 = = Construction and service = = 
 Admiral Chichagov , named for Admiral Vasily Chichagov , was ordered on 4 June 1865 from the Semiannikov & Poletika Shipyard , Saint Petersburg , although the formal keel @-@ laying was not until 20 November 1866 . Construction was delayed by changes to the design and late deliveries of components . She was launched on 28 August 1868 and then transferred to Kronstadt for fitting out as the shallow waters around Saint Petersburg prevented deep @-@ draft ships from being completed . This added more delays as the dockyard there lacked the equipment to efficiently fit out the ships , and she officially entered service in 1869 at the cost of 1 @,@ 177 @,@ 500 rubles . 
 On 20 July 1870 , Admiral Chichagov struck a sandbank near Koivisto at full speed . While not damaged in the incident , she was very firmly stuck and , an attempt by the armored frigate Sevastopol pull her off failed two days later when the hawser snapped . The Russians started to off @-@ load coal and equipment onto the low deck of the Strelets in preparation for another attempt . While rigging another hawser aboard Strelets , it moved unexpectedly , badly injuring the ship 's executive officer and a bosun , who later died of his injuries . The subsequent attempt by Sevastopol also failed , so several barges and a floating crane were summoned from Kronstadt the next day . As much weight as possible was transferred to the barges , including her forward guns , and she was successfully pulled free on 25 July . Admiral Chichagov was not damaged in the incident . 
 On 18 July 1875 , she accidentally collided with the monitor Veschun , but neither ship was seriously damaged . Admiral Chichagov served as the flagship for Captain 1st Rank Stepan Makarov during the 1885 fleet maneuvers in the approaches to the Gulf of Riga . She was reclassified as a coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 . By this time , her role in Russian war plans was to defend the Gulf of Riga against an anticipated German amphibious landing . In 1900 , Admiral Chichagov was assigned to the Kronstadt Engineering School as a training ship , although she was transferred to Libau during the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 to reinforce the port 's defenses . The ship was transferred to the Port of Kronstadt on 31 March 1907 for disposal . The ship was stricken on 14 August and her hulk was used as a target near Reval . Her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = Divergent ( novel ) = 
 Divergent is the debut novel of American novelist Veronica Roth , published by HarperCollins Children 's Books in 2011 . The novel is the first of the Divergent trilogy , a series of young @-@ adult dystopian novels set in the Divergent Universe . The novel Divergent features a post @-@ apocalyptic version of Chicago and follows Beatrice " Tris " Prior as she explores her identity within a society that defines its citizens by their social and personality @-@ related affiliation with five factions , which removes the threat of anyone exercising independent will and re @-@ threatening the population 's safety . Underlying the action and dystopian focused main plot is a romantic subplot between Tris and one of her instructors in the Dauntless faction , nicknamed Four . 
 The novel has been compared to other young adult books such as The Hunger Games and The Maze Runner because of its similar themes and target audience . In particular , the novel explores the themes common to young adult fiction , such as adult authority and the transition from childhood to maturity , as well as such broader motifs as the place of violence and social structures within a post @-@ apocalyptic society . Its major plot device , the division of society into personality types , is one used in other science fiction works . Beyond its literary context , Roth 's open declaration of her religion as a Christian has brought commentary from Christian communities both endorsing and challenging the novel . 
 Roth wrote Divergent while working on a Creative Writing degree at Northwestern University , and it was quickly purchased for publication alongside the subsequent books in the trilogy ( completed in October 2013 ) . Summit Entertainment purchased the media rights to the book in 2011 and subsequently produced a film adaptation titled Divergent which was released March 21 , 2014 . The film , a success amongst audiences , generated $ 288 @,@ 747 @,@ 895 at the box office despite mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Background and setting = = 
 The novel is Veronica Roth 's debut novel and was published a little over a year after Roth graduated with a Bachelor 's degree from the Creative Writing program at Northwestern University . Roth wrote the novel during her senior year winter break and sold movie rights to the novel before she graduated . 
 The novel is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic Chicago . Roth indicated that she did not originally intend to use Chicago as the setting : 
 I wrote the rough draft and I felt like it needed a more grounded sense of place , and I looked at the city I had described , which is all these trains constantly moving , and this lake marsh , and these rivers . And I realized that it was Chicago already , and it was just because that 's the city I 've known and loved the longest . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a post @-@ apocalyptic Chicago , survivors are divided into five factions based on their dispositions : Abnegation , for the selfless ; Amity , for the peaceful ; Candor , for the honest ; Dauntless , for the brave ; and Erudite , for the intellectual . Each year , all sixteen @-@ year @-@ olds take an aptitude test that determines the faction for which they are best suited . After receiving the results , test takers choose a faction at the Choosing Ceremony , no matter what their results were . Those who do not complete initiation into their new faction become " <unk> " and are forced to live in poverty on the streets of the city . 
 Sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Beatrice Prior is born into an Abnegation family . She doesn 't feel she belongs in Abnegation because she doesn 't see herself as naturally selfless . Her aptitude test results are inconclusive and indicate aptitude for three factions – Abnegation , Erudite , and Dauntless . The test administrator warns her never to tell anyone that her results were inconclusive as this marks her as " Divergent " . Beatrice agonizes over Choosing Day , unsure about staying in Abnegation with her parents or moving to a different faction . On Choosing Day , Beatrice decides to leave Abnegation and join Dauntless . Her brother Caleb chooses Erudite . 
 The Dauntless instructor , Four , explains that not all Dauntless initiates will be allowed to enter the faction . The initiates will have to go through a series of training and evaluation . Unique to this faction , only the top ten initiates will stay , while the rest will be dismissed and become <unk> ; by contrast , the other factions allow everyone who complete initiation to enter . During her initiation , Beatrice renames herself Tris and befriends transfer initiates Christina , Al , and Will but comes into conflict with fellow initiates Peter , Drew , and Molly . She also befriends Dauntless @-@ born initiates Uriah , Lynn , and Marlene . 
 Initiation into Dauntless is composed of three stages . The first involves learning how to handle guns and knives and hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with other initiates . Tris lacks the physical strength of most of her fellow initiates but finishes in sixth place by beating the higher @-@ ranked Molly . When the rankings for Stage 1 of initiation are announced , a jealous Peter , who finished second , stabs first @-@ place Edward in the eye with a butter knife during the night . Edward then leaves Dauntless to be <unk> , and his girlfriend Myra follows him out of Dauntless . 
 During Visiting Day , Tris learns that her mother 's faction of origin was Dauntless . 
 Erudite stirs dissent against the Abnegation leadership in the city 's government and accuses Marcus , the Abnegation leader , of abusing his son . The fact that Marcus 's son joined Dauntless two years before , and Tris ' and Caleb 's choices at the Choosing Ceremony , where they switched factions instead of remaining in Abnegation adds to the rumors . Abnegation is also alleged to be hoarding supplies meant to be sent out in the city . 
 The initiates enter Stage 2 of their training , which involves simulations similar to the aptitude tests . Initiates are forced to face hallucinations based upon their deepest fears . The simulations act in a hypnotic fashion and initiates forget their situation isn 't real . Tris ' Divergent abilities enable her to remember that she 's facing a simulation , not reality . She uses this advantage and wins top rank in the class . Peter , Drew , and Al attack Tris in revenge with a threatened sexual assault and attempt to kill her by throwing her into the chasm at Dauntless headquarters . Four intervenes and stops it . Later , Al begs for Tris 's forgiveness , but she rebuffs him . He later commits suicide by jumping into the chasm where he tried to kill Tris . 
 The final stage of Dauntless initiation gathers all their fears in a single simulation landscape . All the initiates , including the <unk> , are aware they are under a simulation and must use the skills they 've learned in the previous stages to overcome each obstacle . Tris ' relationship with Four continues to grow as she prepares for the last stage of testing , and he lets her into his own fear landscape . Four has four fears in his landscape , which is an uncommonly low number , hence his nickname . She also learns he is really Marcus ' son Tobias , the child of the Abnegation leader the <unk> accused of child abuse . Four shares information with Tris that he discovered about Erudite 's plans to use Dauntless to stage an attack on Abnegation . 
 Tris successfully overcomes seven fears in her fear landscape . After her test , she and the other Dauntless members are injected with a new " tracking " serum that supposedly activates if someone goes missing . 
 Before the official initiation ceremony , Four invites Tris back to his private apartment , and Tris expresses her feelings for him . The ceremony begins with the post of final rankings and Tris is ranked first . In the midst of celebrating she suddenly realizes Erudite will use the " tracking " serum to force Dauntless members to carry out their invasion of Abnegation . 
 The night after the ceremony , the serum induces a simulation and all the Dauntless become sleep @-@ walking soldiers under orders to attack the Abnegation compound . The serum doesn 't work on Tris or Tobias ( Four ) because they are Divergent . Tris and Tobias try to break away from the pack and escape as they arrive at the Abnegation compound , but Tris is shot and wounded . Tobias refuses to leave her behind and they are captured and brought before Jeanine , the Erudite leader who is the mastermind of the whole attack . She injects Four with an experimental serum that overrides his Divergence , to control what he can see and hear . Jeanine directs Tobias back to the Dauntless control room to oversee the attack and sentences Tris to death . Tris wakes up sealed inside a real @-@ life glass tank that fills up with water , but her mother breaks the tank and rescues her . Her mother reveals that she is also Divergent before she is killed helping Tris escape . Tris gets away but is forced to kill Will , who attacks her under the influence of the simulation . 
 She finds her father , Andrew , and Tobias ' father , Marcus in a safe house . Tris tells them the reason for Dauntless ' attack on Abnegation . Later , Caleb , Marcus , Andrew , and Tris head to the Dauntless compound to find the source of the simulation and fight their way through to Dauntless headquarters . Tris ' father sacrifices himself to clear the way for her to reach the control room . She confronts the mind @-@ controlled Tobias , who attacks her . Tris realizes she can 't bring herself to kill him and surrenders . This causes Tobias to break through the special sight @-@ and @-@ sound @-@ only simulation . Freed , Tobias helps Tris shut down the Erudite simulation and free the remaining Dauntless from their mind control . They rejoin Caleb , Marcus , and Peter , who helped Tris find the control room in exchange for his safety . The group boards a train to the Amity sector to find the rest of the Abnegation survivors . 
 = = Style = = 
 Many reviewers stated that the novel 's writing style offers a distinctive , quick prose that creates a fast @-@ paced reading experience . Susan Dominus , writing in The New York Times described the style as " brisk pacing , lavish flights of imagination and writing that occasionally startles with fine detail " . Abby Nolan , from The American Prospect , noted that Divergent follows the structural and stylistic patterns of The Hunger Games and Blood Red Road . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Identity = = = 
 As in other children 's and young adult fiction , the novel probes placement of authority and identity within the youth 's relationship to parents and other social forces . Critic Antero Garcia describes the thematic similarity between these dystopian novels as an interest in the " grasp of power between youth and adult authority " and compared the novel to <unk> by Neal <unk> . In The New York Times , Susan Dominus stated that Divergent " explores a more common adolescent <unk> painful realization that coming into one 's own sometimes means leaving family behind ideologically and physically " . The Voice of Youth Advocates agrees , writing that Divergent shows the pressure of " having to choose between following in your parents ' footsteps or doing something new " . Critic Antero Garcia compared the thematic interest in the characters being " forced into limiting constraints of identity and labor associated with their identity " to similar interest in forced identities and labor in the dystopian children 's novels Matched by Allyson Braithwaite <unk> and The Maze Runner by James <unk> . 
 = = = Social structure and knowledge = = = 
 Government division of its population into fragmented communities is a frequent device in young adult ( YA ) children 's fiction . YA classics such as Lois Lowry ’ s The Giver , Monica Hughes ’ s The Dream Catcher , and <unk> Snyder ’ s Green Sky Trilogy use this device to different ends . In her masters thesis , Ashley Ann Haynes describes <unk> of societies within Divergent as a supporting comparison with Hunger Games . Divergent adds a new layer of complexity with its creation of an illusion of democracy for participants in its <unk> society , with the factions controlled by outside force . 
 Some reviews criticize the lack of depth and realism of the social structures within the novel . Kirkus Reviews called the social structure a " preposterous premise " . Booklist called the structure a " simplistic , color @-@ coded world [ that ] stretches credibility on occasion " . In a review for the University of Wisconsin @-@ Whitewater 's student newspaper " Royal Purple News " , <unk> Backhaus notes how the " entire system seems insubstantial " and asks rhetorically " How could it be possible for any individual , with his or her infinite emotions and experiences , to be condensed to one single quality to tolerate for the rest of their lives and to choose at the mere age of 16 ? " In an interview Roth describes the social structure to have expanded from her initial conception , adding Candor to fill " a gap in the reasoning behind the world that needed to be filled " . 
 Social structure most affects the novel 's themes by socially dividing different knowledge types that characters can access . In her book chapter exploring how literacy in different knowledge types affects the series , Alice Curry describes the factions , and character indoctrination in those factions , as deliberately creating knowledge gaps between initiates to different factions . Because of the initiation process , the characters become illiterate in the knowledge valued by the other factions . Tris 's " divergence " allows her to be successful because she can become literate in a broad set of <unk> and information types , and thus she becomes more admirable to the reader . Curry argues that Jeanine 's leadership within Erudite represents an academic " Ivory Tower " that alienates other types of knowledge , thus the book critiques academic learning , in favor of the broader literacy embodied by Tris . Curry compares the novel to Julie <unk> 's 2002 Exodus , describing both as using spaces and landscapes where knowledge is learned to critique " crumbling knowledge institutions " , like academic spaces , that " <unk> " knowledge instead of facilitating deeper holistic knowledge <unk> that create " understanding " . 
 = = = Violence and fear = = = 
 Like The Hunger Games , Divergent depicts considerable violence for a Young Adult novel . The Publishers Weekly review emphasized this stylistic choice , calling it " edgy " and describing the initiation rituals that Tris endures " as spellbinding as they are violent [ requiring ] sadistic tests of strength and courage " . But , as Susan Dominus points out , the novel doesn 't keep this violence at the forefront of reader experience ; she writes in The New York Times , that " Terrible things happen to the people Tris loves , yet the characters absorb these events with disquieting ease . Here , somehow , the novel 's flights from reality distance the reader from the emotional impact that might come in a more affecting realistic ( or even fantasy ) novel . " 
 When describing her inspiration for the Dauntless training their initiates through exposing them to their fears , Roth , in an interview for the website " PopSugar " , says , though influenced by many sources , the most important was her " Psych 101 my first year of college [ where ] I learned about exposure therapy , which is when they treat people with fear , like for anxiety . It exposes them repeatedly to what they 're afraid of , and gradually you become less afraid of it , or have a healthy level of fear , and I thought of the Dauntless then , because they 're conditioning perfectly normal people to get over perfectly rational fears . " Daniel Kraus 's Booklist review of the novel described the intense psychological pressure as like " akin to joining the marines " but also providing the " built @-@ in tension " that makes the novel a compelling read . 
 = = = Christianity = = = 
 Though the novel does not maintain an overtly Christian thematic interest , some readers place the novel 's themes within this context because of Roth 's professed religiosity . In the postscript " Acknowledgements " , Roth emphasizes her Christian faith saying " Thank you , God , for your Son and for blessing me beyond comprehension . " For some reviewers this element of Roth 's lifestyle is important to the novel 's impact ; for example , when reviewing the novel for the Christian Ministry " Break Point " , Sherry Early describes Roth as " a Christian " and the novel setting as " post @-@ feminist , maybe even Christian " . She also says that though the novel is " not overtly Christian " , it follows a " Christian point of view " because it " fight [ s ] against the restrictions placed upon her by a controlling and totalitarian state " and because " Tris must also explore the cracks and imperfections within her own psyche . " K. B. Hoyle also acknowledges that the novel would have a " Christian message " , when reviewing the novel for the Evangelical book review organization The Gospel Coalition . However , Hoyle criticizes the novel for using profane terminology and for never " clarify [ ing ] what the practices are supposed to mean " . 
 Reviewers outside the Christian community have also noticed the Christian context of the novel . In a review of the book and first movie , David Edelstein observed the book 's treatment of intellectuals as following a tendency in Christian culture to question genetic modification and majority : the intellectual Erudite faction are largely depicted as control @-@ hungry villains pitted against the Abnegation faction , who are depicted as righteous and merciful . He wrote " The novelist , Veronica Roth , reserves her loathing for the ' <unk> ' , who spend their days in intellectual pursuit , " and that the trend of intellectualism ( thinking without feeling ) " makes people apt to seize power and impose Maoist @-@ like uniformity on entire populations — on pain of death . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Divergent has received mostly positive reviews . In a review in The New York Times , Susan Dominus wrote that it was " rich in plot and imaginative details " , but also that , compared to other such books in the same genre as the Hunger Games trilogy , it did " not exactly distinguish itself " . In a review for Entertainment Weekly , Breia Brissey said that it was " <unk> and less nuanced " than The Hunger Games but was good , giving it a B + rating . Similarly , though critiquing the " simplistic , color @-@ coded world " , Booklist reviewer Daniel Kraus positively concluded that the novel was full of " gutsy action and romance " and called it a " spin on Brave New World " . Kirkus said it was " built with careful details and intriguing scope " . Common Sense Media commented on the book 's " deep messages about identity and controlling societies " and on the " unstoppable plot that 's remarkably original " . It was rated 5 out of 5 stars and given an age 13 + rating . 
 The book debuted at number six on the New York Times Children 's Chapter Books Best Seller list on May 22 , 2011 , and remained on the list for 11 weeks . It also spent 39 weeks on the Children 's Paperback list in 2012 , reaching number one . The Times changed its Children 's Best Seller lists in December 2012 , eliminating the Children 's Paperback list and recognizing " middle grade " and " young adult " books separately ; Divergent continued its run on the new Young Adult Best Seller list . The novel stayed on the list for 47 weeks until November 3 , 2013 . According to Publishers Weekly , the combined three volumes of the Divergent series sold over 6 @.@ 7 million copies in 2013 ( three million hardcovers , 1 @.@ 7 million paperbacks , and just under two million e @-@ books ) . In the lead up to the release of the film adaptation , Roth 's novel topped USA Today 's Best @-@ Selling Books list in January 2014 . 
 Divergent won Favorite book of 2011 in 2011 's Goodreads Readers Choice Awards , and won the senior category of the 2014 Young Reader 's Choice Award . It was also number one in the Teens ' Top Ten Vote , sponsored by YALSA . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 Summit Entertainment bought the rights to film an adaptation of the novel in 2011 . Summit recruited Neil Burger to direct . Initially , Summit gave the film a budget of $ 40 million , but Lionsgate later increased it to $ 80 million ( which finally changed to $ 85 million ) due to the success of The Hunger Games . 
 Shailene Woodley was chosen to star as Beatrice " Tris " Prior . The role of Tobias " Four " Eaton eventually went to Theo James after an extensive search . Kate Winslet was signed as Jeanine Matthews . Also recruited into the cast were Maggie Q as Tori , Zoe Kravitz as Christina , Ansel Elgort as Caleb , Miles Teller as Peter , Ashley Judd as Natalie Prior , Tony Goldwyn as Andrew Prior , and Jai Courtney as Eric . 
 Filming began in Chicago on April 16 , 2013 and concluded on July 16 , 2013 , with nearly all filming taking place in Chicago . The film was released March 21 , 2014 , earning $ 150 @,@ 947 @,@ 895 in North America , and $ 137 @,@ 228 @,@ 004 in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 288 @,@ 175 @,@ 899 . The critic aggregating sites Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic both noted the films mixed reviews . However , audience surveyor CinemaScore showed that audiences were very receptive to the film . 
 = 1945 Texas hurricane = 
 The 1945 Texas hurricane was a slow @-@ moving tropical cyclone which paralleled the Texas Gulf Coast , causing extensive damage in late @-@ August 1945 . The fifth tropical storm and second hurricane of the annual hurricane season , the storm formed out of an area of disturbed weather which had been situated over the Bay of Campeche on August 24 . In favorable conditions , the system quickly intensified as it steadily moved northward , attaining hurricane intensity later that day . As it approached the coast , however , the hurricane quickly slowed in forward motion , allowing it time to intensify off the Texas coast . After reaching major hurricane status , the storm reached peak intensity on August 26 as a minimal Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) . Later that day , the cyclone executed a slight curve toward the Texas coast , and early the next day made landfall near Seadrift at peak intensity . Once inland , it quickly weakened , and degenerated into a remnant low on August 29 over Central Texas . 
 The hurricane 's slow movement and strong intensity was a catalyst for extensive and damaging impacts in Texas . Prior to making landfall , thousands of people were ordered to evacuate from cities along coastal regions . Upon making landfall , the storm brought strong winds , which caused widespread power outages and infrastructural damage . A peak gust of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) measured in <unk> , Texas . Northeast of Houston , Texas , a tornado killed a person after traveling for 22 mi ( 35 km ) . At the coast , the hurricane produced strong storm surge which swept and damaged port cities . Port Lavaca , Texas was inundated by a 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) storm surge , which at the time was the third highest ever recorded in the state . Damage in the port alone was estimated to be as high as $ 1 million . The strong wave action killed two people when it capsized a fishing vessel . Further inland , the storm produced torrential rainfall , which was also aided by the hurricane 's slow movement . Rainfall peaked at 19 @.@ 6 in ( 500 mm ) in Hockley , Texas . The heavy rains caused extensive crop damage , particularly to cotton and rice crops . Damage to cotton in the Corpus Christi , Texas area alone was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Overall , the hurricane caused $ 20 @.@ 1 million in damage , mostly to crops , and three deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Towards the end of August 1945 , an area of squally weather persisted in the Bay of Campeche , near the Gulf Coast of Mexico . After a prolonged period of marginal development , the cluster of thunderstorms began to quickly organize beginning on August 24 . According to HURDAT – the official database listing positions and intensities of Atlantic tropical cyclones dating back to 1851 – the disturbance became sufficiently organized to be classified as a tropical storm by 0000 UTC on August 24 . At the time , the storm already maintained maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . Initially , the tropical storm moved generally northward at approximately 18 mph ( 29 km / h ) , but gradually slowed as it neared the United States Gulf Coast . Quickly developing past tropical cyclogenesis , the system reached the equivalent of a modern @-@ day Category 1 hurricane at 0600 UTC on August 25 . Its forward motion continued to slow until it moved nearly stationary at roughly 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) , which allowed the system to remain a tropical cyclone for an extended period of time , despite its proximity to the coast . The hurricane 's intensity continued to quickly increase , and by 1200 UTC on August 26 , the storm had attained major hurricane status , the equivalent of a modern @-@ day Category 3 hurricane . 
 The hurricane executed a slight curve to the northeast later that day , causing it to move inland over the Texas coast . Initially , the major hurricane was analyzed to have made landfall early on August 27 over Port Aransas with winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , equivalent to a modern @-@ day Category 4 hurricane . However , an reanalysis was conducted on the system , and concluded that it had only attained Category 3 intensity before making landfall at 1200 UTC that day . The reanalysis moved the landfall point closer to Seadrift as well . At the time , the storm had maximum sustained winds confined within an area about 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the hurricane 's center . The reanalysis also concluded that the storm contained a minimum central pressure of 963 millibars ( 28 @.@ 44 inHg ) at landfall . Once inland , the hurricane slowly weakened , but maintained hurricane intensity until 1200 UTC on August 28 . After further weakening to a tropical depression by 0000 UTC the next day , the disturbance dissipated over the Texas interior at 1800 UTC on August 29 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon classification as a hurricane by the former United States Weather Bureau ( USWB ) on August 25 , a hurricane warning was issued for coastal areas between Corpus Christi and Brownsville , Texas , and between Galveston , Texas and Lake Charles , Louisiana . At the time , the storm was forecast to make landfall between Port O 'Connor and Freeport , Texas . However , all small craft offshore from the mouth of the Rio Grande and Burrwood , Louisiana were warned to remain in port or return to the coast . All other shipping in the western Gulf of Mexico were advised to exercise extreme caution . Despite having just formed , forecasters already suggested that it would be potentially the most destructive storm of the hurricane season thus far . As a result of the storm 's intensity and repeated warnings , thousands evacuated potentially affected coastal regions . In Freeport , Texas , 20 @,@ 000 people evacuated . Mustang Island was fully evacuated prior to the storm impacting land . Throughout the hurricane 's early developmental stages , reconnaissance flights were periodically made into the storm to gather data . 
 Though situated on the opposite side of the Gulf of Mexico as Florida , tropical moisture extending from the hurricane caused torrential rainfall in the state . In St. Petersburg , the heavy rains set a 30 @-@ year record and flooded low @-@ lying areas . <unk> streets blocked traffic and delayed transit bus routes . In Booker and Salt Creeks , the floodwaters backed up sewage systems . Though there were no deaths as a result of the floods , two people were rescued by police after their house was surrounded by water . Telecommunications in the Tampa Bay Area were delayed for up to two hours due to damage sustained to communication lines as a result of the rains . Despite its nearby proximity , effects in Tampa , Florida were much less severe , with only small showers and gusts never exceeding 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) . 
 Upon making landfall on the Texas coast late on August 27 , the hurricane caused a wide swath of destruction , and was considered one of the worst hurricanes to impact the state in at least 25 years . A 400 mi ( 645 km ) wide swath of land experienced moderate to severe impacts during the storm . Strong winds were reported in various locations , with a peak gust of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) measured in <unk> , Texas . At a weather station in Naval Air Station Corpus Christi , a wind gust of 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) was measured . Across Corpus Christi , the strong winds knocked down communication and power lines , causing widespread power outages . Thus , all local radio stations were off air for a period of time . However , power was quickly restored within an hour after cutoff . Winds within the city peaked at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Damage in the city was estimated to be below $ 100 @,@ 000 . Further south in Port Isabel , Texas , winds peaked at 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) . However , in nearby Brownsville , Texas , damage associated with the hurricane . In El Campo , Texas , strong winds blew the roof off of a local hospital . Thus , 30 patients were evacuated to hospitals in Wharton , Texas . Power in Wharton was temporarily knocked out for a short time . As the storm progressed further inland , additional damage was reported . In Bay City , Texas , gusts uprooted trees and scattered debris over the city streets . Heavy rains there inundated roads under as much as 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) of water . As a result , only one highway remained open . In Rockport , Texas , additional homes were unroofed , with damages estimated at $ 500 @,@ 000 . Offshore , the hurricane produced strong waves which caused coastal impacts . In Port Aransas , Texas , waves inundated roads to a depth of 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . The strong waves later separated the port from the mainland , and destroyed or damage all buildings and structures there , causing an estimated $ 750 @,@ 000 in damage there . Power in Port Aransas was disrupted during the night of August 27 . At Aransas Pass , surf was as high as automotive running boards . At Port Lavaca , Texas , the tide rose up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) above normal , inundating the coastal city and forcing the coastline to retreat 50 ft ( 15 m ) from its initial position . At the time , the measured storm surge was only the third highest recorded in Texas history , behind peak measurements taken during the 1900 Galveston hurricane and 1919 Florida Keys hurricane . Damage estimates for Port Lavaca ranged from $ 750 @,@ 000 – $ 1 million . Offshore of Port Isabel , the strong waves capsized a fishing vessel , killing all two of its crew members . 
 The hurricane 's slow movement parallel to the Texas coast resulted in torrential rainfall , peaking at 19 @.@ 6 in ( 500 mm ) near Hockley over a period of a little over three days . The excessive precipitation helped increase monthly rainfall amounts in the region to three times above average . Cotton and rice crops were badly damaged during the storm . The American Crop Growers Association estimated that up to 20 % of the rice crop was lost during the <unk> . Damage to unpicked cotton in the Corpus Christi area alone totaled to $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . In Houston , the heavy rains halted traffic and increased flood risk to property near the city 's bayous . Precipitation in the city peaked at 15 @.@ 65 in ( 398 mm ) in a 24 @-@ hour period . However , the Barker Dam prevented a large scale flooding event in the city . A gust of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) collapsed a suburban residence , killing the occupant inside . Approximately 8 mi ( 13 km ) north @-@ northeast of Houston , a small tornado formed and traversed for 22 mi ( 35 km ) across the northern suburbs of the city , killing a person and causing 15 injuries . The tornado also had a path width of 75 yd ( 70 m ) , and damage to property was estimated at $ 35 @,@ 000 . Heavy rainfall from the storm was reported as far west as San Antonio , Texas . Overall , the hurricane caused $ 20 @.@ 1 million in damages , with $ 14 million attributable to agricultural losses , $ 5 @.@ 883 million to infrastructural damage , and $ 250 @,@ 000 to cattle and poultry losses . Despite the large swath of devastation , only three people were killed due to the extensive precautionary measures taken before the storm . 
 After the hurricane passed , the American Red Cross and other relief agencies began to survey damage and assist in repair and rehabilitation activities . Red Cross personnel in the central coastal area assisted 15 @,@ 000 refugees with food and care necessities . Robert Edison , then @-@ director of the Midwest sector of the agency , requested 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 m ) of lumber and 52 tons ( 47 tonnes ) of steel . The Salvation Army , stationed in Houston , issued an appeal for clothing materials . State health department and agency crews were dispatched to check water and other sanitation facilities . 
 = Bruce Castle = 
 Bruce Castle ( formerly the Lordship House ) is a Grade I listed 16th @-@ century manor house in Lordship Lane , Tottenham , London . It is named after the House of Bruce who formerly owned the land on which it is built . Believed to stand on the site of an earlier building , about which little is known , the current house is one of the oldest surviving English brick houses . It was remodelled in the 17th , 18th and 19th centuries . 
 The house has been home to Sir William Compton , the Barons Coleraine and Sir Rowland Hill , among others . After serving as a school during the 19th century , when a large extension was built to the west , it was converted into a museum exploring the history of the areas now constituting London Borough of Haringey and , on the strength of its connection with Sir Rowland Hill , the history of the Royal Mail . The building also houses the archives of the London Borough of Haringey . Since 1892 the grounds have been a public park , Tottenham 's oldest . 
 = = Origins of the name = = 
 The name Bruce Castle is derived from the House of Bruce , who had historically owned a third of the manor of Tottenham . However , there was no castle in the area , and it is unlikely that the family lived nearby . Upon his accession to the Scottish throne in 1306 , Robert I of Scotland forfeited his lands in England , including the Bruce holdings in Tottenham , ending the connection between the Bruce family and the area . The former Bruce land in Tottenham was granted to Richard <unk> and Thomas <unk> . 
 The three parts of the manor of Tottenham were united in the early 15th century under the <unk> family and have remained united since . In all early records , the building is referred to as the Lordship House . The name Bruce Castle first appears to have been adopted by Henry Hare , 2nd Baron Coleraine ( 1635 – 1708 ) , although Daniel Lysons speculates in The Environs of London ( 1795 ) the name 's use dates to the late 13th century . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 A detached , cylindrical Tudor tower stands immediately to the southeast of the house , and is generally considered to be the earliest part of the building ; however , Lysons believes it to have been a later addition . The tower is built of local red brick , and is 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) tall , with walls 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) thick . In 2006 , excavations revealed that it continues for some distance below the current ground level . It was described in 1829 as being over a deep well , and being used as a dairy . 
 Sources disagree on the house 's initial construction date , and no records survive of its construction . There is some archaeological evidence dating parts of the building to the 15th century ; William Robinson 's History and Antiquities of the Parish of Tottenham ( 1840 ) suggests a date of about 1514 , although the Royal Commission on Historic Monuments attributes it to the late 16th century . Nikolaus Pevsner speculates the front may have formed part of a courtyard house of which the remainder has disappeared . 
 The Grade I mansion 's principal facade has been substantially remodelled . The house is made of red brick with ashlar quoining and the principal facade , terminated by symmetrical matching bays , has tall paned windows . The house and detached tower are among the earliest uses of brick as the principal building material for an English house . 
 Henry Hare , 2nd Baron Coleraine ( 1635 – 1708 ) oversaw a substantial remodelling of the house in 1684 , and much of the existing south facade dates from that time . The end bays were heightened , and the central porch was rebuilt with stone quoins and pilasters , a balustraded top and a small tower and cupola . A plan from 1684 shows the hall in the house 's centre , with service rooms to the west and the main parlour to the east . On the first floor , the dining room was over the hall , the main bedchamber over the kitchen , and a lady 's chamber over the porch . 
 In the early 18th century Henry Hare , 3rd Baron Coleraine ( 1694 – 1749 ) oversaw a remodelling of the north of the house , that added a range of rooms to the north and the Coleraine coat of arms to the pediment of the north facade . In the late 18th century , under the ownership of James Townsend , the narrow east facade of the house was remodelled into an entrance front , and given the appearance of a typical Georgian house . At the same time , the south front 's gabled attics were removed , giving the house 's southern elevation its current appearance . An inventory of the house made in 1789 in preparation for its sale listed a hall , saloon , drawing room , dining room and breakfast parlour on the ground floor , with a library and billiard room on the first floor . 
 In the early 19th century , the house 's west wing was demolished , leaving it with the asymmetrical appearance it retains today . The house was converted into a school , and in 1870 a three @-@ story extension was built in the Gothic Revival style to the northwest of the house . 
 The 2006 excavations by the Museum of London uncovered the chalk foundations of an earlier building on the site , of which nothing is known . Court rolls of 1742 refer to the repair of a drawbridge , implying that the building then had a moat . A 1911 archaeological journal made passing reference to " the recent levelling of the moat " . 
 = = Early residents = = 
 It is generally believed the house 's first owner was Sir William Compton , Groom of the <unk> to Henry VIII and one of the period 's prominent courtiers , who acquired the manor of Tottenham in 1514 . However , there is no evidence of Compton 's living in the house , and there is some evidence the building dates to a later period . 
 The earliest known reference to the building dates from 1516 , when Henry VIII met his sister Margaret , Queen of Scots , at " Maister Compton 's House beside Tottenham " . The <unk> owned the building throughout the 16th century , but few records of the family or the building survive . 
 In the early 17th century , Richard Sackville , 3rd Earl of Dorset and Lady Anne Clifford owned the house . Sackville ran up high debts through gambling and extravagant spending ; the house ( then still called " The Lordship House " ) was leased to Thomas Peniston . Peniston 's wife , Martha , daughter of Sir Thomas Temple was said to be the Earl of Dorset 's mistress . The house was later sold to wealthy Norfolk landowner Hugh Hare . 
 = = 17th century : the Hare family = = 
 = = = Hugh Hare , 1st Baron Coleraine = = = 
 Hugh Hare ( 1606 – 1667 ) had inherited a large amount of money from his great @-@ uncle Sir Nicholas Hare , Master of the Rolls . On the death of his father , his mother had remarried Henry Montagu , 1st Earl of Manchester , allowing the young Hugh Hare to rise rapidly in Court and social circles . He married Montagu 's daughter by his first marriage and purchased the manor of Tottenham , including the Lordship House , in 1625 , and was ennobled as Baron Coleraine shortly thereafter . 
 As he was closely associated with the court of Charles I , Hare 's fortunes went into decline during the English Civil War . His castle at Longford and his house in Totteridge were seized by Parliamentary forces , and returned upon the Restoration in a severe state of disrepair . Records of Tottenham from the period are now lost , and the ownership and condition of the Lordship House during the Commonwealth of England are unknown . Hugh Hare died at his home in Totteridge in 1667 , having choked to death on a bone eating turkey while laughing and drinking , and was succeeded by his son Henry Hare , 2nd Baron Coleraine . 
 = = = Henry Hare , 2nd Baron Coleraine = = = 
 Henry Hare ( 1635 – 1708 ) settled at the Lordship House , renaming it Bruce Castle in honour of the area 's historic connection with the House of Bruce . Hare was a noted historian and author of the first history of Tottenham . He grew up at the Hare family house at Totteridge , and it is not known when he moved to Tottenham . At the time of the birth of his first child , Hugh , in 1668 , the family were still living in Totteridge , while by the time of the death of his first wife Constantia , in 1680 , the family were living in Bruce Castle . According to Hare , Constantia was buried in All Hallows Church in Tottenham . However , the parish register for the period is complete and makes no mention of her death or burial . 
 Following the death of Constantia , Hare married Sarah Alston . They had been engaged in 1661 , but she had instead married John Seymour , 4th Duke of Somerset . There is evidence that during Sarah 's marriage to Seymour and Hare 's marriage to Constantia , a close relationship was sustained between them . 
 The house was substantially remodelled in 1684 , following Henry Hare 's marriage to the dowager Duchess of Somerset , and much of the existing south facade dates from this time . The facade 's dominating feature is a central tower with a belvedere , a motif of the English Renaissance of the late 16th / early 17th centuries ( the Compton family 's Warwickshire home Castle Ashby was also given Renaissance features during the 17th century ) . Hatfield House , also close to London , had a similar central tower constructed in 1611 , as does Blickling Hall in Norfolk , built circa 1616 . However , in resemblance the house appears to favour the style of Burton Agnes Hall constructed between 1601 and 1610 . 
 = = = = The Ghostly Lady of Bruce Castle = = = = 
 Although sources such as Pegram speculate that Constantia committed suicide in the face of a continued relationship between Hare and the Duchess of Somerset , little is known about her life and the circumstances of her early death , and her ghost reputedly haunts the castle . 
 The earliest recorded reference to the ghost appeared in 1858 — almost two hundred years after her death — in the Tottenham & Edmonton Advertiser . 
 A lady of our acquaintance was introduced at a party to an Indian Officer who , hearing that she came from Tottenham , eagerly asked if she had seen the Ghostly Lady of Bruce Castle . Some years before he had been told the following story by a brother officer when encamped on a march in India . One of the Lords Coleraine had married a beautiful lady and while she was yet in her youth had been seized with a violent hatred against her — whether from jealousy or not is not known . He first confined her to the upper part of the house and subsequently still more closely to the little rooms of the clock turret . These rooms looked on the balconies : the lady one night succeeded in forcing her way out and flung herself with child in arms from the parapet . The wild despairing shriek aroused the household only to find her and her infant in death 's clutches below . Every year as the fearful night comes round ( it is in November ) the wild form can be seen as she stood on the fatal parapet , and her despairing cry is heard floating away on the autumnal blast . 
 The legend has now been largely forgotten , and there have been no reported sightings of the ghost in recent times . 
 = = Residents in the 18th century = = 
 Sarah Hare died in 1692 and was buried in Westminster Abbey , and Hare in 1708 , to be succeeded by his grandson Henry Hare , 3rd Baron Coleraine . Henry Hare was a leading antiquary , residing only briefly at Bruce Castle between lengthy tours of Europe . 
 The house was remodelled again under the 3rd Baron Coleraine 's ownership . An extra range of rooms was added to the north , and the pediment of the north front ornamented with a large coat of the Coleraine arms . 
 Hare 's marriage was not consummated , and following an affair with a French woman , Rosa du Plessis , du Plessis bore him his only child , a daughter named Henrietta Rosa <unk> , born in France in 1745 . Hare died in 1749 leaving his estates to the four @-@ year @-@ old Henrietta , but her claim was rejected owing to her French nationality . After many years of legal challenges , the estates , including Bruce Castle , were granted to her husband James Townsend , whom she had married at age 18 . 
 James Townsend was a leading citizen of the day . He served as a magistrate , was Member of Parliament for West Looe , and in 1772 became Lord Mayor of London , while Henrietta was a prominent artist , many of whose engravings of 18th @-@ century Tottenham survive in the Bruce Castle Museum . 
 After 1764 , under the ownership of James Townsend , the house was remodelled again . The narrow east front was remodelled into an entrance front , and given the appearance of a typical Georgian house , while the gabled attics on the south front were removed , giving the south facade the appearance it has today . 
 James and Henrietta Townsend 's son , Henry Hare Townsend , showed little interest in the area or in the traditional role of the Lord of the Manor . After leasing the house to a succession of tenants , the house and grounds were sold in 1792 to Thomas Smith of Gray 's Inn as a country residence . 
 = = John Eardley Wilmot = = 
 John Eardley Wilmot ( c . 1749 – 23 June 1815 ) was Member of Parliament for Tiverton ( 1776 – 1784 ) and Coventry ( 1784 – 1796 ) , and in 1783 led the Parliamentary Commission investigating the events that led to the American Revolution . He also led the processing of compensation claims , and the supply of basic housing and provisions , for the 60 @,@ 000 Loyalist refugees who arrived in England after the independence of the United States . 
 Following the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789 , a second wave of refugees arrived in England . Although the British government did not offer them organised relief , Wilmot , in association with William Wilberforce , Edmund Burke and George Nugent @-@ Temple @-@ Grenville , 1st Marquess of Buckingham , founded " Wilmot 's Committee " , which raised funds to provide accommodation and food , and found employment for refugees from France , large numbers of whom settled in the Tottenham area . 
 In 1804 , Wilmot retired from public life and moved to Bruce Castle to write his memoirs of the American Revolution and his role in the investigations of its causes and consequences . They were published shortly before his death in 1815 . 
 After Wilmot 's death , London merchant John Ede purchased the house and its grounds , and demolished the building 's west wing . It was never rebuilt , resulting in the current skewed shape of the building . In 1827 , Ede sold the house and grounds to Worcestershire educationalist Rowland Hill , for use as a school . 
 = = The Hill School = = 
 Hill and his brothers had taken over the management of their father 's school in Birmingham in 1819 , which opened a branch at Bruce Castle in 1827 , with Rowland Hill as Headmaster . The school was run along radical lines inspired by Hill 's friends Thomas Paine , Richard Price and Joseph Priestley ; all teaching was on the principle that the teacher 's role is to instill the desire to learn , not to impart facts , corporal punishment was abolished and alleged transgressions were tried by a court of pupils , while the school taught a radical ( for the time ) curriculum including foreign languages , science and engineering . Among other pupils , the school taught the sons of many London @-@ based diplomats , particularly from the newly independent nations of South America , and the sons of computing pioneer Charles Babbage . 
 In 1839 Rowland Hill , who had written an influential proposal on postal reform , was appointed as head of the General Post Office ( where he introduced the world 's first postage stamps ) , leaving the school in the hands of his younger brother Arthur Hill . Arthur retired in 1868 , leaving the school in the hands of his son Birkbeck Hill . 
 During the period of the School 's operation , the character of the area had changed beyond recognition . Historically , Tottenham had consisted of four villages on Ermine Street ( later the A10 road ) , surrounded by marshland and farmland . The construction of the Northern and Eastern Railway in 1840 , with stations at Tottenham Hale and Marsh Lane ( later Northumberland Park ) , made commuting from Tottenham to central London feasible for the first time ( albeit by a circuitous eight @-@ mile route via Stratford , more than double the distance of the direct road route ) , as well as providing direct connections to the Port of London . In 1872 the Great Eastern Railway opened a direct line from Enfield to Liverpool Street station , including a station at Bruce Grove , close to Bruce Castle ; the railway provided subsidised workmen 's fares to allow poor commuters to live in Tottenham and commute to work in central London . As a major rail hub , Tottenham grew into a significant residential and industrial area ; by the end of the 19th century , the only remaining undeveloped areas were the grounds of Bruce Castle itself , and the waterlogged floodplains of the River Lea at Tottenham Marshes and of the River Moselle at Broadwater Farm . 
 In 1877 Birkbeck Hill retired from the post of headmaster , ending his family 's association with the school . The school closed in 1891 , and Tottenham Council purchased the house and grounds . The grounds of the house were opened to the public as Bruce Castle Park in June 1892 , the first public park in Tottenham . The house opened to the public as Bruce Castle Museum in 1906 . 
 = = = <unk> 's Tottenham = = = 
 Bruce Castle was among the buildings mentioned in John Abraham <unk> 's 1820 <unk> epic , Tottenham , a romantic depiction of the life of Robert the Bruce : 
 Lovely is moonlight to the poet 's eye , 
 That in a tide of beauty bathes the skies , 
 Filling the balmy air with purity , 
 Silent and lone , and on the <unk> dies — 
 But when on ye her heavenly slumber lies , 
 <unk> OF <unk> ! ' tis more than lovely then . — 
 For such sublime associations rise , 
 That to young fancy 's visionary ken , 
 'Tis like a maniac 's dream — fitful and still again . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Bruce Castle is now a museum , holding the archives of the London Borough of Haringey , and housing a permanent exhibition on the past , present and future of Haringey and its predecessor boroughs , and temporary displays on the history of the area . Other exhibits include an exhibition on Rowland Hill and postal history , a significant collection of early photography , a collection of historic manorial documents and court rolls related to the area , and one of the few copies available for public reading of the Spurs Opus , the complete history of Tottenham Hotspur . In 1949 , the building was Grade I listed ; the round tower was separately Grade I listed at the same time , and the 17th @-@ century southern and western boundary walls of the park were Grade II listed in 1974 . In 1969 the castle became home to the regimental museum of the Middlesex Regiment whose collection was subsequently transferred to the National Army Museum . 
 In July 2006 a major community archaeological dig was organised in the grounds by the Museum of London Archaeological Archive and Research Centre , as part of the centenary celebrations of the opening of Bruce Castle Museum , in which large numbers of local youths took part . As well as large quantities of discarded everyday objects , the chalk foundations of what appears to be an earlier house on the site were discovered . 
 In 2012 the public grounds at Bruce Castle were used for <unk> ART in Haringey , part of the borough ’ s cultural Olympiad offer for 2012 . Up Projects , in partnership with Haringey Council and funded by Arts Council England , commissioned Ben Long to create " Lion Scaffolding Sculpture " , a nine @-@ metre tall classical lion on a plinth that was constructed from builder 's scaffolding . The monumental sculpture , created for the front lawn of Bruce Castle Museum , referenced the traditional archetype of the regal lion commonly found in the grounds of stately homes , but also the heraldic emblem of Robert the Bruce , therefore reflecting on the heritage of the building . Build in situ over four weeks , the fabrication became a durational performance , highlighting the role that work and labour play in the development of any artistic or creative pursuit . 
 = A6 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A6 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A6 ) is a motorway in Croatia spanning 80 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 49 @.@ 8 mi ) . It connects the nation 's capital , Zagreb , via the A1 , to the seaport of Rijeka . The motorway forms a major north – south transportation corridor in Croatia and is a part of European route E65 Nagykanizsa – Zagreb – Rijeka – Zadar – Split – Dubrovnik – Podgorica . The A6 motorway route also follows Pan @-@ European corridor Vb . 
 The A6 motorway runs near a number of Croatian cities , provides access to Risnjak National Park and indirectly to numerous resorts , notably in the Istria and Kvarner Gulf regions . The motorway route was completed in 2008 . The motorway is nationally significant because of its positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects , and because of its contribution to tourism in Croatia . The importance of the motorway as a transit route will be further increased upon completion of a proposed expansion of the Port of Rijeka and Rijeka transport node . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction separated by a central reservation . Sections of the motorway that have a gradient greater than 4 % are divided into three lanes to prevent traffic problems caused by slower vehicles . These sections have no emergency lanes . Similarly , there are no emergency lanes in the tunnels . All intersections of the A6 motorway are grade separated . As the route traverses rugged mountains it requires numerous long bridges , viaducts , tunnels , and other structures . As of 2010 there are nine exits and three rest areas situated along the route . The majority of the motorway is a ticket system toll road with pricing tied to vehicle classification . Each exit between Grobnik mainline toll plaza and Bosiljevo 2 <unk> has a toll plaza . No toll is charged at Bosiljevo 2 where the traffic switches to the A1 motorway ; traffic is tolled upon leaving the A1 motorway . Exits between the mainline toll plaza and Orehovica interchange have no toll plazas , as that part of the A6 route is not tolled . 
 A motorway connecting Zagreb and Rijeka was originally designed in the early 1970s , and construction started north of Rijeka and south of Zagreb . The first section , between Rijeka and Kikovica , opened on September 9 , 1972 , and a Zagreb – Karlovac section followed on December 29 , 1972 . Those sections were the first modern motorways to be built in Croatia and Yugoslavia . Due to political upheavals in Croatia and Yugoslavia , construction of the motorway was labeled a " nationalist project " and , along with the proposed Zagreb – Split motorway , was cancelled in 1971 . After the Croatian War of Independence , efforts to build the motorway were renewed and construction resumed in 1996 . In 2004 , a two @-@ lane , single carriageway expressway was completed between the sections completed 25 years previously , and the second carriageway was built ; the motorway was completed on October 22 , 2008 . Construction costs are estimated at 661 @.@ 5 million euro . Although Hrvatske autoceste normally designs , builds , and operates motorways in Croatia , the A6 motorway is operated and maintained by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A6 motorway is a significant north – south motorway in Croatia connecting the largest seaport of the country , Rijeka , to its hinterland and to the rest of the Croatian motorway network via the A1 motorway Bosiljevo 2 interchange . The motorway follows a route through the Gorski Kotar region . Part of the road network of Croatia , the motorway is also part of European route E65 Nagykanizsa – Zagreb – Rijeka – Zadar – Split – Dubrovnik – Podgorica . The motorway is of major importance to Croatia in terms of development of the economy ; it is especially important for tourism and as a transit transport route . The road serves tourist resorts in Istria and the Kvarner Gulf islands . Because of the link formed between Zagreb and Rijeka , tourism @-@ related traffic originating from the countries neighbouring Croatia to the north flows via this road to the Adriatic coast on the south . The road also serves tourists originating in the northern inland areas of Croatia . The A6 route predominantly follows an east – west orientation , but the motorway is locally regarded as a north – south communication . The ultimate importance of the motorway as a transit route shall be achieved upon completion of the proposed expansion of Port of Rijeka and the Rijeka transport node . The expansion is planned to encompass an enhancement of the cargo handling capacity of the Port of Rijeka ; improved railroad links ; and a new Rijeka bypass motorway linking the A6 , via a new interchange , with the present routes of the A7 and A8 motorways . One of the aims of the project is to increase traffic along the A6 route . As of the June 1997 Pan @-@ European Transport Conference in Helsinki , the motorway is a part of the Pan @-@ European corridor Vb . 
 The motorway spans 80 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 49 @.@ 8 mi ) between Bosiljevo 2 interchange and Rijeka – Orehovica interchange on the A7 motorway . The route serves Vrbovsko via the <unk> , Delnice via the D3 , Crikvenica and Krk via the <unk> , and Bakar via the <unk> state road . The route is complete and further development of the motorway includes only the construction of additional rest areas . The A6 motorway consists of at least two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction along its entire length , except in tunnels , where there are emergency bays instead . Sections of the A6 motorway steeper than 4 % grade have three traffic lanes , and slow vehicles are restricted to driving in the rightmost lane . All of the interchanges are trumpet interchanges . There are a number of rest areas along the motorway providing various types of services ranging from simple parking spaces and restrooms to filling stations , restaurants , and hotels . As of October 2010 , the motorway has nine interchanges providing access to numerous towns and cities and the Croatian state road network . The motorway is operated by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control , and signalling devices , located in zones where driving conditions may vary — at interchanges , near viaducts , bridges , tunnels , and in zones where fog and strong wind are known to occur . The system comprises variable traffic signs used to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions , and other information to motorway users . 
 The A6 motorway mainly runs through the mountainous Gorski Kotar region , requiring not only large bridges and viaducts and long tunnels along the route , but also special care must be paid to protection of the environment , as the route is located in karst terrain , with numerous water supply protection zones and significant natural heritage . Risnjak National Park is located near the A6 route , and is accessed via the Delnice interchange . Due to the motorway access and its proximity to a number of seaside resorts , Risnjak is the most visited national park in Croatia . Karst terrain is especially susceptible to water pollution , so the A6 motorway is equipped with a closed water drainage system designed to channel rainwater , meltwater , and any <unk> to purpose @-@ built processing facilities . Approximately 200 karst features — caves and other types of karst features — were observed and protected during construction of the motorway . An extraordinary example of this was a cavern 83 m ( 272 ft ) long by 63 m ( 207 ft ) wide and 45 m ( 148 ft ) tall , found during execution of the 260 m ( 850 ft ) long Vrata Tunnel . The cavern was bridged by one of the tunnel tubes , which was sealed to protect the cavern and the water flowing through it . 
 = = Toll = = 
 The A6 is a tolled motorway based on the vehicle classification in Croatia using a closed toll system integrated with the A1 motorway . The two roads connect at the Bosiljevo 2 interchange , forming a unified toll system . Since the A1 motorway is operated jointly by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb and Hrvatske autoceste , the toll collection system is operated jointly by the two operators . As of October 2010 , the toll charged along the A6 route between Bosiljevo 2 interchange ( A1 Bosiljevo exit ) and the Kikovica mainline toll plaza varies depending on the length of route travelled and ranges from 6 @.@ 00 kuna ( 0 @.@ 82 euros ) to 33 @.@ 00 kuna ( 4 @.@ 52 euros ) for passenger cars and 25 @.@ 00 kuna ( 3 @.@ 42 euro ) to 139 @.@ 00 kuna ( 19 @.@ 04 euro ) for semi @-@ trailer trucks . The toll is payable in either Croatian kuna or euros and by major credit cards and debit cards . A number of prepaid toll collection systems are also used , including various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operator and ENC — an electronic toll collection ( ETC ) system which is shared by most motorways in Croatia and provides drivers with discounted toll rates for dedicated lanes at toll plazas . 
 The toll collected by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb for use of the A6 motorway is not reported separately . Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb only reports it total toll revenue , including toll revenue collected on the A7 motorway ( Rupa – Jurdani section ) and the A1 motorway ( Lučko – Bosiljevo 2 section ) as well as on the Krk Bridge . In the first half of the 2010 their toll revenue was 188 @.@ 2 million Croatian kuna ( 25 @.@ 3 million euros ) . 
 = = Notable structures = = 
 As the A6 motorway route runs through mountainous terrain of Gorski Kotar , it comprises a substantial number of major structures — bridges , viaducts , tunnels , underpasses , flyovers , and culverts . Out of the total length of the Rijeka – Zagreb motorway of 146 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 91 @.@ 0 mi ) , 22 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) are situated within such structures . The northern part of the Rijeka – Zagreb motorway , designated as the A1 motorway , comprising 38 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 24 @.@ 0 mi ) between Zagreb and Karlovac , contains only 572 metres ( 1 @,@ 877 ft ) of such structures as the section is situated in a plain . The 11 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) between Karlovac and Bosiljevo 2 interchanges , contains as much as 4 @,@ 036 metres ( 13 @,@ 241 ft ) of the structures . Thus the A6 motorway has 17 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 9 mi ) , or 21 % of the route , located within such structures . The Rijeka – Zagreb motorway has a total of 24 viaducts , 13 tunnels , 5 bridges , 45 underpasses , and 26 flyovers . All of the bridges , viaducts , and tunnels on the A6 motorway have at least two driving lanes in each direction . 
 The longest tunnel on the A6 motorway route is the 2 @,@ 143 @-@ metre ( 7 @,@ 031 ft ) Tuhobić Tunnel , located on the Oštrovica – Vrata section . The tunnel was initially opened as a single @-@ tube tunnel in 1996 . The second tunnel tube was excavated in August 2007 and opened to traffic in 2008 . The European Tunnel Assessment Programme ( EuroTAP ) , a tunnel safety assessment programme supported by the European Commission , coordinated by FIA and led by the German motoring club ADAC , tested Tuhobić Tunnel twice — once in 2004 , when it achieved poor results , and again in 2009 after implementation of EuroTAP safety recommendations . The 2009 test ranked the tunnel as the second safest in Europe . An unusual feature associated with the A6 tunnels is the close proximity of the 1 @,@ 490 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 890 ft ) <unk> Kosa and the 610 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) <unk> tunnels — they are separated by less than 60 metres ( 200 ft ) of road . In order to prevent abrupt changes in road conditions caused by the weather , the distance between the tunnels is covered by translucent roofing . The tunnels are located on the Vrbovsko – Ravna Gora section . Other significant tunnels on the A6 motorway are the 1 @,@ 130 @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 710 ft ) Veliki <unk> and Vrata tunnels . While the former , as with all the other tunnels mentioned , is significant due to its length , the latter is notable for the large cavern encountered during its excavation . 
 The most significant bridges and viaducts on the A6 motorway route are the 485 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 591 ft ) <unk> Bridge spanning Lake <unk> near <unk> , on the Vrata – Oštrovica section , and the <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> viaducts . The two viaducts are 924 metres ( 3 @,@ 031 ft ) and 725 metres ( 2 @,@ 379 ft ) long respectively . The remaining viaducts on the motorway that are longer than 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) are <unk> and <unk> viaducts . 
 = = History = = 
 Transport links between Rijeka and Zagreb have always been of substantial importance because of the transport requirements of the Port of Rijeka . This was first recognised by the Habsburg Empire in 1728 , when the Carolina road was completed , and again in 1780 when the road was modernized . The original Rijeka – Zagreb road was replaced in 1811 by a new route , the Louisiana road , in order to avoid the steep sections of its predecessor . The new road remained the primary transport link to Rijeka until 1873 , when the first railroad to the city was built . Further development of the port and industry in Rijeka and Zagreb required a more efficient road , which was built in 1954 . That road was to remain the principal road transport link between the two cities for decades . 
 Zagreb – Rijeka motorway , of which the A6 motorway is a part , was one of three routes defined in 1971 as priority transport routes of Yugoslavia that were to be developed as motorways . The first section of the A6 motorway , between Orehovica and Kikovica , was 10 @.@ 5 km ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) long and opened on September 9 , 1972 . The section was also the first six @-@ lane motorway built in Yugoslavia . The 39 @.@ 3 @-@ kilometre ( 24 @.@ 4 mi ) long Zagreb – Karlovac section , now designated the A1 motorway , was completed on December 29 , 1972 . Further construction was suspended for the following 25 years , as a political decision had been made by the Yugoslav leadership to withdraw funding for the construction . The funds were instead allocated to the construction of a motorway that would travel between Ljubljana , Zagreb , Belgrade , and Skopje , then known as the Brotherhood and Unity Highway . The Croatian section of the highway later became the A3 motorway . After the breakup of Yugoslavia , construction of the Rijeka – Zagreb motorway was still on hold due to the Croatian War of Independence , and no further construction took place until 1996 . The sole exception to the 25 @-@ year @-@ long hiatus was the 7 @.@ 25 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 50 mi ) long Kikovica – Oštrovica section , which was originally executed as an expressway and opened in 1982 . 
 In 1996 , construction of the A6 motorway resumed , and in 1997 , a further 30 km ( 19 mi ) of expressway between Oštrovica and <unk> was completed . In December 1997 , the government of the Republic of Croatia founded the Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb company and tasked it with operating the completed sections of motorway and the construction of the remainder of the route . The new motorway operator resumed construction in three stages . During the first stage , 60 @.@ 18 km ( 37 @.@ 39 mi ) of expressway between <unk> and Karlovac were completed by the end of June 2004 , comprising 60 @.@ 18 kilometres ( 37 @.@ 39 mi ) of motorway and semi @-@ motorway . In the second stage , the expressway was upgraded to a full motorway by the end of October 2008 . This stage required additional construction along 55 @.@ 57 kilometres ( 34 @.@ 53 mi ) of the route . The upgraded motorway was officially opened on October 22 , 2008 , by Prime Minister Ivo Sanader at a ceremony held at the southern portal of Tuhobić Tunnel . The opening ceremony coincided with opening of a new bridge over the river Mura on the border between Croatia and Hungary , connecting the A4 to the Hungarian M7 motorway . Thus the route spanning Budapest – Zagreb – Rijeka was completed as a modern motorway . Construction costs incurred are estimated at 661 @.@ 5 million euros . Even though Hrvatske autoceste normally develops motorways in Croatia , the A6 motorway is operated and maintained by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted by means of a traffic census at toll stations and reported by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , the operator of the motorway , and published by Hrvatske ceste . The reported traffic volume exhibits no significant variations as the motorway chainage increases , and as it passes by various major destinations and the interchanges that serve them , except at the Vrata interchange , where traffic to and from Krk Island , Crikvenica , and Novi Vinodolski flows . The greatest volume of traffic is registered between Delnice and Vrata interchanges — with a 12 @,@ 600 @-@ vehicle annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , and a 21 @,@ 150 @-@ vehicle average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) figure . Sections south of Kikovica interchange likely carry substantial traffic volume as they serve Rijeka commuter traffic as well as the volume registered between the Oštrovica and Kikovica interchanges . However , no traffic volume figures are published for those sections , since motorway traffic is counted by means of toll ticket sales analyses , and the sections south of Kikovica interchange are not tolled . 
 Substantial variations observed between AADT and ASDT are normally attributed to the fact that the motorway carries significant tourist traffic to Istria and Kvarner Gulf . The seasonal increase in traffic volume ranges from 41 % on the Oštrovica – Kikovica section to 69 % as measured on the Bosiljevo 2 – Vrbovsko section . The average summer @-@ season traffic volume increase on the motorway is 65 % . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 As of October 2010 , there are four rest areas operating along the A6 motorway , as a new rest area opened on October 9 , 2010 next to the western portal of Tuhobić Tunnel on the Vrata – Oštrovica section of the route . Applicable legislation provides for four types of rest areas designated as types A through D : A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or a motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café , but no restaurants or accommodations ; and D @-@ type rest areas offer parking spaces only , with possibly some picnic tables , benches , and restrooms . Even though the rest areas found along the A6 motorway generally follow this ranking system , there are considerable variations , as some of them offer extra services . The most notable example is <unk> rest area — even though it has no restaurant and therefore falls below B @-@ type rest area standard , there is , for instance , an RV park available . The filling stations typically have small convenience stores and some of them offer LPG fuel . As of October 2010 , all of the rest areas found along the A6 motorway comply with C @-@ type rest area standards or above . 
 The primary motorway operator , Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , leases the rest areas to various operators through public tenders . As of October 2010 , there are three such rest area operators on the A1 motorway : INA , OMV and Tifon . The rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease the fuel operations ; the Tifon @-@ operated rest area has a restaurant and a hotel operated by Marché , a <unk> Hotels & Resorts subsidiary , but they are also penalized if some facilities required by the lease contract are not operating . All of the A6 motorway rest areas , except Ravna Gora , are accessible from one of the directions of the motorway traffic only . The rest areas normally operate 24 hours a day , seven days a week . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = CM Punk = 
 Phillip Jack " Phil " Brooks ( born October 26 , 1978 ) , also known by the ring name CM Punk , is an American comic book writer , actor , upcoming mixed martial artist and retired professional wrestler who is signed with the Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) . He is perhaps best known for his time in WWE , where he was the longest @-@ reigning WWE Champion of the " modern era , " having held the title for 434 days from November 20 , 2011 to January 27 , 2013 . His reign is officially recognized as the sixth longest of all time , as well as the longest since 1988 . 
 Brooks began his professional wrestling career on the American independent circuit , primarily with Ring of Honor ( ROH ) until 2005 when he signed with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . He is a seven @-@ time world champion in professional wrestling , having won the WWE Championship twice , WWE 's World Heavyweight Championship three times , and the ECW and ROH World Championships once each . Along with Daniel Bryan and Seth Rollins , he is one of three men to have been world champion in both WWE and ROH . Punk is also a one @-@ time World Tag Team Champion ( with Kofi Kingston ) , and one @-@ time Intercontinental Champion , making him the 19th WWE Triple Crown Champion and the fastest man in WWE history to achieve this feat , doing so in 203 days . In addition , he was the 2011 WWE Superstar of the Year and the first two @-@ time Money in the Bank winner . 
 Throughout his career , Punk consistently portrayed the character of an outspoken , sharp @-@ tongued , anti @-@ establishment , straight edge iconoclast . Most of the straight edge principles he portrayed , such as not drinking alcohol or not taking recreational drugs , are his real life views . Depending on his alignment as a hero or villain , he emphasized different aspects of the straight edge culture to garner the desired audience reaction . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brooks was born in Chicago , Illinois and raised in nearby Lockport , Illinois . He was one of five children ; his father was an engineer , while his mother was a homemaker . He attended Lockport Township High School . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1999 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Punk 's first venture into wrestling was a stint in a backyard wrestling federation called the Lunatic Wrestling Federation with his friends and brother Mike Brooks in the mid @-@ late 1990s . He first started using the ring name CM Punk when he was put into a tag team named The Chick Magnets with CM Venom after another performer skipped out on the card . Unlike his friends , Punk genuinely wanted to be a wrestler and saw it as more than simple fun . When the promotion started taking off , doing spot shows out of a warehouse in <unk> , Illinois , Punk found out that his brother Mike had embezzled thousands of dollars from the small company , causing them to become estranged . They have not spoken since . 
 He soon left the federation and enrolled as a student at the " Steel Dominion " wrestling school in Chicago , where he was trained by Ace Steel , Danny Dominion and Kevin Quinn to become a professional wrestler . As part of the training , he wrestled at Steel Domain Wrestling in St. Paul , Minnesota . It was in the Steel Domain that he met Scott Colton , who soon adopted the stage name Colt Cabana . Punk and Cabana became best friends and spent most of their early career together working in the same independent circuit promotions , as opponents or allies . In the independents , along with fellow Steel Domain graduates Colt Cabana , <unk> Smooth , Adam Pearce , and manager Dave <unk> , Punk formed an alliance named the Gold Bond Mafia . 
 = = = IWA Mid @-@ South and Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One ( 2000 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Punk 's home promotion for his early career was considered to be Independent Wrestling Association Mid @-@ South ( IWA Mid @-@ South ) . During Punk 's time in IWA : Mid @-@ South , he had high profile feuds with Colt Cabana and Chris Hero while also rising to the top of the roster winning the IWA Mid @-@ South Light Heavyweight Championship twice and the IWA Mid @-@ South Heavyweight Championship on five separate occasions , beating stars like A.J. Styles , Cabana and even Eddie Guerrero for that Championship . Punk 's feud with Hero included a 55 @-@ minute TLC match , a 93 @-@ minute two out of three falls match , and several 60 @-@ minute time limit draws . 
 Punk 's matches with Cabana led him to being hired by the Ring of Honor promotion . From February 2003 until May 2004 , Punk refused to wrestle for IWA : Mid @-@ South , explaining this as a protest to Ian Rotten 's mistreatment of Chris Hero in the company . Hero , however , has stated he believes there were other reasons , and Rotten 's treatment of him was just an excuse by Punk to stop working for the company . Eventually Punk returned to IWA : Mid @-@ South and continued to perform as a wrestler and commentator for them until 2005 when he was signed to World Wrestling Entertainment . His last appearance in IWA : Mid @-@ South was on July 2 , 2005 in which he competed in a 60 @-@ minute time limit draw against Delirious . 
 On August 1 , 2003 , Punk wrestled for Japanese promotion Pro Wrestling ZERO @-@ ONE on the final day of its 2003 Fire Festival at Korakuen Hall , teaming with C.W. Anderson , Josh Daniels , and <unk> Acid in an eight @-@ man tag team match against <unk> Hidaka , Jun Kasai , Naohiro <unk> , and Tatsuhito Takaiwa ; Punk 's team was defeated . 
 = = = Ring of Honor and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling = = = 
 = = = = Feud with Raven ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 Initially , Punk joined Ring of Honor ( ROH ) as a face , but quickly became a heel in a feud with Raven that featured numerous variants of no disqualification matches . Their rivalry was rooted in Punk 's straight @-@ edge lifestyle , with him likening Raven to his alcoholic father ; it lasted most of 2003 and was considered one of ROH 's top feuds of the year . Their rivalry was settled at The Conclusion in November 2003 , where Punk defeated Raven in a Steel Cage match . At the same time , Punk joined the wrestling promotion NWA Total Nonstop Action ( TNA ) , in which he was paired with Julio Dinero as members of Raven 's TNA alliance The Gathering . 
 Punk started climbing the ranks of ROH , including coming in second at the Second Anniversary Show during the tournament to crown the first ROH Pure Champion , losing to A.J. Styles in the finals and winning the ROH Tag Team Championship twice with Colt Cabana as the Second City Saints . Both times Punk and Cabana defeated the Briscoe Brothers to win the championship . Circa October 2003 , Punk was hired as the first head trainer of the Ring of Honor wrestling school , having previously been a trainer for the Steel Domain and Primetime Wrestling . 
 Shortly before a TNA show on February 25 , 2004 , Punk had a physical scuffle with Teddy Hart outside of a restaurant that was broken up by Sabu . The scuffle reportedly stemmed from an ROH show in which Hart performed three unplanned spots putting several other wrestlers in danger of injury . Around the time of the scuffle , Punk and Dinero stopped appearing on TNA shows , leading to speculation he was fired for the incident . Punk , however , said the scuffle had no bearing on his TNA career . He said the reason he and Dinero stopped appearing on TNA pay @-@ per @-@ views was that TNA officials believed that he and Dinero had not connected with the fans as villains , having turned against the popular Raven and instead formed a villainous tag team managed by James Mitchell . The officials decided that since the teams was not working as villains , the storyline would be put on hold indefinitely , and thus had no work for Punk or Dinero . Punk officially quit TNA in March 2004 during the Rob Feinstein controversy , after having a dispute with the TNA offices over his ability to compete in ROH following a TNA order that their contracted wrestlers were to no longer wrestle in ROH . 
 = = = = " Summer of Punk " ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 In ROH , Punk faced off against ROH World Champion Samoa Joe for the championship in a three match series . The first match , on June 12 , 2004 at World Title Classic in Dayton , Ohio , resulted in a 60 @-@ minute time limit draw when neither Punk nor Joe could pin or cause the other to submit in the 60 minutes . The second match between Punk and Joe was planned for December 4 , 2004 ; however , due to Steve Corino being pulled from a match with Joe by Pro Wrestling ZERO @-@ ONE , the second match was hastily rescheduled on October 11 , 2004 for October 16 in Punk 's hometown of Chicago . At Joe vs. Punk II on October 16 , they wrestled to a second 60 @-@ minute draw . In addition to Joe vs. Punk II becoming Ring of Honor 's best @-@ selling DVD at the time , the match received a five @-@ star rating by Dave Meltzer 's Wrestling Observer Newsletter . It was the first match in North America to receive a five @-@ star rating in seven years , the last one being the Hell in a Cell match between Shawn Michaels and The Undertaker at Badd Blood : In Your House in 1997 . Joe ended the series by defeating Punk in the third and final match on December 4 , 2004 at All @-@ Star Extravaganza 2 in which there was a no time limit stipulation . 
 After a try @-@ out match on May 9 , 2005 ( which aired May 15 ) where he lost to Val Venis on the Sunday Night Heat show , Punk accepted a deal offered by World Wrestling Entertainment in June . Even though he had accepted the deal , Punk went on to defeat Austin Aries with his Pepsi Plunge move , winning the ROH World Championship on June 18 , 2005 at Death Before Dishonor III . Immediately after the match , Punk proceeded to become a villain and started a storyline where he threatened to bring the ROH World Championship to WWE with him . For weeks , Punk teased the ROH locker room and the ROH fans as well as mocking the championship he possessed , going so far as to sign his WWE contract on it . During the storyline , referred to by ROH as the " Summer of Punk " , Mick Foley made several ROH appearances , attempting to convince Punk to do the right thing and defend the title on his way out . On August 12 , 2005 in Dayton , Ohio , Punk lost the ROH World Championship to James Gibson in a four corner elimination match consisting of himself , Gibson , Samoa Joe and Christopher Daniels . Punk 's final scheduled match in Ring of Honor took place at Punk : The Final Chapter on August 13 , 2005 against long @-@ time friend Colt Cabana in a two out of three falls match , which he lost . In his last match , Punk was visibly crying and was showered with streamers when he posed in the middle of the ring . 
 Punk made a special appearance at the ROH show <unk> II on February 11 , 2006 , when the original card had to be scrapped due to Low Ki leaving ROH the week prior . In addition , most of the ROH roster contracted to TNA were pulled from the show because of a snowstorm that TNA officials thought might prevent performers from reaching a pay @-@ per @-@ view scheduled the next day . In the main event , Punk teamed with Bryan Danielson to defeat Jimmy Rave and Adam Pearce in a tag team match . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In September 2005 , Punk was assigned to Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , a WWE developmental territory . He made his debut on September 8 , 2005 , in a dark match , where he , Nigel McGuinness and Paul Burchill were defeated by Deuce Shade , Elijah Burke and Seth Skyfire . On September 26 , 2005 in his OVW television debut , Punk suffered a ruptured eardrum and broken nose after Danny Inferno hit him with an overly stiff right hand . Despite the injury , Punk finished the match and quickly recovered . 
 On November 9 , 2005 , Punk became the OVW Television Champion after defeating Ken Doane , which immediately led to a feud between Punk and Brent Albright , who had previously been feuding with Doane for the Television Championship and had lost his chance to wrestle Doane after Punk hit him with a chair so he himself could wrestle Doane . They wrestled in series of matches , including one that ended in overtime with Albright having Punk submit to Albright 's finisher , the Crowbar , but Punk was able to keep the championship , as he had not agreed to the extra time . On January 4 , 2006 , Punk lost the OVW Television Championship during a three way dance among himself , Albright and Doane . Doane was injured halfway through the match and was replaced by Aaron " The Idol " Stevens . Punk submitted to Albright 's Crowbar and was eliminated , but he returned later in the match to distract Albright allowing Stevens to pin Albright and become the new OVW Television Champion . Albright and Punk then briefly teamed . They became opponents again after Punk denied Albright the respect he demanded and proceeded to continually " punk him out " ( get the better of him ) . This feud continued for weeks with Punk always coming out on top , until a double turn occurred on February 1 , 2006 . Albright turned heel during a tag match , allowing the Spirit Squad to beat Punk , turning him face . Punk had a minor appearance at WrestleMania 22 on April 2 , 2006 as one of the gangsters who rode a 1930s era car to the ring before John Cena 's entrance . 
 After Matt Cappotelli vacated the OVW Heavyweight Championship because of a brain tumor in February 2006 , a tournament was held to crown a new champion . The finals were Brent Albright vs. CM Punk with Albright defeating Punk to become the new champion . Punk and Albright continued their feud , with Albright becoming more unstable and paranoid about maintaining his championship after several close call matches against Punk , resulting in acts such as threatening Maria . On May 3 , 2006 , Punk finally defeated Albright in a strap match to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship . As champion , Punk retained the title in matches against opponents such as Shad Gaspard , Ken Kennedy , Johnny Jeter and Mike " The Miz " Mizanin . 
 On July 28 , 2006 , Punk and Seth Skyfire defeated Shad Gaspard and the <unk> to win the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship at a house show . They lost the Tag Team Championship on August 2 , 2006 to Deuce Shade and " Domino " Cliff Compton after an injured Skyfire tagged in an already injured Punk . This altercation led to a feud between Punk and Skyfire after a rematch for the Tag Team Championship on August 7 , 2006 in which a healthy Punk purposefully tagged in an injured Skyfire to be beaten by Shade and Compton . On August 30 , 2006 , a match was scheduled to take place between Punk and Skyfire for the OVW Heavyweight Championship . Prior to the match , however , Skyfire was attacked by Charles " The Hammer " Evans , with whom Skyfire had also been feuding , and was replaced in the match by Chet Jablonski ( Chet the Jet ) who pinned Punk to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship . As Punk no longer possessed the championship , OVW no longer required him . He was removed from the roster and brought up to the WWE roster full @-@ time . He continued to make sporadic appearances for OVW , such as on their 400th TV episode , until WWE and OVW ended their developmental partnership on February 7 , 2008 . 
 = = = = ECW ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 On June 24 , 2006 , Punk made his ECW debut during a house show at the former ECW Arena , defeating Stevie Richards . He made his TV debut on the July 4 ECW on Sci Fi , cutting a brief pre @-@ taped promo about his straight edge lifestyle emphasizing the disciplinary aspects of being drug and alcohol free . Although he had retained the straight edge gimmick , he now had a Muay Thai training background . Punk made his TV wrestling debut on August 1 , 2006 at the Hammerstein Ballroom , defeating Justin Credible . Punk established himself in ECW by going undefeated , defeating opponents such as Christopher W. Anderson , Stevie Richards and Shannon Moore . 
 Soon after , Punk began feuding with Mike Knox after Knox 's girlfriend , Kelly Kelly , was seen to have feelings for Punk . Punk defeated Knox in their first singles match ( qualifying for the Extreme Elimination Chamber at December to Dismember in the process ) as well as the rematch , after which Kelly Kelly celebrated Punk 's victory over her boyfriend . Punk then teamed with D @-@ Generation X and the Hardy Boyz in their Survivor Series match against Rated @-@ RKO , Knox , Johnny Nitro and Gregory Helms , a match in which all the participants on DX 's side survived elimination . At December to Dismember , Punk participated in the Elimination Chamber for the ECW Championship ; however , he was the first person eliminated by Rob Van Dam . 
 Following the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Punk entered into a feud with Hardcore Holly , who ended Punk 's six @-@ month unbeaten streak in singles competition on January 9 , 2007 . Punk went on to feud with Matt Striker , who gave him his second singles loss since being in ECW on January 30 . Punk then qualified for the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23 by defeating Johnny Nitro . In the final week leading up to WrestleMania 23 , Punk made appearances on both Raw and SmackDown ! , defeating Kenny Dykstra and former World Heavyweight Champion King Booker , respectively . At WrestleMania 23 , Punk competed in , but did not win , the Money in the Bank ladder match , being knocked off the ladder just seconds before the winner , Mr. Kennedy , claimed the briefcase . 
 On the April 10 , 2007 ECW on Sci Fi , Punk briefly became a villain by officially joining the New Breed alliance , after several weeks in which both the New Breed and the ECW Originals had attempted to recruit him . Two weeks later , however , Punk betrayed the New Breed during a four on four elimination match between the New Breed and ECW Originals by kicking New Breed leader Elijah Burke in the back of the head and costing them the match . After the match , Punk proceeded to deliver his finisher , the Go To Sleep , on Burke and sarcastically apologized before leaving the ring alone , becoming a fan favorite again . WWE.com later confirmed that Punk was no longer a member of the New Breed . At Judgment Day , Punk wrestled and defeated Burke in his first singles match on a pay @-@ per @-@ view . Punk then went on to One Night Stand and teamed up with Tommy Dreamer and The Sandman in a tables match to defeat the New Breed . 
 When ECW Champion Bobby Lashley was drafted to Raw and stripped of the ECW Championship , a tournament to declare a new champion was held , with Punk , Elijah Burke , Marcus Cor Von and Chris Benoit . Punk defeated Marcus Cor Von on the June 19 ECW on Sci Fi . He was meant to face Chris Benoit at Vengeance : Night of Champions for the ECW Championship , but Benoit was hastily replaced by Johnny Nitro when Benoit no @-@ showed , after killing his family and self . Nitro subsequently defeated Punk at Vengeance for the vacant championship . Punk won another shot at the title at The Great American Bash against Nitro , who had changed his moniker to John Morrison by this point ; however , Punk was defeated again by Morrison . The next week , Punk challenged Elijah Burke and Tommy Dreamer in a triple threat match to determine the next competitor in Morrison 's 15 Minutes of Fame Challenge , in which Punk came out victorious . A week later , Punk defeated Morrison with the Go To Sleep to earn an ECW Championship title match at SummerSlam . At SummerSlam , however , Punk lost the match when Morrison used the ropes for leverage . 
 At the September 1 , 2007 ( aired September 4 ) ECW taping , in a " last chance " title match , Punk defeated Morrison for the ECW Championship . Punk then went on to have successful title defenses against the likes of Elijah Burke ( at Unforgiven ) , Big Daddy V via disqualification ( at No Mercy ) and The Miz ( at Cyber Sunday ) . On the November 6 , 2007 ECW , Punk retained the ECW Championship in a match against Morrison following The Miz 's interference . At Survivor Series , Punk retained his title in a Triple Threat match , beating The Miz and John Morrison . On the January 22 , 2008 ECW , Chavo Guerrero defeated Punk in a No Disqualification match to win the ECW Championship after Edge , ( acting as a guest commentator at ringside ) ran in and speared Punk . 
 = = = = World Heavyweight Champion ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 At WrestleMania XXIV on March 30 , 2008 , Punk won the Money in the Bank ladder match , after defeating Chris Jericho , Montel Vontavious Porter , Shelton Benjamin , John Morrison , Mr. Kennedy and Carlito . 
 On June 23 , Punk was drafted to the Raw brand during the 2008 WWE draft . His first night on Raw came the following week ; after Batista beat down World Heavyweight Champion Edge , Punk cashed in his Money in the Bank contract and won the World Heavyweight Championship ( and later , the Slammy Award for the " Oh my God " Moment of the Year . ) . Later that night , Punk made his first title defense against JBL , who had challenged him shortly after his win . Punk continued to hold and defend the title until Unforgiven on September 7 . Before the Championship Scramble match , Punk was attacked by The Legacy ( Randy Orton , Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase with Manu ) . Orton finished the assault by punting Punk in the head . Punk could not participate in the match due to the attack and so forfeited the title . He was replaced by Chris Jericho , who won the match and the title . He received a rematch eight days later on the September 15 Raw , where he failed to regain the title in a steel cage match against Jericho . 
 On the October 27 episode of Raw , Punk and Kofi Kingston defeated Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase to win the World Tag Team Championship . The duo were members of Team Batista at Survivor Series , where their team lost to Team Orton . Punk then entered in a number one contender Intercontinental Championship Tournament . He defeated Snitsky and John Morrison in the first two rounds . Punk and Kingston lost the World Tag Team Championship to John Morrison and The Miz at a live event on December 13 , 2008 . The next day Punk defeated Rey Mysterio at Armageddon to win the tournament . On the January 5 , 2009 , episode of Raw , Punk received his title match against William Regal , which ended in a disqualification , when Regal grabbed the referee 's jersey . Due to this , Stephanie McMahon awarded Punk a rematch the following week , but this time it was himself that was disqualified . McMahon awarded him another rematch , this time a No Disqualification match on January 19 Raw , Punk won the match and the title . With this win , he became the 19th Triple Crown Champion , and the fastest to accomplish the feat , shattering Kevin Nash 's old record . Punk lost the title on the March 9 Raw to JBL . At WrestleMania XXV , Punk won the Money in the Bank ladder match and became the first person to win the match twice , as well as the only person to have won twice in a row . 
 On April 13 , 2009 during the 2009 WWE draft , Punk was drafted from Raw to SmackDown . In the period after the draft , Punk feuded with Umaga over Umaga 's repeated surprise attacks while Punk was attempting to cash in his Money in the Bank contract . This ultimately resulted in a Samoan strap match at Extreme Rules , which was won by Punk . 
 At the end of the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Punk cashed in his Money in the Bank contract to defeat Jeff Hardy for the World Heavyweight Championship . Punk retained his title in a Triple Threat match against both Edge and Hardy eight days later on the June 15 Raw . At The Bash in Sacramento , California , Punk lost to Hardy by disqualification after kicking the referee ; in the storyline Punk was injured his eye and said he could not see the referee . Because titles do not change hands on a disqualification , Punk retained the championship . Hardy called Punk 's eye injury into question , believing it to be feigned . Punk turned heel , claiming to be the moral superior of those who support Hardy due to his drug @-@ free lifestyle . At Night of Champions , Punk lost the championship to Hardy . Their feud continued through SummerSlam , where Punk regained the title in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match ; afterward , Punk was attacked by The Undertaker . On the August 28 episode of SmackDown , Punk concluded his program with Hardy and achieved his booked goal of excising him from WWE , defeating Hardy in a steel cage match wherein the loser agreed to leave the company . This earned Punk a second Slammy that December , for 2009 's " Shocker of the Year " . 
 At Breaking Point , Punk defeated The Undertaker in a submission match to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . Undertaker originally won the match with his Hell 's Gate submission hold . SmackDown general manager Theodore Long restarted the match after stating that the ban that former general manager Vickie Guerrero had placed on the move was still in effect . Punk won the match with his Anaconda Vise when referee Scott Armstrong called for the bell despite Undertaker never submitting ( reminiscent to the Montreal Screwjob , which took place in the same venue in 1997 ) . The feud between the two continued and at the Hell in a Cell PPV , Punk lost the World Heavyweight Championship to The Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match . He lost two subsequent rematches against The Undertaker on SmackDown and in a Fatal Four Way match at Bragging Rights also involving Batista and Rey Mysterio . 
 = = = = The Straight Edge Society ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 His character took on a more sinister direction on the November 27 SmackDown when he revealed that he had converted Luke Gallows , who had previously been portrayed as the mentally incompetent wrestler Festus , to the straight @-@ edge lifestyle which had rid him of his mental troubles . Continuing to espouse his straight @-@ edge philosophy , Punk began to present himself as a cult @-@ like savior to the crowd , growing the hair on his head , face and chest in an allusion to Jesus . Through January 2010 , Punk began to convert planted members of the audience to a straight @-@ edge lifestyle , making them take a pledge of allegiance to him and shaving their head as a sign of renewal and devotion . After converting many people who were not seen again , convert Serena began accompanying Punk and Gallows to form the Straight Edge Society . As well as leading this alliance , Punk was also the mentor of WWE NXT rookie Darren Young who flirted with the idea of becoming straight @-@ edge before refusing just before his head was to be shaved . 
 Punk continued to show messianic traits , frequently giving sermons including during the annual Royal Rumble match as well as during an Elimination Chamber match at both of the eponymous pay @-@ per @-@ views . In the Chamber match , he was eliminated by Rey Mysterio , whom he had feuding with leading into the PPV . Tensions escalated as Mysterio prevented him from winning a Money in the Bank qualifying match , causing Punk to interrupt Mysterio 's celebration of his daughter 's ninth birthday . Mysterio challenged Punk to a Street Fight at WrestleMania XXVI but lost to Gallows . Punk added the stipulation that if Rey lost , he would join the Society . At WrestleMania , Punk lost to Mysterio sparking a rematch at Extreme Rules where Punk would have to shave his head , like his disciples , if he lost . Punk won this match after interference from a fourth member of the Society who kept his face covered . At Over The Limit , a third and final match was booked with both stipulations reactivated . In the match Punk lost and was subsequently shaved bald . 
 Embarrassed by being shaved bald as he considered himself always pure unlike his followers , Punk appeared on the following SmackDown , May 29 , wearing a mask to hide his baldness . At Fatal 4 @-@ Way , Punk challenged for the World Heavyweight Championship against Mysterio , The Big Show and the champion Jack Swagger , but was unsuccessful when he was attacked by Kane , who was accusing various people of attacking The Undertaker . On July 16 's SmackDown , Punk was finally unmasked by Big Show while healing from an arm injury . The following week Show also unmasked the anonymous member of the Straight Edge Society who was revealed to be Joey Mercury . This led to a handicap match at SummerSlam where Show defeated the entire Society after Punk abandoned his teammates . Show also beat Punk in a singles match at Night of Champions . Following this Serena was released from WWE while Mercury became injured , severely thinning the Society . Gallows began showing signs of dissension too , and Punk defeated him on SmackDown , airing September 24 , ending the group . 
 = = = = The New Nexus ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 Punk was traded back to the Raw brand on October 11 after being swapped with Edge . He took part in the interbrand tag team match at Bragging Rights after injuring Evan Bourne to win a place , but the team lost . It was reported later that he was suffering with a hip injury that would stop him from competing . To keep a presence on television , he began commentating on Raw from November 22 , having already commentated one NXT . During his commentary , he criticized John Cena for his actions against The Nexus . Sometimes he favored heel wrestlers over face wrestlers . At the end of December , Punk left the commentary team after assaulting John Cena on Raw and SmackDown with a chair . Punk later revealed that his motives for the attacks were that he had joined and assumed control of The Nexus . Punk then made each member of the group prove themselves worthy of a spot , with some choosing to join The Corre , which had been started by former Nexus leader Wade Barrett on SmackDown , instead . 
 Punk then used the group to attack Randy Orton , blaming him for prematurely ending Punk 's first World Heavyweight Championship reign in 2008 . Punk and The Nexus cost Orton his match with The Miz for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble in January 2011 . Orton , in turn , responded by taking out all of the New Nexus members by punting them in the head , leaving Punk alone as the sole surviving member of the group . This all led to a WrestleMania XXVII match and a Last Man Standing match at Extreme Rules both of which Punk lost . Punk then spent the next few months involved in filler feuds , often teaming with fellow Nexus members . 
 = = = = WWE Champion ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 In June , after pinning WWE Champion John Cena on Raw , Rey Mysterio at Capitol Punishment and finally Alberto Del Rio again in a contendership match ( which also included Mysterio ) all within one week , Punk revealed his contract would expire at Money in the Bank and vowed to leave the company with the WWE Championship ; some of his speeches and mannerisms echoed his final months with Ring of Honor . After making a scathing yet highly acclaimed on @-@ air speech concerning the way in which WWE is run and its owner Vince McMahon , he was given a storyline suspension from televised WWE events but was reinstated the following week on Cena 's insistence . Upon his return , Punk ceased to appear with the remaining members of Nexus and the group quietly dissolved that month . This helped transition him from a villainous character back to being a fan @-@ favorite . Two weeks later , at Money in the Bank , Punk defeated John Cena to become the WWE Champion on his final night under contract with WWE . 
 On July 21 , Punk made a surprise appearance at a joint WWE – Mattel panel at the San Diego Comic Con , to mock new Chief Operating Officer Triple H and offer WWE Championship tournament finalist Rey Mysterio a match for his WWE Championship , as long as it was in Punk 's hometown , Chicago . Punk appeared at July 23 's All American Wrestling show , showing respect to Gregory Iron , a wrestler with cerebral palsy . Mysterio won the WWE Championship tournament on the July 25 Raw , only to lose it to Cena later that night . After Cena 's victory , Punk returned to Raw and upstaged the new WWE Champion 's victory celebration while also entering into a title dispute . Triple H later upheld both Punk and Cena 's claims to the WWE Championship as legitimate and scheduled the two to a match at SummerSlam to decide the undisputed WWE Champion . Punk won , but lost the title minutes later to Alberto Del Rio , who had cashed in his Money in the Bank contract after Kevin Nash attacked Punk . 
 The night after SummerSlam , Punk accused Nash of conspiring with Triple H to keep Punk away from the WWE Championship . After repeated confrontations Nash and Punk demanded to face each other at Night of Champions , to which Triple H acquiesced . However , after Punk 's repeated verbal attacks towards him and his wife Stephanie McMahon , Triple H booked himself to replace Nash . At Night of Champions , Punk lost a No Disqualification match after Nash , The Miz , and R @-@ Truth attacked both men . Miz and Truth also attacked Punk at Hell in a Cell after he lost a WWE Championship triple threat match . He attempted to avenge this by teaming with Triple H against Miz and Truth at Vengeance , but lost again due to Nash attacking Triple H. This helped transition Punk 's anti @-@ establishment voice from Triple H to John Laurinaitis , who became the interim Raw general manager . Punk balked at Laurinaitis ' promotion and verbally attacked him as a dull yes man . 
 On October 31 , Punk strong @-@ armed his way into a match with Del Rio at Survivor Series , where he regained the WWE Championship by way of submission with the Anaconda Vise . He went on to defend the title through the end of the year , retaining in a rematch with Del Rio on the November 28 Raw and against both Del Rio and The Miz in a triple threat TLC match at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs . On the December 26 Raw , Punk was defeated by Dolph Ziggler in a gauntlet match ; as a result Ziggler became the number one contender to the WWE Championship . Had he been successful , Punk would have earned the right to face Laurinaitis in a match . The following Raw , Punk was defeated by Ziggler via countout following interference from Laurinaitis ; retaining the championship as a result . <unk> from Laurinaitis caused Punk to lose to Ziggler throughout January which ultimately led to Punk attacking Laurinaitis in retaliation . At the Royal Rumble event , Punk successfully defended his title against Ziggler , despite Laurinaitis acting as the outside enforcer . 
 On the January 30 Raw , Chris Jericho attacked Punk and Daniel Bryan during their Champion vs. Champion match , giving Bryan the win . The following week , Jericho explained his actions by dismissing the WWE roster as imitations of himself and singling out Punk for calling himself the best in the world , a moniker Jericho used the last time he was in WWE . Their rivalry continued through Elimination Chamber where Punk retained the WWE Championship in the namesake structure ; while four competitors were eliminated , Jericho was unable to continue the match after being kicked out of the chamber by Punk , causing temporary injury . The following night on Raw , Jericho earned a match against Punk at WrestleMania XXVIII , and in a bid to psychologically unsettle him , he revealed Punk 's father was an alcoholic and alleged that his sister was a drug addict , asserting that Punk 's straight edge philosophy was paranoia to avoid the same vices and vowing to make Punk turn to alcohol by winning the title from him . John Laurinaitis added the stipulation that the WWE Championship could change hands via disqualification , which led to Jericho inciting Punk into using a weapon , but Punk resisted and retained the title . On the April 2 and 9 episodes of Raw SuperShow , Punk retained the WWE Championship against Mark Henry after losing to him via count @-@ out and disqualification . Following both matches , Jericho attacked Punk and doused him with alcohol . On the April 16 Raw SuperShow , Punk pinned Henry in a no disqualification , no countout match to retain his title . After repeated altercations , the feud between Jericho and Punk culminated in a Chicago Street Fight at Extreme Rules where Punk defeated Jericho to retain the WWE Championship . 
 Punk began a rivalry with Daniel Bryan at the May event Over the Limit , retaining the title after reversing Bryan 's submission hold the " Yes ! " Lock into a pinning combination ; the pinfall saved Punk from his own submission only moments later . Shortly before Over the Limit , Bryan interfered in a non @-@ title match between Punk and Kane to frame Punk for attacking Kane with a steel chair , beginning a three @-@ way rivalry . On the June 1 SmackDown , a WWE Championship match between Punk and Kane ended in a double disqualification after Bryan attacked both men . Meanwhile , Bryan 's jilted ex @-@ girlfriend AJ turned her affections to both Punk and Kane . This feud culminated in a triple threat match at No Way Out , where Punk managed to retain the title after AJ distracted Kane . At Money in the Bank , Punk successfully defended the WWE Championship against Bryan in a No Disqualification match with AJ as special guest referee . 
 On July 23 at Raw 1000 , Punk defended his title against Money in the Bank winner John Cena and lost by disqualification after interference from Big Show . When the night 's special guest The Rock – who had interrupted Punk earlier to announce he would wrestle for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble – intervened to save Cena from Big Show 's assault , Punk attacked him , turning heel . The following week , Punk justified his actions , explaining he was tired of people like Cena and Rock overshadowing him when the WWE Champion should be the focus of the company ; Punk asserted himself further soon after by disrupting a number one contender 's match between Cena and Big Show . As a result , both men were entered into the title match against Punk at SummerSlam where he successfully retained the WWE Championship . In the following weeks , Punk demanded respect from people like AJ Lee , Jerry Lawler and Bret Hart and eventually aligned with Paul Heyman in his feud with Cena . At Night of Champions , Punk retained the WWE Championship after he fought Cena to a draw . Punk continued to feud with Cena , despite the latter 's arm injury , rejecting the requests of Mick Foley and Jim Ross to pick him as his Hell in a Cell opponent and leading to a brawl with WWE chairman Vince McMahon . Cena was eventually pulled from the title match at Hell in a Cell , and replaced by Ryback . On October 28 at the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Punk , with help from referee Brad Maddox , defeated Ryback in a Hell in a Cell match to retain the WWE Championship . 
 The next night on Raw , a furious Mick Foley confronted Punk for refusing to pick John Cena as his Hell in a Cell opponent . This led to the two agreeing to meet at Survivor Series in a traditional five @-@ on @-@ five elimination tag team match with Punk choosing Alberto Del Rio , Cody Rhodes , Damien Sandow , and The Miz for his own team . The next week , Punk was replaced as captain by Dolph Ziggler , and booked in a Triple Threat WWE Championship match against John Cena and Ryback instead by Mr. McMahon . On November 18 at the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Punk won the match by pinning Cena , following interference from the debuting faction called The Shield , composed of Dean Ambrose , Seth Rollins , and Roman Reigns , allowing him to retain the WWE Championship and hold the championship for a full year . On December 4 , Punk underwent surgery to repair a partially torn meniscus , removing him from his title match against Ryback at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs . Despite his injury , Punk became the longest reigning WWE Champion in the past 25 years on December 5 , when he hit 381 days , surpassing John Cena 's 380 @-@ day reign . Punk returned to in @-@ ring action on the January 7 , 2013 Raw , retaining the WWE Championship against Ryback in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match , following interference from The Shield . 
 On January 27 at the Royal Rumble , Punk defended the WWE Championship against The Rock in a match with the stipulation that if The Shield interfered , Punk would be stripped of the title . Punk originally pinned The Rock to retain after The Shield put Rock through a table while the arena lights were out . Vince McMahon began to announce that Punk would be stripped of the title , but he instead restarted the match at The Rock 's request . Punk went on to lose the match , ending his record @-@ setting reign at 434 days . Punk received a title rematch with Rock on February 17 at the Elimination Chamber event , with the stipulation that the Rock would lose the WWE Championship if he was disqualified or counted out , but Rock pinned Punk to retain the title . On the February 25 Raw , Punk faced Royal Rumble winner John Cena for his number one contendership to the WWE Championship , but was defeated . 
 = = = = Final storylines ( 2013 – 2014 ) = = = = 
 Punk set his sights on ending The Undertaker 's WrestleMania streak on the March 4 Raw , in an effort to " take something away from the fans " , as he believed they had taken the WWE title away from him . Punk subsequently defeated Big Show , Randy Orton , and Sheamus in a four @-@ way match to earn the right to face Undertaker . After the real @-@ life death of Paul Bearer the following day , a storyline involving Punk regularly spiting The Undertaker through displays of flippancy and disrespect towards Bearer 's death began . Punk interrupted The Undertaker 's ceremony to honor Bearer on Raw , stealing his trademark urn and later using it to attack Kane , humiliate The Brothers of Destruction , and mock Bearer . On April 7 at WrestleMania 29 , Punk was defeated by The Undertaker who , in the process , extended his streak to 21 – 0 and took back the urn . On the April 15 Raw , Punk addressed the crowd and after briefly recalling his historic championship reign , walked out of the arena . 
 Punk returned at Payback on June 16 , defeating Chris Jericho . The next night on Raw , Punk turned face confronting World Heavyweight Champion Alberto Del Rio and telling Heyman to stay away from him during his matches . Later in the night , after Punk 's win over Del Rio , Brock Lesnar returned and executed an F @-@ 5 on Punk . The next week on Raw , Heyman promised Punk that he did not send Lesnar to attack him , and that he still considered Punk his best friend , stating that any problem Punk and Lesnar had with each other was between them . Following that , Punk defeated Darren Young ; when Young and his tag team partner Titus O 'Neil began attacking him , Heyman summoned his other client , the WWE Intercontinental Champion , Curtis Axel to help Punk fight them off , much to Punk 's dismay . On the July 1 Raw , Punk said that he trusted Heyman but did not trust Axel . On July 14 at Money in the Bank , Punk competed in the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match , but Heyman turned on him by hitting him with a ladder , costing him the match that was ultimately won by Randy Orton . The following night on Raw , Punk called out Heyman , who said that , without him , Punk was no longer the " Best in the World " . He revealed that he did not believe that Punk could beat Lesnar , who then came out and hit the F @-@ 5 on Punk onto the announce table . The following week on Raw , Punk challenged Lesnar to a match at SummerSlam , which Heyman accepted on Lesnar 's behalf . On the August 5 Raw , Punk wrestled Axel to a no @-@ contest , after Heyman attacked him . Lesnar then came out and brawled with Punk , eventually getting the upper hand . Punk got revenge the next week by attacking Lesnar with a camera and a steel chair , after Heyman tried to change the scheduled match between Punk and himself to a handicap match involving Lesnar . He then delivered a Go to Sleep to Axel , who had interfered while Punk was chasing Heyman . On August 18 , at SummerSlam , Punk lost to Lesnar in a No Disqualification match , after interference by Heyman . 
 On the next Raw , Punk had the chance to again become a " Paul Heyman guy " , but declined by attacking Axel . The next week , Punk defeated Axel before being assaulted by him and Heyman . Punk was then scheduled to face Axel and Heyman in a handicap elimination match at Night of Champions , later adding a No Disqualification to the stipulation . During the match , Punk made Axel submit , leaving only Heyman left to deal with , but in the process of attacking Heyman , Ryback attacked Punk and placed Heyman on top of Punk for the pin . At Battleground , Punk defeated Ryback after executing a low blow , while the referee was distracted by Heyman attempting to interfere in the match . On the October 14 episode of Raw , Punk defeated Axel in a Beat the Clock challenge match to determine the stipulation for his rematch with Ryback at the Hell in a Cell pay @-@ per @-@ view . He announced that his match would a be two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match in the Hell in a Cell , in which he would face Paul Heyman and Ryback . On October 27 , at Hell in a Cell , Punk defeated Ryback and Paul Heyman . Punk faced Ryback again in a Street Fight match the following night on Raw , defeating Ryback by submission , thus ending their feud . 
 Punk then moved on to feud with the Wyatt Family ( Bray Wyatt , Luke Harper and Erick Rowan ) , forming an alliance with former rival Daniel Bryan . At Survivor Series , Punk and Bryan defeated Harper and Rowan in a tag team match . After Bryan was " abducted " by the Wyatt Family the following night on Raw , Punk was attacked by former allies The Shield ( Dean Ambrose , Seth Rollins , and Roman Reigns ) . The following week on Raw , Kane announced that Punk would face The Shield in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 1 handicap match at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , which Punk won after Reigns accidentally speared Ambrose . 
 On January 26 , 2014 , Punk was the first entrant in the annual Royal Rumble match . After having lasted until the final four , Kane , who was already eliminated earlier in the match by Punk , eliminated Punk from the outside and proceeded to chokeslam him through the announce table . 
 = = = = Departure and retirement ( 2014 ) = = = = 
 Punk did not appear the following night on Raw , nor did he appear at the SmackDown taping on Tuesday despite being advertised for the event . By Wednesday , WWE.com stopped advertising Punk for future events . The Wrestling Observer reported that , on Monday and prior to Raw , Punk had legitimately walked out after telling Vince McMahon and Triple H that he was " going home " . On February 20 , during a conference call to investors , McMahon said Punk was " taking a sabbatical " . On the March 3 episode of Raw , WWE acknowledged Punk 's absence on television when the show started with Punk 's entrance music playing , only for former manager Paul Heyman to walk out . WWE proceeded to remove Punk from footage of their promotional videos ; this lasted until the first half of July , where WWE used footage of Punk to promote the WWE Network . In an interview published in late May , Punk was asked how it felt " to be retired at 35 " and replied that " it feels good " . On July 15 , WWE.com moved Punk from the active roster to the alumni page without releasing a statement . On the same day , Punk thanked his fans without mentioning WWE . In late July , Punk said that he was " never ever " going to return to wrestling . 
 On an episode of Colt Cabana 's Art of Wrestling podcast released in November 2014 , Punk broke his silence regarding his exit from WWE . In a detailed interview , Punk said that he was suspended for two months after walking out on the company in January and that after the suspension ended , nobody from WWE contacted him . He also told that when he reached out to them for unpaid royalties , he was given a run @-@ around by company executives until he was handed his termination papers and was fired by WWE on his wedding day in June 2014 . The manner of firing was the last straw for Punk , stating that he would never return to WWE and that following a legal settlement with WWE , there would be no further working relationship between them . The settlement included Punk giving WWE permission to sell his remaining merchandise . 
 Punk cited his health as the main reason he left WWE , describing that in his final months in the company , he had been working through an untreated and potentially fatal MRSA infection , broken ribs , injured knees , and multiple concussions including one at the Royal Rumble , as well as having lost his appetite and ability to sleep well . Punk felt that WWE was pressuring and rushing him to wrestle before he had fully recovered . According to him , he found a lump on his back in November 2013 and it was diagnosed as a fatty deposit by Dr. Chris Amann , who refused to remove it despite Punk 's requests . 
 A few days after Punk left WWE , his then @-@ fiancé , April Mendez ( AJ Lee ) , convinced him to get the infection checked by her doctor in Tampa . The doctor , Bateman , not knowing who Punk was or of his medical history , took one look at the lump and diagnosed it as a full @-@ blown MRSA infection and told Punk he could have died due to ignoring it for such a long time . Opting out of going to the hospital for an IV drip , Punk had the doctor get everything out of the infection , describing getting it cut and squeezed out as " the most painful experience of my entire life " , but said that once it was all out and he was on stronger medication , he was able to sleep better than he had in weeks . 
 Other sources of unhappiness Punk had with WWE were his failure to main @-@ event a WrestleMania ( deeming his entire career to be a failure as a result ) , being paid less than other top wrestlers for WrestleMania 29 , doing favors for Vince McMahon ( turning heel while champion , working dangerous matches with Ryback , and working with part @-@ time wrestlers ) and not being owed back , being " creatively stifled " and feeling that there were no long @-@ term plans for wrestlers other than John Cena , as well as receiving smaller paychecks and not getting answers as to how the WWE Network would affect wrestlers ' salaries . Lastly , Punk described having left with " zero passion " for wrestling , and described himself at the time of the interview to be the happiest in many years . 
 Less than a week later , when Vince McMahon was interviewed on The Steve Austin Show via the WWE Network , he apologized to Punk for the manner of his termination , which he termed a " coincidence " while blaming a lack of communication within the organization . McMahon said that he was open to working with Punk again . In a second Art of Wrestling podcast , Punk rejected McMahon 's apology as insincere and a " publicity stunt " as McMahon did not contact him directly to apologize and could have apologized earlier . 
 = = = Wrestling character = = = 
 A key part of Punk 's gimmick emerges in the form of iconoclasm which can be shown in his disinclination to conform and penchant for challenging popular and accepted beliefs , traditions , and customs . A prime example , Punk has adopted his real @-@ life following of the straight edge movement as a major attribute of his professional wrestling character . The character utilizes different elements of Punk 's personality and beliefs of the straight edge movement dependent on his antagonist / protagonist alignment . While portraying a crowd favorite , Punk 's character tends to be that of Punk 's normal personality , largely indifferent to others who drink alcohol , smoke tobacco , partake in recreational drug use or have promiscuous sexual behavior , but emphasizing the social discipline involved with personally abstaining from these behaviors . During his WWE career , Punk also incorporated a belligerently anti @-@ establishment and anti @-@ corporate attitude into his persona . Conversely , his villainous personality tends to be that of one who is hardline or militant straight edge , exemplifying the elitist attitudes and superiority complexes — defined by Punk 's common mantra during villainous @-@ themed promos that , because he is straight edge , he is " better than you " . Punk performs the straight edge symbol of crossing his arms in an X formation while having the letter X written on the back of his hands , usually drawn on his wrist tape . 
 Originally , the initials CM in his ring name represented the phrase " Chick Magnet " , the name of the tag team he was in as a backyard wrestler . Punk , however , later changed CM into a pseudo @-@ acronym , declaring that it has no meaning , though when asked since he has taken to making up meanings that fit the initials , going so far as to make up long stories to explain the origins that do not match the actual origin story at all . Since beginning this practice , Punk has stated CM stands for " Cookie Monster " , " Cookie Master " , " Crooked Moonsault " , " Chuck Mosley " , " Charles Montgomery " , " Charles Manson " , " Chicago Made " , among others . 
 During his entrance , Punk yells " It 's <unk> ' time ! " The phrase is a reference to New York hardcore punk band Sick of It All , who wrote a song with the same name , and Marvel 's fictional character The Thing . 
 An integral part of Punk are the numerous tattoos that adorn his body , some of which have become symbols associated with Punk , as well as mantras and declarations that have been integrated into his gimmick . The tattoos as a whole , due to their large quantity and variety , have also become an attribute identifiable to Punk . The most important of the individual tattoos in Punk 's character , whether through association , symbol , or mantra , are : 
 A Pepsi Globe logo on his left shoulder that inspired the names of two of his signature moves . It also became a symbol of Punk himself , who wore the logo on his ring gear in the independent circuit , as well as a slightly modified Pepsi logo being used as part of his TitanTron entrance video . Punk , a keen Pepsi drinker , chose to receive a Pepsi tattoo to emphasize his straight edge beliefs . The tattoo is also a reference to former Minor Threat guitarist Brian Baker , who had a Coca @-@ Cola tattoo and explained this by saying " I like Coca @-@ Cola " . When people inquire about Punk 's Pepsi tattoo , he often replies " I like Pepsi " in a similar fashion . 
 The words " Straight Edge " are spelled out on Punk 's stomach . This is one of his oldest tattoos ; he has referred to it as his identity . 
 A sleeve tattoo on his left arm that reads " luck is for losers " and features numerous good luck symbols , including a rabbit 's foot , four @-@ leaf clover and a horseshoe . The tattoo also features four ace playing cards as a tribute to trainer Ace Steel . 
 A tattoo on the back of his left hand reading " No gimmicks needed " , a tribute to deceased wrestler Chris Candido . 
 A tattoo across his knuckles with the words " <unk> FREE " ( " <unk> " on his right knuckles and " FREE " on his left ) . 
 A tattoo of his little sister 's jersey number ( 31 ) behind his left ear surrounded by stars , each of which also representing his siblings as a way to bond away from home . 
 A tattoo on his right shoulder of the Cobra Command logo , G.I. Joe 's enemy . Punk is well known for his love of comic books , considering them along with jazz and professional wrestling as three of the original arts that America has given to the world . 
 A tattoo of a rose on his left wrist . 
 A tattoo on his knuckles , below the drug @-@ free tattoo , that reads " romance " when his fingers are intertwined with an <unk> heart on his left pinkie at the end . 
 Punk 's character has been parodied by the wrestling federation Chikara who used a mascot character CP Munk , the straight edge chipmunk . The character includes references to Punk , such as X @-@ marked wrist tape , a Pepsi logo on the costume 's left shoulder , and a high @-@ pitch version of Punk 's best @-@ known independent circuit theme song " Miseria <unk> – The Beginning " , by the band AFI . On his website , Punk has said about the character CP Munk , and the people behind it : 
 = = Mixed martial arts career = = 
 = = = Ultimate Fighting Championship ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 At UFC 181 , on December 6 , 2014 , Brooks announced that he had signed a multi @-@ fight contract with Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) . Regarding his ring name , he told the Las Vegas Sun , " I 've come this far with CM Punk . That 's what people know . I 'm trying to stick with that . I 'm not shying away from it . I 'm not ashamed of it . " His UFC profile lists him as CM Punk . 
 In January 2015 , Brooks began training under Duke <unk> at <unk> MMA Academy , alongside former UFC Lightweight Champion Anthony Pettis and ONE FC Welterweight Champion Ben <unk> . In June 2015 , Punk moved to Milwaukee to be closer to the <unk> gym , while still retaining his home in Chicago . In October 2015 , <unk> announced that Brooks had suffered a shoulder injury , delaying his UFC debut until the next calendar year . On February 6 , 2016 , Brooks was diagnosed with herniated disc in his back , and underwent surgery a few days later . 
 Punk is scheduled to fight Mickey Gall on September 10 , 2016 , at UFC 203 . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Punk wrote the introduction for the hardcover edition of Marvel Comics ' 2012 crossover event Avengers vs. X @-@ Men , and described the opportunity as a " geek dream come true " . 
 In 2013 , Punk wrote a foreword for his friend and ex @-@ girlfriend Natalie Slater 's cookbook Bake and Destroy : Good Food for Bad Vegans . 
 In February 2015 , Marvel Comics ' Thor Annual # 1 , partly written by Punk , was released . Punk co @-@ wrote " The Most Cursed " , which appeared in Vertigo Comics ' Strange Sports Stories # 3 in May 2015 . Punk is also co @-@ writing Marvel Comics ' Drax ongoing series , the first issue of which was published on November 4 , 2015 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Punk made an appearance on the February 16 , 2004 episode of Monster Garage , " Box Truck Wrestling Car " , performing a short match with Samoa Joe . On October 31 , 2006 , Punk joined The Atlantic Paranormal Society ( TAPS ) to shoot the Sci Fi Channel special Ghost Hunters Live , which was a six @-@ hour show broadcast live Halloween night from the Stanley Hotel in Estes Park , Colorado . Initially skeptical about what he might find , Punk said he heard children giggling and footsteps when there were not any children booked into the hotel . 
 In 2008 , Punk appeared as the Sports Grand Marshal of the nationally @-@ televised McDonald 's Thanksgiving Parade in downtown Chicago . He reprised this role in 2012 . 
 On July 15 , 2011 , Punk threw out the ceremonial first pitch at Wrigley Field before a Chicago Cubs game . On May 8 , 2012 , Punk returned to Wrigley Field to throw out the first pitch before the Cubs vs. Braves game . He also threw the first pitch at the New York Mets vs. Miami Marlins game on April 5 , 2013 at Citi Field . 
 On February 13 , 2012 , Punk appeared alongside his friend and Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu coach <unk> Gracie for an edition of Gracie Breakdown , a YouTube series that explains mixed martial arts matches and specifically the BJJ techniques used in them . In the episode , he helped explain the techniques used in the UFC 4 match between Royce Gracie and Dan Severn . Punk had mentioned holding a white belt in BJJ during a January 26 , 2012 interview with Ariel <unk> . 
 Punk has done various work with Nerdist Industries . As part of YouTube Comedy Week in 2013 , Punk starred in a series titled CM Punk 's Grammar Slam on Nerdist 's YouTube channel , explaining grammatical mistakes in messages from wrestling fans and berating them . Later that year , he took part in Nerdist 's All @-@ Star Celebrity Bowling alongside AJ Lee , Fandango , and Kofi Kingston . In 2014 , he was a correspondent for Nerdist at the San Diego Comic Con. He also appeared on The Nerdist Podcast in December 2012 . 
 In November 2013 , Punk was the headlining performer on the I Shit You Not comedy show at Lincoln Lodge in his hometown of Chicago . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = = Film = = = = 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 = = = = Music videos = = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Punk is a playable character in numerous video games : WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 , WWE All Stars , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2011 , WWE ' 12 , WWE ' 13 ( for which he was on the cover ) , WWE 2K14 , WWE 2K15 , and EA Sports UFC 2 . 
 There were legal discussions between Punk and WWE over Punk 's appearance in WWE 2K15 . Despite this , he is still in the video game , with his feud with John Cena being one of the two highlighted rivalries in the " 2K Showcase " mode . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Brooks is an atheist . He is an avid fan of the Chicago Blackhawks and Chicago Cubs . In his spare time , he reads and collects comics . He once worked for a shop named All American Comics , and cites Preacher as his favorite comic . He is close friends with professional wrestlers Colt Cabana ( whom he met when he trained at Steel Domain Wrestling ) and Cliff Compton , as well as Rancid vocalist Lars Frederiksen . 
 Brooks married April " AJ Lee " Mendez on June 13 , 2014 . They split their time between homes in Chicago , Illinois , and Milwaukee , Wisconsin . 
 On February 19 , 2015 , Christopher M. Amann , the WWE doctor who Brooks alleges misdiagnosed his staph infection and mistreated his concussion , filed a lawsuit against Brooks and Scott Colton ( Colt Cabana ) for defamation and invasion of privacy . He is seeking $ 1 million in compensation from each defendant and an undisclosed amount in punitive damages . WWE issued a statement and video in support of Amann , stating that Brooks had never informed anyone at WWE of his staph infection . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 Finishing moves 
 Anaconda vise 
 GTS – Go to Sleep ( Fireman 's carry dropped into a knee lift ) 
 Signature moves 
 Arm trap elbow strikes 
 Arm trap swinging neckbreaker 
 Arm wrench followed by stepping a leg over the wrenched arm and performing a mule kick with the leg below the opponent 's face 
 Belly @-@ to @-@ back suplex , sometimes from the top rope 
 DDT 
 Diving crossbody 
 Diving elbow drop – adopted from and used in tribute to Randy Savage 
 Double underhook powerbomb 
 German suplex 
 Hangman 's neckbreaker to one opponent while simultaneously <unk> another opponent 
 Hurricanrana 
 Koji Clutch 
 Mongolian chop 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Calf 
 Leg lariat 
 Muay Thai 
 Roundhouse 
 <unk> 
 Spinning back 
 Step @-@ up enzuigiri 
 Pepsi Twist ( Hammerlock twisted into a short @-@ range lariat ) 
 Rope hung arm trap can opener 
 Shining wizard 
 Sitout suplex slam 
 Slingshot somersault senton 
 Springboard clothesline 
 Step @-@ up high knee to a cornered opponent followed by a bulldog or a short @-@ arm clothesline 
 Suicide dive 
 Super frankensteiner 
 Swinging neckbreaker 
 Tiger suplex , sometimes from the second turnbuckle 
 Tilt @-@ a @-@ whirl backbreaker 
 Two slaps to the opponent 's face , followed by a spinning back kick to the gut , and then a roundhouse kick to finish the combination 
 Welcome to Chicago ... ( Double underhook backbreaker ) 
 Ring of Honor / Independent circuit 
 Finishing moves 
 Anaconda vise or an arm triangle choke 
 Pepsi Plunge ( Diving double underhook facebuster ) 
 Shining wizard 
 Signature moves 
 Arm wrench followed by stepping a leg over the wrenched arm and performing a mule kick with the leg below the opponent 's face 
 Corkscrew dive transitioned into a diving neckbreaker 
 Crooked Moonsault ( Split @-@ legged moonsault ) 
 Delayed vertical suplex 
 Devil Lock DDT ( Hammerlock legsweep DDT ) 
 <unk> 
 Inverted facelock backbreaker 
 Inverted frankensteiner 
 Jackie Chan ( While sitting in a corner , grasps the top rope with one hand on each side of the turnbuckle and when the opponent attempts to pull him off the ropes by his legs , he performs a back tuck , landing on his feet ) 
 Pepsi Twist ( Jumping hammerlock twisted into a short @-@ range lariat ) 
 Punk @-@ Handle Piledriver ( <unk> reverse piledriver ) 
 Rolling fireman 's carry slam 
 Slingshot somersault senton 
 Springboard corkscrew crossbody 
 Suicide dive 
 Welcome to Chicago , Motherfucker ( Double underhook backbreaker ) 
 Managers 
 Milo Beasley 
 Traci Brooks 
 Bobby Heenan 
 Paul Heyman 
 Serena 
 Luke Gallows 
 Alexis Laree / Vicki Adams 
 Lucy 
 Joshua Masters 
 James Mitchell 
 Dave <unk> 
 Wrestlers managed 
 The Straight Edge Society ( Serena , Luke Gallows , and Joseph Mercury ) 
 The New Nexus ( David Otunga , Husky Harris , Michael McGillicutty , and Mason Ryan ) 
 Nicknames 
 " The Best in the World " 
 " Mr. Money in the Bank " 
 " Paul Heyman Guy " 
 " The only straight edge World Heavyweight Champion in history " 
 " The Second City Saint / Savior " 
 " The Straight Edge Savior / Superstar " 
 " The Voice of the Voiceless " 
 Entrance themes 
 Independent circuit 
 " South of Heaven " by Slayer 
 " A Call for Blood " by Hatebreed 
 Ring of Honor 
 " Miseria <unk> ( The Beginning ) " by AFI 
 " Cult of Personality " by Living Colour 
 " Night Train " by The Bouncing Souls 
 " ¡ Olé ! " by The Bouncing Souls 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 " This Fire Burns " by Killswitch Engage ( August 1 , 2006 – July 17 , 2011 ) 
 " Cult of Personality " by Living Colour ( July 25 , 2011 – January 26 , 2014 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Independent Wrestling Association Mid @-@ South 
 IWA Mid @-@ South Heavyweight Championship ( 5 times ) 
 IWA Mid @-@ South Light Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 International Wrestling Cartel 
 IWC World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mid @-@ American Wrestling 
 MAW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Cyberspace 
 NWA Cyberspace Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Julio Dinero 
 NWA Revolution 
 NWA Revolution Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 OVW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 OVW Southern Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Seth Skyfire 
 OVW Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Second OVW Triple Crown Champion 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Feud of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. John Cena 
 Match of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. John Cena at Money in the Bank 
 Most Popular Wrestler of the Year ( 2011 ) 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2012 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2011 , 2012 ) 
 Ranked # 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2012 
 Revolver 
 Golden Gods Award for Most Metal Athlete ( 2012 ) 
 Ring of Honor 
 ROH World Championship ( 1 time ) 
 ROH Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Colt Cabana 
 St. Paul Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Northern States Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 <unk> Northern States Television Championship ( 2 times ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 ECW Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Kofi Kingston 
 WWE Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Intercontinental Championship # 1 contenders Tournament ( 2008 ) 
 WWE Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Money in the Bank ( 2008 , 2009 ) 
 Nineteenth Triple Crown Champion 
 Slammy Award ( 7 times ) 
 " OMG " Moment of the Year ( 2008 ) – Cashing in Money in the Bank to win the World Heavyweight Championship 
 Shocker of the Year ( 2009 ) – Forcing Jeff Hardy out of the WWE after steel cage match victory 
 Despicable Me ( 2010 ) – <unk> Rey Mysterio and his family 
 Superstar of the Year ( 2011 ) 
 " Pipe Bomb " of the Year ( 2011 ) 
 T @-@ shirt of the Year ( 2011 ) – " Best in the World " 
 Extreme Moment of the Year ( 2013 ) – For exacting revenge on Paul Heyman at Hell in a Cell 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 5 Star Match ( 2004 ) vs. Samoa Joe at ROH Joe vs. Punk II on October 16 
 5 Star Match ( 2011 ) vs. John Cena at Money in the Bank 
 Best Gimmick ( 2009 , 2011 ) 
 Best on Interviews ( 2011 , 2012 ) 
 Feud of the Year ( 2009 ) vs. Jeff Hardy 
 Feud of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. John Cena 
 Match of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. John Cena at Money in the Bank 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Bergen Aviation = 
 A / S Bergen Aviation was a Norwegian airline that never operated any flights . Based in Bergen and established in 1984 , it signed an agreement to fly charter flights with Vestlandsreiser in 1986 . It had also made an unsuccessful attempt to receive concession to operate domestic scheduled flights between Oslo Airport , Fornebu and Bergen Airport , Flesland . The airline bought a Sud Aviation Caravelle , but never received permission to operate . The company 's largest owners were Vesta and Vestlandsreiser . 
 = = History = = 
 Bergen Aviation was established in 1984 . Fifty percent of Bergen Aviation was owned by the insurance company Vesta , twenty percent was owned by <unk> , and the rest was owned by various companies based in Bergen . The airline 's first contract was with charter tour operator Vestlandsreiser , which was scheduled to begin on 1 May 1986 . The contract was secured after Vestlandsreiser on 30 January 1986 had announced that they would terminate their agreement with Swedish airline Transwede , citing the latter 's repeated delays and cancellations . The contract consisted of services from Stavanger Airport , Sola ; Bergen Airport , Flesland ; Haugesund Airport , Karmøy ; and Sandefjord Airport , Torp to Palma de Mallorca Airport , Spain and Crete , Greece . To operate the charter routes , Bergen Aviation bought a 99 @-@ seat Sud Aviation SE @-@ 210 Caravelle from Hispania <unk> <unk> in January 1986 , financed with a loan from <unk> . 
 On 10 February , Bergen Aviation announced that they had applied the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration to operate a scheduled service between Flesland and Oslo Airport , Fornebu . At the time , Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) had a monopoly on the route , which was Norway 's busiest , carrying 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 passengers per day . Einar Falck , Vesta 's chief executive officer , stated that the mechanics strike which had recently hit SAS had shown how vulnerable the SAS monopoly was . He further stated that should Bergen Aviation receive concession , they would acquire Boeing 737 or Douglas DC @-@ 9 aircraft for the route , and the owner group would consider listing the company . The application was part of a trend among smaller Norwegian airlines to apply for the new route . At the time there were 42 pending applications from 15 airlines awaiting decision in the Ministry of Transport and Communications . The Progress Party 's Youth supported Bergen Aviation 's application at its national convention . 
 The airline sent an application to register the Caravelle in April , but the application was canceled later in the month , and the aircraft was subsequently registered in Sweden . By June the airline had still not received permission to operate , causing problems for Vestlandsreiser , who had to make last @-@ minute leases of aircraft , and had to terminate all flights from Stavanger . 
 = Italian cruiser Euridice = 
 Euridice was a torpedo cruiser of the Partenope class built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was built by the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard , with her keel laying in February 1889 , her launching in September 1890 , and her commissioning in May 1891 . Her main armament were her six torpedo tubes , which were supported by a battery of ten small @-@ caliber guns . Euridice spent most of her career in the main Italian fleet , where she was primarily occupied with training exercises . She was withdrawn from service in 1907 and sold for scrapping . 
 = = Design = = 
 Euridice was 73 @.@ 1 meters ( 239 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a beam of 8 @.@ 22 m ( 27 ft 0 in ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 48 m ( 11 ft 5 in ) . She displaced 904 metric tons ( 890 long tons ; 996 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Specific figures for Euridice 's engine performance have not survived , but the ships of her class had top speeds of 18 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 to 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 9 mph ) at 3 @,@ 884 to 4 @,@ 422 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 896 to 3 @,@ 297 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 96 – 121 . 
 Euridice was armed with a main battery of one 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 gun and six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) / 43 guns mounted singly.α She was also equipped with three 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 20 guns in single mounts . Her primary offensive weapon was her six 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 1 @.@ 6 in ( 41 mm ) thick ; her conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Euridice was laid down on 14 February 1889 at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia ( Royal Dockyard in Castellammare di Stabia ) . The completed hull was launched on 22 September 1890 . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 1 May 1891 . Euridice took part in the annual fleet exercises in 1893 in the " attacking squadron " , which also included six ironclads , her sister ship Iride and the torpedo cruisers Goito and Monzambano . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . 
 In 1895 , she was assigned to the 2nd Division of the Permanent Squadron , which included her sister ship Calatafimi , the ironclad battleship Francesco Morosini , and the protected cruiser Etruria . The Squadron was based at La Spezia at the time , though Euridice was stationed primarily in Taranto and Naples , along with most of the other torpedo cruisers of the Italian fleet . In 1896 , she took part in the annual summer maneuvers in July as part of the Second Division of the Reserve Squadron , which also included the ironclads Italia and Ruggiero di Lauria and the protected cruiser Stromboli . 
 Euridice took part in an international naval demonstration in 1897 off Crete during a period of tension between Greece and the Ottoman Empire that culminated in the Greco @-@ Turkish War . At the time , she was assigned to the 1st Division , which included the three Re Umberto class ironclads and the protected cruisers Giovanni Bausan and Vesuvio . In 1903 , Euridice was assigned to the 1st Squadron , along with her sister Minerva . The unit also included eight battleships , six other cruisers , and six destroyers . The 1st Squadron was kept in active service for seven months of the year for training , and had reduced crews for the remainder of the year . The ship was sold for scrap in March 1907 and subsequently broken up . 
 = Boydell Shakespeare Gallery = 
 The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery in London , England , was the first stage of a three @-@ part project initiated in November 1786 by engraver and publisher John Boydell in an effort to foster a school of British history painting . In addition to the establishment of the gallery , Boydell planned to produce an illustrated edition of William Shakespeare 's plays and a folio of prints based upon a series of paintings by different contemporary painters . During the 1790s the London gallery that showed the original paintings emerged as the project 's most popular element . 
 The works of William Shakespeare enjoyed a renewed popularity in 18th @-@ century Britain . Several new editions of his works were published , his plays were revived in the theatre and numerous works of art were created illustrating the plays and specific productions of them . Capitalising on this interest , Boydell decided to publish a grand illustrated edition of Shakespeare 's plays that would showcase the talents of British painters and engravers . He chose the noted scholar and Shakespeare editor George Steevens to oversee the edition , which was released between 1791 and 1803 . 
 The press reported weekly on the building of Boydell 's gallery , designed by George Dance the Younger , on a site in Pall Mall . Boydell commissioned works from famous painters of the day , such as Joshua Reynolds , and the folio of engravings proved the enterprise 's most lasting legacy . However , the long delay in publishing the prints and the illustrated edition prompted criticism . Because they were hurried , and many illustrations had to be done by lesser artists , the final products of Boydell 's venture were judged to be disappointing . The project caused the Boydell firm to become insolvent , and they were forced to sell the gallery at a lottery . 
 = = Shakespeare in the 18th century = = 
 In the 18th century , Shakespeare became associated with rising British nationalism , and Boydell tapped into the same mood that many other entrepreneurs were exploiting . Shakespeare appealed not only to a social elite who prided themselves on their artistic taste , but also to the emerging middle class who saw in Shakespeare 's works a vision of a diversified society . The mid @-@ century Shakespearean theatrical revival was probably most responsible for reintroducing the British public to Shakespeare . Shakespeare 's plays were integral to the theatre 's resurgence at this time . Despite the upsurge in theatre @-@ going , writing tragedies was not profitable , and thus few good tragedies were written . Shakespeare 's works filled the gap in the repertoire , and his reputation grew as a result . By the end of the 18th century , one out of every six plays performed in London was by Shakespeare . 
 The actor , director , and producer David Garrick was a key figure in Shakespeare 's theatrical renaissance . His reportedly superb acting , unrivalled productions , numerous and important Shakespearean portraits , and his spectacular 1769 Shakespeare Jubilee helped promote Shakespeare as a marketable product and the national playwright . Garrick 's Drury Lane theatre was the centre of the Shakespeare mania which swept the nation . 
 The visual arts also played a significant role in expanding Shakespeare 's popular appeal . In particular , the conversation pieces designed chiefly for homes generated a wide audience for literary art , especially Shakespearean art . This tradition began with William Hogarth ( whose prints reached all levels of society ) and attained its peak in the Royal Academy exhibitions , which displayed paintings , drawings , and sculptures . The exhibitions became important public events : thousands flocked to see them , and newspapers reported in detail on the works displayed . They became a fashionable place to be seen ( as did Boydell 's Shakespeare Gallery , later in the century ) . In the process , the public was <unk> with Shakespeare 's works . 
 = = = Shakespeare editions = = = 
 The rise in Shakespeare 's popularity coincided with Britain 's accelerating change from an oral to a print culture . Towards the end of the century , the basis of Shakespeare 's high reputation changed . He had originally been respected as a playwright , but once the theatre became associated with the masses , Shakespeare 's status as a " great writer " shifted . Two strands of Shakespearean print culture emerged : bourgeois popular editions and scholarly critical editions . 
 In order to turn a profit , booksellers chose well @-@ known authors , such as Alexander Pope and Samuel Johnson , to edit Shakespeare editions . According to Shakespeare scholar Gary Taylor , Shakespearean criticism became so " associated with the dramatis personae of 18th @-@ century English literature ... [ that ] he could not be extracted without uprooting a century and a half of the national canon " . The 18th century 's first Shakespeare edition , which was also the first illustrated edition of the plays , was published in 1709 by Jacob Tonson and edited by Nicholas Rowe . The plays appeared in " pleasant and readable books in small format " which " were supposed ... to have been taken for common or garden use , domestic rather than library sets " . Shakespeare became " domesticated " in the 18th century , particularly with the publication of family editions such as Bell 's in 1773 and 1785 – 86 , which advertised themselves as " more instructive and intelligible ; especially to the young ladies and to youth ; glaring indecencies being removed " . 
 Scholarly editions also proliferated . At first , these were edited by author @-@ scholars such as Pope ( 1725 ) and Johnson ( 1765 ) , but later in the century this changed . Editors such as George Steevens ( 1773 , 1785 ) and Edmund Malone ( 1790 ) produced meticulous editions with extensive footnotes . The early editions appealed to both the middle class and to those interested in Shakespeare scholarship , but the later editions appealed almost exclusively to the latter . Boydell 's edition , at the end of the century , tried to reunite these two strands . It included illustrations but was edited by George Steevens , one of the foremost Shakespeare scholars of the day . 
 = = Boydell 's Shakespeare venture = = 
 Boydell 's Shakespeare project contained three parts : an illustrated edition of Shakespeare 's plays ; a folio of prints from the gallery ( originally intended to be a folio of prints from the edition of Shakespeare 's plays ) ; and a public gallery where the original paintings for the prints would hang . 
 The idea of a grand Shakespeare edition was conceived during a dinner at the home of Josiah Boydell ( John 's nephew ) in late 1786 . Five important accounts of the occasion survive . From these , a guest list and a reconstruction of the conversation have been assembled . The guest list reflects the range of Boydell 's contacts in the artistic world : it included Benjamin West , painter to King George III ; George Romney , a renowned portrait painter ; George Nicol , bookseller to the king ; William Hayley , a poet ; John Hoole , a scholar and translator of Tasso and Aristotle ; and Daniel Braithwaite , secretary to the postmaster general and a patron of artists such as Romney and Angelica Kauffman . Most accounts also place the painter Paul Sandby at the gathering . 
 Boydell wanted to use the edition to help stimulate a British school of history painting . He wrote in the " Preface " to the folio that he wanted " to advance that art towards maturity , and establish an English School of Historical Painting " . A court document used by Josiah to collect debts from customers after Boydell 's death relates the story of the dinner and Boydell 's motivations : 
 [ Boydell said ] he should like to wipe away the stigma that all foreign critics threw on this nation — that they had no genius for historical painting . He said he was certain from his success in encouraging engraving that Englishmen wanted nothing but proper encouragement and a proper subject to excel in historical painting . The encouragement he would endeavor to find if a proper subject were pointed out . Mr. Nicol replied that there was one great National subject concerning which there could be no second opinion , and mentioned Shakespeare . The proposition was received with acclaim by the Alderman [ John Boydell ] and the whole company . 
 However , as Frederick Burwick argues in his introduction to a collection of essays on the Boydell Gallery , " [ w ] hatever claims Boydell might make about furthering the cause of history painting in England , the actual rallying force that brought the artists together to create the Shakespeare Gallery was the promise of engraved publication and distribution of their works . " 
 After the initial success of the Shakespeare Gallery , many wanted to take credit . Henry Fuseli long claimed that his planned Shakespeare ceiling ( in imitation of the Sistine Chapel ceiling ) had given Boydell the idea for the gallery . James Northcote claimed that his Death of Wat Tyler and Murder of the Princes in the Tower had motivated Boydell to start the project . However , according to Winifred Friedman , who has researched the Boydell Gallery , it was probably Joshua Reynolds 's Royal Academy lectures on the superiority of history painting that influenced Boydell the most . 
 The logistics of the enterprise were difficult to organise . Boydell and Nicol wanted to produce an illustrated edition of a multi @-@ volume work and intended to bind and sell the 72 large prints separately in a folio . A gallery was required to exhibit the paintings from which the prints were drawn . The edition was to be financed through a subscription campaign , during which the buyers would pay part of the price up front and the remainder on delivery . This unusual practice was necessitated by the fact that over £ 350 @,@ 000 — an enormous sum at the time , worth about £ 38 @.@ 8 million today — was eventually spent . The gallery opened in 1789 with 34 paintings and added 33 more in 1790 when the first engravings were published . The last volume of the edition and the Collection of Prints were published in 1803 . In the middle of the project , Boydell decided that he could make more money if he published different prints in the folio than in the illustrated edition ; as a result , the two sets of images are not identical . 
 Advertisements were issued and placed in newspapers . When a subscription was circulated for a medal to be struck , the copy read : " The <unk> of this great national undertaking will also have the satisfaction to know , that their names will be handed down to Posterity , as the Patrons of Native Genius , enrolled with their own hands , in the same book , with the best of Sovereigns . " The language of both the advertisement and the medal emphasised the role each subscriber played in the patronage of the arts . The subscribers were primarily middle @-@ class Londoners , not aristocrats . Edmund Malone , himself an editor of a rival Shakespeare edition , wrote that " before the scheme was well @-@ formed , or the proposals entirely printed off , near six hundred persons eagerly set down their names , and paid their subscriptions to a set of books and prints that will cost each person , I think , about ninety guineas ; and on looking over the list , there were not above twenty names among them that anybody knew " . 
 = = Illustrated Shakespeare edition and folio = = 
 The " magnificent and accurate " Shakespeare edition which Boydell began in 1786 was to be the focus of his enterprise — he viewed the print folio and the gallery as offshoots of the main project . In an advertisement prefacing the first volume of the edition , Nicol wrote that " splendor and magnificence , united with correctness of text were the great objects of this Edition " . The volumes themselves were handsome , with gilded pages that , unlike those in previous scholarly editions , were unencumbered by footnotes . Each play had its own title page followed by a list of " Persons in the Drama " . Boydell spared no expense . He hired the typography experts William Bulmer and William Martin to develop and cut a new typeface specifically for the edition . Nicol explains in the preface that they " established a printing @-@ house ... [ and ] a foundry to cast the types ; and even a manufactory to make the ink " . Boydell also chose to use high @-@ quality wove Whatman paper . The illustrations were printed independently and could be inserted and removed as the purchaser desired . The first volumes of the Dramatic Works were published in 1791 and the last in 1805 . 
 Boydell was responsible for the " splendor " , and George Steevens , the general editor , was responsible for the " correctness of text " . Steevens , according to Evelyn Wenner , who has studied the history of the Boydell edition , was " at first an ardent advocate of the plan " but " soon realized that the editor of this text must in the very scheme of things give way to painters , publishers and engravers " . He was also ultimately disappointed in the quality of the prints , but he said nothing to jeopardize the edition 's sales . Steevens , who had already edited two complete Shakespeare editions , was not asked to edit the text anew ; instead , he picked which version of the text to reprint . Wenner describes the resulting hybrid edition : 
 The thirty @-@ six plays , printed from the texts of Reed and Malone , divide into the following three groups : ( 1 ) five plays of the first three numbers printed from Reed 's edition of 1785 with many changes adopted from the Malone text of 1790 ( 2 ) King Lear and the six plays of the next three numbers printed from Malone 's edition of 1790 but exhibiting conspicuous deviations from his basic text ( 3 ) twenty @-@ four plays of the last twelve numbers also printed from Malone 's text but made to conform to Steevens 's own edition of 1793 . 
 Throughout the edition , modern ( i.e. 18th @-@ century ) spelling was preferred as were First Folio readings . 
 Boydell sought out the most eminent painters and engravers of the day to contribute paintings for the gallery , engravings for the folio , and illustrations for the edition . Artists included Richard Westall , Thomas Stothard , George Romney , Henry Fuseli , Benjamin West , Angelica Kauffman , Robert Smirke , John Opie , Francesco Bartolozzi , Thomas Kirk , Henry Thomson , and Boydell 's nephew and business partner , Josiah Boydell . 
 The folio and the illustrated Shakespeare edition were " by far the largest single engraving enterprise ever undertaken in England " . As print collector and dealer Christopher Lennox @-@ Boyd explains , " had there not been a market for such engravings , not one of the paintings would have been commissioned , and few , if any , of the artists would have risked painting such elaborate compositions " . Scholars believe that a variety of engraving methods were employed and that line engraving was the " preferred medium " because it was " clear and <unk> " and because it had a high reputation . <unk> engraving , which was quicker and often used to produce shading effects , wore out quicker and was valued less . Many plates were a mixture of both . Several scholars have suggested that mezzotint and aquatint were also used . Lennox @-@ Boyd , however , claims that " close examination of the plates confirms " that these two methods were not used and argues that they were " totally unsuitable " : mezzotint wore quickly and aquatint was too new ( there would not have been enough artists capable of executing it ) . Most of Boydell 's engravers were also trained artists ; for example , Bartolozzi was renowned for his stippling technique . 
 Boydell 's relationships with his illustrators were generally congenial . One of them , James Northcote , praised Boydell 's liberal payments . He wrote in an 1821 letter that Boydell " did more for the advancement of the arts in England than the whole mass of the nobility put together ! He paid me more nobly than any other person has done ; and his memory I shall ever hold in reverence " . Boydell typically paid the painters between £ 105 to £ 210 , and the engravers between £ 262 and £ 315 . Joshua Reynolds at first declined Boydell 's offer to work on the project , but he agreed when pressed . Boydell offered Reynolds carte blanche for his paintings , giving him a down payment of £ 500 , an extraordinary amount for an artist who had not even agreed to do a specific work . Boydell eventually paid him a total of £ 1 @,@ 500 . 
 There are 96 illustrations in the nine volumes of the illustrated edition and each play has at least one . Approximately two @-@ thirds of the plays , 23 out of 36 , are each illustrated by a single artist . Approximately two @-@ thirds of the total number of illustrations , or 65 , were completed by three artists : William Hamilton , Richard Westall , and Robert Smirke . The primary illustrators of the edition were known as book illustrators , whereas a majority of the artists included in the folio were known for their paintings . Lennox @-@ Boyd argues that the illustrations in the edition have a " uniformity and cohesiveness " that the folio lacks because the artists and engravers working on them understood book illustration while those working on the folio were working in an unfamiliar medium . 
 The print folio , A Collection of Prints , From Pictures Painted for the Purpose of Illustrating the Dramatic Works of Shakspeare , by the Artists of Great @-@ Britain ( 1805 ) , was originally intended to be a collection of the illustrations from the edition , but a few years into the project , Boydell altered his plan . He guessed that he could sell more folios and editions if the pictures were different . Of the 97 prints made from paintings , two @-@ thirds of them were made by ten of the artists . Three artists account for one @-@ third of the paintings . In all , 31 artists contributed works . 
 = = Gallery building = = 
 In June 1788 , Boydell and his nephew secured the lease on a site at 52 Pall Mall ( 51 ° 30 ′ 20 @.@ 5 ″ N 0 ° 8 ′ 12 ″ W ) to build the gallery and engaged George Dance , then the Clerk of the City Works , as the architect for the project . Pall Mall at that time had a mix of expensive residences and commercial operations , such as bookshops and gentleman 's clubs , popular with fashionable London society . The area also contained some less genteel establishments : King 's Place ( now Pall Mall Place ) , an alley running to the east and behind Boydell 's gallery , was the site of Charlotte Hayes 's high @-@ class brothel . Across King 's Place , immediately to the east of Boydell 's building , 51 Pall Mall had been purchased on 26 February 1787 by George Nicol , bookseller and future husband of Josiah 's elder sister , Mary Boydell . As an indication of the changing character of the area , this property had been the home of <unk> 's gentleman 's club from 1773 to 1787 . Begun as a gambling establishment for wealthy young men , it had later become a reformist political club that counted William Pitt and William Wilberforce as members . 
 Dance 's Shakespeare Gallery building had a monumental , neoclassical stone front , and a full @-@ length exhibition hall on the ground floor . Three interconnecting exhibition rooms occupied the upper floor , with a total of more than 4 @,@ 000 square feet ( 370 m2 ) of wall space for displaying pictures . The two @-@ storey façade was not especially large for the street , but its solid classicism had an imposing effect . Some reports describe the exterior as " sheathed in copper " . 
 The lower storey of the façade was dominated by a large , rounded @-@ arched doorway in the centre . The <unk> arch rested on wide piers , each broken by a narrow window , above which ran a simple cornice . Dance placed a transom across the doorway at the level of the cornice bearing the inscription " Shakespeare Gallery " . Below the transom were the main entry doors , with glazed panels and side lights matching the flanking windows . A radial fanlight filled the lunette above the transom . In each of the spandrels to the left and right of the arch , Dance set a carving of a lyre inside a <unk> wreath . Above all this ran a panelled band course dividing the lower storey from the upper . 
 The upper façade contained paired pilasters on either side , and a thick entablature and triangular pediment . The architect Sir John Soane criticised Dance 's combination of slender pilasters and a heavy entablature as a " strange and extravagant absurdity " . The capitals topping the pilasters sported volutes in the shape of ammonite fossils . Dance invented this neo @-@ classical feature , which became known as the Ammonite Order , specifically for the gallery . In a recess between the pilasters , Dance placed Thomas Banks 's sculpture Shakespeare attended by Painting and Poetry , for which the artist was paid 500 guineas . The sculpture depicted Shakespeare , reclining against a rock , between the Dramatic Muse and the Genius of Painting . Beneath it was a panelled pedestal inscribed with a quotation from Hamlet : " He was a Man , take him for all in all , I shall not look upon his like again " . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The Shakespeare Gallery , when it opened on 4 May 1789 , contained 34 paintings , and by the end of its run it had between 167 and 170 . ( The exact inventory is uncertain and most of the paintings have disappeared ; only around 40 paintings can be identified with any certainty . ) According to Frederick Burwick , during its sixteen @-@ year operation , the Gallery reflected the transition from Neoclassicism to Romanticism . Works by artists such as James Northcote represent the conservative , neoclassical elements of the gallery , while those of Henry Fuseli represent the newly emerging Romantic movement . William Hazlitt praised Northcote in an essay entitled " On the Old Age of Artists " , writing " I conceive any person would be more struck with Mr. Fuseli at first sight , but would wish to visit Mr. Northcote oftener . " 
 The gallery itself was a fashionable hit with the public . Newspapers carried updates of the construction of the gallery , down to drawings for the proposed façade . The Daily Advertiser featured a weekly column on the gallery from May through August ( exhibition season ) . Artists who had influence with the press , and Boydell himself , published anonymous articles to heighten interest in the gallery , which they hoped would increase sales of the edition . 
 At the beginning of the enterprise , reactions were generally positive . The Public Advertiser wrote on 6 May 1789 : " the pictures in general give a mirror of the poet ... [ The Shakespeare Gallery ] bids fair to form such an epoch in the History of the Fine Arts , as will establish and confirm the superiority of the English School " . The Times wrote a day later : 
 This establishment may be considered with great truth , as the first stone of an English School of Painting ; and it is peculiarly honourable to a great commercial country , that it is indebted for such a distinguished circumstance to a commercial character — such an institution — will place , in the Calendar of Arts , the name of Boydell in the same rank with the Medici of Italy . 
 Fuseli himself may have written the review in the Analytical Review , which praised the general plan of the gallery while at the same time hesitating : " such a variety of subjects , it may be supposed , must exhibit a variety of powers ; all cannot be the first ; while some must soar , others must skim the meadow , and others content themselves to walk with dignity " . However , according to Frederick Burwick , critics in Germany " responded to the Shakespeare Gallery with far more thorough and meticulous attention than did the critics in England " . 
 Criticism increased as the project dragged on : the first volume did not appear until 1791 . James Gillray published a cartoon labelled " Boydell sacrificing the Works of Shakespeare to the Devil of Money @-@ Bags " . The essayist and soon @-@ to @-@ be co @-@ author of the children 's book Tales from Shakespeare ( 1807 ) Charles Lamb criticised the venture from the outset : 
 What injury did not Boydell 's Shakespeare Gallery do me with Shakespeare . To have Opie 's Shakespeare , Northcote 's Shakespeare , light headed Fuseli 's Shakespeare , wooden @-@ headed West 's Shakespeare , deaf @-@ headed Reynolds ' Shakespeare , instead of my and everybody 's Shakespeare . To be tied down to an authentic face of Juliet ! To have Imogen 's portrait ! To confine the <unk> ! 
 Northcote , while appreciating Boydell 's largesse , also criticised the results of the project : " With the exception of a few pictures by Joshua [ Reynolds ] and [ John ] Opie , and — I hope I may add — myself , it was such a collection of slip @-@ slop imbecility as was dreadful to look at , and turned out , as I had expected it would , in the ruin of poor Boydell 's affairs " . 
 = = Collapse = = 
 By 1796 , subscriptions to the edition had dropped by two @-@ thirds . The painter and diarist Joseph Farington recorded that this was a result of the poor engravings : 
 West said He looked over the Shakespeare prints and was sorry to see them of such inferior quality . He said that excepting that from His Lear by Sharpe , that from Northcote 's children in the Tower , and some small ones , there were few that could be approved . Such a mixture of dotting and engraving , and such a general deficiency in respect of drawing which He observed the Engravers seemed to know little of , that the volumes presented a mass of works which He did not wonder many subscribers had declined to continue their subscription . 
 The mix of engraving styles was criticised ; line engraving was considered the superior form and artists and subscribers disliked the mixture of lesser forms with it . Moreover , Boydell 's engravers fell behind schedule , delaying the entire project . He was forced to engage lesser artists , such as Hamilton and Smirke , at a lower price to finish the volumes as his business started to fail . Modern art historians have generally concurred that the quality of the engravings , particularly in the folio , was poor . Moreover , the use of so many different artists and engravers led to a lack of stylistic cohesion . 
 Although the Boydells ended with 1 @,@ 384 subscriptions , the rate of subscriptions dropped , and remaining subscriptions were also increasingly in doubt . Like many businesses at the time , the Boydell firm kept few records . Only the customers knew what they had purchased . This caused numerous difficulties with debtors who claimed they had never subscribed or had subscribed for less . Many subscribers also defaulted , and Josiah Boydell spent years after John 's death attempting to force them to pay . 
 The Boydells focused all their attention on the Shakespeare edition and other large projects , such as The History of the River Thames and The Complete Works of John Milton , rather than on lesser , more profitable ventures . When both the Shakespeare enterprise and the Thames book failed , the firm had no capital to fall back upon . Beginning in 1789 , with the onset of the French revolution , John Boydell 's export business to Europe was cut off . By the late 1790s and early 19th century , the two @-@ thirds of his business that depended upon the export trade was in serious financial difficulty . 
 In 1804 , John Boydell decided to appeal to Parliament for a private bill to authorise a lottery to dispose of everything in his business . The bill received royal assent on 23 March , and by November the Boydells were ready to sell tickets . John Boydell died before the lottery was drawn on 28 January 1805 , but lived long enough to see each of the 22 @,@ 000 tickets purchased at three guineas apiece ( £ 250 each in modern terms ) . To encourage ticket sales and reduce unsold inventory , every purchaser was guaranteed to receive a print worth one guinea from the Boydell company 's stock . There were 64 winning tickets for major prizes , the highest being the Gallery itself and its collection of paintings . This went to William Tassie , a gem engraver and cameo modeller , of Leicester Fields ( now Leicester Square ) . Josiah offered to buy the gallery and its paintings back from Tassie for £ 10 @,@ 000 ( worth about £ 730 @,@ 000 now ) , but Tassie refused and auctioned the paintings at Christie 's . The painting collection and two reliefs by Anne Damer fetched a total of £ 6 @,@ 181 18s . 6d . The Banks sculpture group from the façade was initially intended to be kept as a monument for Boydell 's tomb . Instead , it remained part of the façade of the building in its new guise as the British Institution until the building was torn down in 1868 – 69 . The Banks sculpture was then moved to Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon and re @-@ erected in New Place Garden between June and November 1870 . The lottery saved Josiah from bankruptcy and earned him £ 45 @,@ 000 , enabling him to begin business again as a printer . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 From the outset , Boydell 's project inspired imitators . In April 1788 , after the announcement of the Shakespeare Gallery , but a year before its opening , Thomas Macklin opened a Gallery of the Poets in the former Royal Academy building on the south side of Pall Mall . The first exhibition featured one work from each of 19 artists , including Fuseli , Reynolds , and Thomas Gainsborough . The gallery added new paintings of subjects from poetry each year , and from 1790 supplemented these with scenes from the Bible . The Gallery of the Poets closed in 1797 , and its contents were offered by lottery . This did not deter Henry Fuseli from opening a Milton Gallery in the same building in 1799 . Another such venture was the Historic Gallery opened by Robert Bowyer in Schomberg House at 87 Pall Mall in about 1793 . The gallery accumulated 60 paintings ( many by the same artists who worked for Boydell ) commissioned to illustrate a new edition of David Hume 's The History of Great Britain . Ultimately , Bowyer had to seek parliamentary approval for a sale by lottery in 1805 , and the other ventures , like Boydell 's , also ended in financial failure . 
 The building in Pall Mall was purchased in 1805 by the British Institution , a private club of connoisseurs founded that year to hold exhibitions . It remained an important part of the London art scene until disbanded in 1867 , typically holding a Spring exhibition of new works for sale from the start of February to the first week of May , and a loan exhibition of old masters , generally not for sale , from the first week of June to the end of August . 
 The paintings and engravings that were part of the Boydell Gallery affected the way Shakespeare 's plays were staged , acted , and illustrated in the 19th century . They also became the subject of criticism in important works such as Romantic poet and essayist Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's " Lectures on Shakespeare " and William Hazlitt 's dramatic criticism . Despite Charles Lamb 's criticism of the Gallery 's productions , Charles and Mary Lamb 's children 's book , Tales from Shakespeare ( 1807 ) , was illustrated using plates from the project . 
 The Boydell enterprise 's most enduring legacy was the folio . It was reissued throughout the 19th century , and in 1867 , " by the aid of photography the whole series , excepting the portraits of their Majesties George III. and Queen Charlotte , is now presented in a handy form , suitable for ordinary libraries or the drawing @-@ room table , and offered as an appropriate memorial of the tercentenary celebration of the poet 's birth " . Scholars have described Boydell 's folio as a precursor to the modern coffee table book . 
 = = = Sculptures = = = 
 Shakespeare attended by Painting and Poetry by Thomas Banks ( on façade of gallery building ) 
 Present location : New Place Gardens , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon 
 Coriolanus by Anne Seymour Damer ( bas relief ) 
 Antony and Cleopatra by Anne Seymour Damer ( bas relief ) 
 = = = Paintings = = = 
 The Paintings list is derived from the numbered catalogue The exhibition of the Shakspeare gallery , Pall @-@ Mall : being the last time the pictures can ever be seen as an entire collection ( London : W. Bulmer & Co . , 1805 ) , The Boydell Shakespeare Gallery edited by Walter Pape and Frederick Burwick ( <unk> : Peter Pomp , 1996 ) , and " What Jane Saw " . 
 = = = Folio engravings = = = 
 = = = Illustrated edition = = = 
 = Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose = 
 " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Directed by David Nutter and written by Darin Morgan , the installment serves as a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story — a stand @-@ alone plot unconnected to the overarching mythology of The X @-@ Files . Originally aired by the Fox network on October 13 , 1995 , " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " received a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 and was seen by 15 @.@ 38 million viewers . The episode received critical acclaim , and several writers named it among the best in the series . The episode won both an Emmy for Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series as well as an Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the abnormal ; the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of murders of psychics and fortune tellers . The two are assisted by Clyde Bruckman ( Peter Boyle ) , an enigmatic and reluctant individual who possesses the ability to foresee how people are going to die . 
 Morgan wished to write an episode of The X @-@ Files wherein one of the characters commits suicide at the end . Although Morgan was initially afraid to add humor to his script , he created a compromise by making the episode as dark as possible . Several of the characters ' names are references to silent film @-@ era actors and screenwriters . Notably , the episode features a prediction by Bruckman — that Agent Scully will not die — that is later bookended by the sixth season episode " Tithonus . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 St. Paul , Minnesota : In a store , Clyde Bruckman ( Peter Boyle ) , a life insurance salesman , purchases a paper and a lottery ticket and leaves . In the street , he almost bumps into an inconspicuous man ( Stuart Charno ) , who heads to a gypsy palm reader named Madame Zelma ( Karin Konoval ) . After seeking his fortune , the inconspicuous man attacks and kills her . A few days later , the eyes and entrails of a tea leaf reader , who was also a doll collector , have been found in her apartment , her body being missing . FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) arrive at the scene of that murder to help the local cops , who have recruited the help of a psychic , the eccentric Stupendous Yappi ( Jaap Broeker ) . Although the psychic delivers extremely vague clues , the cops are thoroughly impressed ; both Scully and Mulder , however , are not , especially after Yappi diagnoses that it is Mulder — not Scully — who is a skeptic . 
 Meanwhile , after Bruckman takes the trash out for his neighbor , he discovers the body of Madame Zelma outside in his dumpster . When interviewed by Mulder and Scully , he reveals details about the crime that he could not have known from the media accounts , which causes Mulder to believe that Bruckman has psychic ability . Mulder insists that Bruckman join them in a visit to the crime scene at the doll collector 's apartment . Thanks to seemingly psychically gained information from Bruckman , her body is soon found in a nearby lake . 
 At the police station , Mulder tests Bruckman 's ability by having him handle various objects to see what they " tell " him . It becomes apparent that Bruckman 's only real psychic talent is an ability to see details of people 's deaths . Scully arrives with a key chain bearing the insignia of an investment company that uses astrology to make financial predictions , taken from the doll collector 's body - the same key chain was found on two of the other dead fortunetellers . Bruckman knows that the firm is owned by one Claude Dukenfield , not through a psychic revelation but because he coincidentally sold the man an insurance policy recently . He says that Mulder and Scully will not be able to talk to Dukenfield though , because he has been murdered . 
 Mulder and Scully drive Bruckman to a wooded spot where Bruckman has said they will find Dukenfield 's body . As they <unk> through the woods , Bruckman explains how he gained his ability following the death of Buddy Holly and The Big Bopper in a plane crash . Bruckman cannot pinpoint the exact spot where the body is , however , so they return to the parked car , where they see a lifeless hand sticking out of the wet mud underneath . Traces of silk fibers are subsequently found on Dukenfield similar to fibers found on previous victims - they are later analyzed and found to be from lace . 
 At his home Bruckman has gotten a note from the killer saying he is going to die when they first meet , and telling him to say " hi " to the FBI agents . The killer apparently also has some psychic ability - the postmark is dated before Bruckman joined the murder investigation . Bruckman describes Mulder 's death as the killer sees it : getting his throat slit by the killer after stepping in a pie in a kitchen . However Bruckman tells Mulder he 's not able to see what happens afterwards . Meanwhile , the inconspicuous man consults a tarot card reader , who says that the killer seeks answers from " a man with special wisdom " and that his confusion will soon abruptly end " with the arrival of a woman - a blonde or a brunette , possibly a redhead . " When there is just one card left unturned , the killer says that it is not meant for him but for the reader , and turns it over to reveal the " death " card . 
 Since the killer knows Bruckman 's home address , the agents bring him to a hotel where they take turns guarding him . While Scully does not believe in Bruckman 's power , the two develop a fast friendship . Bruckman asks Scully why she is not interested in knowing how she will die . Scully finally breaks down and asks him to tell her , to which Bruckman , joyfully , but cryptically , replies , " You don 't . " Bruckman later tells Scully that they will end up in bed together , in a very special moment neither of them will forget . This reinforces her skepticism . 
 A detective named Havez ( Dwight McFee ) takes over as Bruckman 's guard when Mulder and Scully are called to investigate yet another new murder victim : the tarot card reader . As they leave they bump into a bellhop who is delivering food to Bruckman 's room . The bellhop is actually the killer , and when he enters the room ( while Havez is in the washroom ) , he is delighted to discover that Bruckman has been brought right to where he works . As he is about to kill Bruckman , Havez re @-@ enters and the killer attacks and kills him instead . Meanwhile , Scully finds the same silk fiber at the new crime scene , and realizing that the bellhop had it on his tray , deduces that he is the murderer . They rush back to the hotel . Mulder chases the killer to the basement kitchen and the scene plays out as described in Bruckman 's earlier premonition , but when the killer attacks Mulder , Scully arrives in the nick of time and shoots him — what Bruckman had seen was the dying killer 's last thoughts , not Mulder 's death . 
 Unable to find Bruckman in the hotel , Mulder and Scully return to Bruckman 's apartment to find that Bruckman has committed suicide ; Scully sees a plastic bag has been tied around his head , and that he is clutching a bottle of pills in his hand . Scully sits on Bruckman 's bed holding his hand , deeply moved , just as he had predicted . That night Scully sees a commercial for the Stupendous Yappi on TV , causing her to throw her phone at it . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 This episode was the second of four episodes written for the series by Darin Morgan . Morgan had previously written the second season episode " Humbug " , which was more overtly humorous than any other episode of the series . Morgan , who felt he had scripted the episode the " wrong " way , sought to return to " what the show is really about " in his next episode . For inspiration , Morgan watched the first season episode " Beyond the Sea " , which features a questionable psychic ; after viewing it multiple times , he expressed a desire to write an episode with a similar feel . After the scripting of " Humbug " , Morgan claims that he entered into a state of depression . Using this period of his life as inspiration , he decided to write a plot about a character who committed suicide at the end of the episode . Another reason for this stylistic choice was because Morgan feared putting too much comedy into the episode , like his previous effort " Humbug " . As such , he purposely tried to make it as serious and dark as possible , only to end up adding more jokes by the time the final draft was completed . 
 The episode 's concern with the nature of free will and determinism grew out of Morgan 's difficulties with plotting and constructing plot @-@ twists ; he explained that Bruckman and the killer interact in ways " that were really easy to plot , but which makes the story seem complicated . " While writing the character 's lines , Morgan realized that Mulder , were he to interact with a " normal person " , would come off as sounding insane when in fact he is supposed to be a smart person . As such , Morgan decided to " shake up Mulder 's image " to make him look slightly ridiculous ; in the episode , Mulder views Bruckman " only as a phenomenon " and not as a person . To counter this , Morgan wrote Scully to see Bruckman , not as a psychic , but as a human . 
 Bruckman 's cryptic prediction that Scully would not die " sent fans into a frenzy " due to its implications . Morgan explained that the line merely was a reference to Bruckman knowing how Scully would die , but liking her too much to divulge the information . However , many interpreted the warning to mean that Scully could not actually die and was , in essence , immortal . This interpretation , popular with fans on the internet , was verified by Frank Spotnitz . However , Spotnitz later admitted that this sub @-@ plot was bookended by the sixth season episode " Tithonus , " which showed Scully starting to die , only to have her come back , fulfilling Bruckman 's prophecy . Spotnitz later called this ending " very satisfying . " Series creator Chris Carter , however , stated in a 2014 <unk> AMA that Scully is in fact , immortal . 
 The joke in the episode about Fox Mulder 's predicted death being by autoerotic asphyxiation was inspired by previous jokes in the series about Mulder 's interest in pornography . It was also inspired by a book Morgan had read on homicide investigations . While Morgan noted that he hypothesized that might be a way that Mulder would die , the line was meant as a joke . Many of the names used in the episode are homages to the silent film era . The name " Clyde Bruckman " refers to an actual screenwriter and director of silent comedies of the same name who committed suicide . The names of characters Detective Havez and Detective Cline are also references to a writer and director from that era : Jean Havez and Eddie Cline , respectively . One of the victims , Claude Dukenfield , is a reference to the real name of W.C. Fields . The name of the hotel in this episode , " Le <unk> " is a reference to a boat used by Buster Keaton in the movie The Boat . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 The role of the title character Clyde Bruckman — who was based on Morgan 's " depressive " father — was originally written with Bob Newhart in mind , but Peter Boyle later won the part . Although Chris Carter preferred to not cast well @-@ known actors , he felt that Boyle was such a gifted character actor that he ignored his usual prejudice for this episode . The character of the Stupendous Yappi was specifically written for Jaap Broeker , David Duchovny 's stand @-@ in . Morgan described the character as a cross between Uri Geller and the Amazing <unk> . The character later appeared again in the episode " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " . Stuart Charno — credited as Stu Charno in the episode — played the part of the killer in this episode ; he is the husband of Sara Charno , a former writer on the show who wrote the second season episode " Aubrey " . 
 " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " was filmed in British Columbia , as were the rest of the third season episodes . Visual effects producer Mat Beck and Toby Lindala created the elaborate dream sequence where Bruckman 's body decomposes . The two used a skeleton rib cage made of copper wire along with fake skin that melted into gelatin when the wires were heated . Eight different stages were used for the effect — starting with Boyle in makeup , progressing to the dummy , and eventually a computer generated skeleton — which were morphed together . Morgan explained that , because Nutter and fellow director Kim Manners were under time constraints , Morgan was allowed to function almost " as a producer of [ the ] episode . " After filming for the entry ceased , he was allowed to personally work with the series ' editor . The episode 's original cut was 10 minutes too long , resulting in multiple scenes with Bruckman and Scully being removed from the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " originally aired on the Fox network on October 13 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by 15 @.@ 38 million viewers . The success of the episode led to it earning two Primetime Emmy Awards — writer Darin Morgan won the Emmy for Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series , while Peter Boyle won the Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series . 
 " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " has been critically lauded . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a full five stars and called it " a little slice of genius " . The two applauded the episode 's rich humor , as well as its exploration of extremely dark themes in a lighthearted way . Shearman and Pearson concluded that " the troubled questions Morgan poses here " about free will and death " are best answered by the writing of the episode itself … an episode like this isn 't random — it 's finely wrought , and thoughtful , and compassionate , and is a triumph of individualism . " Author Phil Farrand rated the episode as his third favorite episode of the first four seasons in his book The Nitpickers Guide to the X @-@ Files . Both Paul Cornell and Keith Topping , in the book Extreme Possibilities applauded the episode ; Cornell called it " an extraordinary piece of work " and altogether gorgeous " , whereas Topping labelled it a " little gem " . Conversely , Martin Day , in the same book , wrote a negative review , calling it " duller than a dull thing with dull knobs " , despite noting that it was " clever and well @-@ acted " . 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode four stars out of four and called it " one of those rare episodes where everything comes together — funny , bizarre , absurd , ironies , and sad . " She applauded Boyle 's acting , noting that he " gives a performance that simply takes over the TV screen " , and argued that " only actors as strong as Duchovny and Anderson , with their blissfully deadpan delivery , could withstand such a titanic presence , but withstand it they do . " Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a rare " A + " , writing , " Boyle gets lots of help from another superlative , laugh @-@ a @-@ minute script [ which ] nicely captures one of the overarching themes of the show : fate and man 's isolation . " Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode an " A " and wrote positively of the ending , writing that , " for an episode that ends with a likable character killing himself , ' Bruckman ' isn 't what I 'd call a downer . " He called the entry his " favorite episode of The X @-@ Files because it 's funny , suspenseful , does well by Scully and Mulder , and creates some indelible characters . " 
 Since its original airing , critics have listed " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " among the best X @-@ Files episodes . TV Guide called it the tenth greatest episode in television history . Review website IGN named it the best standalone X @-@ Files episode of the entire series , writing that the episode " is a distinctive episode of the series , mixing a healthy amount of humor [ ... ] with some very nasty business [ ... ] In just 44 minutes , Boyle creates a fully formed character who makes a big impact in his one and only appearance . " Topless Robot named it the ninth @-@ funniest episode of the series . Starpulse listed it as the third @-@ best X @-@ Files episode . Charlie Jane Anders and Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach of io9 included it on the list of " 10 TV Episodes that Changed Television " . Tom Kessenich , in Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , named the episode the seventh @-@ best installment of the series , noting that it features " a wonderful blend of humor , drama , and pathos , something The X @-@ Files did better than just about any other show this past decade . " The cast and crew of the series have expressed their enjoyment of the installment . Duchovny considers " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " to be one of his favorite episodes of the third season . Nutter highlighted it as one of the most enjoyable entries that he had worked on . He also noted that , " the writing was so tight and so crisp and so fresh that I think , as a director , the only thing you have to do is create the atmosphere , set up the characters , set up the shots and you are basically invisible . Then you step back and just let it happen . " Series writer and producer Frank Spotnitz stated that the episode worked on many levels and that it is his favorite of the episodes written for the show by Morgan . In 2016 , Ira Madison of Vulture.com named it the best episode of the series and " one of the best episodes of television ever " , stating that the episode " takes every element that made the series so iconic and throws them all into one heartbreaking installment " . 
 = Ficus aurea = 
 Ficus aurea , commonly known as the Florida strangler fig ( or simply strangler fig ) , golden fig , or <unk> , is a tree in the family Moraceae that is native to the U.S. state of Florida , the northern and western Caribbean , southern Mexico and Central America south to Panama . The specific epithet aurea was applied by English botanist Thomas Nuttall who described the species in 1846 . 
 Ficus aurea is a strangler fig . In figs of this group , seed germination usually takes place in the canopy of a host tree with the seedling living as an epiphyte until its roots establish contact with the ground . After that , it enlarges and strangles its host , eventually becoming a free @-@ standing tree in its own right . Individuals may reach 30 m ( 100 ft ) in height . Like all figs , it has an obligate mutualism with fig wasps : figs are only pollinated by fig wasps , and fig wasps can only reproduce in fig flowers . The tree provides habitat , food and shelter for a host of tropical lifeforms including epiphytes in cloud forests and birds , mammals , reptiles and invertebrates . F. aurea is used in traditional medicine , for live fencing , as an ornamental and as a bonsai . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ficus aurea is a tree which may reach heights of 30 m ( 98 ft ) . It is monoecious : each tree bears functional male and female flowers . The size and shape of the leaves is variable . Some plants have leaves that are usually less than 10 cm ( 4 in ) long while others have leaves that are larger . The shape of the leaves and of the leaf base also varies — some plants have leaves that are oblong or elliptic with a wedge @-@ shaped to rounded base , while others have heart @-@ shaped or ovate leaves with cordate to rounded bases . F. aurea has paired figs which are green when unripe , turning yellow as they ripen . They differ in size ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 cm [ 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 in ] , about 1 cm [ 0 @.@ 4 in ] , or 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 2 cm [ 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 5 in ] in diameter ) ; figs are generally sessile , but in parts of northern Mesoamerica figs are borne on short stalks known as peduncles . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 With about 750 species , Ficus ( Moraceae ) is one of the largest angiosperm genera ( David <unk> of Chelsea Physic Garden ranked it as the 31st largest genus ) . Ficus aurea is classified in the subgenus Urostigma ( the strangler figs ) and the section Americana . Recent molecular phylogenies have shown that subgenus Urostigma is polyphyletic , but have strongly supported the validity of section Americana as a discrete group ( although its exact relationship to section <unk> is unclear ) . 
 Thomas Nuttall described the species in the second volume of the his 1846 work The North American Sylva with specific epithet aurea ( ' golden ' in Latin ) . In 1768 , Scottish botanist Philip Miller described Ficus maxima , citing Carl Linnaeus ' Hortus Cliffortianus ( 1738 ) and Hans Sloane 's Catalogus plantarum <unk> in insula Jamaica ( 1696 ) . Sloane 's illustration of the species , published in 1725 , depicted it with figs borne singly , a characteristic of the Ficus subgenus <unk> . As a member of the subgenus Urostigma , F. aurea has paired figs . However , a closer examination of Sloane 's description led Cornelis Berg to conclude that the illustration depicted a member of the subgenus Urostigma ( since it had other diagnostic of that subgenus ) , almost certainly F. aurea , and that the illustration of singly borne figs was probably artistic license . Berg located the plant collection upon which Sloane 's illustration was based and concluded that Miller 's F. maxima was , in fact , F. aurea . In his description of F. aurea , which was based on plant material collected in Florida , Thomas Nuttall considered the possibility that his plants belonged to the species that Sloane had described , but came to the conclusion that it was a new species . Under the rules of botanical nomenclature , the name F. maxima has priority over F. aurea since Miller 's description was published in 1768 , while Nuttall 's description was published in 1846 . 
 In their 1914 Flora of Jamaica , William Fawcett and Alfred Barton <unk> linked Sloane 's illustration to the tree species that was then known as Ficus <unk> , a name that had been assigned to it in August <unk> 's Flora of the British West Indian Islands . Gordon DeWolf agreed with their conclusion and used the name F. maxima for that species in the 1960 Flora of Panama . Since this use has become widespread , Berg proposed that the name Ficus maxima be conserved in the way DeWolf had used it , a proposal that was accepted by the nomenclatural committee . 
 <unk> the name Ficus maxima did not leave F. aurea as the oldest name for this species , as German naturalist Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link had described Ficus ciliolosa in 1822 . Berg concluded that the species Link described was actually F. aurea , and since Link 's description predated Nuttall 's by 24 years , priority should have been given to the name F. ciliolosa . Since the former name was widely used and the name F. ciliolosa had not been , Berg proposed that the name F. aurea be conserved . In response to this , the nomenclatural committee ruled that rather than conserving F. aurea , that it would be better to reject F. ciliolosa . Conserving F. aurea would mean that precedence would be given to that name over all others . By simply rejecting F. ciliolosa , the committee left open the possibility that the name F. aurea could be supplanted by another older name , if one were to be discovered . 
 = = = Synonyms = = = 
 In 1920 , American botanist Paul C. Standley described three new species based on collections from Panama and Costa Rica — Ficus <unk> , F. <unk> and F. <unk> . DeWolf concluded that they were all the same species , and Berg synonymised them with F. aurea . These names have been used widely for Mexican and Central American populations , and continue to be used by some authors . Berg suspected that Ficus <unk> Carvajal and Cuevas @-@ Figueroa may also belong to this species , but he had not examined the original material upon which this species was based . 
 Berg considered F. aurea to be a species with at least four morphs . " None of the morphs " , he wrote , " can be related to certain habitats or altitudes . " Thirty years earlier , William Burger had come to a very different conclusion with respect to Ficus <unk> , F. <unk> and F. <unk> — he rejected DeWolf 's <unk> of these three species as based on incomplete evidence . Burger noted that the three taxa occupied different habitats which could be separated in terms of rainfall and elevation . 
 = = Reproduction and growth = = 
 Figs have an obligate mutualism with fig wasps , ( Agaonidae ) ; figs are only pollinated by fig wasps , and fig wasps can only reproduce in fig flowers . Generally , each fig species depends on a single species of wasp for pollination . The wasps are similarly dependent on their fig species in order to reproduce . Ficus aurea is pollinated by Pegoscapus mexicanus ( <unk> ) . 
 Figs have complicated inflorescences called syconia . Flowers are entirely contained within an enclosed structure . Their only connection with the outside is through a small pore called ostiole . <unk> figs like F. aurea have both male and female flowers within the syconium . Female flowers mature first . Once mature , they produce a volatile chemical attractant . Female wasps squeeze their way through the ostiole into the interior of the syconium . Inside the syconium , they pollinate the flowers , lay their eggs in some of them , and die . The eggs hatch and the larvae parasitise the flowers in which they were laid . After four to seven weeks ( in F. aurea ) , adult wasps emerge . Males emerge first , mate with the females , and cut exit holes through the walls of the fig . The male flowers mature around the same time as the female wasps emerge . The newly emerged female wasps actively pack their bodies with pollen from the male flowers before leaving through the exit holes the males have cut and fly off to find a syconium in which to lay their eggs . Over the next one to five days , figs ripen . The ripe figs are eaten by various mammals and birds which disperse the seeds . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Figs flower and fruit asynchronously . Flowering and fruiting is staggered throughout the population . This fact is important for fig wasps — female wasps need to find a syconium in which to lay their eggs within a few days of emergence , something that would not be possible if all the trees in a population flowered and fruited at the same time . This also makes figs important food resources for frugivores ( animals that feed nearly exclusively on fruit ) ; figs are one of the few fruit available at times of the year when fruit are scarce . 
 Although figs flower asynchronously as a population , in most species flowering is synchronised within an individual . Newly emerged female wasps must move away from their natal tree in order to find figs in which to lay their eggs . This is to the advantage of the fig , since it prevents self @-@ pollination . In Florida , individual F. aurea trees flower and fruit asynchronously . Within @-@ tree <unk> in flowering is likely to raise the probability of self @-@ pollination , but it may be an adaptation that allows the species to maintain an adequate population of wasps at low population densities or in strongly seasonal climates . 
 Flowering phenology in Ficus has been characterised into five phases . In most figs , phase A is followed almost immediately by phase B. However , in F. aurea immature inflorescences can remain dormant for more than nine months . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Ficus aurea is a fast @-@ growing tree . As a hemiepiphyte it germinates in the canopy of a host tree and begin life as an epiphyte before growing roots down to the ground . F. aurea is also a strangler fig ( not all <unk> figs are <unk> ) — the roots fuse and encircle the host tree . This usually results in the death of the host tree , since it effectively girdles the tree . Palms , which lack secondary growth , are not affected by this , but they can still be harmed by competition for light , water and nutrients . Following Hurricane Andrew in 1992 , F. aurea trees regenerated from root suckers and standing trees . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Ficus aurea ranges from Florida , across the northern Caribbean to Mexico , and south across Central America . It is present in central and southern Florida and the Florida Keys , The Bahamas , the Caicos Islands , Hispaniola , Cuba , Jamaica , the Cayman Islands , San Andrés ( a Colombian possession in the western Caribbean ) , southern Mexico , Belize , Guatemala , Honduras , Nicaragua , El Salvador , Costa Rica and Panama . It grows from sea level up to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 500 ft ) above sea level , in habitats ranging from Bahamian dry forests , to cloud forest in Costa Rica . 
 Ficus aurea is found in central and southern Florida as far north as Volusia County ; it is one of only two native fig species in Florida . The species is present in a range of south Florida ecosystems , including coastal hardwood hammocks , cabbage palm hammocks , tropical hardwood hammocks and shrublands , temperate hardwood hammocks and shrublands and along watercourses . In The Bahamas , F. aurea is found in tropical dry forests on North Andros , Great Exuma and Bimini . F. aurea occurs in 10 states in Mexico , primarily in the south , but extending as far north as Jalisco . It is found in tropical deciduous forest , tropical semi @-@ evergreen forest , tropical evergreen forest , cloud forest and in aquatic or <unk> habitats . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Ficus aurea is a strangler fig — it tends to establish on a host tree which it gradually encircles and " strangles " , eventually taking the place of that tree in the forest canopy . While this makes F. aurea an agent in the mortality of other trees , there is little to indicate that its choice of hosts is species specific . However , in dry forests on Great Exuma in The Bahamas , F. aurea establishes exclusively on palms , in spite of the presence of several other large trees that should provide suitable hosts . Eric <unk> and colleagues attributed this to the fact that humus accumulates on the leaf bases of these palms and provides a relatively moist microclimate in a dry environment , facilitating seedling survival . 
 Figs are sometimes considered to be potential keystone species in communities of fruit @-@ eating animals because of their asynchronous fruiting patterns . Nathaniel Wheelwright reports that emerald <unk> fed on unripe F. aurea fruit at times of fruit scarcity in Monteverde , Costa Rica . Wheelwright listed the species as a year @-@ round food source for the resplendent quetzal at the same site . In the Florida Keys , F. aurea is one of five fruit species that dominate the diet fed by white @-@ crowned pigeons to their nestlings . F. aurea is also important in the diet of mammalian frugivores — both fruit and young leaves are consumed by black howler monkeys in Belize . 
 The interaction between figs and fig wasps is especially well @-@ known ( see section on reproduction , above ) . In addition to its pollinators ( Pegoscapus mexicanus ) , F. aurea is exploited by a group of non @-@ pollinating <unk> wasps whose larvae develop in its figs . These include <unk> , inquilines and kleptoparasites as well as parasitoids of both the pollinating and non @-@ pollinating wasps . 
 The invertebrates within F. aurea syconia in southern Florida include a pollinating wasp , P. mexicanus , up to eight or more species of non @-@ pollinating wasps , a plant @-@ parasitic nematode transported by the pollinator , mites , and a predatory rove beetle whose adults and larvae eat fig wasps . Nematodes : <unk> aureus ( <unk> ) is a plant @-@ parasitic nematode associated with the pollinator Pegoscapus mexicanus and syconia of F. aurea . Mites : belonging to the family <unk> ( <unk> ) have been recognized in the syconia of F. aurea and F. citrifolia , but they have not been identified even to genus , and their behavior is undescribed . Rove beetles : <unk> <unk> is a rove beetle ( Coleoptera : Staphylinidae ) whose adults enter late @-@ stage syconia of F. aurea and F. citrifolia . Adults eat fig wasps ; larvae develop within the syconia and prey on fig wasps , then pupate in the ground . 
 As a large tree , F. aurea can be an important host for epiphytes . In Costa Rican cloud forests , where F. aurea is " the most conspicuous component " of intact forest , trees in forest patches supported richer communities of epiphytic bryophytes , while isolated trees supported greater lichen cover . 
 Florida International University ecologist Suzanne <unk> reported the presence of extrafloral nectaries on F. aurea figs in the Florida Everglades . <unk> nectaries are structures which produce nectar but are not associated with flowers . They are usually interpreted as defensive structure and are often produced in response to attack by insect herbivores . They attract insects , primarily ants , which defend the nectaries , thus protecting the plant against herbivores . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The fruit of Ficus aurea is edible and was used for food by the indigenous people and early settlers in Florida ; it is still eaten occasionally as a backyard source of native fruit . The latex was used to make a chewing gum , and aerial roots may have been used to make lashings , arrows , <unk> and fishing lines . The fruit was used to make a rose @-@ coloured dye . F. aurea was also used in traditional medicine in The Bahamas and Florida . Allison <unk> and colleagues screened F. aurea for anti @-@ quorum sensing activity ( as a possible means of anti @-@ bacterial action ) , but found no such activity . 
 Individual F. aurea trees are common on dairy farms in La Cruz , <unk> and Santa Elena in Costa Rica , since they are often spared when forest is converted to pasture . In interviews , farmers identified the species as useful for fence posts , live fencing and firewood , and as a food species for wild birds and mammals . 
 Ficus aurea is used as an ornamental tree , an indoor tree and as a bonsai . Like other figs , it tends to invade built structures and foundations , and need to be removed to prevent structural damage . Although young trees are described as " rather ornamental " , older trees are considered to be difficult to maintain ( because of the adventitious roots that develop off branches ) and are not recommended for small areas . However , it was considered a useful tree for " <unk> " to conserve energy in south Florida , since it is " not as aggressive as many exotic fig species , " although it must be given enough space . 
 = Cyclone Hollanda = 
 Cyclone Hollanda was the worst tropical cyclone in Mauritius in 19 years . It formed on February 6 , 1994 , in the central Indian Ocean in the southern hemisphere . The cyclone moved southwestward for much of its duration , striking Mauritius on February 10 at peak intensity with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . It later passed just southeast of Réunion before turning to the south and weakening . The cyclone became extratropical on February 14 in the southern Indian Ocean . 
 On Mauritius , Hollanda destroyed or severely damaged 450 houses , which left at least 1 @,@ 500 people homeless . High winds left half of the island without power , and also caused severe crop damage ; nearly half of the island 's sugar crop was destroyed , which necessitated for the government to assist in replanting efforts . Hollanda killed 2 people and caused $ 135 million in damage on Mauritius . About a week after the cyclone struck , Cyclone Ivy also affected the area , although to a lesser degree . The highest rainfall from the cyclone fell on Réunion , with 741 mm ( 29 @.@ 2 in ) recorded at Grand Coude . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Based on analysis from Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) , a disturbance in the Indian Ocean intertropical convergence zone became evident south of the Chagos Archipelago on February 6 , after Cyclone Geralda struck Madagascar and moved away from the region . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed it as developing a day prior in the same general area . Later on February 6 , a circulation developed concurrently with an area of organized convection . On February 8 , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Hollanda as it moved southwestward , its motion influenced by a ridge to its south . A trough turned the storm to the south @-@ southwest , and Hollanda intensified into a tropical cyclone – the equivalence of a hurricane – on February 9 . 
 After becoming a tropical cyclone , Hollanda developed a small 20 km ( 12 mi ) eye as it tracked toward the island of Mauritius , located east of Madagascar . Continuing to intensify , the cyclone struck the northern coast of the island at 1800 UTC on February 10 at peak intensity , with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) ( 10 minute sustained winds ) as assessed by MFR . In addition , the cyclone produced gusts to 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) . At the same time , the JTWC estimated peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) ( 1 minute sustained winds ) . While moving over Mauritius , the eye became disrupted , although Hollanda maintained much of its intensity as it passed just southeast of Réunion early on February 11 . The cyclone remained well @-@ defined as it moved more poleward , and an irregular eye remained visible on satellite imagery . On February 13 , Hollanda turned eastward due to a trough , and the next day it became extratropical over the southern Indian Ocean . Its remnants persisted at least two more days . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Before Hollanda struck Mauritius , most people were already residing at home , due to the cyclone striking during the Chinese New Year . Officials closed the airport prior to the cyclone 's arrival , and most stores and banks were also closed . Officials also ordered for cars to be off the roads during the storm and for people to remain indoors . Forecasters initially expected the storm would remain slightly offshore . 
 Ultimately , Cyclone Hollanda made landfall at peak intensity , producing wind gusts of 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) in Mauritius 's capital city of Port Louis . Strong winds affected the northern and western portions of the island , particularly near the coast , and the cyclone was considered the worst to hit there since Cyclone <unk> in 1975 . In addition to the winds , the storm dropped torrential rainfall that reached 711 mm ( 28 @.@ 0 in ) in Mare aux Vacoas . Across the island , Hollanda destroyed 290 houses and severely damaged another 160 , which left at least 1 @,@ 500 people homeless . Included among the damaged buildings was the Russian embassy , which faced such difficulties making repairs that the ambassadors moved their offices . Damage to schools was estimated at 25 million rupees ( $ 1 @.@ 3 million 1994 USD ) , causing some to be closed for as long as 12 days . High winds downed 30 % of the island 's trees . Many fell onto power lines , which left 60 % of Mauritians without power and about half without telephone service . All external communications were cut to the country during the cyclone . In addition , nearly half of the sugar plantations were destroyed , although the primary industry of tourism was not significantly affected . In total , the cyclone killed two people , and left $ 135 million in damage ( 1994 USD ) ; the total included lost productivity , such as decreased sugar output . Less than a week after Hollanda struck , Cyclone Ivy also hit Mauritius , although to a lesser extent than Hollanda . The combined impact caused most roads to be blocked by either fallen trees or mudslides ; all main roads were quickly restored . 
 Following the storm 's passage , the Mauritius government opened 130 shelters , and also provided 5 @,@ 000 rupees to each homeless family . The crop damage from Hollanda , in addition to a drought , decreased the following year 's output by 22 % . In response , the government provided seeds to farmers so they could replant their crops . Most of the island had their power restored by ten days after the storm . The country 's prime minister issued an appeal to the European Union for 67 million rupees ( $ 3 @.@ 6 million 1994 USD ) in assistance , although later dropped it to less than half that total . The requested aid was for the restoration of phone and power utilities . The storm 's severe impact on Mauritius caused a sharp drop in the country 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) per capita , and the overall GDP decreased by 10 % . 
 Although the cyclone did not strike the island of Réunion , Hollanda produced strong wind gusts that peaked at 234 km / h ( 145 mph ) in Sainte @-@ Rose . Rainfall on the island peaked at 741 mm ( 29 @.@ 2 in ) at Grand Coude . The cyclone left damage to crops , power systems , telephones , and the water network , mostly due to the strong winds . 
 = Prevailing winds = 
 Prevailing winds are winds that blow predominantly from a single general direction over a particular point on the Earth 's surface . The dominant winds are the trends in direction of wind with the highest speed over a particular point on the Earth 's surface . A region 's prevailing and dominant winds are often affected by global patterns of movement in the Earth 's atmosphere . In general , easterly flow occurs at low and medium latitudes globally . In the mid @-@ latitudes , westerly winds are the rule and their strength is largely determined by the polar cyclone . In areas where winds tend to be light , the sea breeze / land breeze cycle is the most important to the prevailing wind ; in areas which have variable terrain , mountain and valley breezes dominate the wind pattern . Highly elevated surfaces can induce a thermal low , which then augments the environmental wind flow . 
 Wind roses are tools used to determine the direction of the prevailing wind . Knowledge of the prevailing wind allows the development of prevention strategies for wind erosion of agricultural land , such as across the Great Plains . Sand dunes can orient themselves , or perpendicular to , the prevailing wind regime within coastal and desert locations . Insects drift along with the prevailing wind , while birds are able to fly more independently of it . Prevailing winds in mountainous locations can lead to significant rainfall gradients within the topography , ranging from wet across windward @-@ facing slopes to desert @-@ like conditions along their lee slopes . Prevailing winds can have differences due to the uneven heating of the Earth . 
 = = Determination for a location = = 
 A wind rose is a graphic tool used by meteorologists to give a succinct view of how wind speed and direction are typically distributed at a particular location . Presented in a polar coordinate grid , the wind rose shows the frequency of winds blowing from particular directions . The length of each spoke around the circle is related to the frequency that the wind blows from a particular direction per unit time . Each concentric circle represents a different frequency , emanating from zero at the center to increasing frequencies at the outer circles . A wind rose plot may contain additional information , in that each spoke is broken down into color @-@ coded bands that show wind direction ranges . Wind roses typically use 8 or 16 cardinal directions , such as north ( N ) , NNE , NE , etc . , although they may be subdivided into as many as 32 directions . 
 = = Climatology = = 
 = = = Trades and their impact = = = 
 The trade winds ( also called trades ) are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics near the Earth 's equator , equatorward of the subtropical ridge . These winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere . The trade winds act as the steering flow for tropical cyclones that form over world 's oceans , guiding their path westward . Trade winds also steer African dust westward across the Atlantic ocean into the Caribbean sea , as well as portions of southeast North America . 
 = = = Westerlies and their impact = = = 
 The westerlies or the prevailing westerlies are the prevailing winds in the middle latitudes ( i.e. , between 35 and 65 degrees latitude ) , which blow in areas poleward of the high pressure area known as the subtropical ridge in the horse latitudes . These prevailing winds blow from the west to the east , and steer extra @-@ tropical cyclones in this general manner . The winds are predominantly from the southwest in the Northern Hemisphere and from the northwest in the Southern Hemisphere . They are strongest in the winter when the pressure is lower over the poles , such as when the polar cyclone is strongest , and weakest during the summer when the polar cyclone is weakest and when pressures are higher over the poles . 
 Together with the trade winds , the westerlies enabled a round @-@ trip trade route for sailing ships crossing the Atlantic and Pacific oceans , as the westerlies lead to the development of strong ocean currents in both hemispheres . The westerlies can be particularly strong , especially in the southern hemisphere , where there is less land in the middle latitudes to cause the flow pattern to amplify , which slows the winds down . The strongest westerly winds in the middle latitudes are called the Roaring Forties , between 40 and 50 degrees south latitude , within the Southern Hemisphere . The westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm , equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents , especially in the southern hemisphere because of its vast oceanic expanse . 
 The westerlies explain why coastal North America tends to be wet , especially from Northern California to Alaska , during the winter . Differential heating from the sun between the land which is quite cool and the ocean which is relatively warm causes areas of low pressure to develop over land . This results in moisture rich air from the Pacific Ocean to flow from the west , resulting in frequent rainstorms and wind on the coast . This moisture continues to flow eastward until orographic lift caused by the Coast , Cascade , Columbia and Rocky Mountains cause a rain shadow effect which limits further penetration of these systems and associated rainfall eastward . This trend reverses in the summer when strong heating of the land causes high pressure and tends to block moisture @-@ rich air from the Pacific from reaching land . This explains why most of coastal North America in the middle latitudes experiences dry summers , despite abundant rainfall in the winter . 
 = = = Polar easterlies = = = 
 The polar easterlies ( also known as Polar Hadley cells ) are the dry , cold prevailing winds that blow from the high @-@ pressure areas of the polar highs at the north and South poles towards the low @-@ pressure areas within the westerlies at high latitudes . Like trade winds and unlike the westerlies , these prevailing winds blow from the east to the west , and are often weak and irregular . Due to the low sun angle , cold air builds up and subsides at the pole creating surface high @-@ pressure areas , forcing an equatorward outflow of air ; that outflow is deflected westward by the Coriolis effect . 
 = = Local considerations = = 
 = = = Sea and land breezes = = = 
 In areas where the wind flow is light , sea breezes and land breezes are important factors in a location 's prevailing winds . The sea is warmed by the sun to a greater depth than the land due to its greater specific heat . The sea therefore has a greater capacity for absorbing heat than the land , so the surface of the sea warms up more slowly than the land 's surface . As the temperature of the surface of the land rises , the land heats the air above it . The warm air is less dense and so it rises . This rising air over the land lowers the sea level pressure by about 0 @.@ 2 % . The cooler air above the sea , now with higher sea level pressure , flows towards the land into the lower pressure , creating a cooler breeze near the coast . 
 The strength of the sea breeze is directly proportional to the temperature difference between the land mass and the sea . If an offshore wind of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) exists , the sea breeze is not likely to develop . At night , the land cools off more quickly than the ocean due to differences in their specific heat values , which forces the daytime sea breeze to dissipate . If the temperature onshore cools below the temperature offshore , the pressure over the water will be lower than that of the land , establishing a land breeze , as long as an onshore wind is not strong enough to oppose it . 
 = = = Circulation in elevated regions = = = 
 Over elevated surfaces , heating of the ground exceeds the heating of the surrounding air at the same altitude above sea level , creating an associated thermal low over the terrain and enhancing any lows which would have otherwise existed , and changing the wind circulation of the region . In areas where there is rugged topography that significantly interrupts the environmental wind flow , the wind can change direction and accelerate parallel to the wind obstruction . This barrier jet can increase the low level wind by 45 percent . In mountainous areas , local distortion of the airflow is more severe . Jagged terrain combines to produce unpredictable flow patterns and turbulence , such as rotors . Strong updrafts , downdrafts and eddies develop as the air flows over hills and down valleys . Wind direction changes due to the contour of the land . If there is a pass in the mountain range , winds will rush through the pass with considerable speed due to the Bernoulli principle that describes an inverse relationship between speed and pressure . The airflow can remain turbulent and erratic for some distance downwind into the flatter countryside . These conditions are dangerous to ascending and descending airplanes . 
 Daytime heating and nighttime cooling of the hilly slopes lead to day to night variations in the airflow , similar to the relationship between sea breeze and land breeze . At night , the sides of the hills cool through radiation of the heat . The air along the hills becomes cooler and denser , blowing down into the valley , drawn by gravity . This is known a katabatic wind or mountain breeze . If the slopes are covered with ice and snow , the katabatic wind will blow during the day , carrying the cold dense air into the warmer , barren valleys . The slopes of hills not covered by snow will be warmed during the day . The air that comes in contact with the warmed slopes becomes warmer and less dense and flows uphill . This is known as an <unk> wind or valley breeze . 
 = = Effect on precipitation = = 
 Orographic precipitation occurs on the windward side of mountains and is caused by the rising air motion of a large @-@ scale flow of moist air across the mountain ridge , resulting in adiabatic cooling and condensation . In mountainous parts of the world subjected to consistent winds ( for example , the trade winds ) , a more moist climate usually prevails on the windward side of a mountain than on the leeward or downwind side . Moisture is removed by orographic lift , leaving drier air ( see katabatic wind ) on the descending and generally warming , leeward side where a rain shadow is observed . 
 In South America , the Andes mountain range blocks Pacific moisture that arrives in that continent , resulting in a desertlike climate just downwind across western Argentina . The Sierra Nevada range creates the same effect in North America forming the Great Basin and Mojave Deserts . 
 = = Effect on nature = = 
 Insects are swept along by the prevailing winds , while birds follow their own course . As such , fine line patterns within weather radar imagery , associated with converging winds , are dominated by insect returns . In the Great Plains , wind erosion of agricultural land is a significant problem , and is mainly driven by the prevailing wind . Because of this , wind barrier strips have been developed to minimize this type of erosion . The strips can be in the form of soil ridges , crop strips , crops rows , or trees which act as wind breaks . They are oriented at a right angle to the wind in order to be most effective . In regions with minimal vegetation , such as coastal and desert areas , transverse sand dunes orient themselves perpendicular to the prevailing wind direction , while longitudinal dunes orient themselves parallel to the prevailing winds . 
 = Bergen Light Rail = 
 Bergen Light Rail ( Norwegian : Bybanen ) is a light rail system in Bergen , Norway . The first stage of the project is a twenty @-@ station stretch between the city center and Lagunen Storsenter , where the first 15 stations comprising a 9 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 1 mi ) stretch opened in 2010 , and the second is a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) stretch from Nesttun to Lagunen which opened in June 2013 . Construction on a third stretch from Lagunen to Bergen Airport , Flesland is planned to open in 2016 . Further plans for the project involve mooted extensions to Åsane and Storavatnet . 
 Plans for rail transit have existed since the 1970s , following the 1965 closing of the Bergen Tramway . A rapid transit design was first discarded , and in the 1990s a light rail line was proposed . The decision to start construction was made in 2005 . The first stage was built by the municipality , with financing from the state and the toll road ring , based on the Bergen Program . Ownership , maintenance and further extensions and vehicles are the responsibility of Hordaland County Municipality through its wholly owned subsidiary Bybanen AS . Operation is governed by public service obligation contracts issued by the county public transport authority Skyss . From 2010 to 2017 the line and its 20 <unk> will be operated by Keolis Norge ( formerly Fjord1 Partner ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first public transport in Bergen was the Bergen Tramway , which operated between 1897 and 1965 . It was limited to the inner parts of the city and did not reach the suburbs . The city council therefore decided to close it , arguing that the future lay in private cars , diesel buses and trolleybuses . In the 1960s , the removal on restriction on car sales created more traffic than the roads could handle and consequently both buses and cars began increasingly being stuck in rush @-@ hour queues . The municipality and the Norwegian Public Roads Administration started looking at rectifying the situation by building a ring road around the city , and by alternative means of public transport . 
 Prior to the shortening of the main Bergen Line railway with the Ulriken Tunnel , the Bergen – Nesttun Line was an important commuter rail service , feeding suburban residents from Fana into the city center . In 1917 , the section was the most heavily trafficked railway in the country , with a travel time between 20 and 27 minutes . There were up to 27 trains per day , of which five continued to Garnes . In 1918 , the line was proposed for doubling and electrification : the latter was completed in 1954 . The same year , annual ridership were down to 870 @,@ 000 passengers . After the opening of the Ulriken Tunnel commuter trains were kept for six months , with the last trip ran on 31 January 1965 . 
 During the 1970s , plans had existed for an extensive rapid transit system , with an underground section in the city center . Inspired by the successful Oslo Metro that had opened in 1966 , similar plans were developed . The proposed network was close to the current long @-@ term plans for the light rail system , and consisted of three branches from the city center to <unk> , <unk> and the airport . Four @-@ car trains would operate at ten @-@ minute headways . The suggestion was discussed by the city council in 1973 , but no decision was taken . As an alternative , expansion of the railway from Bergen to Eidsvåg , Åsane and Nesttun was proposed . Fast commuter trains could then be supplemented with buses . 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , a toll ring was constructed around Bergen to finance a massive investment in motorways . This included European Route E39 north and south of the center , the road to the airport , and west to Loddefjord and Storavatnet . Bridges were constructed to Lindås , Askøy and Sotra , and large parking garages were built in the city center . Despite this congestion continued , and it was no better in the 2000s than in the 1970s . Proposals to build bus lanes and traffic signal preemption was disregarded by the Public Roads Administration . 
 In 1995 , the municipal bus company Bergen Sporvei made a proposal to establish what they called the Lightning Tram , from Varden in Fyllingsdalen via a tunnel to <unk> and the city center , then make a 120 ° turn and return along the route of the Bergen trolleybus to <unk> . The same year , the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature proposed a more extensive system , the Environmental Tram , which more closely resembles the current proposals . From the city center , it would run northwards via Åsane to <unk> and southwards via <unk> to the airport ( not via Nesttun ) . The southern section would have branches from Hop to Nesttun and Midttun , and from Minde westwards to Fyllingsdalen and Loddefjord . Later , Bergen Sporvei 's successor , Gaia <unk> , proposed building a bus rapid transit . 
 = = = Political process = = = 
 The plans launched by the city administration most closely resembled the Environmental Tram , with slight changes . The initial plans involved a line from the city center via Nesttun to the airport at Flesland . It became part of a political compromise , the Bergen Program , which ensured a number of road investments at the same time as the light rail system , all financed through the toll ring . However , a lack of funds made it necessary to build the line to Nesttun only , instead of all the way to the airport . The initial decision was taken by Bergen City Council on 13 March 2000 , in the Parliament of Norway in 2002 , and with the financing secured , by the city council in 2005 . Only the Progress Party and the Pensioners ' Party voted against light rail . Forty per cent is financed by the state , the remainder by the county , the municipality and through the toll ring . 
 The arguments for light rail were mainly related to the environment , urban development and reduction in road congestion . Light rail is estimated to increase the use of public transport from Fana , reducing both local and global pollution . The roads do not have capacity for further growth , and any increase in public transport would need to be taken along the light rail routes on buses — this would give higher operating costs for public transport or higher investment costs for roads . Around the stations , high @-@ density commercial and residential centers can be established . Opponents of the project argued that it is unfair that public transport be funded by car drivers through toll roads . Protests from people in northern and western areas of the city have risen , since they are paying for the system but will not receive the benefits . Another issue has been speed : the line to Nesttun has 15 stops in 10 kilometers ( 6 mi ) , giving an average speed of 28 km / h ( 17 mph ) . For people living south of Nesttun , this will give a longer travel time to the city center than with direct buses that do not make intermediate stops . 
 The naming of the stations caused local debate . A draft for names were made by the municipal administration and then sent to the borough councils in Fana , <unk> and Bergenhus . Four names were changed : <unk> from <unk> , Florida from Strømmen , Brann stadion from <unk> and Hop from Troldhaugen . Brann stadion and Troldhaugen were afterwards considered by the municipal administration , because they could be in violation of the Place Name Act . The general rule is to use the place name where the station is located , and naming after institutions or facilities nearby is not permitted unless they are in the immediate vicinity . Brann stadion , named for the football venue , was declared a borderline case , but within the rules , while Troldhaugen was not permitted because the area is not in the vicinity of the station . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Initial works commenced in August 2007 , when <unk> was demolished to make room for a temporary bus terminal that would allow <unk> to be closed for construction . Contracts for building the line were awarded to Svein Boasson , NCC Construction , <unk> <unk> and Veidekke Entreprenør . The contract for laying the tracks was awarded to Baneservice . 
 Construction started in January 2008 . To pass over Strømmen , a fourth Nygård Bridge was built for cars , and the oldest was upgraded and used by the light rail line . In several places the road needed to be dug up to remove pipes and cables . In November 2009 , Gulating Court of Appeal ruled that the power company BKK had to pay 80 million NOK for the moving of power lines , and could not charge the costs to the project . By June 2008 , the first tracks had been laid . 
 Four companies bid for the initial public service obligation to operate the line : Fjord1 Partner , Norges Statsbaner , Tide Bane and Veolia Transport Norge . On 3 April 2009 , the public transport agency Skyss announced that Fjord1 Partner , a joint venture between Fjord1 AS and Keolis , had won the tender competition . Fjord1 Partner received 324 applications for their 26 jobs as drivers and 10 jobs as traffic controllers . In 2014 Fjord1 AS sold their shares in Fjord1 Partner to Keolis , and the company changed its name to Keolis Norge AS . 
 Along with the establishment of the light rail service , the public transport in Bergen underwent other changes . Skyss was established in 2007 to administer the public transport system , manage routes and market public transport , which would be operated by private companies based on public service obligations . At the same time , a new electronic ticketing system was introduced . 
 Because of delays from Stadler 's subcontractors , five instead of eight trams were available when the line opened on 22 June 2010 . Skyss had planned to operate with a ten @-@ minute headway until August , but had a 15 @-@ minute headway until 16 August . To compensate , none of the parallel bus routes ceased until then . On 7 June , two trams collided at low speed at Byparken , causing a derailment and forced the two trams to be repaired . This caused the summer schedule to be reduced to a 30 @-@ minute headway . From 1 November , the line started running every six minutes during the rush hour . On 22 June , the first part of the line was officially opened by Queen Sonja of Norway . 
 = = Route = = 
 The first part of the line is 9 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 1 mi ) and runs from the city center to Nesttun . The northernmost part of the line , Byparken Terminal , is a transit mall at the heart of the city center and has interchange with all buses serving the city center . The line runs south along <unk> , with <unk> stop serving the railway station and <unk> serving the bus station . Southwards , the line runs in a grass right @-@ of @-@ way through Nygård and Florida , serving the campus of the University of Bergen . The line passes over Nygård Bridge before coming to Danmarks plass , the only island platform on the system . In this area , the track is on maize , a type of surface that allows emergency vehicles to drive safely , but makes the surface look unsafe for cars . 
 The line passes the depot at Kronstad before reaching Kronstad stop , almost at the door of the Bergen University College . From here , the line follows <unk> , where Brann Stadion stop serves the Brann Stadion football venue . Wergeland is at the mouth of the 1 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometer ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) <unk> , S @-@ shaped with a 6 @.@ 0 % gradient and a curve radius of 150 meters ( 490 ft ) . From the southern portal the line changes to conventional railway track with ballast , allowing trams to operate at 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . The next stops are <unk> , <unk> and Fantoft , the later serving a large complex of student dormitories . Southwards is the 1 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometer ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) Fantoft Tunnel , followed by Paradis stop . The line continues along the <unk> inlet to Hop , along the former right @-@ of @-@ way of Bergen 's first motorway . Nesttun Terminal was the terminus until the extension to Lagunen was finished . 
 After the completion to Nesttun , the line was <unk> southwards to <unk> at Lagunen Storsenter . Construction began in January 2011 , on its own right @-@ of @-@ way parallel to the existing road ; , the track was completed in October 2012 . The first test run to Lagunen was conducted on 6 December 2012 , and the line was opened to the public on 22 June 2013 . 
 The light rail is now under construction from Lagunen via <unk> to Bergen Airport , Flesland . Both <unk> and Indre <unk> have experienced rapid housing construction without a corresponding increase of public transport . Further out is a large corporate center with many of Bergen 's largest employers , such as Telenor , Statoil and BKK . The area was built without sufficient roads or public transport , and has among the worst road congestion in the urban area . Building the light rail line to Flesland will supplement the airport shuttles and offer cheaper service for locals and employees at the airport . Another incentive to build to Flesland was that there was sufficient available land which allows a large depot to be constructed . After the line was opened to Lagunen , there was insufficient space at Kronstad to house additional trams . The line to the airport is scheduled to open in 2016 . 
 = = Plans = = 
 Plans for the expansion northwards from the city center to Åsane involve either building the system to replace many of the local buses operating in <unk> , or make the light rail line an express service . If the latter is chosen , the line will bypass Bryggen in a tunnel and make few stops before Åsane . An important stop mid @-@ way is the Norwegian School of Economics . The terminus will probably be Åsane Senter or Nyborg ; the former shopping center has set aside areas for a station . At Åsane , a major bus terminal would allow connections to the northern parts of Bergen , suburbs further north and areas in Nordhordland . An important political argument for prioritizing this line is to spread out the investments to all parts of the city , since the line is being financed by taxpayers and car @-@ users throughout the city . 
 The third planned expansion runs from the city center southwards , east of the Center – Nesttun Line , serving <unk> University Hospital . It then heads west , intersecting with the first line at Kronstad , runs through a tunnel before serving the areas of Fyllingsdalen . The line can use parts of the Norwegian National Rail Administration 's right of way from the city center to Kronstad , and would feature a station under the hospital , which is Western Norway 's largest work place . It is not planned an extension to Loddefjord and Storavatnet from Fyllingsdalen at this time because the time of travel will be much higher than the direct bus line using the highway to the city center . 
 A project group with members of the Norwegian Public Roads Administration and the National Rail Administration have proposed that instead of rebuilding the Ulriken Tunnel to double track , a new double @-@ track light rail tunnel could be built from the city center to Arna . This would allow the light rail line to replace the two @-@ station Bergen Commuter Rail service , and give better access to the city center for people from Arna . Several politicians , including the majority in Hordaland County Council , have stated that they in the long run they want the light rail line extended northwards to Knarvik and westwards to Straume and <unk> . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The building of the line is the responsibility of Bybanen <unk> , which is an agency within Hordaland County . The physical infrastructure and trams are owned by Bybanen AS , a limited company wholly owned by Hordaland County . This company is responsible for maintenance of the right @-@ of @-@ way and the vehicles , and for extensions . Light rail operations are based on contracts granted after public tender competitions held by Skyss , a county agency that administers all public transport in Hordaland , including buses , boats and ferries . From 2010 to 2017 , with the possibility for a two @-@ year extension , the line will be operated by Keolis Norge AS . Stadler has the responsibility for maintenance of the trams for the first seven years , as part of the purchase contract . 
 The line is operated on a four / five @-@ minute headway by all @-@ stops trams , with an eight @-@ minute headway in off @-@ peak times and a 20 minutes headway at night . Travel time from Byparken to Lagunen is 32 minutes . In 2015 , the full price of a single ticket is NOK 35 . Tickets are valid with free transfer to buses in Bergen . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 In 2007 , the Planning Office ordered 12 <unk> from Stadler Rail , with an additional four on option . The first tram arrived on 7 December 2009 , and was used for testing in the months leading up to the opening . Before the opening , three more trams were in place . The trams are 32 @.@ 180 m ( 105 @.@ 58 ft ) long and 2 @.@ 65 meters ( 8 ft 8 in ) wide , weighing 35 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 35 @.@ 1 long tons ; 39 @.@ 4 short tons ) . They have five articulated sections , and are expandable with another two modules to a length of 42 meters ( 138 ft ) , should higher capacity be necessary . All stations are built for extended trams . 
 There is a slightly elevated driver 's cab at each end . Eight motors provide a total of 360 kW ( 480 hp ) for three bogies . This allows a maximum speed of 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) , limited to 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) in city streets and 25 km / h ( 16 mph ) in the depots . Acceleration is 1 @.@ 25 m / s2 ( 4 @.@ 13 ft / s2 ) , and they are capable of operating on a 7 @.@ 0 % gradient . Current is collected via a pantograph , at 750 volts direct current . Each tram is sufficiently powerful to haul another unit in case of emergencies . 
 Capacity is for 212 passengers , of which 84 can sit four abreast . The entire tram is step @-@ free , including between the cars and the platforms . Seats are designed for travel times up to 60 minutes . There are four slide and plug doors on each side ; three are double , with a total width of 1 @,@ 300 @-@ millimeter ( 4 ft 3 in ) , while the last is a single 800 @-@ millimeter ( 2 ft 7 in ) door . Stop buttons are only available at the doors ; this has been chosen to speed alighting times . Between the seats there is a minimum width of 720 mm ( 2 ft 4 in ) , which allows wheelchair and buggy access along the full length of the car . All stations are announced visually and orally . The trams have wireless Internet access . 
 All stations are announced with a short distinctive melody and the station 's name . The melodies were composed by Snorre Valen , while the voice was recorded by Heidi Lambach . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 The system is standard gauge with 2 @.@ 65 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 8 in ) -wide cars , with the platforms built to allow 44 @-@ meter ( 144 ft ) long trams . The line has no terminal balloon loops , so trams must be bi @-@ directional . The current is supplied from six rectifiers , specified so the system can operate with two rectifiers out of service . In the city center the overhead wire has been designed to minimize the number of poles , while in the suburban areas a conventional system has a carrier wire above the power wire . 
 The line is double track , allowing visual signaling and speed adjustment on all at @-@ grade stretches . In city streets S60 track is used ; on private right @-@ of @-@ way , S49 track . The minimum curve radius is 25 metres ( 82 ft ) and tracks in city streets are laid within a rubber jacket to reduce noise . In the tunnels , only one tram can operate in each direction ; this is regulated by lights and an automatic Train Protection system . Signaling uses the German <unk> system , not traditional Norwegian light signals . The line has traffic signal preemption , so the trams send a signal to the traffic light control when the driver starts the door @-@ closing signal to give the tram priority at traffic lights . 
 The depot is at Kronstad , at a former yard used by the Norwegian State Railways , where a track that connects the light rail network to the Bergen Line . The depot was finished in 2009 , and has room for 16 40 @-@ meter ( 130 ft ) trams plus a workshop with space for two trams and a garage with place for three . There is sufficient area for further expansion , but tracks have not been laid . When the light rail line is expanded to Flesland , a new main depot is planned in an area with cheaper land , and Kronstad depot will be converted to a pure overnighting facility . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 Fifteen stations were built for the first stage , and five for the second stage . The stations and the visual profile of the system as a whole are designed by the Bergen @-@ based design groups <unk> and <unk> <unk> Design , and Copenhagen @-@ based <unk> . The stations of the first two stages are at street level , with facilities for buying tickets and dynamic displays that show when the next tram will arrive . The platforms have step @-@ free access to the trams , allowing unhindered accessibility by wheelchairs and <unk> . 
 The municipal government has permitted denser development around the stations , where it wants most new housing and commercial property to be built . Development projects for <unk> , Wergeland , Paradis and Lagunen have been announced by private developers . Many of the stations are in primarily residential areas , and the projects have met resistance from residents who fear that the character of their neighborhoods will be altered . 
 = Myth : The Xenogears Orchestral Album = 
 Myth : The Xenogears Orchestral Album is an arranged soundtrack to Square Enix 's role @-@ playing video game Xenogears . It is the third soundtrack to the game , after Xenogears Original Soundtrack and Creid , another arranged album , both released in 1998 . Myth was composed by the game 's composer Yasunori Mitsuda and arranged by Mitsuda , Youki Yamamoto , Sachiko Miyano , and Natsumi Kameoka . The album contains 14 tracks , including a song performed by the Irish singer Joanne Hogg , and has a length of 51 : 33 . The orchestration was performed by the Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra , conducted by Yamamoto . The album was announced in October 2010 , and was released on February 23 , 2011 by Square Enix . A vinyl record version of the album was released on April 1 , 2011 , consisting of six tracks from the full album . 
 Reviewers were consistent in their praises and criticism of the album . They noted the high production values and the quality of the original compositions and the performance of the orchestra . They also felt that the later tracks in the album were notably weaker than the early tracks , that the arrangements in general did not stray far from the source material , and that several of the track choices did not seem to fit as well as orchestral renditions as others . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Xenogears composer Yasunori Mitsuda announced plans to create an album of orchestral arrangements of music from that game on October 6 , 2010 , via his Twitter account . Mitsuda had previously released two albums of music from the game , both in 1998 , the year the game was released — Xenogears Original Soundtrack , a soundtrack album for the game , and Creid , an album of arranged music inspired by Celtic folk music and Japanese rock . He has said that he decided to make the album due to the emotions that he and fans still felt about the game 13 years after its release , which led him to want to commemorate that . The music of Xenogears is particularly close to Mitsuda , as it was the last soundtrack that he worked on for Square Enix — the first video game company he worked for — and he knew that he would be leaving when he composed the soundtrack for the game . He has said that he had been considering the idea of a Xenogears orchestral album for six or seven years prior to starting on it , but until then did not have both the opportunity to work on the project and the confidence in his own abilities as an orchestrator to make the album sound as he wished . 
 When the album was announced , Square Enix opened a poll for members of their fan club to vote on tracks that they would like to see in the album . The poll was closed on October 20 and in December the top ten results were published . Eight of these were eventually included in the final album — " Crimson Knight " and " Awakening " were excluded . Although Mitsuda tried to put as many of the suggestions into the album as he felt were appropriate , he only included the top three " without thinking " . He was limited in his track selection due to many of the original tunes sharing common themes , while he wanted only one instance of a given theme to be present on Myth . The tracklist was initially set to feature ten tracks , but was later expanded to fourteen . 
 The album was recorded with the Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra in Bulgaria and was mixed in London in December , 2010 . Of the fourteen tracks , Mitsuda only arranged one for orchestration ; Youki Yamamoto , who also conducted the orchestra , arranged three , Sachiko Miyano arranged two , and Natsumi Kameoka of Mitsuda 's Procyon Studio arranged seven . Joanne Hogg reprised her role as the vocalist for " Small Two of Pieces " ; however , the lyrics were not re @-@ recorded . Instead , her original performance from the game 's soundtrack was used . The title " Myth " was chosen by Mitsuda so that " this work may become everyone ’ s myth " , as he wanted the music to remind listeners of " fond memories and thoughts of the world of " the original game and soundtrack . 
 The album was released on February 23 , 2011 . It contains 14 tracks with a total length of 51 : 33 . The album was published by Square Enix and has a catalog number of SQEX @-@ <unk> . The physical release of the album was only in Japan , though it was additionally released digitally on iTunes outside of the country . Additionally , on April 1 , 2011 , Square Enix published a vinyl record version of the album . This version contains six tracks , corresponding to tracks 1 , 3 , 4 , 8 , 12 , and 13 from the full album . It has a length of 28 : 33 and the catalog number SE @-@ <unk> . Ringtones for " Village Pride " , " A Distant Promise " , " Dark Dawn " and " Small Two of Pieces " were released on January 28 , 2011 . Mitsuda noted that there might be a second orchestral album in the future if the first was successful ; he described himself as " very keen on the idea of producing the second album " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his review of the album , <unk> Fagen of Original Sound Version concluded that it was " part masterpiece , part phone @-@ in . " He felt that the majority of the album , especially the first two @-@ thirds , was composed of strong , high @-@ quality tracks . However , he felt that a few pieces , in particular the final three tracks , were " underwhelming " . He described the overall effect as " a row of books with only one bookend " as the album in his opinion did not have a strong or defined ending . Ben Schweitzer of Square Enix Music Online said that while " the album as a whole is worthwhile " , that it was " in some ways like a wasted opportunity . " He felt that the majority of the tracks were short orchestrations that did not attempt to stray from the original material , which in his opinion meant that they were left to stand on the merits of the original compositions rather than their own merits . He did note that the quality of the orchestra was high , and called out " Cage of Remorse and Relief " and " Soaring " as especially well done . 
 Myth was reviewed by two separate critics from RPGFan . Eric <unk> praised the album , saying that half of the songs were great and the other half were " pretty good " ; he called out " Village Pride " as one of the best . Like Fagen he felt that the second half of the album contained several tracks that were " forgettable , phoned @-@ in or a poor song selection for this album " . He agreed with Schweitzer that the majority of the arrangements did not deviate much from the original compositions , but said that it was what he expected and wanted from an orchestral arrangement album . Stephen Meyerink , in his review , was less receptive to the album , saying that " It 's good . It 's not great . " He praised the technical quality of the performances , especially those of the string section of the orchestra , but criticized the lack of originality in the arrangements . He noted " Soaring " and " Bonds of Sea and Flames " as some of the few tracks he felt brought something unique to the arrangement . He felt that while the original compositions were strong , that the album felt " rushed " and " phoned @-@ in " with poor track selection , made more to tie in with the release of Xenogears on the PlayStation Network that year than for the love of the music . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 For many of the tracks , the English names used in the iTunes release are different than the literal translation of the Japanese names , which were used for the original soundtrack . When the literal translation differs , it is marked after the Japanese name . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Yasunori Mitsuda – composer , arranger , orchestrator , producer 
 Youki Yamamoto - arranger , orchestrator , conductor 
 Sachiko Miyano - arranger , orchestrator 
 Natsumi Kameoka - arranger , orchestrator 
 The Bulgarian Symphony Orchestra – orchestra 
 Joanne Hogg – vocals on " Small Two of Pieces " 
 Tetsuya Takahashi - lyrics on " The Beginning and the End " 
 Masato Kato - lyrics on " Small Two of Pieces " 
 = Syndicate ( 2012 video game ) = 
 Syndicate is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Starbreeze Studios and published by Electronic Arts for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . It is a reboot of the Syndicate series of real @-@ time tactical shooter games developed by Bullfrog Productions . The game was released in February 2012 worldwide . 
 Set in the year 2069 , the narrative revolves around Miles Kilo , an agent of EuroCorp , one of the world 's largest corporations . As an agent , Miles must help EuroCorp to eliminate important personnel from rival corporations ; in the process , he discovers the evil , secret practice used by EuroCorp to recruit agents . The game features a large variety of weapons ; from standard pistols to the futuristic guns . Kilo is implanted with a computer chip that allows him to access the dataverse and can use hacking to defeat enemies and solve environmental puzzles . 
 Pre @-@ production of the game began in 2007 . Electronic Arts approached Starbreeze Studios to revive the franchise because Electronic Arts was impressed with the quality of Starbreeze Studios ' previous games and believed they could add " style " to the series . The game was returned to the drawing board after a year of development , and the co @-@ operative multiplayer mode was added to the main game . The development team hoped the game would appeal to both newcomers and players of the original game ; they maintained the theme of the original and drastically changed the gameplay . Richard K. Morgan was hired to write the story for the game . 
 The game received mixed critical reviews upon release . Critics praised the gameplay , style , graphics , art direction , artificial intelligence and the co @-@ operative mode , but the game 's story was criticized . The game 's budget was smaller than typical AAA video game , and was considered as a commercial failure for Electronic Arts . The game 's excessive violence led to the game being banned in Australia . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike the original series of games , Syndicate is a first @-@ person shooter set in 2069 . Players assume control of Miles Kilo , an augmented agent working for EuroCorp in a corrupted , deceitful world in which corporations compete with each other for power . Players can run , jump , slide , hide behind covers , and carry two weapons and grenades to defeat enemies and bosses , who each have unique abilities . The game features 19 weapons , ranging from assault rifles , rocket launchers and machine pistols , to futuristic weapons such as laser rifles , Gauss Guns with bullets that can track enemies automatically , and <unk> Dark Shooters that can paralyze enemies for a short time . Weapons can be customized and upgraded with 87 attachments and 25 upgrade options . These upgrades may alter the nature of these weapons , transforming standard ammunition to cover @-@ penetrating ammunition . The game also features an " execution " mechanic , allowing players to perform melee takedowns . 
 Miles has a " DART @-@ 6 " chip that grants him hacking and " breaching " abilities . Some enemies also have this type of chip , and Miles can interact with them . With the chips , objects , collectibles and enemies are automatically tagged and highlighted via augmented reality of the heads @-@ up display . Players can use the " breaching " abilities to hack into enemies ' minds and control their actions . They have access to three options ; " Backfire " that causes enemies ' weapons to malfunction and backfire , stunning them ; " Suicide " that causes enemies to kill themselves ; and " <unk> " that leads enemies to defect to the player 's side before committing suicide . The game also allows players to locate enemies behind cover with the use of " Dart Overlay " and slow down time temporarily , which increases the damages dealt by players and their health regeneration rate . Abilities and skills implanted in the chip can be enhanced by collecting and extracting the chips of fallen enemies . The upgrades can boost players ' damages and increases their recovery speed . Players are tasked with using the breaching abilities to interact with objects , solve environmental puzzles , strip the special armor of enemies and disarm explosives . The breaching mechanic has a time limit and must be recharged before another activation . 
 The game does not have a competitive multiplayer mode , but it has a cooperative multiplayer mode that pits four players together to complete a nine @-@ mission campaign based on the campaign of the original Syndicate games . Players face enemies that become increasingly difficult to deal with as the game progresses . They can choose from four character classes : Medic , Spec Ops , Assault and Generic , each with different abilities . The breaching mechanic is also present in the mode for defensive and offensive purposes . For instance , they can hack into a turret to disable its armor or heal team @-@ mates using this mechanic . Players receive points as they progress through the game 's levels ; these points can be used to research new weapons . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 In 2017 , the mega @-@ corporation Eurocorp is created by a merger between the world 's largest corporations . In 2025 , Eurocorp releases the DART chip , a neural implant that allows users to access the dataverse , making most electronic devices obsolete . As a result of the DART chip , the world is no longer ruled by governments but by mega @-@ corporations known as " <unk> " . However , only half of the world 's population embrace the chip ; the " unchipped " are abandoned and denied the benefits afforded by their chipped counterparts . Corporate espionage and corporate warfare for dominance between syndicates becomes the norm , resulting in the creation of " agents " — bio @-@ engineered enforcers augmented by a militarized version of the chip who protect the interests of their corporate masters . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In 2069 , Agent Miles Kilo , EuroCorp 's latest agent , is equipped with the new prototype DART 6 chip created by Eurocorp scientist Lily Drawl ( voiced by Rosario Dawson ) . After a successful test run of the chip 's abilities , EuroCorp CEO Jack Denham ( voiced by Brian Cox ) assigns him to kill Lily 's counterpart , Chang , at the rival syndicate <unk> . Accompanied by his mentor Agent Jules Merit ( voiced by Michael Wincott ) , Kilo attacks the Los Angeles branch of <unk> and corners Chang , who shoots himself . Kilo retrieves Chang 's chip and learns from an encrypted conversation that Lily has been sharing information about the DART 6 chip with him . 
 Although shocked by Lily 's betrayal , Denham decides to have Kilo and Merit keep Lily under surveillance because she is too valuable to eliminate . As they observe her in her apartment , Lily has an argument with a person named Kris before she is suddenly kidnapped by the syndicate Cayman @-@ Global . Kilo fights off the Cayman @-@ Global forces and follows Lily 's abductors to their floating base in the Atlantic Ocean . Kilo kills a major Cayman @-@ Global agent and rescues Lily , and they learn the syndicate is preparing a war against Eurocorp . 
 In New York , Kilo and Lily land in the Downzone where the unchipped , lower @-@ class population lives . After they split up and head towards Eurocorp HQ , Kilo is betrayed by Lily and is sent into a trap with EMP mines , injuring him and disabling his chips . After his chips regain function , Kilo is given orders to either capture or kill Lily . After fighting off <unk> , Kilo learns their leader Kris — Lily 's ex @-@ boyfriend and colleague — is responsible for instigating a war between the syndicates . Kris reveals he started the war so he could hack into the dataverse and kill the syndicates and their chipped populations as punishment for abandoning the unchipped . Lily , who wants to find a peaceful solution and make the syndicates care about the unchipped , opposes the idea . Kilo fights Kris , who attempts to suicide bomb him but kills himself instead . Kilo apprehends Lily ; he can either kill her or release her . Lily is captured and a barely @-@ alive Kilo is retrieved . 
 At Eurocorp New York HQ , Denham and Merit believe Kilo is brain @-@ dead and send him to be rebooted while they plan to retrieve Lily 's chip and recover useful information on DART 6 . Kilo begins to remember his secret past : he learns that Denham led a Eurocorp team to kill his parents and abduct him as a baby because he has genes ideal for becoming an agent . Kilo escapes from his restraints and rescues Lily , who tells Kilo that like him , all of Eurocorp 's agents were abducted as children and their memories were modified so they would remain loyal to Eurocorp . Lily created the DART 6 chip , hoping to use it to make the syndicates retain their humanity and care about both chipped and un @-@ chipped civilians , but she realizes she was naïve to think that way . 
 As Cayman @-@ Global attacks Eurocorp 's New York HQ , Kilo and Lily head towards Denham 's office to prevent him from activating the kill switch on their DART chips . Kilo has to fight off both Eurocorp and Cayman @-@ Global forces , as well as several EuroCorp agents . At the top of the tower , he is forced to fight Merit and two other agents , who are under Denham 's orders to kill him . Kilo defeats the agents , and overpowers and kills Merit . Kilo then heads towards Denham 's office but finds Denham has activated his kill switch , which starts to affect Kilo 's movements . Weakened , Kilo confronts Denham , who justifies abducting him as a child . Kilo manages to fight against the kill @-@ switch order and corners Denham , who lets himself fall over a ledge to his death . As the game ends , Eurocorp lies in ruins and Lily gives Kilo a pistol , telling him that he is free from anyone 's control . 
 = = Development = = 
 The original version of Syndicate is a tactical shooter developed by Bullfrog Productions and produced by Peter Molyneux in 1993 . Electronic Arts had wanted to make a new Syndicate game for several years but had not found an opportunity to do so . They hoped to bring new elements and drastically altered gameplay concepts that would suit the franchise 's universe . They eventually partnered with Starbreeze , which they recognized as an excellent studio for making first @-@ person video games with distinctive styling . Pre @-@ production of the game began in 2007 ; it was carried out by a small team of staff members after the studio completed work on The Chronicles of Riddick : Assault on Dark Athena . However , mid way through the game 's development , there were also many creative differences between the developer and the publisher , and the two companies suffered from an inharmonious relationship . 
 During the first stage of development , the game had no co @-@ operative multiplayer mode ; it focused on the story instead of the cyberpunk element . A year after development began , the game was sent for reworking because the studio thought they had not captured the essence of the Syndicate series . The team had little experience in making a co @-@ operative games due to technological restraints , but decided to experiment with it . The internal reception of the co @-@ op prototype was positive ; testers said it fit with the canonical fiction of the franchise . The team had once worked on a competitive multiplayer mode for the game , but thought it was not original enough for inclusion . As the game lacked a cooperative multiplayer element , the developers abandoned the use of an online pass , unlike most EA games at that time . 
 The development team hoped the new title would appeal to both newcomers and fans of the series , be accessible and introduce the franchise to a broader audience . They assumed most players would not have played the original Syndicate games . The team also considered that because of the change in audience tastes and the introduction of new video game platforms , altering the game 's perspective to first @-@ person was a correct decision . Turning it into a first @-@ person game was the first design choice made by the team , who hoped allowing players to view from the agent 's perspective directly would make the game more immersive for players . 
 The team aimed to replicate the playing experience and difficulty of the extant Syndicate . Starbreeze considered the difficulty of the first game to be part of the franchise 's legacy and was worth preserving ; they hoped the new game would be challenging enough for players without being frustrating . They introduced a rarely scripted artificial intelligence ( AI ) into the game . The AI reacts to players ' actions and was programmed to relocate itself after being attacked . The new game has less gore than the older one ; players still can kill innocent civilians but the team minimized these scenarios , which they thought were part of the game 's environment rather than gameplay elements . 
 The game was designed to have a sense of unpredictability so it can be played without confining the player to rules . To achieve this , the company added the breaching system , which adds more varieties of combat and gives players more choices when dealing with the artificial intelligence . The breaching system , which originated as a mini @-@ game , was designed to be simple so it would not interrupt the flow of gameplay . Instead of being purely a first @-@ person shooter , the game features action @-@ adventure elements that allow players to choose their progression and tasks them with solving environmental puzzles . 
 Because the new game is set within a well @-@ established franchise , Starbreeze tried to retain the essence of the world and rebuild these elements . The game 's story was written by British science @-@ fiction writer Richard K Morgan , whom the team approached after they read his book Altered Carbon . Syndicate was Morgan 's second video @-@ game script after 2011 's Crysis 2 ; he used the original game for reference and included elements that those who had played it would immediately recognize . He preserved the original 's dystopian setting and theme , and hoped to use these elements to build a powerful story . Morgan traveled to Sweden to meet Starbreeze 's game designers to ensure the game 's story would not contradict its overall design . 
 The team 's goal was to make the game different from contemporaneous first @-@ person shooters . The team ensured the game had its own style that would differentiate itself from other games . This was achieved by using a " split @-@ world aspect " , which divided the game 's into two areas , each with a different artstyle . The team added details and aesthetics to the game 's three syndicates in the upper zone so they would easily be recognized and be different from each another . " The Downzone " , where non @-@ implanted poor people live , has a different design from the three syndicates . The team took ideas for this area from Mirror 's Edge . Both sides were inspired by futuristic films such as Blade Runner , Minority Report and Gattaca . In addition , the split @-@ world concept applies to the gameplay . The Downzone enemies tend to be more aggressive and anti @-@ agents , and some gameplay segments such as the breaching system are inapplicable in such areas . 
 Syndicate uses Starbreeze 's in @-@ house game engine , which had been modified for the creation of the game . The team used Beast to achieve global illumination and a realistic lighting system , and a new physics solver to deliver more physical interactions . The team aimed to maintain a consistent visual quality on all the platforms on which the game was released , even though the PC version had the advantage of higher resolution and frame rate . The engine allowed the inclusion of post @-@ process @-@ effects previously used in Assault on Dark Athena , such as motion blur and depth of field . Their artstyle was changed to suit the game 's overall style . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In 2008 , Electronic Arts announced that Starbreeze Studios was working with EA on two projects ; one was a new project set in one of EA 's older franchises under the name Project Redlime . The name " Syndicate " was trademarked multiple times by Starbreeze and EA , and a small portion of the game 's script was accidentally leaked before the game 's official revelation . EA officially revealed the game on 12 September 2011 , and announced that it is a reboot for the franchise . A demo of the game , which only included the co @-@ op mode and the " Western Europe " map , was released for the Xbox Live Marketplace and PlayStation Network on 31 January 2012 . The game was announced and shipped in under six months ; it was released worldwide on 21 February 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Syndicate received generally positive reviews from critics . The game 's story received mixed responses . The reviewer from GameTrailers called the plot predictable and considered several of the game 's plot points boring . He praised the game 's dialogue for its flow and the backstory presented . The reviewer said the campaign lacked scale but was nevertheless enjoyable and worthwhile playing . He also said the celebrity @-@ led voice cast had successfully brought " believability " to the game . This was echoed by Jeff Gerstmann from Giant Bomb . In contrast , Martin Gaston from VideoGamer.com said he was disappointed with the campaign and considered it one of the game 's biggest flaws . He said the world deserves more exploration than it had in Syndicate , and that the development team did not seem to understand the creative vision of the first version of the game . He also said the emphasis on morals did not excel because it does not fit the game 's overall style . He disliked the game 's protagonist , whom he thought was bland , making him difficult for players to relate to . Xav De Matos from Joystiq said the story is filled with promises but the overall product failed to differentiate itself from other shooters with similar themes . Dan Whitehead from Eurogamer compared it unfavourably to its predecessors and called it unambitious and uninspiring . 
 The overall gameplay received praise . Gaston described the shooting as " clever " and said the DART @-@ 6 breaching abilities have encouraged players to experiment . He said the combination of the breaching system and gunfights made Syndicate better than some other contemporaneous first @-@ person shooters . GameTrailers ' reviewer said the DART @-@ 6 system provides players with choice and the recharge time of the breaching abilities tasks players with managing a " micro @-@ economy " that encourages and rewards skills . Both Gaston and GameTrailers said the game missed out opportunities for limiting the use of some of Kilo 's powers , which are only shown in cutscenes . Gerstmann liked the game 's gameplay and said the control was fun , and that he appreciated the ability to shoot while running . He also admired the breaching abilities and found them satisfying to use . Whitehead shared similar thoughts , saying the breaching abilities tasks players with deploying strategy and make the game deeper than typical run @-@ and @-@ gun video games . 
 The game 's AI received praise . GameTrailers ' reviewer said enemies " know how to die in style " and that the boss fights are memorable , even though they can be repetitive . Gaston considered it " missed opportunities " . De Matos appreciated the boss fights and said it was fun and interesting , and tasks players with learning the pattern of these boss fights and using the correct skill to defeat them . 
 Reviewers praised the game 's graphical quality . Gerstmann said the use of lighting added a unique style to the game . He also liked the depiction of the two major areas of the game , and the game 's sounds , which he said suited the tone of the game . Alexandra Hall from GamesRadar said " Starbreeze really coaxed some beautiful sights out of aging hardware " . She added that some players may not be pleased with the game 's bloom effects . David Houghton of the same publication said the game is " a decent shooter " but that its <unk> effects were " nonsensically over @-@ the @-@ top " . Peter Eykemans from IGN echoed similar thoughts , declaring that the motion bloom and blinding light a problem . However , he admitted that the game " constantly looks great " , and that its simple design has made the game to look very polished . 
 The four @-@ player , co @-@ operative , multiplayer mode received acclaim . Gaston said it was a " watered down version of Left 4 Dead " , but it was nonetheless a fun and pleasant experience for most players . De Matos said the game had encouraged players to work together to defeat enemies and to plan before attacking , which he said had turned the mode to a " gratifying " experience . He criticized the game 's difficulty , which he said does not scale well , and the scripted enemies , which made the game less dynamic . Whitehead highly recommended the co @-@ operative mode , which he thought should have been the game 's main focus . He added that it provided more freedom to the players than the campaign . 
 Critics had mixed feelings about the game . Gerstmann said he had an " outstanding time " with it , and that it had offered an excellent twist to the genre . De Matos said it had successfully branched out the franchise to a new direction , even though it may not be what players of the original Syndicate would expect . However , he said the spirit of the franchise is still maintained and preserved . Gaston said Starbreeze was not able to capture the franchise 's vision and that the game was not well @-@ executed overall . Whitehead described the game as " fun " , even though he thought Syndicate was a forgettable experience that will live under the shadow of rival shooters . 
