 = = = Sales = = = 
 In an interview with Computer and Video Games , Frank <unk> of EA said the Syndicate revival had not been as successful as had been hoped , saying , " Syndicate was something that we took a risk on . It didn 't pay off — it didn 't work . " In a 2012 interview with Edge , Mikael Nermark , CEO of Starbreeze Studios , said the game sold around 150 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . According to Nermark , the budget for creating this game was less than those of other triple @-@ A video games ; he also said that despite the poor commercial performance , the team was still proud of the final product . 
 = = = Australian censorship = = = 
 On 20 December 2011 , it was reported that Syndicate has been refused classification by the Australian Classification Board . The board was especially critical of what it considered to be the game 's excessive violence : explicit depictions of dismemberment , decapitation , exposed flesh and bone from injuries ; and copious blood spray . EA Australia said they would not appeal the decision or change the game to address the Board 's concerns . EA also complained about Australia 's " arcane censorship on games " and said Syndicate would be released on schedule and uncut with an adults @-@ only rating in New Zealand . 
 = Nick & Norah 's Infinite Playlist = 
 Nick & Norah 's Infinite Playlist is a 2008 romantic comedy @-@ drama film directed by Peter Sollett and starring Michael Cera and Kat Dennings . Written by Lorene Scafaria and based on the novel of the same name by Rachel Cohn and David Levithan , the story tells of teenagers Nick ( Cera ) and Norah ( Dennings ) , who meet when Norah asks Nick to pretend to be her boyfriend for five minutes . Over the course of the night , they try to find their favorite band 's secret show and search for Norah 's drunken best friend . 
 The film came into development in 2003 when producer Kerry Kohansky Roberts found Cohn and Levithan 's novel and decided to adapt it for film . Scafaria was hired to write the script in 2005 , and Sollett signed on to direct the film in 2006 . Principal photography took place over 29 days from October to December 2007 , primarily in Manhattan and Brooklyn , New York City . 
 The film premiered on September 6 , 2008 at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival and was released theatrically on October 3 , 2008 . It tripled its US $ 10 million budget with a total gross of US $ 33 @.@ 5 million . An accompanying soundtrack was released on September 23 , 2008 , and the film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on February 3 , 2009 . It attracted generally positive reviews from critics and received nominations for three Satellite Awards , one GLAAD Media Award , one MTV Movie Award and one Golden Reel Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A straight bass player in an " all gay band " called The Jerk @-@ Offs , Nick O 'Leary ( Michael Cera ) is a teenager from Hoboken , New Jersey . Nick is still heartbroken after his girlfriend , Tris ( Alexis Dziena ) , broke up with him three weeks , two days , and 23 hours ago , and continues to make " breakup " mix CDs for her . Thom ( Aaron Yoo ) and Dev ( Rafi Gavron ) , his gay bandmates who both hate Tris , convince Nick to perform at a club because his favorite band — the legendary , publicity @-@ shy indie band Where 's Fluffy ? — is performing somewhere in New York City that night . Norah Silverberg ( Kat Dennings ) attends the same high school as Tris , Convent of the Sacred Heart , and though Norah and Tris dislike each other , they have a mutual friend named Caroline ( Ari Graynor ) . Norah has not met Nick , but shares his taste in music based on recovering his mix CDs after Tris discards them in the trash . That night , the three girls end up at Arlene 's Grocery on Manhattan 's Lower East Side , where The Jerk @-@ Offs are playing . Norah asks Nick to pretend to be her boyfriend to show up Tris . Norah kisses him , unaware that he is the ex @-@ boyfriend of Tris . Caroline gets drunk and Norah wants to take her home , but Nick 's bandmates ( who see Norah as a potential new girlfriend for him ) offer to take Caroline home so Norah and Nick can spend time together trying to find the show . 
 When Thom and Dev stop at Gray 's Papaya for hot dogs , a confused Caroline escapes from Thom 's van . Nick and Norah meet up with Thom and Dev to try to find her . A confusing phone call leads them to look for her at a club that " Where 's Fluffy ? " is rumored to be playing , but with no success . Tris , eager to win back Nick , catches up with them when she gets a phone call from Caroline , who is now able to tell Norah that she has " found Jesus " and " an altar boy without pants . " They find a drunk Caroline on stage at a gay cabaret dressed as a Christmas tree . When they arrive at Nick 's car , Tris is sitting on the hood waiting for him . Norah tells him how nice it was to meet him , but he leaves to talk with Tris without giving Norah a response . An upset Norah meets up at a club with her friend with benefits , Tal ( Jay Baruchel ) , but soon realizes that he has an ulterior motive and hopes to get a deal for his band with Norah 's father , a record producer ( Richard <unk> ) . She agrees to pay for Tal and his friends ' drinks , but she tells the waitress to increase the tab because there was a miscalculation , and she leaves him to pay . Nick , meanwhile , decides to confront Tris , but she tells him she wants to be together again and asks for a ride home . Tris asks Nick to stop by the river , where she tries to seduce him . Whilst she seductively dances in front of the car , Nick reminisces fondly about Norah and the night 's events and drives away , leaving Tris behind . 
 Nick calls Norah , apologizing for leaving , and she agrees to meet him again . Deciding to go somewhere where no one they know will find them , they arrive at Electric Lady Studios , a music studio owned by Norah 's father . Once there , Norah gets Nick to play something he wrote in the studio , but then joins him in the recording room . Norah gets a text message from Caroline telling her where she found Where 's Fluffy ? playing . When they arrive at the show , they meet Tris , who cannot understand why Nick will not take her back , and Tal , who wants the same answer from Norah . Tal starts a fight with Nick , but Thom and Dev 's friend , <unk> ( Jonathan B. Wright ) , steps in and headbutts Tal . Nick and Norah share a smile and leave together . At Pennsylvania Station , Nick admits that he does not care about missing the concert , and they kiss on the escalator as the sun rises over New York City . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Michael Cera plays Nick O 'Leary , the " straight bass player in a gay band " teenager who is heartbroken after his girlfriend breaks up with him . Cera was the first actor to be cast after being recommended to Sollett by producer Kerry Kohansky Roberts based on his performance in Arrested Development . Sollett called him a " genius " and a " terrific actor " , as well as a " brilliant improvisational comedian " . Cera , who had previously taken improvisation classes , said that " It 's fun [ to improvise ] , just having a conversation . It always feels real because it is real . " He lived in an apartment in New York 's East Village for the duration of filming . Cera had never driven a stick shift vehicle before filming , and was taught so that he could be shot driving Nick 's Yugo . 
 Kat Dennings plays Norah Silverberg , the teenage daughter of a wealthy record producer who shares Nick 's passion for music . Dennings was the second actor to be cast ( Cera having been first ) , Sollett saying that " her being liberated from [ people 's expectations ] liberated the film in many ways , and certainly her character from cliché . " Dennings felt that she related to Norah more than any other she had played before and " wanted to make sure she was really fleshed out " . Her favorite day of shooting was with a group of drag queens at a gay cabaret , but she said that filming Norah 's first orgasm was " really uncomfortable ... Really , really . " 
 Ari Graynor plays Caroline , Norah 's best friend . Graynor auditioned for the roles of both Norah and Caroline , and was chosen to play Caroline , which she says rescued her from " one of those horrible actor black holes of really thinking that I 'd probably never work again " . Graynor related to both characters , saying that " I 've had many nights as Caroline . And I 've had many nights as Norah , taking care of Caroline . " Sollett claimed that " everything she did in the movie was her own invention " , calling her improvisation " brilliant " . She improvised an entire scene taking place at the Port Authority Bus Station in which Caroline talks to a stranger and which was not part of the script . When Caroline vomits , Graynor held a mixture of ginger ale and ginger cookie in her mouth which she spat into a toilet and a bag . 
 Alexis Dziena plays Tris , Nick 's unfaithful ex @-@ girlfriend who attends school with Norah and Caroline . Dziena was one of the first actors cast , having done her final read @-@ through audition with Cera , Dennings , and Graynor . She said that the filming period was " a really fantastic time " , but complained about the night shoots and having to sleep through the day : " Oh , it 's terrible . ... I 'm okay as long as the sun 's not up when I 'm going to sleep but sleeping during the day is rough . " 
 Aaron Yoo plays Thom , Nick 's friend and the guitarist for The Jerk @-@ Offs . Yoo was supposed to mime playing the guitar when filming The Jerk @-@ Offs ' concert , but requested that he be taught the chords to play when he had spare time . He found it very difficult to drive the van featured in the film and jokingly referred to it as a " tank " and a " World War II veteran " . 
 Rafi Gavron plays Dev , Nick 's friend and the lead singer of The Jerk @-@ Offs . Gavron recorded a song performed by The Jerk @-@ Offs in the film at Electric Lady Studios , where part of the story takes place . Filming The Jerk @-@ Offs ' concert at Don Hill 's in New York , the owner of the bar , Don Hill , mistook Gavron for a professional musician in spite of Gavron 's calling himself a " useless singer " . 
 Jay Baruchel plays Tal , Norah 's " friend with benefits " and an amateur musician . Baruchel said that the film was " by far the hippest movie I 've ever been in — that 's for damn sure " . 
 Jonathan B. Wright as <unk> , a friend of Thom and Dev . 
 Rachel Cohn and David Levithan , authors of the same @-@ titled novel on which the film is based , cameo as a couple sitting behind Nick and Norah at a diner . 
 Eddie Kaye Thomas , Graynor 's then boyfriend , cameos as Jesus in a gay cabaret 
 Devendra Banhart , John Cho , Seth Meyers , and Andy Samberg are also featured . 
 Kevin Corrigan agreed to cameo so long as he had no speaking lines ; his scene , which was not scripted , was entirely improvised by Graynor . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist was originally the novel written by Rachel Cohn and David Levithan , which producer Kerry Kohansky Roberts brought into development as a film in 2003 . Lorene Scafaria was hired by Roberts in early 2005 to adapt the novel for Chris and Paul Weitz and Focus Features ; the script was her first film adaptation . Peter Sollett signed on to direct the film in 2006 , when the script was in its second draft , and collaborated with Scafaria . Scafaria said that Norah " was me on the page " , while Sollett felt that as a teenager he was " not dissimilar to Nick " . Both had similar experiences to Nick and Norah , commuting into Manhattan at night , Scafaria from New Jersey and Sollett from Staten Island . 
 Cohn and Levithan had written the novel in alternating chapters : Cohn writing from Norah 's perspective and Levithan writing from Nick 's perspective . Cera and Dennings recorded voice @-@ over narration to mimic the first @-@ person perspective from which the novel is written , but the voice @-@ overs were not included in the final cut of the film . Scafaria says that the differences between the novel and the film were " to make it a little more cinematic " . She said that Nick and Norah 's parents were written out of the script " to absorb what it 's like to be young , [ because ] you 're not thinking about your parents when you 're out all night " . In addition to searching for Where 's Fluffy ? , Sollett felt that the film needed a second MacGuffin to propel the story forwards , so Norah 's best friend Caroline got drunk and then lost , giving Nick and Norah an additional objective . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Shooting on a budget of US $ 10 million , principal photography of Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist took place from late October to early December 2007 . The film was shot over 29 days in one @-@ week blocks , and was one of the first to receive a filming subsidy from the state of New York under the " Made in NY " incentive program . Filming took place mainly in Manhattan 's East Village and Lower East Side , as well as Williamsburg , Brooklyn . Filming locations included Katz 's Delicatessen , Mercury Lounge , Arlene 's Grocery , Pennsylvania Station , Port Authority Bus Terminal , the <unk> restaurant and Don Hill 's bar . Union Pool , a bar in Brooklyn , was also used for filming but requested to be called " Brooklyn Pool " in the film , and Norah 's father 's recording studio was filmed at Electric Lady Studios . Some scenes were shot on a sound stage in a studio in Brooklyn . 
 The cast did many rehearsals , including on @-@ location rehearsals , which Dennings described as " the most practical thing I 've ever heard of " . During the course of filming , the actors slept during the day , woke in the afternoon , had their make @-@ up applied on set , and filmed from dusk until dawn . The cast and crew members would often sit inside the The Jerk @-@ Offs ' van between takes to avoid the cold , and sometimes stayed inside , out of sight , while scenes were being filmed in the van . Reshoots of the film began in May 2008 ; the film had originally begun at The Jerk @-@ Offs ' show where Nick and Norah first meet , and all prior scenes were written in later . Editor Myron Kerstein cut some of the shots on set due to time and budgetary restraints . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist received generally positive reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 74 % based on 179 reviews , with an average score of 6 @.@ 5 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist combines a pair of charming leads , the classic New York backdrop and a sweet soundtrack " . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 64 out of 100 , based on 32 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , praising Dennings ' on @-@ screen presence , the " considerable chemistry " between Cera and Dennings , and the " excellent " soundtrack . The New York Times critic A. O. Scott described Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist as a " shy , sweet romance " that " surveys the varieties of teenage experience with tolerant sympathy " . James Berardinelli of ReelViews reviewed the film warmly with 3 out of 4 stars , complimenting the soundtrack , the " witty " dialog and the appeal of the film to both adults and teenagers . Michael Ordona wrote for the Los Angeles Times that the film is familiar , but is " fleshed out with atmosphere , a nice blend of broad goofiness and sophistication , and two appealing leads who bring it to life " . Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum graded the film as an A – , giving particular commendation to its nonchalant portrayal of gay teenagers and Norah 's Jewish identity . Richard Corliss of Time magazine opined that the film was " smart , sweet , [ and ] bordering @-@ on @-@ adorable " while the title characters were " worth watching , admiring and cuddling up to " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist " doesn 't bring much to the party . [ ... ] It 's not much of a film , but it sort of gets you halfway there , like a Yugo . " Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers gave the film 2 out of 4 stars , saying , " I 'm yawning just writing this . [ ... ] Sollett , hoping for a Before Sunrise / Before Sunset vibe , sadly settles for a soggy aftertaste . " In a review for The Village Voice , Robert Wilonsky likened the film to " something crafted in a lab by 54 @-@ year @-@ old hucksters trying to sell shit to the kids under the cheerless guise of ' alternative . ' The only thing it 's an alternative to ? Good . " Variety magazine 's John Anderson described it as a " sparsely plotted comedy " that is " sweet , no doubt , but a bit too slick for its own good " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The world premiere of Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist was held on September 6 , 2008 at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival . It was released theatrically in the United States on October 3 , 2008 , grossing US $ 11 @,@ 311 @,@ 751 from 2 @,@ 421 screens on its debut weekend , placing third in the box office rankings . The following weekend , it grossed $ 6 @,@ 420 @,@ 474 with a per @-@ screen average of $ 2 @,@ 652 and a cumulative gross of $ 20 @,@ 730 @,@ 708 , ranking fifth . It earned another $ 3 @,@ 693 @,@ 384 on its third weekend with a per @-@ screen average of $ 1 @,@ 648 and a cumulative gross of $ 26 @,@ 500 @,@ 875 , dropping to eighth place . The film ended its theatrical run with a total domestic gross of $ 31 @,@ 487 @,@ 293 and a foreign gross of $ 2 @,@ 018 @,@ 844 , giving a worldwide total of $ 33 @,@ 506 @,@ 137 . It placed 92nd for the highest @-@ grossing films of 2008 and 85th for the year 's highest @-@ grossing opening weekends . 
 The film was screened at the London Film Festival in October 2008 and at the Buenos Aires International Festival of Independent Cinema in March 2009 . 
 = = = Award nominations = = = 
 Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist was nominated for three Satellite Awards , in the categories of Best Film – Musical or Comedy , Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy ( Michael Cera ) , Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy ( Kat Dennings ) , but failed to win any . The film was also nominated at the GLAAD Media Awards in the category of Outstanding Film – Wide Release , and Kat Dennings was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance – Female . The film 's supervising music editor Andrew Dorfman was nominated for a Golden Reel Award by the Motion Picture Sound Editors for Best Sound Editing – Music in a Feature Film , but did not win . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Nick and Norah 's Infinite Playlist was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on February 3 , 2009 . The disc includes : one audio commentary with Peter Sollett , Michael Cera , Kat Dennings and Ari Graynor , and another with Sollett , Rachel Cohn , David Levithan , and Lorene Scafaria ; the featurettes " A Nick and Norah Puppet Show by Kat Dennings " and " Ari Graynor 's Video Diary : A Look Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes " ; a music video for Bishop Allen 's song " Middle Management " ; storyboard animations with optional audio commentary ; a faux interview with Michael Cera , Kat Dennings and Eddie Kaye Thomas ; deleted scenes ; outtakes ; and a photo gallery . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Cohn and Levithan 's novel contained many musical references , including songs by The Cure and Green Day , as did Scafaria 's screenplay , which she originally submitted with a mix CD featuring her ideas for the film 's soundtrack , including songs by The Black Keys , Bloc Party , and Frou Frou . In the final cut of the film , however , most of the music was chosen by Sollett , editor Myron Kerstein and music supervisor Linda Cohen . Sollett said that he " got lucky " with the songs that he was able to choose because , within the financiers and the studio , " there was nobody in that group who knew all that much about music or the music that we had in the film " . His objective when selecting the music was to find " the best music you haven 't heard yet " , primarily from bands based in New York City . While filming in New York , he emailed songs " right out of my iTunes [ library ] " which he thought would suit particular scenes to Kerstein , who was in Los Angeles assembling the film as it was shot . 
 = Saadanius = 
 Saadanius is a genus of fossil primate dating to the Oligocene that is closely related to the common ancestor of the Old World monkeys and apes , collectively known as catarrhines . It is represented by a single species , Saadanius <unk> , which is known only from a single partial skull tentatively dated between 29 and 28 mya ( million years ago ) . It was discovered in 2009 in western Saudi Arabia near Mecca and was first described in 2010 after a comparison with both living and fossil catarrhines . 
 Saadanius had a longer face than living catarrhines and lacked the advanced frontal sinus ( <unk> in the facial bones ) found in living catarrhines . However , it had a bony ear tube ( ectotympanic ) and teeth comparable to those of living catarrhines . The discovery of Saadanius may help answer questions about the evolution and appearance of the last common ancestors of Old World monkeys and apes . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Saadanius is known from a single specimen , the holotype , named " SGS @-@ UM 2009 @-@ 002 " , stored in Jeddah , Saudi Arabia , at the Paleontology Unit of the Saudi Geological Survey ( SGS ) . Its type locality , or the place it was discovered , was on top of an oolitic ironstone fossil bed of the middle <unk> Formation located in the southwest corner of <unk> Al <unk> , in western Saudi Arabia , close to Mecca . The specimen was discovered in February 2009 by paleontologist Iyad Zalmout , who had traveled to the region to search for ancient whale and dinosaur fossils . While looking for dinosaur fossils in an area that , according to the maps he was working from , contained rock layers that dated to the Cretaceous ( 145 – 66 mya ) , Zalmout found the jawbone of a hippo @-@ like creature , called an <unk> ( a close relative of whales and hippos ) , which dated to Eocene or Oligocene . This indicated that the rock layers were much younger than what was dated on the maps . The following day , he noticed fossil teeth , which he immediately recognized as those of a primate . Zalmout emailed a photo of the teeth to paleontologist Philip D. Gingerich , with whom he was working as a postdoctoral fellow . Gingerich , an expert on ancient primates and whales , confirmed that it was indeed a primate . Due to a tight schedule , Zalmout had to leave the exposed fossil embedded in the rock for the next few days because collecting it would require days of work . The fossil was soon recovered by a joint expedition involving the SGS and the University of Michigan . 
 The fossil was not formally described until 2010 when its discovery was announced in the journal Nature . The fossil was dated to about 28 or 29 million years ago based on comparisons of fossils of <unk> and <unk> ( members of the group that includes elephants and hyraxes ) found nearby with fossils from similarly aged African deposits . However , the date has yet to be confirmed by other dating techniques . The genus name , Saadanius , comes from the Arabic word , <unk> ( Arabic : <unk> ) , which is the collective term for apes and monkeys . The species name , <unk> , is a reference to the al Hijaz region , in which it was discovered . 
 = = Type specimen = = 
 Saadanius had a longer face than living catarrhines , more closely resembling New World monkeys in appearance , although it was larger — possibly the size of a gibbon . Its enlarged , deep @-@ rooted canine teeth , the diastema ( space ) between its canine teeth and second incisors , and its sagittal crest ( ridge of bone running lengthwise down the top of the skull ) suggest that the specimen was a male . These features are shared among male Old World monkeys . Saadanius lacks the advanced frontal sinus found in living catarrhines , but it does possess an ectotympanic , or bony ear tube , found in living catarrhines . <unk> , the oldest stem group of catarrhines , which date back 35 to 30 mya , lacked a fully developed ectotympanic . 
 The specimen had serious puncture wounds on the front of the skull , indicating that it had been preyed upon by a large carnivore . One puncture wound was on the right side of the braincase and may have been the fatal blow . There was also a bite mark on the frontal trigon . 
 Like other catarrhine primates , Saadanius was probably a tree @-@ dweller ( arboreal ) . During the time it would have lived , the Red Sea had not yet formed , and new plant and animal species would have been arriving from nearby Eurasia as it converged with the Afro @-@ Arabian landmass . 
 = = Phylogeny and significance = = 
 Comparative anatomy and cladistic analysis indicate that Saadanius is more closely related to the last common ancestor of crown catarrhines than any other known fossil catarrhines , placing the common ancestry of Catarrhini in Arabia and Africa . Other stem catarrhines include <unk> , such as <unk> , and <unk> , such as <unk> . The closer similarities between Saadanius and crown catarrhines , particularly its ectotympanic , suggest Saadanius of all known fossil primates most closely resembled the last common ancestor of living catarrhines . Its discovery has provided new details about human evolution , particularly the split between the Old World monkeys and the ape lineage that eventually led to humans . 
 The discovery of Saadanius provides new evidence for competing hypotheses about the facial appearance of the ancestral crown catarrhines , or common ancestor . One reconstruction is based on living catarrhine traits and predicts a short face and a rounded braincase , similar to that of a gibbon . Another reconstruction , based on the morphology of early Miocene apes and the basal <unk> <unk> , predicts that the last common ancestor had a projecting snout and tall face , like that of living baboons and the oldest fossil apes and Old World monkeys . The conservative features of Saadanius , similar to those of the older stem catarrhines , support the latter hypothesis , according to Zalmout et al . However , one palaeontologist , Eric Delson , has cautioned that geological pressure may have distorted the shape of the skull . 
 According to Zalmout et al . , Saadanius may also help resolve the age of the <unk> – <unk> split . <unk> work has typically placed the divergence between 25 and 23 mya , but genetic @-@ based estimates have placed it in the early Oligocene , approximately 33 mya . Despite the predictions from the genetic tests , little fossil evidence has been found for a last common ancestor between 30 and 23 mya , favoring a later split . Only isolated teeth of <unk> hinted at the existence of potential basal hominoids in the late Oligocene ( between 24 and 27 @.@ 5 mya ) , while the oldest fossil Old World monkey , <unk> <unk> , dates to 19 mya . With the discovery of Saadanius , Zalmout et al. suggested a later split than the genetic data , dating between 29 – 28 and 24 mya . However , Pozzi et al. later argued that although Saadanius is a significant discovery , because it is a stem catarrhine , it could not be used to date the divergence of the crown group . The presence of stem taxa in the fossil record does not indicate that crown groups have evolved , and stem taxa may survive for millions of years after the crown taxa appear . For this reason , the fossil record can only suggest a hard minimum boundary for divergence dates , which corresponds to the first appearance of a crown taxon . Furthermore , Pozzi et al. pointed out that the supplementary material published by Zalmout et al. demonstrated that <unk> were more closely related to living catarrhines than Saadanius . 
 The fossil find has also been seen by the SGS as an important find for Saudi Arabia , because it enriches the fossil record for the region . As a result of the find , both the SGS and the University of Michigan are considering more collaborative field explorations in the country . 
 = Belle ( Disney ) = 
 Belle is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Pictures ' 30th animated feature film Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . Originally voiced by American actress and singer Paige O 'Hara – who auditioned for the role five times after first reading about it in The New York Times – Belle is the non @-@ conforming daughter of an eccentric inventor . <unk> by her village peers due to her intelligence and love of books , Belle yearns to abandon her uneventful life in favor of adventure . When her father Maurice is imprisoned by a cold @-@ hearted beast , Belle offers him her own freedom in exchange for her father 's , and eventually learns to love the Beast despite his outward appearance . 
 Disney chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg commissioned Beauty and the Beast as an animated musical with a strong heroine , and hired first @-@ time screenwriter Linda Woolverton to write it . Basing her on the heroine of Jeanne @-@ Marie Leprince de Beaumont 's fairy tale " Beauty and the Beast " , Woolverton adapted Belle into a stronger and less passive character for the film . Inspired by the women 's rights movement , Woolverton wanted Belle to be a unique Disney heroine different from The Little Mermaid 's popular Ariel , and thus deliberately conceived the character as a feminist in an effort to avoid the criticism Disney had long been receiving due to the studio 's reputation of depicting its female characters as victims . 
 Belle 's strength and love of reading was inspired by American actress Katharine Hepburn 's performance as Jo March in the film Little Women ( 1933 ) , while the writers instilled the adventure @-@ seeking heroine with goals and aspirations beyond romance . However , the story artists and animators often disagreed with Woolverton 's liberated vision for the character . Animated by James Baxter and Mark Henn , the former of whom based the character 's graceful gait on those of impressionist Edgar Degas ' ballerinas , Belle 's European facial features were inspired by those of British actresses Vivien Leigh and Audrey Hepburn . Several additional Hollywood actresses inspired Belle 's appearance , including Natalie Wood , Elizabeth Taylor and Grace Kelly . 
 Belle has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics who appreciated the character 's bravery , intelligence and independence . Reception towards her feminism , however , has been more mixed , with commentators accusing the character 's actions of being romance @-@ oriented . The fifth Disney Princess , Belle is often ranked among the franchise 's best . Highly regarded as one of Disney 's strongest examples of a feminist character , critics agree that Belle helped spearhead a generation of independent film heroines while changing the reputation of a Disney princess . Also one of Disney 's most iconic characters , Belle was the only animated heroine nominated for the American Film Institute 's greatest heroes in film ranking . The character also appears in the film 's several sequels and spin @-@ offs , as well as her own live @-@ action television series . American actress Susan Egan originated the role of Belle in the Broadway musical adaptation of the film , for which she was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 After the success of Walt Disney Productions ' first feature @-@ length animated film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , filmmaker Walt Disney himself made several attempts to adapt the fairy tale " Beauty and the Beast " by Jeanne @-@ Marie Leprince de Beaumont into one of the studio 's earliest animated feature films during the 1940s and 1950s . However , the project was continuously abandoned due to the fairy tale 's " static " plot and main characters . The filmmaker was also concerned about the " unnecessary intensity " required to depict Belle imprisoned . Inspired by the unprecedented success of The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Disney chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg green @-@ lit another attempt at adapting " Beauty and the Beast " under the direction of Richard Purdum . However , Katzenberg did not approve of Purdum 's dark , somber version of the fairy tale , and ultimately ordered that it be restarted from scratch in favor of creating a Broadway @-@ style musical film starring a strong heroine , similar to The Little Mermaid . Opting instead for a " feminist twist " on the story , Katzenberg hired television writer Linda Woolverton , who had never written an animated film before , to write the film 's screenplay . 
 Before Beauty and the Beast , Disney 's tradition of depicting female characters as victims had already long been established . The fact that Belle was hardly depicted as a feminist in earlier versions of the film became a point of contention among the filmmakers . Despite the fact that Disney wanted Beauty and the Beast to resemble an old @-@ fashioned film , the filmmakers envisioned Belle as " a woman that was ahead of her time " . As the first woman in the history of Disney to write a feature @-@ length animated film , Woolverton decided to explore Belle as an opportunity to create a female character who would ultimately be better received than Disney 's previous animated heroines , specifically Ariel from The Little Mermaid . Woolverton was aware that the task would be particularly challenging due to the previous character 's popularity , but fought relentlessly to make sure that she was creating " a new kind of Disney heroine . " Inspired by the women 's rights movement Woolverton herself had experienced during the 1960s and 1970s , the screenwriter was determined to avoid creating another " insipid " Disney princess and decided to conceive Belle as a headstrong feminist . Woolverton strongly believed that contemporary audiences would not identify with Belle unless she was updated appropriately , and thus evolved the character into " a woman of the ' 90s " . The screenwriter refused to watch Jean Cocteau 's 1946 film adaptation of the fairy tale and chose to base Belle on American actress Katharine Hepburn 's portrayal of Jo March in the 1933 film adaptation of Louisa May Alcott 's book Little Women instead , who she felt was " a real depiction of womanhood . " Similarly , story artist Brenda Chapman drew influence from Hepburn 's on @-@ screen bickering with actor Spencer Tracy during the scene in which Belle tends to the Beast 's wounds . 
 Animator Mark Henn observed that , unlike Ariel , Belle does not " fall in love at first sight " ; instead " there 's an actual relationship you see grow " . In the original fairy tale , Belle has two selfish sisters who both have their own respective love interests , all of whom Woolverton omitted from the screenplay in favor of focusing solely on Belle 's relationship with Gaston . At one point , Belle had a younger sister named Clarice and a cruel aunt named Marguerite , both of whom were discarded – Clarice to emphasize Belle 's loneliness , and Marguerite to be replaced by Gaston as the film 's villain . Woolverton also eliminated the subplot of Belle asking her father for a rose . Despite constant " regressive " re @-@ writes , Woolverton 's overall vision for Belle generally remained intact . Beauty and the Beast 's story department was predominantly male , a time during which few women were involved . Woolverton often found herself at odds and disagreeing with the more traditional story artists in regards to Belle 's role in the film , but continued to be supported by Katzenberg and lyricist Howard Ashman . 
 According to Woolverton , the story team challenged nearly every line of dialogue Woolverton suggested for the character . On one occasion , the story artists re @-@ wrote what Woolverton had originally scripted as Belle using a map to indicate places to where she would like to travel to the character baking a cake . Arguing that the liberated Belle would not even know how to bake , Woolverton decided to compromise by having the character read a book instead , which was similarly debated because some filmmakers considered reading to be too passive an activity . To resolve this , Woolverton scripted Belle walk while reading , an activity in which Woolverton herself partook as a child . In Beaumont 's fairy tale , Belle is essentially forced to replace her father as the Beast 's prisoner . To make the character more independent , Woolverton re @-@ wrote her so that she willingly ventures into the woods in search of her father , bravely confronts the Beast and ultimately trades her own freedom in return for Maurice 's instead . During Gaston 's climactic fight with the Beast , the character 's line " Time to die ! " was changed to " Belle is mine ! " in order return the focus of the story to Belle . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Disney had originally considered casting American actress and singer Jodi Benson , who famously provided the voice of Ariel in The Little Mermaid , as Belle , but ultimately felt that the actress sounded " too American " and young . Describing the character as " a woman that was ahead of her time , " the filmmakers wanted Belle to sound " more like a woman than a girl . " Director Kirk Wise was specifically searching for an actress capable of " creat [ ing ] a character completely with her voice " , inspired by American entertainer Judy Garland . American actress and singer Paige O 'Hara was performing on Broadway in New York when she first read about the role and Beauty and the Beast in The New York Times . Upon discovering that the studio was holding auditions for the lead role of Belle and specifically recruiting Broadway performers at the behest of lyricist Howard Ashman and composer Alan Menken , O 'Hara immediately insisted that her agent schedule her an audition . O 'Hara auditioned for the role five times , competing against approximately 500 hopefuls . O 'Hara 's first two auditions required the actress to mail audio recordings of her voice to the studio in Los Angeles . The actress was also required to perform a song of her choice , selecting " Heaven Help My Heart " from the musical Chess . At her first legitimate audition , O 'Hara spoke and sang in a higher register than her own in an effort to mimic the voice of Snow White from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , but the filmmakers insisted that she use her natural voice instead . O 'Hara 's last few auditions were attended by Ashman and Menken , directors Wise and Gary Trousdale , and producers Katzenberg and Don Hahn . Ashman was already familiar with O 'Hara 's Broadway stint as Ellie May Chipley in the musical Show Boat . An hour after her fifth and final audition , O 'Hara received a telephone call from Disney on her birthday informing her that she had successfully been cast . The actress was fairly confident that the role was hers before she was officially cast , and credits the fact that Ashman enjoyed her performance on the cast recording of the musical Show Boat . O 'Hara admitted , " I 'm not usually confident about auditions ... but I just understood ( Belle ) so much . " 
 Despite her successful stage career , O 'Hara was virtually unknown to Hollywood audiences before was cast in Beauty and the Beast ; she is recognized as one of the last relatively obscure actresses to be cast in a feature @-@ length Disney animated film . 30 years old at the time of her audition , O 'Hara consequently imbued Belle 's voice with a mature , " womanly quality " despite the character 's young age . Woolverton appreciated the fact that O 'Hara sounded more mature than traditional Disney heroines . Additionally , O 'Hara identified with her character because they were both ostracized by their peers throughout their childhood because of their unconventional interests , explaining , " I was odd growing up myself . I mean , I was into musical theater and Gershwin and Rodgers and Hammerstein while people were going to Led Zeppelin concerts . So I understood that ... I wasn 't the norm either . I was very focused on my career , on my performing all through my childhood and my teens ... I had a one @-@ track mind , and I think that Belle was like that a lot . " O 'Hara also shares Belle 's interest in reading . Wise was pleased with the quality of O 'Hara 's voice , which reminded him of Garland . O 'Hara initially found it challenging to control her speaking volume due to having been trained to project as a stage actress . O 'Hara told The Guardian that to solve this she " softened and used the microphone . " The actress would occasionally ad @-@ lib her own dialogue . However , none was included in the final film because it sounded " too modern " . O 'Hara and American actor Robby Benson , who provides the voice of the Beast , asked Disney to allow the co @-@ stars to record together as opposed to the traditional method of being isolated in a recording booth , to which the studio agreed despite its costliness . O 'Hara credited the filmmaker 's decision with developing both the film and Belle and the Beast 's relationship . O 'Hara and Benson became the first Disney voice actors to record together . In total , the recording process took over two years to complete . 
 Since the November 1991 release of Beauty and the Beast , O 'Hara has returned to The Walt Disney Company on several occasions to voice Belle in a variety of media and merchandise , including its direct @-@ to @-@ video sequels Beauty and the Beast : The Enchanted Christmas ( 1997 ) , Belle 's Magical World ( 1998 ) and Belle 's Tales of Friendship ( 1999 ) , as well as various video game releases such as the Kingdom Hearts series and several audio and video recordings associated with the Disney Princess franchise . Additionally , O 'Hara was hired by Disney to perform the song " Belle " at the 64th Academy Awards in 1992 . O 'Hara has referred to the studio as her " main employer for 20 years " . In 2011 , O 'Hara was officially replaced by actress Julie Nathanson , who first voiced Belle in the video game Kinect Disneyland Adventures ( 2011 ) . O 'Hara revealed to the Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal that news of the replacement greatly upset her to the point of which she was willing to re @-@ record much of Belle 's dialogue in an attempt to prove to the company that she is still capable of voicing the character . However , O 'Hara eventually admitted that she found the process quite difficult as a result of the way in which her voice has changed over the course of 20 years . 
 = = = Personality and design = = = 
 According to producer Don Hahn , Beaumont 's original Belle is an " incredibly passive " character , the personality of whom he likened to those of Sleeping Beauty and Cinderella , as well as American actress and animal rights activist Doris Day , describing them as women who are " capable , but filling a role that women might fill in the 1950s and 1960s . ” The filmmakers painstakingly reworked Belle into a more three @-@ dimensional character by providing her with goals and aspirations beyond romance and marriage , while expanding her passive role into that of a more inquisitive heroine . Determined to have Belle resemble " an unusual Disney heroine , " Woolverton deliberately molded her into an independent character who is not a princess , enjoys books and has little interest in marriage for marriages sake , and worked closely with Ashman to create a proactive heroine " who was a thinker and a reader and she wasn ’ t about what she looked like and she wasn ’ t a victim . " Both Woolverton and O 'Hara encouraged the filmmakers to emphasize the intelligent and book @-@ loving aspects of Belle 's personality . However , at times the animators struggled to realize Woolverton 's vision . Originally , Belle was depicted constantly crying throughout her imprisonment ; Woolverton resented this , arguing that the character was much more likely to be either searching for an escape or simply " be intrigued that she was living in an enchanted castle " than crying . " Once everybody realized she wasn ’ t going to be this typical Disney female , they would go to the extreme ... She became bitchy " ; the screenwriter argued that Belle would be " too smart " to act this way . A few years older than The Little Mermaid 's Ariel , Belles ' love of reading makes the character more worldly and mature than her predecessor . Belle is believed by Henn to be " probably " the oldest of Disney 's princesses , at 20 years of age . Although Belle being well @-@ read is mentioned in the original fairy tale , it is hardly important to the plot . Thus , Belle 's love of reading was expanded upon , borrowing from both the Little Woman character Jo March and Woolverton 's own love of reading to demonstrate the character 's intelligence and open mind . 
 To demonstrate that the character is not perfect , Woolverton described " a little wisp of hair that keeps falling in her face , " which was the only direction she used to describe Belle 's physical appearance . Belle 's supervising animators were James Baxter and Mark Henn . Henn 's second Disney heroine , the animator had previously contributed to animating Ariel . Wanting Belle to be significantly different and more European in appearance than Ariel , the animators drew her with fuller lips , narrower eyes and darker eyebrows , which were inspired by the facial features of British actresses Vivien Leigh and Audrey Hepburn ; Belle 's yellow ballgown was inspired by a similar costume Hepburn had worn in the film Roman Holiday ( 1953 ) . Hahn and a team of male filmmakers designed the ballgown while consuming pizza and drinking alcohol . More statuesque than most Disney princesses , Belle 's appearance was inspired by that of American actress Jennie Garth . The animators also used photographs of Hollywood actresses Natalie Wood , Elizabeth Taylor and Grace Kelly for reference . Baxter studied the art of French impressionist Edgar Degas , a painter known for his portraits of ballerinas , whose work inspired the animator to incorporate " graceful , swan @-@ like movements " into Belle 's performance . Henn was specifically assigned certain scenes to animate from the studio 's Florida division , namely the character exploring the West Wing , the scene in which Belle tends to the Beast 's wounds , and the " Something There " musical sequence . Art director Brian McEntee suggested that Belle be the only character in her village to wear blue in order emphasize the fact that she is different and an outcast . The colors Belle wears also mimic her emotions , blue being associated with sadness and loneliness . Blue was also used to symbolize good , while Gaston 's red represented evil . According to the Directory of World Cinema : American Hollywood by Lincoln Geraghty , Belle was inspired by actress Judy Garland 's role as Dorothy Gale in The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) and Julie Andrews ' performance as Maria von Trapp in The Sound of Music ( 1965 ) . 
 O 'Hara felt that Belle originally looked " too perfect , " likening the character 's appearance to actresses Elizabeth Taylor and Angelina Jolie . Actress and model Sherri Stoner served as the performance model for Belle , providing live @-@ action reference for the animators as they drew the character . Belle 's tendency to constantly brush her hair away from her face was also inspired by both Stoner and O 'Hara . " I was constantly doing that and little quirky things that they would catch , " O 'Hara told The Guardian . The animators also incorporated O 'Hara 's eyes , cheekbones and the way in which she raises her eyebrow into Belle 's face . Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Charles Solomon observed inconsistencies in Belle 's appearance , writing , " The prettiest and liveliest Belle waltzes with Beast in his marble ballroom and weeps over his body before he 's transformed into the Prince " while " The Belle who receives the library from Beast has wider @-@ set eyes and a more prominent mouth than the noticeably slimmer Belle who sings ' Something There ' " . Beauty and the Beast became the first animated film to fully credit each animator responsible for animating a specific character during the film 's closing credits . Having since animated Jasmine in Aladdin ( 1992 ) , Mulan in Mulan ( 1998 ) and Tiana in The Princess and the Frog ( 2009 ) , Henn has established himself " as the go @-@ to man behind many Disney princesses . " 
 = = Characterization and themes = = 
 Woolverton created Belle as part of " her self @-@ directed mandate to move women and girls forward . " The Express @-@ Times described the character as an intelligent young woman who " sings songs about reading and wanting to gain knowledge , rather than falling in love . " Woolverton credits Belle 's knowledge and love of books with providing the character with a " point of view of her life and that doesn 't necessarily involve a man getting her there . " One of the film 's main themes , Belle is considered an outsider because her love of reading provides her with knowledge of the outside world as opposed to her " narrow @-@ minded " village peers . Writing for Wired.com , Matt Blum dubbed Belle " the <unk> heroine of any Disney animated film . " Similarly , Boxoffice 's Amy Nicholson coined the character " Disney 's Smartest Heroine , " while Rob Burch of The Hollywood News observed that the character " comes across as arrogant at times " because she " spends much of the first act complaining . " In her book Sex , Love and Abuse : Discourses on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault , author Sharon Hayes described Belle as " the quintessential beautiful young ingenue . " Comparing Belle 's personality to that of the princess in the Brothers Grimm 's fairy tale " The Frog Prince " , The Meanings of " Beauty and the Beast " : A Handbook author Jerry Griswold described the character as a similarly " feisty and outspoken " heroine . Writing for St. Francis Xavier University , Dawn Elizabeth England observed that Belle possesses equally as many traditionally feminine as she does masculine traits , citing her bravery , independence and assertiveness as masculine , and her sensitivity and fearfulness as feminine . According to Hard Bodies : Hollywood Masculinity in the Reagan Era author Susan Jeffords , " Belle 's credentials as heroine are established ... when she is the only one of the town 's single women not to swoon over Gaston , " while the character 's love of reading is essentially manipulated " to mark her as better than the rest of the townspeople . " Writing for The Statesman , David O 'Connor cited Belle 's intelligence and <unk> as " in stark opposition to the insensitive and significantly dim @-@ witted Gaston . " Critics continue to debate over whether Belle or the Beast is the film 's protagonist . Susan Jeffords , author of Hard Bodies : Hollywood Masculinity in the Reagan Era , felt that although Belle appears to be the protagonist in Beaumont 's original fairy tale , the character becomes " less the focus of the narrative " in Disney 's adaptation and more of a " mechanism for solving the Beast 's ' dilemma ' . " In her article " The Tangled Evolution of the Disney Princess " , Noelle <unk> felt that Belle arrived just in time when Disney 's heroines were " in a dire need for some change , " awarding her " the red stamp of approval " for her intelligence and spirit . 
 Analyzing ways in which Disney 's heroines have evolved overtime due to " the approach to the characterization of the princesses chang [ ing ] " as the characters gradually transformed from passive young women into heroines who " had ambitions and desires aside from finding true love , " critics often divide the Disney Princesses into three separate categories and rank Belle among the middle of the timeline , with Kit Steinkellner of <unk> observing that the character improved upon " the Disney princess archetype " by simultaneously serving as both a " dreamer " and a " doer " in her film , as opposed to exclusively the former . Film historian Paula Sigman Lowery explained to the Daily Express that Belle 's personality is a combination of Ariel 's spirit and burgeoning independence , and Pocahontas ' maturity , while Belle is " a little older [ than Ariel ] and a little further along in their journey towards independence . " About.com 's David Nusair believes that Belle belongs to a category of Disney Princesses known as " The Lady Vanishes , " in which the heroines , in spite of being brave , outspoken and independent , nonetheless " are forced to behave passively as others help them achieve their respective goals . " Michelle Munro , writing for Durham College of Applied Arts and Technology , felt that even though Belle shares several traits with her more passive predecessors , the character introduced " new possibilities for princesses . " Girls in Capes wrote that Belle pioneered a generation of princesses who taught " about ambition , self @-@ discovery and the pursuit of what we want . " Additionally , Belle remains Disney 's first and only princess to have hazel eyes . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 Belle debuted in Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) as a beautiful bibliophile who , although praised by her fellow villagers for her unrivaled beauty , is at the same time ridiculed for her intelligence and non @-@ conformity . Having grown weary of her uneventful provincial life , in which she is relentlessly romantically pursued by an arrogant hunter named Gaston , Belle longs for adventure . When her father Maurice is imprisoned by a cold @-@ hearted beast , Belle sacrifices her own freedom in return for his , promising to remain with the Beast in his castle among his staff of enchanted objects forever . Although she initially dislikes her captor , Belle gradually learns to accept the Beast in spite of his appearance and eventually befriends him . Belle and the Beast 's strong bond greatly envies Gaston to the point of which he storms the castle and kills him , only to fall to his own death in the process . However , Belle confesses her love for the Beast just in time to break the spell under which he had been placed by an enchantress as punishment for his selfish ways , and the Beast ultimately transforms back into a handsome prince . 
 In Beauty and the Beast : The Enchanted Christmas ( 1997 ) , Belle attempts to reignite the castle 's waning spirit by reintroducing and celebrating Christmas , in spite of the Beast 's strong resentment towards the holiday . Meanwhile , a solemn pipe organ named Forte grows determined to sabotage Belle and the Beast 's burgeoning friendship because he longs to maintain his co @-@ dependent relationship with his master . Tricked by Forte into retrieving a large Christmas tree from a frozen pond , Belle nearly drowns , only to be rescued by the Beast . The Beast , however , having been misinformed by Forte , wrongly accuses Belle of trying to escape again , and locks her in the dungeon as punishment . When the Beast finally discovers the truth , they forgive each other , and Belle helps him thwart Forte 's plan to destroy the castle . Beauty and the Beast : Belle 's Magical World ( 1998 ) , depicts Belle as she interacts with both the Beast and his enchanted servants in various segments , exploring themes such as forgiveness , friendship , cooperation and respect . 
 In Belle 's Tales of Friendship ( 1999 ) , a spin @-@ off of the film series , Belle owns a bookstore in which she teaches valuable lessons to children by reading and retelling well @-@ known stories and fairy tales , narrating four classic Disney animated shorts : The Three Little Pigs ( 1933 ) , Peter and the Wolf ( 1946 ) , The Wise Little Hen ( 1934 ) and Morris the Midget Moose ( 1950 ) . For the first time , Belle appears as both animated and live @-@ action versions of herself , voiced and portrayed by actresses Paige O 'Hara and Lyndsey McLeod , respectively . In the television series Sing Me a Story with Belle ( 1995 – 1999 ) , Belle , in a role reprised by McLeod , owns her own music and bookshop , where she is visited by children to whom she tells and sings stories . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 Belle appeared in the Broadway musical adaptation of Beauty and the Beast . The role was originated by actress Susan Egan , who was initially reluctant to audition for Beauty and the Beast because she " thought it was a terrible idea for Disney to put a cartoon on Broadway . " However , her agent managed to convince her otherwise , and Egan ultimately turned down callbacks for roles in the musicals My Fair Lady , Carousel and Grease in favor of starring as Belle in Beauty and the Beast because she had always wanted to originate a Broadway role . Egan had never watched Beauty and the Beast prior to her audition , relying solely on " her own creative instincts " instead . Egan 's performance earned her a Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical at the 48th Tony Awards . A total of seventeen actresses have portrayed Belle in the Broadway musical , among them recording artists Debbie Gibson and Toni Braxton , The Sopranos ' Jamie @-@ Lynn Sigler , and Disney Channel alumnae Christy Carlson Romano and Anneliese van der Pol , the latter of whom became Broadway 's final Belle when the show ended its thirteen @-@ year @-@ long run in 2007 . Actress Sarah <unk> remains Broadway 's longest @-@ running Belle . 
 A best @-@ selling R & B singer , Braxton made her Broadway debut when she was cast as Belle in 1998 , turning down actress Halle Berry 's role in the film Why Do Fools Fall In Love ( 1998 ) . Braxton 's desire to pursue an acting career stemmed from a series of conflicts with the singer 's record label at the time , in turn making her the only African American to portray Belle in the show 's history . Belle 's ballad " A Change in Me " was written by songwriters Alan Menken and Tim Rice specifically for Braxton . However , the song was ultimately so well @-@ received that it has been included in the musical ever since . During her tenure as Belle , Braxton was stalked by an " obsessed fan . " The stalker had reportedly " bombarded " Braxton with threatening e @-@ mails and letters . Several measures were taken to ensure the singer 's safety , including forcing Braxton to dress in full disguise when traveling to and from the theatre in addition to reducing her total number of weekly performances from eight to seven . The stalker was eventually arrested and charged with " aggravated harassment . " 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Belle along with Beast and Chip appeared at the 64th Academy Awards as presenters for Best Animated Short Feature . She also makes a brief cameo appearance in Disney 's 34th animated feature film The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) during the " Out There " musical sequence . Belle appeared in the animated television series Disney 's House of Mouse and its direct @-@ to @-@ video films Mickey 's Magical Christmas : Snowed in at the House of Mouse and Mickey 's House of Villains . In the television series , Belle is voiced by American actress and singer Jodi Benson , while O 'Hara reprises her role in the film . She was featured as one of the seven Princesses of Heart in the Kingdom Hearts video game series . A live @-@ action version of Belle appears as a main character in the ABC television series Once Upon a Time , where she serves as the love interest of Rumplestiltskin ( who is the show 's version of the Beast ) . She is portrayed by Australian actress Emilie de Ravin . Another live @-@ action version of the character appeared in the 2015 television film Descendants , where she was played by Keegan Connor Tracy ( who is also a cast member on Once Upon a Time , except she plays The Blue Fairy / Mother Superior in the series ) and serves as the Queen of the United States of <unk> . The series Sofia the First included a cameo by Belle in a 2013 episode . In January 2015 , English actress Emma Watson announced that she will be portraying Belle in a live @-@ action adaptation of the film , scheduled for a 2017 release . 
 Belle was also the main character in various comic books based on the film , including one set during Belle 's stay at the castle published by Marvel Comics , and a prequel set several years before the film distributed by Disney Comics . In the former , the storylines generally have the servants trying to coax Belle into doing something with the Beast , only for it to backfire and nearly ruin their friendship before they make up . In the latter serial , Belle ends up locked up in a cellar by village children after reluctantly playing pirates with them , and later nearly goes down the path leading to Beast 's castle . The latter serial also implies that she holds <unk> views and refuses to associate herself with the village children , especially the males , due to their not being as well @-@ versed in literature as she . 
 Belle and the other characters from the first movie appear in the stage show , Beauty and the Beast Live on Stage at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , Walt Disney World . Belle appears in a meet @-@ and @-@ greet attraction at Magic Kingdom 's Fantasyland called Enchanted Tales with Belle . In season 18 of Dancing With the Stars , Danica McKellar played Belle while performing a Quickstep on a Disney themed episode . Ginger Zee and Edyta <unk> also both portrayed Belle while performing a Foxtrot and Waltz respectively during the Disney night episode of the 22nd season of Dancing with the Stars . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Belle has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics , several of whom voiced their preference for the character over her predecessor , Ariel from The Little Mermaid . Hal Hinson of The Washington Post described Belle as a " compelling " character who is " more mature , more womanly and less blandly asexual " than Ariel , as well as " a more worldly girl " , describing her as " a bookworm , with gumption and a mind of her own . " Similarly comparing Belle to Ariel , John Hartl of The Seattle Times wrote that , in Beauty and the Beast , " there 's rarely a sense of deja vu , perhaps because the heroine is so different from ' Mermaid 's ' dependent Ariel , and her dilemma is more poignant , " while Boxoffice scribed , " Undoubtedly in response to criticism that the cute little ' Mermaid ' Ariel was nothing more than a precocious sexpot , the idea @-@ people behind this beauty — aptly named Belle ... chose to make her an icon of self @-@ reliance and a voracious reader with a curiosity and love for everything around her . " Jennie Punter of The Globe and Mail extolled Belle as a " smart , courageous ... ' take @-@ charge kind of gal ' , " while crowning her the " main attraction of Beauty and the Beast . " Emma Cochrane of Empire hailed Belle as " a feminist heroine who [ is ] more rounded than previous Disney characters " , while Paste 's Annlee Ellingson similarly enjoyed the character 's " feminist kick . " Stephen Hunter of The Baltimore Sun wrote that " Belle ... is no passive fairy tale princess , but a real live girl , with a spunky personality and her own private agenda . " TV Guide wrote that " The familiar narrative is strengthened by the independent , self @-@ assured character of Belle , " concluding , " Unlike Disney heroines from Snow White through Ariel , Belle is smart , knows what she wants , and doesn 't spend her time pining away for the love of a handsome prince . " Marc Bernardin of Entertainment Weekly praised Belle 's heroism , dubbing her " the hero " of Beauty and the Beast , while Entertainment Weekly 's Christian Blauvelt opined , " Unlike previous Disney heroines who needed to be rescued by a prince themselves , Belle not only saves the Beast 's life , she saves his soul . " TLC 's Vicki Arkoff received Belle as a " smart " and " sharp @-@ tongued " heroine , crediting the character for " break [ ing ] Disney 's passive @-@ princess mold . " About.com 's David Nusair described Belle as an " admirable " heroine . AllMovie 's Don Kaye and Perry Seibert echoed each other 's reviews of the character , with Kaye describing both Belle and the Beast as " three @-@ dimensional ... complex individuals who defy stereotyping and change over the course of the story , " and Seibert calling Belle a " strong female character " who " sidesteps most of the clichés surrounding Disney heroines . " Common Sense Media hailed Belle as " one of Disney 's smartest , most independent heroines . " 
 Meanwhile , Belle 's relationship with the Beast has also been met with positive reviews . About.com 's David Nusair wrote that " the palpable chemistry between Belle and The Beast <unk> [ es ] that Beauty and the Beast lives up to its reputation as one of the most memorable romances of all time . " Describing it as an " unconventional romance , " Charles Solomon of the Los Angeles Times opined , " The idea of a young woman learning to love a gentle heart hidden beneath a baleful exterior represented a major break with tradition . " Likewise , critics enjoyed O 'Hara 's performance . According to Variety , Belle was " magnificently voiced by O ’ Hara . " The Star @-@ Ledger 's Stephen Whitty enjoyed O 'Hara 's " pretty soprano . " John Hartl of The Seattle Times wrote , " O 'Hara does a spirited job of investing the character with warmth , intuition and maturity , " while the Sun @-@ Sentinel 's Candice Russel felt that O 'Hara " does a good job of creating Belle as intellectual , wisely feminine and disarmed by the stirrings of her heart . " According to the Young Writers Society , Belle remains the best @-@ reviewed Disney Princess to @-@ date . 
 One of the character 's few negative reviews was written by Ethan Alter of Television Without Pity , who opined : 
 [ T ] he movie ... present [ ed ] audiences with a willful female protagonist that was firmly in control of her romantic destiny and regularly placed reading books above chasing after boys . And it 's true that in that respect at least , Belle stood in stark contrast to past Disney heroines ... Still , the filmmakers didn 't do the character any favors by swapping out that boy crazy trait for a pronounced <unk> streak that comes across as a little creepy . Besides being utterly devoted to her father , Belle 's relationship with the Beast possesses a distinctly mother / toddler dynamic ... Their romance also lacks spark because – due to the fundamental set @-@ up of the narrative ... it 's always clear that he needs her far more than she needs him . Particularly when compared to some of the dynamic animated heroines that came after her ... today Belle can 't help but seem ... bland . 
 = = = Feminist analysis = = = 
 Jezebel determined that Belle " is often held up as the standard of the ' feminist ' Disney princess . " According to Tales , Then and Now : More Folktales as Literary Fictions for Young Adults author Anna E. Altmann , Disney heavily promoted Beauty and the Beast as " a feminist fairy tale " due to Belle 's characterization and role in the film . In his book Hearing a Film , Seeing a Sermon : Preaching and Popular Movies , author Timothy B. <unk> agreed that the character indicated " Disney 's ... continued efforts to reshape their heroines for a more feminist age . " According to Girl Culture : An Encyclopedia author Claudia Mitchell , Belle 's feminism was influenced by third @-@ wave feminism and the relatively new concept of girl power during the 1990s . Feminist critics have been generally mixed in their analyses of Belle , arguing over whether or not the character is in fact " feminist enough . " Although Beauty and the Beast was initially lauded upon release for starring a " forward thinking and feminist " heroine , critics tend to agree that , in spite of Belle 's independence and resentment towards Gaston , Beauty and the Beast essentially remains a romance about a girl who finally " meets her ideal man . " Acknowledging that Belle " represented significant change from [ her ] sweet , mop @-@ wielding predecessors , " Twilight and History author Nancy <unk> observed that " the end result of fulfillment through marriage has been maintained . " Kathleen Maher of The Austin Chronicle cited Belle as an example of " pseudo @-@ feminism " because she rejects one man , Gaston , in favor of another , a prince . While commending Belle for " seeing past the beast 's appearance , " Judith <unk> of The Independent in the end accused the character of " melting back into the role of wife when he turns back into a handsome prince . " Fairy Tale author Andrew <unk> referred to Belle as Disney 's attempt to address " feminist criticism of its representation of women in earlier films , " but ultimately criticized the character 's curiosity for " extend [ ing ] only to romance , " additionally accusing her of being " a zealous individualist with a pathological hostility to common men and women . " Meanwhile , Stylist ranked Belle among the most feminist Disney characters , describing her as an " incredibly intelligent " woman who " doesn 't stand for a man who considers her as just a piece of meat ... she wants someone who loves her for her mind too . " Acknowledging the character 's " feminist longings , " Daniel <unk> , author of America 's Film Legacy : The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry , cited Belle as Disney 's " modern @-@ day corrective to Snow White . " Beyond Adaptation : Essays on Radical Transformations of Original Works author Phyllis <unk> wrote that , initially , Beauty and the Beast does not seem " remotely feminist . " However , the author did acknowledge Belle as " an appealing character with a noticeable feminist streak , " but in the end criticized Disney 's Consumer Products of reversing what the film had nearly accomplished by inducting the character into the Disney Princess franchise . In Refinery29 's " Definitive Ranking Of Disney Princesses As Feminist Role Models , " author Vanessa <unk> ranked the character eighth but described her personality and ambitions as " confusing . " Complex 's Tara Aquino described Belle as " a kinda feminist ... who 's well @-@ read , self @-@ sufficient , and with standards high enough that she doesn 't fall for the town 's brain @-@ dead pretty boy . " 
 Commentators have generally reacted more cynically towards Belle 's relationship with the film 's male characters , particularly the Beast , questioning its morality . Writing for the University of Central Florida , Faith Dickens felt that after Belle 's introduction , the character becomes little more than " a vehicle for exploring the Beast 's dilemmas , " while her initial pining for adventure is replaced by romance . Dickens went on to criticize the fact that while Belle appears to be " perfect the way she is , " the Beast " need [ s ] to be reformed . " Anna E. Altmann , author of Tales , Then and Now : More Folktales as Literary Fictions for Young Adults , disliked the fact that Belle appears to share a motherly relationship with both the Beast and Maurice . Altman also panned the fact that Belle 's interest in reading appears to be limited to fairy tales , ultimately dismissing the character as little more than " a feisty North American version of " Beaumont 's heroine . Orange Coast writer Henry A. Giroux felt that Belle serves as little more than " a prop for resolving the Beast 's problems . " Sonia Saraiya of Nerve ranked Belle the sixth moth feminist Disney Princess , writing that , unlike Ariel , " Belle 's sass doesn 't come from teenage rebellion , but rather from intellectual acuity . " Saraiya commended Belle for resisting " her village 's expectations of what her life should look like , " crediting her with being " the first princess to express some skepticism about married life . " While calling Belle 's sacrifice " brave , " the author also labeled it " not much of a step for womankind , " in the end accusing her of falling " for a domineering man . " Similarly , Kit Steinkellner of <unk> expressed concern over the " abusive undercurrents running through Belle and Beast ’ s relationship . " Meanwhile , Bustle 's Mary Grace Garis also commended Belle 's aspirations and love of reading , but criticized her relationship with the Beast , concluding , " Though the ’ 90s showed a move toward princesses wanting to buck conventions and free themselves from their fathers ( or the town misogynist ) the endgame is the still the same , elaborating , " When the movie ends , they ’ re still solidly with a man , their dreams of adventure abandoned . Therefore , the Disney renaissance is characterized more by theoretical want of adventure rather than a genuine pursuit . " 
 = = = Accolades and legacy = = = 
 Deemed an " iconoclast " by Boxoffice , Belle continues to be recognized for her role in Beauty and the Beast . Established as an icon , the character holds the distinction of being Disney 's first feminist princess . According to Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast , before Belle " being a Disney princess meant singing songs about how much you love combing your hair with a fork and giving away your voice if it meant you got to marry the guy with that dreamy chiseled jaw . " Commentators believe that the character 's performance in Beauty and the Beast as one of Disney 's first strong female leads is responsible for changing the way in which women would be depicted in future animated films . According to About.com 's David Nusair , Belle " updated the princess formula for an entirely new generation . " The Atlantic 's Lindsay Lowe echoed Nusair 's sentiment , citing Belle as the character responsible for ending Disney 's " long history of ... docile heroines . " The Daily Campus ' Cathy Schmidt recognized Belle and Ariel as " the beginnings of the more modern Disney princesses . " Writing for Virgin Media , <unk> Salt believes that the character " proved that audiences could fall in love with a brown @-@ haired intellectual . " A survey conducted by Disney proved that Belle inspired young woman to read after the film 's release . Justin Humphreys of The Hook expressed , " Belle remains a most successful princess because people can relate " to her . Meanwhile , the Los Angeles Times ' Charles Solomon ranked Belle among the four Disney Princesses responsible for breaking " the bonds of convention . " Elina <unk> of Parenting believes that Belle 's " bravery and independence helped redefine the meaning of a Disney princess . " The character was placed first on E ! ' s ranking of the Disney Princesses due to her lack of vanity , relatability and intelligence , while Cosmopolitan ranked her fourth . In the magazine 's " Definitive Ranking Of Disney Princesses " , Seventeen ranked Belle fifth . Similarly , BuzzFeed also ranked the character fifth , praising her love of reading . BuzzFeed also determined that Belle is the most popular Disney Princess , with the character having garnered 18 % of votes . Belle is the fifth most successful Disney Princess in terms of box office revenue , with her film grossing over $ 350 million . However , following the release of Frozen and popularity of its heroines Elsa and Anna , even though neither of them are officially part of the line @-@ up , Belle became the lowest @-@ selling Disney Princess on eBay in 2013 , with sales of less than $ 7 @,@ 000 despite the fact that she is often cited as a favorite among customers . 
 Belle remains one of Disney 's most beloved animated heroines . The character was the only animated heroine to be nominated for the American Film Institute 's greatest heroes in film ranking . CNN ranked Belle among " Merida and other animated heroines " , a list recognizing some of Disney 's greatest heroines . According to the Daily Mirror , Belle is Disney 's second most iconic character , describing her as a " portrait of bravery , teaching us to look beyond appearances and stand up for what we believe in . " Meanwhile , PopMatters ranked Belle Disney 's second best hero . Considered to be both a sex symbol and fashion icon , Belle has garnered accolades for both her appearance and costumes . The character was ranked 64th on UGO 's list of the most attractive female cartoon characters , while being ranked 14th on Complex 's " 25 Hottest Cartoon Women of All Time " . E ! ranked Belle the second best @-@ dressed Disney Princess , crowning her " the most couture of all the Disney princesses . " Author Emily Popp went on to praise the character 's ballgown for being " off the Oscar de la Renta runway , " while Vogue included it among the " Most Famous Dresses " , with author Sarah Karmali dubbing it " One of the most instantly recognisable dresses in Disney history . " Revered as iconic , the dress is currently among the most famous in film history . Belle appeared on BuzzFeed 's " Definitive Ranking Of 72 Disney Princess <unk> " four times , ranking the character 's green , blue , pink and yellow dresses 51st , 37th , 31st and 15th , respectively . Similarly , Belle 's blue , pink , yellow and green costumes were ranked 18th , 10th , ninth and fourth by Official Disney Blogs , whose author believes that the character 's ballgown " went down in the history books . " Belle appeared on Stylist 's list of the " Best beauty looks in Disney " twice , both for the character 's hairstyles . Entertainment Weekly ranked Belle 's hair fifth in the magazine 's " Disney Princesses : Ranking Their <unk> – and Don 'ts ! " 
 Belle helped establish Woolverton as a " legendary screenwriter " ; the writer continues to be commended for her dedication to creating strong female characters ; ever since Belle , the majority of Woolverton 's female characters have been headstrong , independent women , namely Nala in The Lion King ( 1994 ) , Mulan in Mulan ( 1998 ) , Alice in Alice in Wonderland ( 2010 ) and Maleficent in Maleficent ( 2014 ) . Susan Wloszczyna of Indiewire wrote that " Woolverton set a new standard for fully fleshed @-@ out fairy @-@ tale heroines ... with Belle " , in turn paving the way for The Hunger Games ' Katniss Everdeen , and Frozen 's Anna and Elsa ( 2013 ) . Woolverton remains protective of Belle , explaining , " [ she ] was my first @-@ born child , so there ’ s a little bit of possessiveness , which really I had to let it go " . Beauty and the Beast , Belle performs the film 's opening number , " Belle " , which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 64th Academy Awards in 1992 . In 1998 , O 'Hara was nominated for an Annie Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement for Voice Acting by a Female Performer in an Animated Feature Production for reprising her role as Belle in the second of Beauty and the Beast 's three direct @-@ to @-@ video sequels , Belle 's Magical World . To commemorate her work on Beauty and the Beast and various contributions to Disney , O 'Hara was honored with a Disney Legends award on August 19 , 2011 . Disney hired Spanish actress Penélope Cruz to pose as Belle in photographer Annie Leibovitz 's Disney Dream Portrait Series , while actor Jeff Bridges posed as the Beast . The Daily Mail described the image as Cruz " wearing Belle 's gorgeous yellow gown and being lifted high into the air by her prince , " accompanied by the phrase " Where a moment of beauty lasts forever . " 
 = SS Empire Simba = 
 SS Empire Simba was a British steam @-@ powered cargo ship . She was originally an American ship , launched in 1918 as SS West Cohas . During a stint in the United States Navy from 1918 to 1919 , she was called USS West Cohas ( ID @-@ 3253 ) . 
 West Cohas was built in 1918 for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) as part of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States for the World War I war effort . She was the 24th ship built by Skinner & Eddy of Seattle , Washington , and was completed in 88 calendar days . She was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) of the United States Navy as USS West Cohas ( ID @-@ 3253 ) in June 1918 . After several overseas trips for the Navy , she was decommissioned in May 1919 and returned to the USSB . 
 West Cohas ran aground off Sable Island in 1925 while trying to assist a vessel in distress , but otherwise had a relatively uneventful merchant career for the USSB . In 1933 , she was sold to the Lykes Brothers Steamship Company . In 1939 , she collided with the Irish passenger ship Munster , which damaged both vessels . In June 1940 , West Cobalt was sold to British interests and renamed Empire Simba . 
 During convoy service in World War II , Empire Simba initially sailed between the United Kingdom and North America carrying cargos of scrap iron from the United States . She was bombed by a German aircraft on 1 March and abandoned . She was towed to port for repairs but was struck by a German land mine dropped in a bombing raid . After six months of repairs , she began sailing roundtrips to Freetown , Sierra Leone . On one return voyage to the UK in July 1944 , she collided with another ship in the convoy . After splitting the rest of the war between voyages to North America and Africa , Empire Simba was loaded with chemical weapons in August 1945 and scuttled west of Ireland . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Cohas , one of some 24 West ships built by Skinner & Eddy of Seattle , Washington . 
 West Cohas ( Skinner & Eddy No. 24 , USSB No. 1177 ) was launched on 4 May 1918 and delivered to the United States Navy upon completion later in the month . West Cohas was built in a total of 73 working days , 88 calendar days , and was listed in seventh place on a list of the ten fastest @-@ built ocean @-@ going vessels compiled in 1920 . Skinner & Eddy received a $ 64 @,@ 000 bonus for completing the ship early . 
 The ship was 409 @.@ 6 ft ( 124 @.@ 8 m ) long between perpendiculars and 423 ft 9 in ( 129 @.@ 16 m ) overall , and had a beam of 54 @.@ 2 ft ( 16 @.@ 5 m ) . Her draught was 24 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) ( mean ) or 27 @.@ 1 ft ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) and her depth of hold was 29 ft 9 in ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) . Her tonnages were 5 @,@ 647 GRT , 5 @,@ 173 tons under deck ; 3 @,@ 465 NRT 8 @,@ 554 DWT 12 @,@ 225 displacement . 
 The ship had a double reduction @-@ geared steam turbine that drove her single screw propeller , giving her a speed of 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ) . By 1930 her equipment included submarine signalling and radio . 
 = = Military career = = 
 USS West Cohas ( ID @-@ 3253 ) was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) on 4 June with Lieutenant Commander W.F. Andrews , USNRF , in command . After successfully completing sea trials , West Cohas sailed for Arica , Chile , to carry a cargo of nitrates to the United States . Sailing from Arica on 29 July , West Cohas transited the Panama Canal and arrived at Charleston , South Carolina , where she unloaded the cargo . She sailed up the East Coast to Norfolk , Virginia , where she arrived on 25 September . After taking on a full load of matériel for the American Expeditionary Force in France , she sailed on 9 October for Brest , France , where she arrived on 28 October . While in port discharging her cargo , the Armistice was signed on 11 November , ending the fighting . She sailed for the United States ten days later . 
 After her return , West Cohas made two post @-@ war more voyages to La Pallice , France . She was employed as a transport during her return trips to the United States . Though specific information about the number of troops West Cohas carried ( or was capable of carrying ) is unknown , SS West Arrow , a Skinner & Eddy @-@ constructed sister ship , carried 23 men on at least one voyage . She returned to Norfolk on 5 May at the conclusion of her second voyage where she was decommissioned 4 days later and returned to the USSB . 
 = = Civilian career = = 
 After her return to the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , West Cohas sailed on a France – Southampton – New York route through 1920 . In September 1919 , West Grama carried 56 passengers from <unk> to New York . 
 Little is known about West Cohas 's subsequent civilian career until 1925 . On 20 July , The Washington Post carried a news report that West Cohas had run aground on shoals off Sable Island . The French fishing trawler Labrador had run aground on the shoals on the morning of 19 July and had issued a distress call . The nearby West Cohas steamed to her aid , but became stranded on the rocks nearby and issued her own distress call . Lifesaving crews had been dispatched but could reach neither ship because of fog and waves . At press time the Canadian government buoy tender and several tugs were reported on their way to aid both ships . There were no follow up reports to indicate how much damage West Cohas sustained , but she escaped the fate of the 399 GRT Labrador , which was a total loss . West Cohas had been repaired and was back in service by November 1926 , when The Wall Street Journal reported that she was to begin service carrying grain from Galveston , Texas , to London . 
 In 1933 , West Cohas was sold to the Lykes Brothers Steamship Company , which assigned her to its Ripley Steamship Company subsidiary . During the 1930s , Lykes Brothers primarily operated cargo ships between Gulf Coast and Caribbean ports , and , though there is little specific information available regarding West Cohas 's movements , it is likely that she called at Gulf coast and Caribbean ports for portions of her Lykes Brothers career . In July 1938 , she was sailing from New Orleans to Liverpool when she rammed the Irish motor vessel Munster 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) north of Dublin . Munster , with 200 passengers aboard , was damaged on her starboard side , while West Cohas 's bow was twisted from the impact . Both vessels made it to Liverpool without loss of life . 
 = = World War II = = 
 On 21 June 1940 , Lykes Brothers sold West Cohas to British interests for transfer to British registry . The crew for the newly British ship was shipped from Liverpool on the Cunard Line ocean liner Scythia to New York via Halifax and bussed to Galveston , Texas , to take possession of the ship . Sailing from that port , they took on a load of scrap iron and headed for Bermuda . At Bermuda , West Cohas joined a convoy to Halifax and then on to Liverpool . At about 1030 hrs on 19 August West Cohas lost track of the convoy but continued on independently , arriving at Liverpool on 23 August . West Cohas sailed for Methil five days later and arrived on 1 September . 
 The ship was transferred to the Ministry of War Transport , which renamed her Empire Simba and assigned Andrew Weir & Co. of London to manage her . After spending six weeks at Methil , where she had an advanced ship degaussing system installed among other repairs , Empire Simba proceeded to Oban via Lyness in mid November . She set out for North America in Convoy OB @-@ 253 on 2 December . Four days out , heavy weather dispersed the convoy , and Empire Simba proceeded independently . The ship continued to take a beating from heavy seas which opened the number one cargo hold to the ocean . Because the water was coming in faster than the bilge pumps in the hold number one could pump , the crew cut through the bulkheads into cargo hold number two to double the pumping capacity and were able to keep the ship under control long enough to arrive in Bermuda on 26 December . After temporary repairs were made there , Empire Simba sailed on 6 January 1942 first to Halifax and then to Baltimore for more permanent repairs . 
 After two weeks in Baltimore , Empire Simba headed to Hampton Roads , Virginia , to take on another load of scrap iron for the UK . After making her way to Halifax by early February , she sailed on 9 February as a part of Convoy HX @-@ 108 , but dropped out and joined up with Convoy SC @-@ 22 , a slower convoy that had left Halifax a day earlier . Off the Northern Ireland coast , the convoy escorts broke off and Empire Simba and three other ships sailed into the Irish Sea . Headed to her destination of Port Talbot , Empire Simba was at the back of the line of the four ships . At 1300 hrs on 1 March , a Heinkel He 111 bomber of Kampfgeschwader 27 , Luftwaffe attacked the column , and had a near miss on Empire Simba . The force of the explosion shattered the main water injection pipe in the engine room , flooding her engine room and leaving the ship dead in the water . The German bomber , with smoke trailing from it after being hit by bullets from one of Empire Simba 's two Hotchkiss Mark I machine guns , headed off for Ireland . There were no towing vessels immediately available for Empire Simba , so as darkness approached , Empire Simba 's crew abandoned the ship for the escorting trawler . Taking the ship 's two machine guns , the chronometer , and some personal belongings , the crew were landed at Milford Haven . Empire Simba was saved and towed into Birkenhead , where the officers rejoined with their erstwhile ship . During an overnight bombing raid on the night of 12 / 13 March , German bombers parachuted land mines on Birkenhead . One landed on Empire Simba and exploded , causing significant damage to the ship . 
 By mid @-@ August 1941 , Empire Simba , with a completely new crew , had been repaired enough to set out in a Liverpool – Freetown convoy , but evidently returned to Liverpool the same day . After making her way to Oban on 9 September , she began the first of seven roundtrips to Freetown over the next 18 months , including convoy SL 125 . Twice , when setting out with convoys , Empire Simba had to return to port with unspecified problems . In a third convoy sailing , a problem with her steering gear caused her to collide with another convoy ship , Empire Scott , and on 1 August Empire Simba straggled and dropped out of the convoy . 
 In February and March 1944 , Empire Simba made an extended round trip from the UK to Gibraltar . During this time , she called in neutral Spain at Valencia on 15 March and <unk> on 18 March . Between April 1944 and June 1945 she made four transatlantic crossings , interrupted by another trip to Freetown in December 1944 . 
 = = = Scuttling = = = 
 By August 1945 , Empire Simba was at anchor in the harbour of Cairn Ryan in the west of Scotland . There she was loaded with 8 @,@ 000 tons of chemical weapons that had been stockpiled for use if the Germans had used chemical weapons first . On 11 September Empire Simba was scuttled in the North Atlantic beyond the continental shelf , 120 nautical miles ( 138 miles ; 222 km ) northwest of Ireland . Her wreck is at 55 ° 30 ′ N 11 ° 00 ′ W in 8 @,@ 200 feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m ) of water . 
 Empire Simba was one of four redundant cargo ships that the Admiralty used to dispose of chemical ammunition at the same site in the North Atlantic in 1945 . The others were SS Empire Cormorant on 1 October , SS <unk> on 30 October , and SS Lambridge on 30 December . 
 = Bonfire ( horse ) = 
 Bonfire ( March 21 , 1983 – October 28 , 2013 ) , full name Gestion Bonfire , was an Oldenburg gelding that competed in dressage with Dutch rider Anky van Grunsven . Between 1991 and 2000 , the pair competed in multiple national and international championships , including three Olympic Games and two World Equestrian Games . They won one gold medal and four silver medals at the Olympics and one gold and three silvers at the World Equestrian Games . Although known for having a hot temperament , Bonfire mellowed as he aged , becoming one of Van Grunsven 's best horses – until she found his replacement , Salinero , she did not think she would ever find a horse to match Bonfire 's talent . A statue of Bonfire stands in Van Grunsven 's home town of Erp . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The brown Oldenburg gelding was born March 21 , 1983 , bred by Karl Bernd Westerholt of Lemwerder , Germany . His sire was Welt As and his dam was <unk> ( his dam 's sire was <unk> xx ) . 
 Van Grunsven first met Bonfire when he was two and a half years old , having been under saddle for only a week . He was later purchased by Van Grunsven 's father . At first it appeared that the young horse would be a poor prospect , as his hot temperament led to poor gaits . However , he did well at learning advanced dressage moves such as the <unk> and passage , and so Van Grunsven continued to work with him . He improved , and by the time he was seven years old , he was competing at the Grand Prix level . His temperament continued to lead to difficult rides , and he had a tendency to spook at small items near the ring ; these tendencies decreased as he grew older . 
 = = Competitive career = = 
 Bonfire competed with Van Grunsven at his first Olympic Games ( her second Games ) in 1992 at the Barcelona Games . There , the pair took 4th individually , while helping the Dutch team to a silver medal . At the 1996 Summer Olympics , they repeated the team performance , while improving to take an individual silver medal . In 2000 , at the Sydney Games , the pair won their first ( and only ) individual gold , while helping the Dutch team to a third silver medal . After the Sydney Games , Van Grunsven replaced Bonfire with Salinero as her Olympic horse . Bonfire and Van Grunsven also competed in two World Equestrian Games . The first , the 1994 The Hague Games , resulted in two medals for the pair – an individual gold and a team silver . At the second , the 1998 World Equestrian Games in Rome , the pair took home both the individual and team silver . However , Van Grunsven considered the judging at this Games so poor that she said " I thought I would quit dressage . " 
 In 1991 , Bonfire made his European Dressage Championship debut at Donaueschingen , Germany , where he and Van Grunsven took an individual 5th , while assisting the Dutch team to a bronze medal . At the 1995 Championships in Mondorf , Luxembourg , the pair took the silver medal both individually and with the Dutch team . At the 1999 Championships at Arnhem , the Netherlands Bonfire and Van Grunsven took the title – gold in the individual – as well as assisting the Dutch team to another silver medal . He was also a nine @-@ time national dressage champion in the Netherlands . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 As he grew older , he retained his famed elasticity but show signed of age in other areas , especially at the walk , which was his weakest skill in the dressage ring . Bonfire was retired from competition after the 2000 Olympic Games . To celebrate his retirement , there was a ceremony in Van Grunsven 's home town and a farewell ride at an international jumping competition in Maastricht , Netherlands . After Bonfire 's retirement , Van Grunsven stated that she never thought she would find another horse as good as he was ; however , his successor Salinero proved to be even more successful . 
 In Van Grunsven 's home town of Erp there is a statue of Bonfire . As of 2012 , he lived on Van Grunsven 's farm in the Netherlands . 
 Bonfire was euthanized following adrenal disease and hoof inflammation on 28 October 2013 , aged 30 . 
 = Lights and Sounds ( song ) = 
 " Lights and Sounds " is a song by the American pop punk band Yellowcard . The song was written collaboratively by all the band members for their fifth album , Lights and Sounds ( 2006 ) . The track is built around an instrumental guitar riff , which is then followed with a repetitive drumming beat , then it is followed by a roaring guitar sound . 
 The song 's lyrics are based on the band coping with the success they were enduring when writing songs for their second album . It is also based on how they have aged in the process . " Lights and Sounds " also goes with what vocalist Ryan Key described as when he was preoccupied with making the album . 
 The song was released on November 15 , 2005 , and peaked at number four on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart . It also appeared at number twenty @-@ six on the Hot Digital chart . The song peaked at number 50 on Billboard 's Hot 100 and Pop 100 in the 42 spot . Internationally , the track appeared for one week in the UK Singles Chart at number 56 . It also appeared in the Australian and New Zealand charts , respectively . 
 " Lights and Sounds " was well received by music critics , who noted the track 's general sound . The song won the 2006 Spike Video Game Award in the category for Best Song , after it was featured in the video game , Burnout Revenge . During promotion for the band 's album , the music video for " Lights and Sounds " was featured in a Verizon Wireless V @-@ cast commercial . The music video was shot in October 2005 and the video is a performance @-@ only video , in which the band play in a dark room with thin lights , a homage to the song 's title . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine in June 2005 , Yellowcard vocalist Ryan Key revealed that the song was written " really late in the process " when development of the album began . Key also talked about the sound featured in the song , saying : " ... it 's got such an amazing , driving , rock- & -roll vibe to it , with none of that frickin ' pop @-@ punk and alternative rock stigma . Secondly , I hate <unk> being tagged as an alternative rock band . It 's just a great rock song . That 's something we 've been striving to write for a long time , so when we were done , it was a relief . " 
 In another Rolling Stone interview , the band explained the meaning of the title track , saying that is based on a " whirlwind rocker about the pressures on the band members " and how they have changed as they have aged . Bassist Peter Mosely , in discussion of this , said : " We 're older than people think we are . [ ... ] We go through months of serenity , and then there 'll be this one night where there will be evil . " In another interview discussion about " Lights and Sounds " , Key noted that it is " about a band like us coming into a career that we didn 't think we 'd have . You find yourself surrounded by a lot of false people , a lot of people who are not doing it for the same reasons you are . That song is about the struggle of not giving in to that . " The band explained that the lyrics , " Make it new but stay in the lines / Just let go but keep it inside / Smile big for everyone / Even when you know what they 've done / They gave you the end but not where to start / Not how to build , how to tear it apart " , were written because of that particular reason . Key also revealed that the lyrics , " They gave you the end / But not where to start / Not how to build / But how to tear it apart " , were references to bands <unk> and Bad Religion . Key also explained that when he was preoccupied by distractions , in which he referred to them as " lights and sounds " , which ultimately resulted in the band naming the album and track title just that . Key also revealed that it was because that is how it surrounded the band , when working on the album . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Yellowcard released " Lights and Sounds " in the United States on November 15 , 2005 , as the lead single of their fifth album . The song peaked at number four on Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . The song also appeared on the Hot Digital Songs chart on the number twenty @-@ six position . It also charted in Billboard 's Hot 100 and Pop 100 , respectively . Internationally , the song appeared in the UK Singles Chart on March 18 , 2006 , in the number 56 position , for one week . " Lights and Sounds " also appeared in the Australian chart , in the number twenty @-@ four spot . The track peaked on the New Zealand charts at number twenty @-@ three . Afterward , the song spent 11 weeks on the chart , before retiring on April 19 . 
 The song received positive reception from critics . In the Blender magazine review of the album , critic Andy Greenwald , wrote : " The title track [ Lights and Sounds ] , bursting with buzzing distortion , builds into a satisfying anti @-@ glitz rant . " Tom <unk> of Entertainment Weekly reported that the song " crams all of the genre 's essential tropes — distorted power chords , abrupt dynamic shifts , and singsong melodies — into three and a half minutes of radio @-@ friendly fire . " Chris Saunders of MusicOMH noted that the song is laden with " memorable hooks , quiet / loud dynamics and emotive lyrics which will no doubt cut through to many a disenchanted youth : ' They gave you the end but not the where to start / not how to build , how to tear it apart . ' " Saunders concluded that the song " is as lively and rousing as most of their best tracks . " Sputnikmusic wrote : " The adventure is only on the second track [ Lights and Sounds ] and the guys of Yellowcard are just getting started . This is by far the best tune on the album . " Bart <unk> of The Clarion wrote : " The album 's single and title cut , ' Light 's and Sounds ' , follows with an amazing performance by every band member . The song provides a quick , hard @-@ hitting beat that brings back Yellowcard 's hybrid punk and emo music that the band explored in its previous single , ' Way Away ' . " 
 " Lights and Sounds " was featured on a Verizon Wireless <unk> commercial around the time of the album 's release . The song was also featured in the video game Burnout Revenge and won the 2006 Spike Video Game Award for Best Song . The song is also featured in the 2010 video game Tony Hawk : <unk> , and an episode of the teen drama One Tree Hill . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video for " Lights and Sounds " was shot on a Van Nuys , California sound stage in October 2005 . Originally , the video was supposed to be directed by Ryan Key , when the time came to start production , it was instead directed by Marc Webb , who had previously worked with Yellowcard on their 2004 video for " Ocean Avenue " . The video premiered on November 7 , 2005 , on MTV2 . 
 In an interview with MTV News , Webb revealed that the band wanted a " performance video " and that they wanted to go back to their " rock roots " . When asked the concept behind the video , Webb said : " They provided the sound and I provided the lights . A whole lot of lights . We used the same guy who did the lighting setup for Lenny Kravitz 's ' Are You Gonna Go My Way ? ' and Coldplay 's ' Speed of Sound . ' But it 's also rough around the edges — we used a bunch of different processes when developing the film . " He also concluded with , " ... it 's a big performance video . But it 's them performing inside of this wind @-@ tunnel of light . It 's a lot of smoke and mirrors , and a lot of camera tricks . There 's a big light wall , streaks of light , xenon lighting effects and strobe lights . [ ... ] But it 's all wrapped around this very simple performance environment " . 
 The video opens with a scene of the band in a stage room with a tunnel light , which is accompanied by the song playing in the background . The scene moves to the band grabbing their instruments , respectively . The band proceeds in performing the song . The scene then shifts to Key when he begins to sing . The camera shifts all around the room with different color lights , including a bullet hole scenery , as it then shifts to the band , as they continue performing . When Key sings " ' Cause nobody 's there " the light wall changes into a bright purple background . As the video shows the band continuing the song still at a fast pace , the effect is followed by a slow motion sequence . In the middle of the song , the lights are turned off , leaving the room pitch black . This is followed with the camera switching to the band members as they begin to play , once more , only with a bright yellow light on the tip of their instruments ; the tips of the drum sticks that Parsons is holding also have yellow lights . As Key sings " I 've got a way to work this out " blue lights emerge in the wall behind the group . The video ends with a focus on Key 's microphone . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 AU Single : 
 " Lights and Sounds " – 3 : 28 
 " Three Flights Down " – 4 : 44 
 " When We 're Old Men " – 3 : 32 
 " Lights and Sounds " ( Live ) – 3 : 38 
 Maxi : 
 " Lights and Sounds " – 3 : 30 
 " When We 're Old Men " – 3 : 32 
 " Lights and Sounds " ( Live ) – 6 : 08 
 " Lights and Sounds " ( Multimedia Track ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = George Washington in the American Revolution = 
 George Washington ( February 22 , 1732 – December 14 , 1799 ) commanded the Continental Army in the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) , and was the first President of the United States , serving from 1789 to 1797 . Because of his central role in the founding of the United States , Washington is often called the " Father of his Country " . His devotion to republicanism and civic virtue made him an exemplary figure among early American politicians . 
 Washington played a leading military and political role in the American Revolution . His involvement began as early as 1767 , when he first took political stands against the acts of the British Parliament . After the war broke out with the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775 , his role became military with his appointment as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Continental Army . He appeared before the Second Continental Congress in military uniform , signaling that he was prepared for war . Congress created the Continental Army on June 14 ; the next day it selected Washington as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . The task he took on was enormous , balancing regional demands , competition among his subordinates , morale among the rank and file , attempts by Congress to manage the army 's affairs too closely , requests by state governors for support , and an endless need for resources with which to feed , clothe , equip , arm , and move the troops . 
 In the early years of the war Washington was often in the middle of the action , first directing the Siege of Boston to its successful conclusion , but then losing New York City and almost losing New Jersey before winning surprising and decisive victories at Trenton and Princeton at the end of the 1776 campaign season . At the end of the year in both 1775 and 1776 , he had to deal with expiring enlistments , since the Congress had only authorized the army 's existence for single years . With the 1777 establishment of a more permanent army structure and the introduction of three @-@ year enlistments , Washington built a reliable stable of experienced troops , although hard currency and supplies of all types were difficult to come by . In 1777 Washington was again defeated in the defense of Philadelphia , but sent critical support to Horatio Gates that made the defeat of Burgoyne at Saratoga possible . Following a difficult winter at Valley Forge and the entry of France into the war in 1778 , Washington followed the British army as it withdrew from Philadelphia back to New York , and fought an ultimately inconclusive battle at Monmouth Court House in New Jersey . 
 Washington 's activities from late 1778 to 1780 were more diplomatic and organizational , as his army remained outside New York , watching Sir Henry Clinton 's army that occupied the city . Washington strategized with the French on how best to cooperate in actions against the British , leading to ultimately unsuccessful attempts to dislodge the British from Newport , Rhode Island and Savannah , Georgia . His attention was also drawn to the frontier war , which prompted the 1779 Continental Army expedition of John Sullivan into upstate New York . When General Clinton sent the turncoat General Benedict Arnold to raid in Virginia , Washington began to detach elements of his army to face the growing threat there . The arrival of Lord Cornwallis in Virginia after campaigning in the south presented Washington with an opportunity to strike a decisive blow . Washington 's army and the French army moved south to face Cornwallis , and a cooperative French navy under Admiral de Grasse successfully disrupted British attempts to control of the Chesapeake Bay , completing the entrapment of Cornwallis , who surrendered after the Siege of Yorktown in October 1781 . Although Yorktown marked the end of significant hostilities in North America , the British still occupied New York and other cities , so Washington had to maintain the army in the face of a bankrupt Congress and troops that were at times mutinous over conditions and pay . The army was formally disbanded after peace in 1783 , and Washington resigned his commission as commander @-@ in @-@ chief on December 23 , 1783 . 
 = = Military experience = = 
 Born into a well @-@ to @-@ do Virginia family near Fredericksburg in 1732 [ O.S. 1731 ] , Washington was schooled locally until the age of 15 . The early death of his father when he was 11 eliminated the possibility of schooling in England , and his mother rejected attempts to place him in the Royal Navy . Thanks to the connection by marriage of his half @-@ brother Lawrence to the wealthy Fairfax family , Washington was appointed surveyor of Culpeper County in 1749 ; he was just 17 years old . Washington 's brother had purchased an interest in the Ohio Company , a land acquisition and settlement company whose objective was the settlement of Virginia 's frontier areas , including the Ohio Country , territory north and west of the Ohio River . Its investors also included Virginia 's Royal Governor , Robert Dinwiddie , who appointed Washington a major in the provincial militia in February 1753 . 
 Washington played a key role in the outbreak of the French and Indian War , and then led the defense of Virginia between 1755 and 1758 as colonel of the Virginia Regiment . Although Washington never received a commission in the British Army , he gained valuable military , political , and leadership skills , and received significant public exposure in the colonies and abroad . He closely observed British military tactics , gaining a keen insight into their strengths and weaknesses that proved invaluable during the Revolution . He demonstrated his toughness and courage in the most difficult situations , including disasters and retreats . He developed a command presence — given his size , strength , stamina , and bravery in battle , he appeared to soldiers to be a natural leader and they followed him without question . Washington learned to organize , train , and drill , and discipline his companies and regiments . From his observations , readings and conversations with professional officers , he learned the basics of battlefield tactics , as well as a good understanding of problems of organization and logistics . He gained an understanding of overall strategy , especially in locating strategic geographical points . He developed a very negative idea of the value of militia , who seemed too unreliable , too undisciplined , and too short @-@ term compared to regulars . On the other hand , his experience was limited to command of at most 1 @,@ 000 men , and came only in remote frontier conditions that were far removed from the urban situations he faced during the Revolution at Boston , New York , Trenton and Philadelphia . 
 = = Political resistance = = 
 In December 1758 Washington resigned his military commission , and spent the next 16 years as a wealthy Virginia plantation owner ; as such he also served in the Virginia House of Burgesses . Although he expressed opposition to the 1765 Stamp Act , the first direct tax on the colonies , he did not take a leading role in the growing colonial resistance until protests of the Townshend Acts ( enacted in 1767 ) became widespread . In May 1769 , Washington introduced a proposal , drafted by his friend George Mason , calling for Virginia to boycott British goods until the Acts were repealed . Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts in 1770 , and , for Washington at least , the crisis had passed . However , Washington regarded the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774 as " an Invasion of our Rights and Privileges " . In July 1774 , he chaired the meeting at which the " Fairfax Resolves " were adopted , which called for , among other things , the convening of a Continental Congress . In August , Washington attended the First Virginia Convention , where he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress . As tensions rose in 1774 , he assisted in the training of county militias in Virginia and organized enforcement of the boycott of British goods instituted by the Congress . 
 = = Boston = = 
 After the Battles of Lexington and Concord near Boston in April 1775 , the colonies went to war . Washington appeared at the Second Continental Congress in a military uniform , signaling that he was prepared for war . Congress created the Continental Army on June 14 , 1775 , and discussed who should lead it . Washington had the prestige , military experience , charisma and military bearing of a military leader and was known as a strong patriot ; he was also popular in his home province . There was no other serious competition for the post , although Washington did nothing to actively pursue the appointment . Massachusetts delegate John Adams nominated Washington , believing that appointing a southerner to lead what was then primarily an army of northerners would help unite the colonies . Washington reluctantly accepted , declaring " with the utmost sincerity , I do not think myself equal to the Command I [ am ] honored with . " 
 Washington assumed command of the colonial forces outside Boston on July 3 , 1775 , during the ongoing siege of Boston , after stopping in New York City to begin organizing military companies for its defense . His first steps were to establish procedures and to weld what had begun as militia regiments into an effective fighting force . He was assisted in this effort by his adjutant , Brigadier General Horatio Gates , and Major General Charles Lee , both of whom had significant experience serving in the British Army . 
 When inventory returns exposed a dangerous shortage of gunpowder , Washington asked for new sources . British arsenals were raided ( including some in the West Indies ) and some manufacturing was attempted ; a barely adequate supply ( about 2 @.@ 5 million pounds ) was obtained by the end of 1776 , mostly from France . In search of heavy weapons , he sent Henry Knox on an expedition to Fort Ticonderoga to retrieve cannons that had been captured there . He resisted repeated calls from Congress to launch attacks against the British in Boston , calling war councils that supported the decisions against such action . Before the Continental Navy was established in November 1775 he , without Congressional authorization , began arming a " secret navy " to prey on poorly protected British transports and supply ships . When Congress authorized an invasion of Quebec , believing that province 's people would also rise against British military control , Washington reluctantly went along with it , even authorizing Benedict Arnold to lead a force from Cambridge to Quebec City through the wilderness of present @-@ day Maine . 
 As the siege dragged on , the matter of expiring enlistments became a matter of serious concern . Washington tried to convince Congress that enlistments longer than one year were necessary to build an effective fighting force , but he was rebuffed in this effort . The 1776 establishment of the Continental Army only had enlistment terms of one year , a matter that would again be a problem in late 1776 . 
 Washington finally forced the British to withdraw from Boston by putting Henry Knox 's artillery on Dorchester Heights overlooking the city , and preparing in detail to attack the city from Cambridge if the British tried to assault the position . The British evacuated Boston and sailed away , although Washington did not know they were headed for Halifax , Nova Scotia . Believing they were headed for New York City ( which was indeed Major General William Howe 's eventual destination ) , Washington rushed most of the army there . 
 = = Defeated at New York City = = 
 Washington 's success in Boston was not repeated in New York . Recognizing the city 's importance as a naval base and gateway to the Hudson River , he delegated the task of fortifying New York to Charles Lee in February 1776 . Despite the city 's poor defensibility , Congress insisted that Washington defend it . The faltering military campaign in Quebec also led to calls for additional troops there , and Washington detached six regiments northward under John Sullivan in April . The wider theaters of war had also introduced regional frictions into the army . Somewhat surprised that regional differences would be a problem , on August 1 he read a speech to the army , in which he threatened to punish " any officers or soldiers so lost to virtue and a love of their country " that might exacerbate the regional differences . The mixing of forces from different regions also brought more widespread camp diseases , especially dysentery and smallpox . 
 Washington had to deal with his first major command controversy while in New York , which was partially a product of regional friction . New England troops serving in northern New York under General Philip Schuyler , a scion of an old patroon family of New York , objected to his aristocratic style , and their Congressional representatives lobbied Washington to replace Schuyler with General Gates . Washington tried to resolve the issue by giving Gates command of the forces in Quebec , but the collapse of the Quebec expedition brought renewed complaints . Despite Gates ' experience , Washington personally preferred Schuyler . To avoid a potentially messy situation , General Washington gave Schuyler overall command of the northern department , but assigned Gates as second in command with combat authority . The episode exposed Washington to Gates ' desire for advancement , possibly at his expense , and to the latter 's influence in Congress . 
 General Howe 's army , reinforced by thousands of additional troops from Europe and a fleet under the command of his brother , Admiral Richard Howe , began arriving off New York in early July , and made an unopposed landing on Staten Island . Without intelligence about Howe 's intentions , Washington was forced to divide his still poorly trained forces , principally between Manhattan and Long Island . The Howes , who were politically ambivalent about the conflict , had been authorized to act as peace commissioners , and attempted to establish contact with Washington . However , they refused to address their letters to " General George Washington " , and his representatives refused to accept them . 
 In August , the British finally launched their campaign to capture New York City . They first landed on Long Island in force , and flanked Washington 's forward positions in the Battle of Long Island . General Howe refused to act on a significant tactical advantage that could have resulted in the capture of the remaining Continental troops on Long Island , but he chose instead to besiege their positions . Although Washington has been criticized by many historians for sending additional troops to reinforce the redoubts on Long Island , it was clear to both Washington and the Howes that the Americans had successfully blocked the East River against major shipping by sinking ships in the channel , and that he was consequently not risking the entrapment of additional men . In the face of a siege he seemed certain to lose , Washington then decided to withdraw . In what some historians call one of his greatest military feats , he executed a nighttime withdrawal from Long Island across the East River to Manhattan to save those troops . 
 The Howe brothers then paused to consolidate their position , and the admiral engaged in a fruitless peace conference with Congressional representatives on September 11 . Four days later the British landed on Manhattan , scattering inexperienced militia into a panicked retreat , and forcing Washington to retreat further . After Washington stopped the British advance up Manhattan at Harlem Heights on September 16 , Howe again made a flanking maneuver , landing troops at Pell 's Point in a bid to cut off Washington 's avenue of retreat . To defend against this move , Washington withdrew most of his army to White Plains , where after a short battle on October 28 he retreated further north . This isolated the remaining Continental Army troops in upper Manhattan , so Howe returned to Manhattan and captured Fort Washington in mid November , taking almost 3 @,@ 000 prisoners . Four days later , Fort Lee , across the Hudson River from Fort Washington , was also taken . Washington brought much of his army across the Hudson into New Jersey , but was immediately forced to retreat by the aggressive British advance . 
 During the campaign a general lack of organization , shortages of supplies , fatigue , sickness , and above all , lack of confidence in the American leadership resulted in a melting away of untrained regulars and frightened militia . Washington grumbled , " The honor of making a brave defense does not seem to be sufficient stimulus , when the success is very doubtful , and the falling into the Enemy 's hands probable . " Washington was fortunate that General Howe was more focused on gaining control of New York than on destroying Washington 's army . Howe 's overly rigid adherence to his plans meant that he was unable to capitalize on the opportunities that arose during the campaign for a decisive action against Washington . 
 = = Counterattack in New Jersey = = 
 After the loss of New York , Washington 's army was in two pieces . One detachment remained north of New York to protect the Hudson River corridor , while Washington retreated across New Jersey into Pennsylvania , chased by General Charles , Earl Cornwallis . Spirits were low , popular support was wavering , and Congress had abandoned Philadelphia , fearing a British attack . Washington ordered General Gates to bring troops from Fort Ticonderoga , and also ordered General Lee 's troops , which he had left north of New York City , to join him . Lee , whose relationship with Washington was at times difficult , made excuses and only traveled as far as Morristown , New Jersey . When Lee strayed too far from his army on December 12 , his exposed position was betrayed by Loyalists , and a British company led by Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton surrounded the inn where he was staying and took him prisoner . Lee 's command was taken over by John Sullivan , who finished marching the army to Washington 's camp across the river from Trenton . 
 The capture of Lee resulted an important point in negotiations between the sides concerning the treatment of prisoners . Since Lee had previously served in the British Army , he was treated as a deserter , and threatened with military punishments appropriate to that charge . Even though he and Lee did not get on well , Washington threatened to treat captured British officers in the same manner Lee and other high @-@ profile prisoners were treated . This resulted in an improvement in Lee 's captivity , and he was eventually exchanged for Richard Prescott in 1778 . 
 Despite the loss of troops due to desertion and expiring enlistments , Washington was heartened by a rise in militia enlistments in New Jersey and Pennsylvania . These militia companies were active in circumscribing the furthest outposts of the British , limiting their ability to scout and forage . Although Washington did not coordinate this resistance , he took advantage of it to organize an attack on an outpost of Hessians in Trenton . On the night of December 25 – 26 , 1776 , Washington led his forces across the Delaware River and surprised the Hessian garrison , capturing 1 @,@ 000 men . 
 This action significantly boosted the army 's morale , but it also brought Cornwallis out of New York . He reassembled an army of more than 6 @,@ 000 men , and marched most of them against a position Washington had taken south of Trenton . Leaving a garrison of 1 @,@ 200 at Princeton , Cornwallis then attacked Washington 's position on January 2 , 1777 , and was three times repulsed before darkness set in . During the night Washington evacuated the position , masking his army 's movements by instructing the camp guards to maintain the appearance of a much larger force . Washington then circled around Cornwallis 's position with the intention of attacking the Princeton garrison . 
 Hugh Mercer , leading the American advance guard , encountered British soldiers from Princeton under the command of Charles Mawhood . The British troops engaged Mercer and in the ensuing battle , Mercer was mortally wounded . Washington sent reinforcements under General John Cadwalader , which were successful in driving Mawhood and the British from Princeton , with many of them fleeing to Cornwallis in Trenton . The British lost more than one quarter of their force in the battle , and American morale rose with the victory . 
 These unexpected victories drove the British back to the New York City area , and gave a dramatic boost to Revolutionary morale . During the winter , Washington , based in winter quarters at Morristown , loosely coordinated a low @-@ level militia war against British positions in New Jersey , combining the actions of New Jersey and Pennsylvania militia companies with careful use of Continental Army resources to harry and harass the British and German troops quartered in New Jersey . 
 Washington 's mixed performance in the 1776 campaigns had not led to significant criticism in Congress . Before fleeing Philadelphia for Baltimore in December , Congress granted Washington powers that have ever since been described as " dictatorial " . The successes in New Jersey nearly deified Washington in the eyes of some Congressmen , and the body became much more deferential to him as a result . John Adams complained of the " superstitious veneration " that Washington was receiving . Washington 's performance also received international notice : Frederick the Great , one of the greatest military minds , wrote that " the achievements of Washington [ at Trenton and Princeton ] were the most brilliant of any recorded in the history of military achievements . " The French foreign minister , a strong supporter of the American cause , renewed the delivery of French supplies . 
 = = Philadelphia and Valley Forge = = 
 = = = Early maneuvers = = = 
 In May 1777 , uncertain whether General Howe would move north toward Albany or south toward Philadelphia , Washington moved his army to the Middlebrook encampment in New Jersey 's Watchung Mountains . When Howe then moved his army southwest from New Brunswick , Washington correctly interpreted this as a move to draw him out of his strong position , and refused to move . Only after Howe apparently retreated back toward the shore did Washington follow , but Howe 's attempt to separate him from his mountain defenses was foiled in the Battle of Short Hills in late June . Howe , who had already decided to campaign against Philadelphia , then withdrew from New Jersey , embarked much of his army on ships in late July , and sailed away , leaving Washington mystified as to his destination . 
 Washington 's difficulty in discerning Howe 's motives was due to the presence of a British army moving south from Quebec toward Fort Ticonderoga under the command of General John Burgoyne . Howe 's departure was in part prompted by the successful capture of the fort by Burgoyne in early July . Although there had been an expectation on Burgoyne 's part that Howe would support his campaign to gain control of the Hudson , Howe was to disappoint Burgoyne , with disastrous consequences to the British . When Washington learned of the abandonment of Ticonderoga ( which he had been told by General Anthony Wayne " can never be carried , without much loss of blood " ) , he was shocked . Concerned that Howe was heading up the Hudson , he ordered Arnold , along with Daniel Morgan and his corps of riflemen , north to assist General Gates with the defense of the Hudson . 
 Washington had had some difficulty with General Arnold in the spring . Congress had adopted a per @-@ state scheme for the promotion of general officers , which resulted in the promotion of several officers to major general ahead of other officers with more experience or seniority . Combined with the commissioning of foreign officers to high ranks , this had led to the resignation of John Stark . Arnold , who had distinguished himself in the Canadian campaign , had also threatened to resign . Washington wrote to Congress on behalf of Arnold and other officers who were disgruntled by this promotion scheme , stating that " two or three other very good officers " might be lost because of it . Washington had also laid the seeds for conflict between Arnold and Gates when he gave Arnold command of forces in Rhode Island in late 1776 ; because of this move Gates came to view Arnold as a competitor for advancement , and the previously positive relationship between Gates and Arnold cooled . However , Arnold put aside his complaints when the news of Ticonderoga 's fall arrived , and agreed to serve . 
 Congress , at the urging of its diplomatic representatives in Europe , had also issued military commissions to a number of European soldiers of fortune in early 1777 . Two of those recommended by Silas Deane , the Marquis de Lafayette and Thomas Conway , would prove to be important in Washington 's activities . Lafayette , just twenty years old , was at first told that Deane had exceeded his authority in offering him a major general 's commission , but offered to volunteer in the army at his own expense . Washington and Lafayette took an instant liking to one another when they met , and Lafayette became one of Washington 's most trusted generals and confidants . Conway , on the other hand , did not think highly of Washington 's leadership , and proved to be a source of trouble in the 1777 campaign season and its aftermath . 
 = = = Fall of Philadelphia = = = 
 When Washington learned that Howe 's fleet was sailing north in Chesapeake Bay , he hurried his army south of Philadelphia to defend the city against Howe 's threat . General Howe turned Washington 's flank at the Battle of Brandywine on September 11 , 1777 , and marched unopposed into Philadelphia on September 26 after some further maneuvers . Washington 's failure to defend the capital brought on a storm of criticism from Congress , which fled the city for York , and from other army officers . In part to silence his critics , Washington planned an elaborate assault on an exposed British base in Germantown . The October 4 Battle of Germantown failed in part due to the complexity of the assault , and the inexperience of the militia forces employed in it . Over 400 of Washington 's men were captured , including Colonel George Mathews and the entire 9th Virginia Regiment . It did not help that Adam Stephen , leading one of the branches of the attack , was drunk , and broke from the agreed @-@ upon plan of attack . He was court martialed and cashiered from the army . Historian Robert Leckie observes that the battle was a near thing , and that a small number of changes might have resulted in a decisive victory for Washington . 
 Meanwhile , Burgoyne , out of reach from help from Howe , was trapped and forced to surrender his entire army on October 17 , ten days after the Battle of Bemis Heights . The victory made a hero of General Gates , who received the adulation of Congress . While this was taking place Washington presided from a distance over the loss of control of the Delaware River to the British , and marched his army to its winter quarters at Valley Forge in December . Washington chose Valley Forge , over recommendations that he camp either closer or further from Philadelphia , because it was close enough to monitor British army movements , and protected rich farmlands to the west from the enemy 's foraging expeditions . 
 = = = Valley Forge = = = 
 Washington 's army stayed at Valley Forge for the next six months . Over the winter , 2 @,@ 500 men ( out of 10 @,@ 000 ) died from disease and exposure . The army 's difficulties were exacerbated by a number of factors , including a quartermaster 's department that had been badly mismanaged by one of Washington 's political opponents , Thomas Mifflin , and the preference of farmers and merchants to sell their goods to the British for hard currency instead of the nearly worthless Continental currency . <unk> also sought to benefit at the army 's expense , charging it 1 @,@ 000 times what they charged civilians for the same goods . Congress authorized Washington to seize supplies needed for the army , but he was reluctant to use such authority , since it smacked of the tyranny the war was supposedly being fought over . 
 During the winter he introduced a full @-@ scale training program supervised by Baron von Steuben , a veteran of the Prussian general staff . Despite the hardships the army suffered , this program was a remarkable success , and Washington 's army emerged in the spring of 1778 a much more disciplined force . 
 Washington himself had to face discontent at his leadership from a variety of sources . His loss of Philadelphia prompted some members of Congress to discuss removing him from command . They were prodded along by Washington 's detractors in the military , who included Generals Gates , Mifflin , and Conway . Gates in particular was viewed by Conway and Congressmen Benjamin Rush and Richard Henry Lee as a desirable replacement for Washington . Although there is no evidence of a formal conspiracy , the episode is known as the Conway Cabal because the scale of the discontent within the army was exposed by a critical letter from Conway to Gates , some of whose contents were relayed to Washington . Washington exposed the criticisms to Congress , and his supporters , within Congress and the army , rallied to support him . Gates eventually apologized for his role in the affair , and Conway resigned . Washington 's position and authority were not seriously challenged again . Biographer Ron Chernow points out that Washington 's handling of the episode demonstrated that he was " a consummate political <unk> " who maintained his temper and dignity while his opponents schemed . 
 = = French entry into the war = = 
 The victory at Saratoga ( and to some extent Washington 's near success at Germantown ) were influential in convincing France to enter the war openly as an as an American ally . French entry into the war changed its dynamics , for the British were no longer sure of command of the seas and had to worry about an invasion of their home islands and other colonial territories across the globe . The British , now under the command of General Sir Henry Clinton , evacuated Philadelphia in 1778 and returned to New York City , with Washington attacking them along the way at the Battle of Monmouth ; this was the last major battle in the north . Prior to the battle Washington gave command of the advance forces to Charles Lee , who had been exchanged earlier in the year . Lee , despite firm instructions from Washington , refused Lafayette 's suggestion to launch an organized attack on the British rear , and then retreated when the British turned to face him . When Washington arrived at the head of the main army , he and Lee had an angry exchange of words , and Washington ordered Lee off the command . Washington , with his army 's tactics and ability to execute improved by the training programs of the previous winter , was able to recover , and fought the British to a draw . Lee was court martialed and eventually dismissed from the army . 
 Not long after Clinton 's return to New York , a French fleet arrived off the North American coast . Washington was involved in the discussion on how to best use this force , and an attack was planned against the British outpost at Newport , Rhode Island . Despite the presence of two of Washington 's most reliable subordinates , Lafayette and Greene , the attempt at cooperation was a dismal failure . British and Indian forces organized and supported by Sir Frederick Haldimand in Quebec began to raid frontier settlements in 1778 , and Savannah , Georgia was captured late in the year . 
 During the comparatively mild winter of 1778 – 79 , Washington and Congress discussed options for the 1779 campaign season . The possibility of a Franco @-@ American campaign against Quebec , first proposed for 1778 , had a number of adherents in Congress , and was actively supported by Lafayette in Washington 's circle . Despite known weaknesses in Quebec 's provincial defenses , Washington was adamantly opposed to the idea , citing the lack of troops and supplies with which to conduct such an operation , the nation 's fragile financial state , and French imperial ambitions to recover the territory . Under pressure from Congress to answer the frontier raids , Washington countered with the proposal of a major expedition against the Iroquois . This was approved , and in the summer of 1779 a sizable force under Major General John Sullivan made a major expedition into the northwestern frontier of New York in reprisal for the frontier raids . The expedition successfully drove the Iroquois out of New York , but otherwise had little effect on the frequency and severity of frontier raids . 
 Washington 's opponent in New York , however , was not inactive . Clinton engaged in a number of amphibious raids against coastal communities from Connecticut to Chesapeake Bay , and probed at Washington 's defenses in the Hudson River valley . Coming up the river in force , he captured the key outpost of Stony Point , but advanced no further . When Clinton weakened the garrison there to provide men for raiding expeditions , Washington organized a counterstrike . General Anthony Wayne led a force that , solely using the bayonet , recaptured Stony Point . The Americans chose not to hold the post , but the operation was a boost to American morale and a blow to British morale . American morale was dealt a blow later in the year , when the second major attempt at Franco @-@ American cooperation , an attempt to retake Savannah , failed with heavy casualties . 
 = = British southern strategy and treason = = 
 The winter of 1779 – 80 was one of the coldest in recorded colonial history . New York Harbor froze over , and the winter camps of the Continental Army were deluged with snow , resulting in hardships exceeding those experienced at Valley Forge . The war was declining in popularity , and the inflationary issuance of paper currency by Congress and the states alike harmed the economy , and the ability to provision the army . The paper currency also hit the army 's morale , since it was how the troops were paid . Congress fixed the rate between paper and gold dollars at 40 @-@ to @-@ 1 in March 1780 , but many merchants refused to accept the Continental currency at the official exchange rate . One Loyalist wrote , " Mock @-@ money and mock @-@ states shall melt away / / And the mock troops disband for want of pay . " 
 The British in late 1779 embarked on a new strategy based on the assumption that most Southerners were Loyalists at heart . General Clinton withdrew the British garrison from Newport , and marshalled a force of more than 10 @,@ 000 men that in the first half of 1780 successfully besieged Charleston , South Carolina . In June 1780 he captured over 5 @,@ 000 Continental soldiers and militia in the single worst defeat of the war for the Americans . Washington had at the end of March pessimistically dispatched several regiments troops southward from his army , hoping they might have some effect in what he saw as a looming disaster . He also ordered troops stationed in Virginia and North Carolina south , but these were either captured at Charleston , or scattered later at Waxhaws and Camden . Camden saw the ignominious defeat of General Gates , who had been appointed to the southern command by Congress without Washington 's advice or knowledge beforehand . Gates famously abandoned his army and retreated 180 miles ( 290 km ) by horse after his battle lines were broken . The debacle ended Gates ' career as a field officer , but he eluded formal inquiries into his behavior because of his political connections . 
 Washington 's army suffered from numerous problems in 1780 : it was undermanned , underfunded , and underequipped . Because of these shortcomings Washington resisted calls for major expeditions , preferring to remain focused on the principal British presence in New York . Knowledge of discontent within the ranks in New Jersey prompted the British in New York to make two attempts to reach the principal army base at Morristown . These attempts were defeated , with significant militia support , in battles at Connecticut Farms and Springfield . 
 September 1780 brought a new shock to Washington . British Major John André had been arrested outside New York , and papers he carried exposed a conspiracy between the British and General Benedict Arnold . Washington respected Arnold for his military skills , and had , after Arnold 's severe injuries in the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777 , given him the military command of Philadelphia . During his administration there , Arnold had made many political enemies , and in 1779 he began secret negotiations with General Clinton ( mediated in part by André ) that culminated in a plot to surrender West Point , a command Arnold requested and Washington gave him in July 1780 . Arnold was alerted to André 's arrest and fled to the British lines shortly before Washington 's arrival at West Point for a meeting . In negotiations with Clinton , Washington offered to exchange André for Arnold , but Clinton refused . André was hanged as a spy , and Arnold became a brigadier general in the British Army . Washington organized an attempt to kidnap Arnold from New York City ; it was frustrated when Arnold was sent on a raiding expedition to Virginia . 
 = = Yorktown = = 
 The early months of 1781 continued to be difficult for the American cause . Troops mutinied in Pennsylvania , inspiring troops in New Jersey to also do so . Washington was uninvolved in resolving the Pennsylvania troops ' demands , but he sent troops under General Robert Howe that harshly put down the New Jersey mutiny , hanging two men . 
 General Arnold 's raiding expedition to Virginia was a notable success , ravaging the countryside and destroying military and economic infrastructure and supplies . He was ineffectually opposed by Virginia militia and Continental recruits under Baron von Steuben . Washington ordered Lafayette and additional Continental troops south , and convinced French Admiral Destouches to send his Newport @-@ based fleet to the Chesapeake . Destouches was however opposed by the British fleet of Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot at the Battle of Cape Henry in March 1781 , and was unable to gain entry to the bay . General Clinton thereafter sent more troops to Virginia under General William Phillips , who resumed raiding operations in central Virginia . 
 In the early months of 1781 the French foreign minister , the comte de Vergennes , realized that the war , now being conducted on a global stage , could not last much longer without decisive action in North America . To this end , the French army at Newport was ordered to join Washington 's outside New York , and the Comte de Grasse , commander of that year 's West Indies fleet , was ordered to assist in operations in North America . France also gave six million livres to the United States to assist in the war effort . 
 In May 1781 Washington and the French army command met at Wethersfield , Connecticut after the French instructions arrived . They discussed options for joint operations , with Washington arguing for an assault on New York , and Rochambeau for operations in Virginia against General Phillips . Rochambeau agreed to bring his army to New York , and dispatches were sent to the West Indies outlining the options to de Grasse . 
 General Clinton had turned over command of the southern army to General Cornwallis . After the defeat of Gates at Camden , he had nominally gained control over South Carolina , although there was significant militia skirmishing , led by partisan fighters like Francis Marion and Thomas Sumter . Cornwallis then attempted to extend British authority into North Carolina , but one wing of his army was defeated in the October 1780 Battle of Kings Mountain , and another was defeated in the January 1781 Battle of Cowpens . Kings Mountain in particular proved a decisive blow to further attempts to recruit Loyalists , and force Cornwallis had been instructed to rely upon . In the wake of Camden , Washington had selected Nathanael Greene to replace Gates at the head of the southern Continental forces , and Greene waged an effect partisan campaign against Cornwallis . When he finally reached sufficient strength , Greene offered Cornwallis open battle at Hillsboro , North Carolina in March . Although he lost the Battle of Guilford Court House , Greene inflicted significant casualties on Cornwallis while retaining his own army intact . 
 Cornwallis moved to Wilmington , North Carolina to regroup , and then made the controversial decision to bring his army into Virginia , which he saw as the supply base for Greene 's army . Joining with the army of Phillips , he maneuvered against the growing Continental presence led by Lafayette , while continuing to raid and destroy economic and military targets in the state . Eventually his decision to enter Virginia reached Clinton , who was surprised at the move . After a series of confusing and sometimes contradictory suggestions , Clinton in late July issued firm orders to Cornwallis to establish a fortified deep @-@ water port in Virginia . Cornwallis informed Clinton that he would do so at Yorktown . 
 = = = Siege and victory = = = 
 Admiral de Grasse received the dispatches of Washington and Rochambeau in mid @-@ July . He immediately sent dispatches north indicating that he would be sailing for the Chesapeake Bay to assist in operations there . When Washington learned of this decision , he reluctantly abandoned the idea of attacking New York . In a brilliant but risky strategic move , he marched 6 @,@ 000 soldiers from New York to Virginia , leaving the New York highlands only lightly defended . Washington would in later years claim that early preparations to operate against New York were intended to deceive Clinton , but the documentary record of 1781 did not support him . Later operations , as the march got underway , did involve deliberate deception . As part of the march troops appeared to establish camps and other works on the west side of the Hudson , as if preparing for an attack on New York . By the time Clinton saw through the deception , Washington had already crossed the Delaware . 
 De Grasse sailed north with his entire fleet ( 28 ships of the line ) , while his British counterpart , Admiral Rodney ( not expecting de Grasse to take his entire fleet ) sent only 15 ships in pursuit . In early September , while the French and Continental armies marched south , de Grasse and the British fleet ( enlarged by the inclusion of ships from New York to 19 ships ) met in the Battle of the Chesapeake . The French victory was strategically vital , for it denied the British control of the Chesapeake and set the stage for the encirclement of Cornwallis at Yorktown . 
 Upon his arrival at Yorktown Washington had command of 5 @,@ 700 Continentals , 3 @,@ 200 militia and 7 @,@ 800 French regulars . On September 28 the Franco @-@ American army blockaded Yorktown , and began digging siege trenches on October 6 . By the 9th guns had been emplaced on the first parallel , and began firing on the entrenched British camp . Work proceeded rapidly thereafter on the second parallel , only 300 yards ( 270 m ) from the British defenses . On the 14th two outer redoubts of the British defenses were stormed , and the entirety of the British camp was with range of the French and American cannons . After a failed attempt to escape across the York River , Cornwallis opened negotiations on October 17 . Two days later terms were agreed , and his 8 @,@ 000 men paraded in surrender . Despite the size of the contending forces , and the importance of the siege , there were only 260 allied and 550 British casualties . One of the American casualties was Washington 's stepson and aide @-@ de @-@ camp John Parke Custis , who died of a camp disease during the siege . 
 The disaster at Yorktown broke the morale of the governing class in London and paralyzed Britain 's national will to make war . The war party in Britain lost control of Parliament , and the new government opened peace talks . These came to fruition in 1783 with the Treaty of Paris , in which Britain recognized American independence . 
 = = Waiting for peace = = 
 Following Yorktown , Washington 's army returned to New York , while Rochambeau 's remained in Virginia . Washington , concerned that Congress " may think our work too nearly closed " , worked to make sure that the army would be prepared for a campaign in 1782 . Although British ship movements caused Washington some concerns during the winter of 1781 – 2 , he was able to enjoy relative comfort in Philadelphia . He returned to his headquarters in Newburgh , New York in March 1782 , where he had to deal with greedy military supply contractors . The execution of militia officer Joshua Huddy by Loyalists occasioned an exchange between Washington and Clinton , and led to the so @-@ called " Asgill Affair " , after the officer selected to be executed in retaliation for Huddy 's hanging . Despite the onset of peace negotiations in the second half of 1782 , Washington remained vigilant , treating with suspicion assertions on the part of General Clinton 's replacement , Sir Guy Carleton , that he had suspended " all hostilities " . To boost morale , Washington introduced the Badge of Military Merit , to be awarded for " unusual gallantry " or " extraordinary fidelity and essential service " . The badge , a purple @-@ colored cloth in the shape of a heart , is a precursor to the modern American Purple Heart . 
 In 1783 Washington continued to keep the army ready at Newburgh , although some of his officers made veiled threats to Congress about long @-@ overdue pay . Washington diffused this hint at mutiny with an address to the troops on March 15 recommending patience . On March 26 he was informed that France and Spain had made peace with Britain , one of the last preconditions for a final peace . Thereafter he was occupied with the logistics of prisoner exchanges , and pressed Congress to ensure soldiers being furloughed or discharged received at least some of their back pay . He met once with General Carleton to discuss the return of runaway slaves , a contentious point on which Carleton refused to budge . ( Carleton announced in the meeting , to Washington 's apparent chagrin , that 6 @,@ 000 Negroes had already been sent to Nova Scotia , and refused to assist the efforts of slave hunters . ) In June troops in Pennsylvania mutinied , marching on Philadelphia and surrounding the State House where Congress sat . In response Congress temporarily relocated to Princeton , and Washington dispatched troops south from New York . After action by Congress addressed their concerns , the mutinous troops returned to their posts . 
 The Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3 , 1783 . On November 21 , the British evacuated New York City , and Washington and Governor George Clinton took possession of the city , ending large @-@ scale British occupation of American territory . ( Britain continued to occupy frontier forts that had been ceded to the United States until the mid @-@ 1790s . ) 
 = = Resignation and post @-@ war career = = 
 Washington 's contribution to victory in the war was not that of a great battlefield tactician . He has been characterized , according to historian Edward G. Lengel , in many different ways : " charismatic hero , master of guerrilla warfare , incompetent or infallible battlefield commander , strategic genius , nationalist visionary , fanatical <unk> , and lucky dog " . Although he has frequently been said to engage in the Fabian strategy of wearing his opponent down , the truth is more nuanced . On a number of occasions his subordinates convinced him to hold off on plans of attack they saw as rash . Washington only really adopted a Fabian strategy between late 1776 and the middle of 1777 , after losing New York City and seeing much of his army melt away . Trenton and Princeton were Fabian examples . By August 1777 , however , Washington had rebuilt his strength and his confidence and stopped using raids and went for large @-@ scale confrontations , as at Brandywine , Germantown , Monmouth and Yorktown . 
 Washington is often characterized as complaining about undisciplined militia forces , but he understood that they were a vital part of the nation 's defenses , since regular army troops could not be everywhere . He was also at times critical of the mercenary spirit and " the dearth of public spirit " that often underlay difficulties in recruiting for the army . 
 One of Washington 's important contributions as commander @-@ in @-@ chief was to establish the precedent that elected civilian officials , rather than military officers , possessed ultimate authority over the military . Throughout the war , he deferred to the authority of Congress and state officials , and he relinquished his considerable military power once the fighting was over . This principle was especially visible in his handling of the Newburgh conspiracy , and in his " Farewell Orders " . The latter document was written at his final wartime headquarters , a house on the outskirts of Princeton owned by the widow Berrien ( later to be called Rockingham ) , but was sent to be read to the assembled troops at West Point on November 2 . At Fraunces Tavern in New York City on December 4 , he formally bade his officers farewell . On December 23 , 1783 , Washington resigned his commission as commander @-@ in @-@ chief to the Congress of the Confederation at Annapolis , Maryland , and retired to his home at Mount Vernon . 
 After the war Washington chaired the Constitutional Convention that drafted the United States Constitution , and was then elected the first President of the United States , serving two terms . He briefly engaged in additional military service during a threatened war with France in 1798 , and died in December 1799 . He is widely recognized as the " Father of his country " . 
 In 2012 , a poll conducted by the British National Army Museum recognized Washington as " Britain 's Greatest Military Enemy . " He beat out Ataturk , Irish independence hero Michael Collins , Erwin Rommel , and Napoleon . 
 = = = Cited sources = = = 
 = Aboriginal Memorial = 
 The Aboriginal Memorial is a work of contemporary Indigenous Australian art from the late 1980s , and comprises 200 decorated hollow log coffins . It was conceived by <unk> ( John ) Mundine in 1987 – 88 and realised by 43 artists from Ramingining and neighbouring communities of Central Arnhem Land , in the Northern Territory . Artists who participated in its creation included David <unk> and George <unk> . 
 The work was created to coincide with the Australian Bicentenary and commemorates those Indigenous Australians who died as a result of European settlement . It was acquired by the National Gallery of Australia , where it is on permanent display . Its first exhibition was at the Sydney Biennale in 1988 , and it was the centrepiece of an exhibition of Indigenous art at Russia 's Hermitage Museum in 2000 . As of 2014 it stands at the entry to the National Gallery 's new wing that opened in September 2010 . 
 = = Creation = = 
 In 1988 , Australia marked 200 years since its first official white settlement , established by Captain Arthur Phillip on Sydney Harbour in 1788 . While some Indigenous Australians protested the event , and referred to the occasion as Invasion Day rather than Australia Day , a group of Indigenous artists from Ramingining in the Northern Territory decided to create an artwork to mark the anniversary . The project was initiated by <unk> Mundine , an Indigenous art advisor and curator , who was working at Ramingining prior to the Bicentenary . A small group of artists including David <unk> , Paddy <unk> , George <unk> and Jimmy <unk> decided the form of the project , but ultimately 43 artists from the region contributed pieces to the Memorial . 
 The work takes the form of 200 hollow log coffins , known as <unk> : the number was chosen to mark the years of European settlement . Such coffins are a form of funerary art and are used throughout the Arnhem Land region for reburial ceremonies . The items displayed in Aboriginal Memorial , however , were created for the purpose of the artwork and have not at any stage contained human remains , nor been used in reburial ceremonies . The work was intended " to commemorate the thousands of Aboriginal people who had perished in the course of European settlement , and for whom it has not been possible to conduct appropriate mortuary rites " . The intention behind the work drew attention in 2005 when Melbourne newspaper The Age ran an editorial asking whether it might be appropriate to commemorate Aboriginal resistance to white settlement at the Australian War Memorial , and to move the Aboriginal Memorial to that location as part of that commemoration . 
 Log coffins are made from trees that have been naturally hollowed out by termites . They are cut , cleaned and then painted with natural pigments during a ceremonial camp . The Aboriginal Memorial decorations reflect traditional clan designs and significant dreamings for which the artists had responsibility . 
 = = Exhibition and critical reception = = 
 The creators of the Aboriginal Memorial always intended that it be publicly displayed , and in 1987 the work was offered to the National Gallery of Australia , which helped fund its completion . After being first exhibited at the Sydney Biennale in 1988 , it was moved to the National Gallery , its present home . In 2000 , the Memorial formed the centrepiece of a major exhibition of Australian Indigenous art held in the prestigious Nicholas Hall at the Hermitage Museum in Russia . The exhibition received a positive reception from Russian critics , one of whom wrote : 
 This is an exhibition of contemporary art , not in the sense that it was done recently , but in that it is cased in the mentality , technology and philosophy of radical art of the most recent times . No one , other than the Aborigines of Australia , has succeeded in exhibiting such art at the Hermitage . 
 Described as an icon of the National Gallery 's collection , and " one of the outstanding works of art to have been created in Australia " , the memorial is laid out with a central pathway between the log @-@ coffins representing the passage of the <unk> River through central Arnhem Land . In the late 2000s , the work was included in the list of the 20 most valuable artworks in the Gallery 's collection , and was the only Australian artwork to make that list . At that time , of the 20 most valuable Australian artworks in the collection , it was also the only one by Indigenous artists . Andrew Sayers , former head of Australia 's National Portrait Gallery and the National Museum of Australia , described the work as " among the most profound works of art to emerge from the last 20 years " . 
 In the late 2000s , the work was temporarily withdrawn from display to undergo significant conservation work . Completed in October 2009 , the restoration was followed by the work 's relocation in 2010 to the entrance area of the new gallery building , where it is intended to be the first work seen by visitors to the gallery . 
 = 2015 Italian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Italian Grand Prix ( formally known as the Formula 1 Gran Premio d 'Italia 2015 ) was a Formula One motor race held on 6 September 2015 at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza in Monza , Italy . The race was the twelfth round of the 2015 season , and marked the eighty @-@ fifth running of the Italian Grand Prix . 
 Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes was the defending race winner , and entered with a 28 @-@ point lead over teammate Nico Rosberg in the Drivers ' Championship , with Sebastian Vettel a further 39 points behind . Mercedes lead the Constructors ' Championship by 184 points over Ferrari , with Williams a further 81 points behind in third . 
 Hamilton completed the second Grand Slam of his career by winning the race , taking pole position , setting the fastest lap and leading every lap of the race . He finished 25 seconds ahead of Vettel , while Felipe Massa finished third for Williams . Rosberg retired with three laps to go due to an engine failure , resulting in Hamilton extending his lead in the Drivers ' Championship to 53 points . Hamilton 's victory was confirmed a few hours after the race following an investigation from race stewards after it was discovered that the left @-@ rear tyre on his Mercedes was below Pirelli 's recommended minimum tyre pressure standards in a random check but due to procedural inconsistencies , no sanctions were imposed against either Mercedes driver or the team . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Tyre supplier Pirelli brought its white @-@ banded medium compound tyre as the harder " prime " tyre and the yellow @-@ banded soft compound as the softer " option " compound , as opposed to the previous year where the company brought the hard compound as the prime and medium compound as the option . Sauber 's Head of Track Engineering , Giampaolo Dall 'Ara , praised the updated choice , summing up that it will challenge teams to make time in the corners in addition to going for pure top speed , putting on a better show for the fans . However , Pirelli had received criticism from several drivers and commentators following tyre failures on Nico Rosberg 's and Sebastian Vettel 's cars at the Belgian Grand Prix . Prior to the Italian Grand Prix , Formula One commercial rights holder Bernie Ecclestone called for the drivers to keep their concerns to themselves , saying : " We ’ re not going to let them [ Pirelli ] go . They ’ re doing a good job . " 
 The Lotus team , who had their cars impounded by bailiffs following Belgium two weeks earlier , managed to get their cars back in time for the Grand Prix . Despite their financial troubles , the team said it had enough funds for the rest of the season . Meanwhile , contract negotiations were high in the agenda prior to the weekend , with Williams announcing that the team would retain Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas for 2016 , while Nico Hülkenberg signed a new two @-@ year deal with Force India . An additional talking point was the future of the Italian Grand Prix at Monza , with the event at risk to be dropped from the calendar . After the race , Ferrari 's Sebastian Vettel spoke out in favour of the venue , saying : " If we take this race away from the calendar for any shitty money reasons , you are basically ripping our hearts out " . 
 In terms of technical developments , Ferrari upgraded their engine for their home race by using three of their development tokens while Mercedes spent all seven of their remaining engine tokens . As a result of this , Mercedes became the first team in 2015 to use all their tokens , with both Honda and Ferrari having four tokens remaining and Renault having twelve tokens left for later in the season . Because of these changes both Mercedes cars were on their third powerplants , whilst both Ferraris were on their fourth power units . Additionally , Toro Rosso , Red Bull and McLaren received grid penalties for exceeding their parts usage , forcing them to start at the back of the grid . McLaren went back to using their snub nose design , which they had replaced earlier in the season ahead of the Austrian Grand Prix , in order to achieve better aerodynamics and lower drag for the high @-@ speed Monza circuit . 
 Prior to the race , Lewis Hamilton was leading the World Championship on 227 points , 28 clear of teammate Rosberg . Sebastian Vettel was in third place , another 39 points adrift . In the Constructors ' standings , Mercedes were in front on 426 points , with Ferrari and Williams second and third on 242 and 161 points respectively . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held ; there were two 90 @-@ minute sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . In what The Guardian described as an " as dominant as ever " performance , Mercedes and Lewis Hamilton lead the times in both practice sessions on Friday , with Nico Rosberg in second on both occasions . During the first session on Friday morning , Hamilton led his teammate by half a second , with Sebastian Vettel in third , another full second behind . Daniel Ricciardo was the fastest driver in a Renault @-@ powered car , and trailed Hamilton by more than two seconds . Jolyon Palmer again replaced Romain Grosjean in the Lotus during the first practice and ended the session half a second off his teammate 's pace in fifteenth . Carlos Sainz , Jr. briefly brought out a red flag when he got stuck in the gravel after spinning out at Parabolica . 
 At the second practice session on Friday afternoon , Ferrari was able to reduce the gap to Mercedes , with Vettel third a little more than seven tenths of a second behind Hamilton . Nico Rosberg was just 0 @.@ 021 seconds off his teammate 's time of <unk> , even leading through the first two sectors but losing fastest time through the third and final sector . The two Force India cars of Sergio Pérez and Nico Hülkenberg split the two Ferraris , with Kimi Räikkönen finishing in sixth . Max Verstappen was the second Toro Rosso driver of the day to spin out into the gravel , but he was able to continue after losing control of his car at the Ascari chicane . There were technical problems for both Daniel Ricciardo and Jenson Button . While the Australian had to cut his first run short due to a <unk> issue , Button was summoned back into the pits after only three laps with an unspecified problem . 
 In the third session on Saturday morning , Lewis Hamilton once more finished fastest , but this time it was Sebastian Vettel in second , <unk> behind Hamilton 's time of <unk> The session started on a slightly wet track caused by rain over the night , but it soon dried up . Ricciardo 's session was marred by another technical problem , this time an engine failure to his newly equipped power unit . His teammate Daniil Kvyat did not have a productive session either as he spent most of the time in the garage , setting only seventeenth best time . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . Before qualifying began on Saturday afternoon , Mercedes was forced to change the power unit in Nico Rosberg 's car back to the one used in Belgium , which had already run for six full races , after finding an issue with the new specification unit . Meanwhile , Lotus was forced to borrow tyre blankets from other teams , as their own had been rendered unusable by rain during the night . When the session began , Nico Hülkenberg was one of the first out on track , but his fast lap was disrupted by Marcus Ericsson , who was later penalised for the incident . Both Daniel Ricciardo and Max Verstappen spent most of the session in the pits . While Ricciardo was able to get out and set a lap sufficient to see him proceed to the second part of qualifying ( Q2 ) , Verstappen went out only to see his engine cover blown off at Curva Grande , scattering the track with debris , though at the very end of the session , so no other cars were affected . Next to Verstappen , both Manor Marussia and McLaren drivers were eliminated . 
 During the first timed runs in Q2 , Lewis Hamilton was seven @-@ tenths of a second quicker than teammate Rosberg , while the Ferraris split the pair to place provisional second and third . Nevertheless , both Mercedes drivers did not go out again . Sebastian Vettel set a second timed lap to improve his time , now a little more than a tenth behind Hamilton . Many drivers only set one timed lap towards the end of the session , with Pastor Maldonado , Felipe Nasr , Carlos Sainz , Jr. and Daniil Kvyat unable to move on into Q3 , while Ricciardo did not set a time , leaving him fifteenth for the time being . 
 When Q3 was contested by the top ten drivers , Nico Rosberg was the first to set a time , but Hamilton immediately went faster , setting a time of 1 : 23 @.@ 397 , which eventually secured him pole position . Again , both Ferraris went faster than Rosberg , being about three @-@ tenths of a second behind Hamilton . During the last timed runs , Räikkönen moved ahead of Vettel to qualify on the front row , while Rosberg improved his time , but stayed in fourth on the grid . He would later refer to his old power unit as the main reason for his qualifying performance . Nico Hülkenberg posted a time good enough for ninth , but his car came to a halt at the pit lane entrance , after his team had miscalculated the fuel put into his car . The two Williams of Massa and Bottas qualified fifth and sixth respectively , with Hülkenberg 's teammate Pérez behind them in seventh , ahead of Romain Grosjean . Marcus Ericsson rounded up the top ten , but was later dropped to twelfth on the grid for <unk> Hülkenberg in Q1 . It was Hamilton 's eleventh pole position in twelve races in the season so far . 
 Toro Rosso ’ s Max Verstappen was handed a drive @-@ through penalty to be served within the first three laps of the race due to an unsafe pit release during qualifying . Kimi Räikkönen expressed delight with his front row performance , saying that the team was surprised by the strong result and calling it " our best qualifying of the year as a team " . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 As the race got under way , Kimi Räikkönen 's Ferrari remained motionless on the spot and only started after all other cars had passed the Finn . Meanwhile , Hamilton got through the first chicane in front of Vettel , but his teammate Rosberg had to avoid Räikkönen 's car and lost two places to the two Williams of Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas . Both Lotus drivers were forced to retire before the end of the second lap , Grosjean due to contact with another car , while Maldonado damaged his chassis when he went over a kerb . While Räikkönen charged through the field to get back up to twelfth place by lap three , Lewis Hamilton quickly increased his advantage over Vettel and moved out of the one @-@ second DRS window . Nico Rosberg was unable to pass Bottas on track and was told by his team to cool his brakes . Further back , the Red Bull sponsored cars moved up the order as well , with Carlos Sainz , Jr . , Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat fighting for tenth position . Sainz yielded his place on lap 11 , when he needed to go into the pits for a five @-@ second penalty handed to him for cutting the chicane at the start . By lap 14 , Hamilton led Vettel by over eight seconds , with Rosberg still behind both Williams in fifth place , pushing Bottas by enabling DRS on the long straights . Behind the German were the two Force Indias of Sergio Pérez and Nico Hülkenberg . 
 On lap 18 , Rosberg was the first of the front runners to come in , attempting to " undercut " the two Williams , who were forced to pit shortly after . Massa came in a lap later and Bottas on lap 22 , both emerging from the pits behind the Mercedes of Rosberg , who was now third . By lap 26 , both Hamilton and Vettel had pitted as well , as Hamilton was leading the Ferrari by more than twelve seconds . By that point , Räikkönen , who had yet to stop , was in third place but easily overtaken by Rosberg on lap 28 . On lap 29 , Daniel Ricciardo , also still on his original tyres , moved past Pérez into sixth position , only for the Mexican to retrieve it a lap later . At the end of lap 29 , Räikkönen pitted but almost collided with Roberto Merhi at the pit entrance . After his stop , the Finn emerged tenth , but quickly moved up the order again , taking eighth from Marcus Ericsson on lap 32 . By lap 36 , Nico Rosberg had moved within four seconds of Sebastian Vettel in front of him , while Räikkönen moved into seventh at the expense of Nico Hülkenberg . 
 By lap 45 , Vettel and Rosberg encountered backmarkers on track , which allowed Rosberg to move closer to his compatriot , trailing him by less than three seconds . On lap 49 , Mercedes told Hamilton to increase his speed , without giving the driver an explanation . With Hamilton leading Vettel by 23 seconds , the call came unexpected . It later proved to be caused by the fact that Hamilton 's left rear tyre had too little pressure at the start , leading the team to fear for a time penalty after the race . Fernando Alonso retired from the race on lap 50 due to loss of power . One lap later , Räikkönen moved into sixth place by overtaking the Force India of Sergio Pérez . With one lap to go , Rosberg was moving ever closer to Vettel in front , when his engine failed , forcing him to retire , handing Felipe Massa the final spot on the podium , who defended the position from teammate Bottas over the final lap . Lewis Hamilton finished the race to take victory on what he himself described as " the best [ weekend ] I ’ ve ever driven " . He finished more than 25 seconds ahead of Vettel . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 For more than two hours after the race , Hamilton 's victory was still up for debate , as his left rear tyres was found to have had <unk> less tyre pressure than regulated . While Lewis Hamilton stated in the post @-@ race press conference that he had not been aware of the issue , Williams officials Pat Symonds and Rob Smedley called for Hamilton 's disqualification , with the latter pointing out that it was " a safety issue " . The <unk> eventually decided not to take any further action , stating that : " In making this determination regarding the pressure , the stewards noted that the tyre warming blankets had been disconnected from their power source , as is normal procedure , and the tyres were significantly below the maximum permitted tyre blanket temperature at the time of the FIA 's measurement on the grid and at significantly different temperatures from other cars measured on the grid . Further , the stewards are satisfied that the team followed the currently specified procedure , supervised by the tyre manufacturer for the safe operation of the tyres . Therefore , the stewards decide to take no further action . " 
 At the podium interview , conducted by film director George Lucas , Lewis Hamilton expressed gratitude to his team and the fans at the venue . Felipe Massa , asked about his last lap fight with teammate Bottas , stated : " I ’ m getting old for that ! I even said to the team I ’ m getting old ! The last three laps of the race I was fighting with my team @-@ mate . It was very difficult but we managed to be here . " During the post @-@ race press conference , Hamilton expressed surprise over his championship lead , since he had not been made aware of Rosberg 's retirement at that point . When asked about the tyre pressure issue , Sebastian Vettel defended Hamilton , saying : " I think it ’ s not fair to hand that question to Lewis because he doesn ’ t know what ’ s going on [ ... ] . In a lot of respect and fairness he did a very good job today and you have to accept that . " 
 Following the race , Red Bull team principal Christian Horner said that Mercedes had made a " worrying step forward " with their new engine specification , admitting that the team was " in a league of their own at the moment " . Nico Rosberg , who had raced with the old specification version of the power unit , described the race as a " massive step in the wrong direction " . After the race , the team revealed that they had turned his engine up in order to help him catch Vettel in the closing stages . The team later admitted that using the new power unit at the Italian Grand Prix had been " a risk " . 
 As a result of the race , Lewis Hamilton extended his lead in the championship to 53 points over teammate Rosberg . His second @-@ place finish meant that Sebastian Vettel moved closer to Rosberg , now trailing him by 21 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Mercedes now led the field on 451 points , with Ferrari and Williams in second and third , on 270 and 188 points respectively . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Marcus Ericsson received a 3 @-@ spot grid penalty for impeding Nico Hülkenberg , but only dropped two places due to the penalty incurred by Sainz . ^ 2 – Carlos Sainz , Jr. received a 35 @-@ place grid penalty for an assortment of changes to his power unit . ^ 3 – Daniil Kvyat received a 35 @-@ place grid penalty for an assortment of changes to his power unit . ^ 4 – Daniel Ricciardo received a 50 @-@ place grid penalty for an assortment of changes to his power unit . ^ 5 – Jenson Button received a 5 @-@ place grid penalty for changing to his ninth ICU , but moved up one place due to more severe penalties incurred by other drivers . ^ 6 – Fernando Alonso received a 10 @-@ place grid penalty for changing to his ninth ICU , but moved up one place due to more severe penalties incurred by other drivers . ^ 7 – Max Verstappen received a 30 @-@ place grid penalty for an assortment of changes to his power unit , which provisionally placed him in the 17th position . However , he further failed to set a qualifying time within 107 % , but was allowed to start in the final grid spot by the stewards . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Nico Rosberg and Fernando Alonso were both classified as they had completed 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Countershading = 
 Countershading , or Thayer 's Law , is a form of camouflage . Countershading is the pattern of animal coloration in which an animal ’ s pigmentation is darker on the upper side and lighter on the underside of the body . This pattern is found in many species of mammals , reptiles , birds , fish , and insects , and has existed since at least the Cretaceous period . 
 When light falls on a uniformly coloured object such as a sphere from above , it makes the upper side appear lighter and the underside darker , grading from one to the other . This pattern of light and shade makes the object appear solid , and therefore acts as a visual cue which makes the object easier to detect . Countershading reduces the ease of detection of predators and prey by counterbalancing the effects of self @-@ shadowing , again typically with grading from dark to light . In theory this could be useful for military camouflage , but in practice it has rarely been applied , despite the best efforts of the artist Abbott Handerson Thayer and the zoologist Hugh Cott . 
 The precise function of various patterns of animal coloration has been debated by zoologists such as Hannah Rowland ( 2009 ) , with the suggestion that there may be multiple functions including flattening and background matching when viewed from the side ; background matching when viewed from above or below , implying separate colour schemes for the top and bottom surfaces ; outline obliteration from above ; and a variety of largely untested non @-@ camouflage theories . A related mechanism , counter @-@ illumination , adds the creation of light by bioluminescence or lamps to match the actual brightness of a background . Counter @-@ illumination camouflage is common in marine organisms such as squid . It has been studied up to the prototype stage for military use in ships and aircraft , but it too has rarely or never been used in warfare . 
 The reverse of countershading , with the belly pigmented darker than the back , enhances contrast and so makes animals more conspicuous . It is found in animals that can defend themselves , such as skunks . The pattern is used both in startle or deimatic displays and as a signal to warn off experienced predators . However , animals that habitually live upside @-@ down but lack strong defences , like the Nile catfish and the luna moth caterpillar , have upside @-@ down countershading for camouflage . 
 = = Early research = = 
 The English zoologist Edward Bagnall Poulton , author of The Colours of Animals ( 1890 ) discovered the countershading of various insects , including the pupa or chrysalis of the purple emperor butterfly , <unk> iris , the caterpillar larvae of the brimstone moth , <unk> <unk> and of the peppered moth , <unk> betularia . However he did not use the term countershading , nor did he suggest that the effect occurred widely . 
 The New Hampshire artist Abbott Handerson Thayer was one of the first to study and write about countershading . In his 1909 book Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , he correctly described and illustrated countershading with photographs and paintings , but wrongly claimed that almost all animals are countershaded . For this reason countershading is sometimes called Thayer ’ s Law . Thayer wrote : 
 Animals are painted by Nature darkest on those parts which tend to be most lighted by the sky 's light , and vice versa . ... the fact that a vast majority of creatures of the whole animal kingdom wear this gradation , developed to an exquisitely minute degree , and are famous for being hard to see in their homes , speaks for itself . 
 Thayer observed and painted a number of examples , including the Luna moth caterpillar <unk> luna , both in its habitual upside @-@ down feeding position , where its countershading makes it appear flat , and artificially inverted from that position , where sunlight and its inverted countershading combine to make it appear heavily shaded and therefore solid . Thayer obtained a patent in 1902 to paint warships , both submarines and surface ships , using countershading , but failed to convince the US Navy to adopt his ideas . 
 Hugh Bamford Cott in his 1940 book Adaptive Coloration in Animals described many instances of countershading , following Thayer in general approach but criticising Thayer 's excessive claim ( " He says ' All patterns and colors whatsoever of all animals that ever prey or are preyed upon are under certain normal circumstances obliterative . ' " ) that effectively all animals are camouflaged with countershading . Cott calls this " Thayer straining the theory to a fantastic extreme " . 
 Both Thayer and Cott include in their books photographs of a non @-@ countershaded white cockerel against a white background , to make the point that in Thayer 's words " a monochrome object can not be ' obliterated ' , no matter what its background " or in Cott 's words " Colour resemblance alone is not sufficient to afford concealment " . Cott explains that 
 Contrary to what might have been expected by any one lacking in artistic perception , the bird appears highly conspicuous , the back looking lighter , and the breast darker , than the background , although in actual fact , back , background and breast are all pure white . " 
 = = Application = = 
 = = = In animals = = = 
 Countershading is observed in a wide range of animal groups , both terrestrial , such as deer , and marine , such as sharks . It is the basis of camouflage in both predators and prey . It is used alongside other forms of camouflage including colour matching and disruptive coloration . Among predatory fish , the gray snapper , <unk> griseus , is effectively flattened by its countershading , while it hunts an " almost invisible " prey , the hardhead fish , <unk> laticeps which swims over greyish sands . Other countershaded marine animals include blue shark , herring , and dolphin ; while fish like the mackerel and sergeant fish are both countershaded and patterned with stripes or spots . 
 It tones the canvas on which are painted the Leopard 's spots , the Tiger 's stripes ... It is the dress almost universally worn by rodents ... It is the essential uniform adopted by <unk> , Asses , Antelopes , Deer ... It is repeated extensively among the marsupials ... It provides a basic livery for the great majority of snakes , lizards , and amphibians . Among insects it reaches a fine state of perfection in different caterpillars and grasshoppers . ... It is , however , in rivers , and in the surface waters of the sea , that countershading reaches its maximum development and significance . 
 Countershading existed in marine reptiles in the Cretaceous period . <unk> skin pigmented with dark @-@ coloured eumelanin reveals that both leatherback turtles and mosasaurs had dark backs and light bellies . 
 = = = A related mechanism : counter @-@ illumination = = = 
 Another form of animal camouflage uses bioluminescence to increase the average brightness of an animal to match the brightness of the background . This is called counter @-@ illumination . It is common in mid @-@ water pelagic fish and invertebrates especially squid . It makes the counter @-@ illuminated animal practically invisible to predators viewing it from below . As such , counter @-@ illumination camouflage can be seen as an extension beyond what countershading can achieve . Where countershading only paints out shadows , counter @-@ illumination can add in actual lights , permitting effective camouflage in changing conditions , including where the background is bright enough to make an animal that is not counter @-@ illuminated appear as a shadow . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Countershading , like counter @-@ illumination , has rarely been applied in practice for military camouflage , though not because military authorities were unaware of it . Both Abbott Thayer in the First World War and Hugh Cott in the Second World War proposed countershading to their countries ' armed forces . They each demonstrated the effectiveness of countershading , without succeeding in persuading their armed forces to adopt the technique , though they influenced military adoption of camouflage in general . 
 Cott was a protege of John Graham Kerr who had quarrelled with Norman Wilkinson in the First World War about dazzle camouflage for ships . Wilkinson remained influential in 1939 as an inspector of camouflage , so a political argument developed . Cott was invited to camouflage a 12 @-@ inch rail @-@ mounted gun , alongside a similar gun camouflaged conventionally . Cott carefully combined disruptive contrast to break up the gun barrel 's outlines with countershading to flatten out its appearance as a solid cylinder . The guns were then photographed from the air from various angles , and in Peter Forbes 's view " the results were remarkable . " Cott 's gun is " invisible except to the most minute scrutiny by someone who knows exactly where to look and what to look for . The other gun is always highly visible . " The authorities hesitated , appearing to be embarrassed by the evidence that Cott was right . Cott was posted to the Middle East , and Kerr unsuccessfully intervened , pleading for guns to be painted Cott 's way and Cott to be brought home . 
 The Australian zoologist William Dakin in his 1941 book The Art of Camouflage followed Thayer in describing countershading in some detail , and the book was reprinted as a military handbook in 1942 . Dakin photographed model birds , much as Thayer and Cott had done , and argued that the shoulders and arms of battledress should be countershaded . 
 Countershading was described in the US War Department 's 1943 Principles of Camouflage , where after four paragraphs of theory and one on its use in nature , the advice given is 
 Upper surfaces should be painted and textured so as to conform to the color and tone of the surrounding country ( background ) and the sides graded and toned from this to the white which the under surfaces and parts in shade should be painted . 
 Inventors have continued to advocate military usage of countershading , with for example a 2005 US patent for personal camouflage including countershading in the form of " statistical <unk> " with varying sizes of rounded dark patches on a lighter ground . 
 Research by Ariel <unk> and Yehezkel Yeshurun investigating " camouflage breaking " , the automated detection of objects such as tanks , showed that analysing images for convexity by looking for graded shadows can " break very strong camouflage , which might delude even human viewers . " More precisely , images are searched for places where the gradient of brightness crosses zero , such as the line where a shadow stops becoming darker and starts to become lighter again . The technique defeated camouflage using disruption of edges , but the authors observed that animals with Thayer countershading are using " counter @-@ measures to convexity based detectors " , which implied " predators who use convexity based detectors . " 
 = = Function = = 
 Hannah Rowland , reviewing countershading 100 years after Abbott Thayer , observed that countershading , which she defines as " darker pigmentation on those surfaces exposed to the most lighting " is a common but poorly understood aspect of animal coloration . She noted there had been " much debate " about how countershading works . She considered the evidence for Thayer 's theory that this acts as camouflage " by reducing ventral shadowing " , and reviewed alternative explanations for countershading . 
 Camouflage theories of countershading , Rowland wrote , include " self @-@ shadow concealment which results in improved background matching when viewed from the side " ; " self @-@ shadow concealment that flattens the form when viewed from the side " ; " background matching when viewed from above or below " ; and " body outline obliteration when viewed from above " . These are examined in turn below . 
 = = = <unk> and background matching when viewed from the side = = = 
 Cott , like Thayer , argued that countershading would make animals hard to see from the side , as they would " fade into a ghostly elusiveness " . Rowland notes that Cott is here reviewing Thayer 's theory and " reinforcing the view that a gradation in shading would act to eliminate the effects of ventral shadowing . " Kiltie measured the effect of the countershading of the grey squirrel , Sciurus carolinensis , showing that when the squirrel is horizontal the self @-@ shadowing of the belly is partly concealed , but that when the squirrel is vertical ( as when climbing a tree trunk ) this effect did not occur . 
 Thayer 's original argument , restated by Cott , was that nature did the exact opposite with countershading that an artist did with paint when creating the illusion of solid three @-@ dimensionality , namely counteracting the effect of shade to flatten out form . <unk> is a powerful cue used by animals in different phyla to identify the shapes of objects . Research with chicks showed that they preferred to peck at grains with shadows falling below them ( as if illuminated from above ) , so both humans and birds may make use of shading as a depth cue . 
 = = = Background matching from above or below = = = 
 A completely different function of animal ( and military vehicle ) coloration is to camouflage the top and bottom surfaces differently , to match their backgrounds below and above respectively . This was noted , for example , by Frank Evers Beddard in 1892 : 
 Among pelagic fish it is common to find the upper surface dark @-@ coloured and the lower surface white , so that the animal is inconspicuous when seen either from above or below . 
 Early researchers including Alfred Russel Wallace , Beddard , Cott and Craik argued that marine animals including pelagic fish such as marlin and mackerel , as well as dolphins , sharks , and penguins the upper and lower surfaces are sharply distinct in tone , with a dark upper surface and often a nearly white lower surface . They suggested that when seen from the top , the darker dorsal surface of the animal would offer camouflage against the darkness of the deep water below . When seen from below , the lighter ventral area would similarly provide the least possible contrast with the sunlit ocean surface above . There is some evidence for this in birds , where birds that catch fish at a medium depth , rather than at the surface or on the seabed , are more often coloured in this way , and the prey of these birds would see only the underside of the bird . Rowland concluded that each possible role for coloration patterns lumped together as " countershading " needs to be evaluated separately , rather than just assuming it functions effectively . 
 = = = Outline obliteration from above = = = 
 Rowland ( 2009 ) identified an additional mechanism of countershading not previously analysed , namely that a round body like a cylinder illuminated and seen from above appears to have dark sides . Using a graphics tool , she demonstrated that this effect can be flattened out by countershading . Since predators are known to use edges to identify prey , countershading may therefore , she argues , make prey harder to detect when seen from above . 
 = = = Non @-@ camouflage theories = = = 
 Non @-@ camouflage theories include protection from ultraviolet light ; thermoregulation ; and protection from abrasion . All three of these " plausible " theories remained largely untested in 2009 , according to Rowland . 
 = = Evidence = = 
 Despite demonstrations and examples adduced by Cott and others , little experimental evidence for the effectiveness of countershading was gathered in the century since Thayer 's discovery . Experiments in 2009 using artificial prey showed that countershaded objects do have survival benefits and in 2012 , a study by William Allen and colleagues showed that countershading in 114 species of ruminants closely matched predictions for " self @-@ shadow concealment " , the function predicted by Poulton , Thayer and Cott . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Evolutionary developmental biology ( ' Evo Devo ' ) has assembled evidence from embryology and genetics to show how evolution has acted at all scales from the whole organism down to individual genes , proteins and genetic switches . In the case of countershaded mammals with dark ( often brownish ) upper parts and lighter ( often buff or whitish ) under parts , such as in the house mouse , it is the Agouti gene which creates the difference in shading . Agouti encodes for a protein , the Agouti signalling peptide ( ASP ) , which specifically inhibits the action of the Melanocortin 1 receptor ( MC1R ) . In the absence of the Agouti protein , alpha @-@ <unk> @-@ stimulating hormone stimulates the cells bearing MC1R , melanocytes , to produce dark eumelanin , colouring the skin and fur dark brown or black . In the presence of the Agouti protein , the same system produces the lighter @-@ coloured , yellow or red <unk> . A genetic switch active in the cells of the embryo that will become the belly skin causes the Agouti gene to become active there , creating the countershading seen in adult mammals . 
 = = Reverse countershading = = 
 If countershading paints out shadows , the reverse , darkening the belly and lightening the back , would maximise contrast by adding to the natural fall of light . This pattern of animal coloration is found in animals like the skunk and honey badger with strong defences — the offensive stink of the skunk , and the sharp claws , aggressive nature and stink of the honey badger . These animals do not run when under attack , but move slowly , often turning to face the danger , and giving deimatic or threat displays either to startle inexperienced predators , or as an aposematic signal , to warn off experienced ones . 
 The caterpillar of the Luna moth , as discovered by Thayer , is in Cott 's phrase " countershaded in relation to [ its ] attitude " , i.e. shaded with a light back grading to a dark belly , as also is the Nile catfish , <unk> <unk> for the same reason : these animals ( and other caterpillars including <unk> io and the eyed hawkmoth , <unk> ocellatus ) habitually live ' upside down ' with the belly uppermost . Similarly in the sea slug Glaucus atlanticus , the reverse countershading is associated with inverted habits . These animals are thus employing countershading in the usual way for camouflage . 
 = = Examples in animals = = 
 = = = Pioneering books = = = 
 Beddard , F. E. ( 1892 ) . Animal coloration ; an account of the principal facts and theories relating to the colours and markings of animals . Swan Sonnenschein . 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1940 ) . Adaptive Coloration in Animals . Oxford University Press . 
 Thayer , Gerald H. ( 1909 ) . Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom . An Exposition of the Laws of Disguise Through Color and Pattern : Being a Summary of Abbott H. Thayer 's Discoveries . Macmillan . 
 Wallace , A.R. ( 1889 ) . Darwinism . An exposition of the theory of natural selection with some of its applications . Macmillan . 
 = = = General reading = = = 
 Behrens , Roy R ( 2009 ) . Goldstein , E Bruce , ed . Encyclopedia of Perception , Volume 1 . <unk> pp. 233 – 235 . 
 Edmunds , Malcolm ( 2008 ) . " Deimatic Behavior " . In Capinera , John L. Encyclopedia of Entomology . Springer . 
 Forbes , Peter ( 2009 ) . Dazzled and Deceived : Mimicry and Camouflage . Yale . 
 Rowland , Hannah M ( 2011 ) . " The history , theory and evidence for a cryptic function of countershading " . In Stevens , Martin ; <unk> , Sami . Animal Camouflage : Mechanisms and Function . Cambridge University Press . 
 Ruxton , Graeme D ; Sherratt , Tom N ; Speed , Michael P ( 2004 ) . " 3 . Countershading and counterillumination " . Avoiding Attack : The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis , Warning Signals and Mimicry . Oxford University Press . 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 Allen , William L ; Baddeley , Roland ; <unk> , Innes C ; Scott @-@ Samuel , Nicholas E ( December 2012 ) . " A Quantitative Test of the Predicted Relationship between Countershading and Lighting Environment " . The American Naturalist 180 ( 6 ) : 762 – 776 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Anon ( 4 November 1943 ) . " Principles of Camouflage " . Tactical and Technical Trends 37 . 
 Behrens , Roy ( 27 February 2009 ) . " Revisiting Abbott Thayer : non @-@ scientific reflections about camouflage in art , war and zoology " . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B ( Royal Society Publishing ) 364 ( 1516 ) : 497 – 501 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1098 / <unk> PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 05 @-@ 05 . 
 Craik , KJ ( 1944 ) . " White plumage of sea @-@ birds " . Nature 153 : 288 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> . 
 Edmunds , M ; <unk> , RA ( 1994 ) . " The survival value of countershading with wild birds as predators " . Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 51 ( 4 ) : 447 – 452 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 Elias , Ann ( 2011 ) . " Camouflage Australia : Art , Nature , Science and War " . Sydney University Press. pp. 47 – 53 . 
 Hershberger , W ( 1970 ) . " Attached @-@ shadow orientation perceived as depth by chickens reared in an environment illuminated from below " . J. Comp . <unk> . <unk> 73 : 407 – 411 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1037 / <unk> . 
 Jones , BW ; <unk> , MK ( 2004 ) . " Counterillumination in the Hawaiian bobtail squid , Euprymna scolopes Berry ( Mollusca : Cephalopoda ) " ( PDF ) . Marine Biology 144 ( 6 ) : 1151 – 1155 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> @-@ 003 @-@ 1285 @-@ 3 . 
 Kiltie , RA ( 1944 ) . " Testing Thayer 's countershading hypothesis - an image @-@ processing approach " . Animal Behaviour 38 : 542 – 544 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> @-@ 3472 ( 89 ) 800 . 
 ONR ( 2013 ) . " Ocean Life : Mammals <unk> " . Office of Naval Research . Retrieved 11 January 2013 . 
 Poulton , Edward B. ( October 1887 ) . " Notes in 1886 upon Lepidopterous Larvae , etc . " . Transactions of the Entomological Society of London : 294 . 
 Poulton , Edward B ( October 1888 ) . " Notes in 1887 upon Lepidopterous Larvae , etc . " . Transactions of the Entomological Society of London : 595 – 596 . 
 Rowland , Hannah M. ( 2009 ) . " Abbott Thayer to the present day : what have we learned about the function of countershading ? " ( PDF ) . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364 : 519 – 527 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1098 / <unk> PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 Ruxton , Graeme D ; Speed , Michael P ; Kelly , David J ( 2004 ) . " What , if anything , is the adaptive function of countershading ? " ( PDF ) . Animal Behaviour 68 : 445 – 451 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> 
 Speed , MP ; Kelly , David J ; Davidson , AM ; G.D. Ruxton ( 2005 ) . " Countershading enhances crypsis with some bird species but not others " . Behavioral Ecology 16 ( 2 ) : 327 – 334 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / <unk> / <unk> . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 <unk> , Ariel ; Yeshurun , Yehezkel . " Convexity @-@ based Camouflage Breaking " ( PDF ) . Tel Aviv <unk> pp. 1 – 4 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 . 
 Tooley , Kurt ( 15 December 2005 ) . " Advanced camouflage system and method , Patent application 11 / 159 @,@ 911 , Publication US 2005 / <unk> A1 " . US Patent Office. pp. 1 – 4 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 . 
 Young , RE ; Roper , CFE ( 1976 ) . " Bioluminescent countershading in midwater animals : Evidence from living squid " . Science 191 ( <unk> ) : 1046 – 1048 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1126 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Young , RE ; Roper , CFE ( 1977 ) . " Intensity regulation of bioluminescence during countershading in living midwater animals " . Fishery Bulletin 75 ( 2 ) : 239 – 252 . 
 = Allosaurus = 
 Allosaurus ( / <unk> / ) is a genus of large theropod dinosaur that lived 155 to 150 million years ago during the late Jurassic period ( Kimmeridgian to early Tithonian ) . The name " Allosaurus " means " different lizard " . It is derived from the Greek ἄλλος / <unk> ( " different , other " ) and σαῦρος / sauros ( " lizard / generic reptile " ) . The first fossil remains that can definitely be ascribed to this genus were described in 1877 by paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh , and it became known as Antrodemus . As one of the first well @-@ known theropod dinosaurs , it has long attracted attention outside of paleontological circles . Indeed , it has been a top feature in several films and documentaries about prehistoric life . 
 Allosaurus was a large bipedal predator . Its skull was large and equipped with dozens of sharp , serrated teeth . It averaged 8 @.@ 5 m ( 28 ft ) in length , though fragmentary remains suggest it could have reached over 12 m ( 39 ft ) . Relative to the large and powerful hindlimbs , its three @-@ fingered forelimbs were small , and the body was balanced by a long and heavily muscled tail . It is classified as an allosaurid , a type of carnosaurian theropod dinosaur . The genus has a complicated taxonomy , and includes an uncertain number of valid species , the best known of which is A. fragilis . The bulk of Allosaurus remains have come from North America 's Morrison Formation , with material also known from Portugal and possibly Tanzania . It was known for over half of the 20th century as Antrodemus , but study of the copious remains from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry brought the name " Allosaurus " back to prominence , and established it as one of the best @-@ known dinosaurs . 
 As the most abundant large predator in the Morrison Formation , Allosaurus was at the top of the food chain , probably preying on contemporaneous large herbivorous dinosaurs and perhaps even other predators . Potential prey included ornithopods , stegosaurids , and sauropods . Some paleontologists interpret Allosaurus as having had cooperative social behavior , and hunting in packs , while others believe individuals may have been aggressive toward each other , and that congregations of this genus are the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcasses . It may have attacked large prey by ambush , using its upper jaw like a hatchet . 
 = = Description = = 
 Allosaurus was a typical large theropod , having a massive skull on a short neck , a long tail and reduced forelimbs . Allosaurus fragilis , the best @-@ known species , had an average length of 8 @.@ 5 m ( 28 ft ) , with the largest definitive Allosaurus specimen ( AMNH 680 ) estimated at 9 @.@ 7 meters ( 32 feet ) long , and an estimated weight of 2 @.@ 3 metric tons ( 2 @.@ 5 short tons ) . In his 1976 monograph on Allosaurus , James Madsen mentioned a range of bone sizes which he interpreted to show a maximum length of 12 to 13 m ( 39 to 43 ft ) . As with dinosaurs in general , weight estimates are debatable , and since 1980 have ranged between 1 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 300 pounds ) , 1 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 to 8 @,@ 800 lb ) , and 1 @,@ 010 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 230 pounds ) for modal adult weight ( not maximum ) . John Foster , a specialist on the Morrison Formation , suggests that 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) is reasonable for large adults of A. fragilis , but that 700 kg ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) is a closer estimate for individuals represented by the average @-@ sized thigh bones he has measured . Using the subadult specimen nicknamed " Big Al " , researchers using computer modelling arrived at a best estimate of 1 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) for the individual , but by varying parameters they found a range from approximately 1 @,@ 400 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 100 lb ) to approximately 2 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) . 
 Several gigantic specimens have been attributed to Allosaurus , but may in fact belong to other genera . The closely related genus Saurophaganax ( OMNH 1708 ) reached perhaps 10 @.@ 9 m ( 36 ft ) in length , and its single species has sometimes been included in the genus Allosaurus as Allosaurus maximus , though recent studies support it as a separate genus . Another potential specimen of Allosaurus , once assigned to the genus Epanterias ( AMNH 5767 ) , may have measured 12 @.@ 1 meters ( 40 feet ) in length . A more recent discovery is a partial skeleton from the Peterson Quarry in Morrison rocks of New Mexico ; this large allosaurid may be another individual of Saurophaganax . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The skull and teeth of Allosaurus were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size . Paleontologist Gregory S. Paul gives a length of 845 mm ( 33 @.@ 3 in ) for a skull belonging to an individual he estimates at 7 @.@ 9 m ( 26 ft ) long . Each premaxilla ( the bones that formed the tip of the snout ) , held five teeth with D @-@ shaped cross @-@ sections , and each maxilla ( the main tooth @-@ bearing bones in the upper jaw ) had between 14 and 17 teeth ; the number of teeth does not exactly correspond to the size of the bone . Each dentary ( the tooth @-@ bearing bone of the lower jaw ) had between 14 and 17 teeth , with an average count of 16 . The teeth became shorter , more narrow , and more curved toward the back of the skull . All of the teeth had saw @-@ like edges . They were shed easily , and were replaced continually , making them common fossils . 
 The skull had a pair of horns above and in front of the eyes . These horns were composed of extensions of the lacrimal bones , and varied in shape and size . There were also lower paired ridges running along the top edges of the nasal bones that led into the horns . The horns were probably covered in a keratin sheath and may have had a variety of functions , including acting as sunshades for the eye , being used for display , and being used in combat against other members of the same species ( although they were fragile ) . There was a ridge along the back of the skull roof for muscle attachment , as is also seen in tyrannosaurids . 
 Inside the lacrimal bones were depressions that may have held glands , such as salt glands . Within the maxillae were sinuses that were better developed than those of more basal theropods such as Ceratosaurus and <unk> ; they may have been related to the sense of smell , perhaps holding something like Jacobson 's organ . The roof of the braincase was thin , perhaps to improve thermoregulation for the brain . The skull and lower jaws had joints that permitted motion within these units . In the lower jaws , the bones of the front and back halves loosely articulated , permitting the jaws to bow outward and increasing the animal 's gape . The braincase and frontals may also have had a joint . 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 Allosaurus had nine vertebrae in the neck , 14 in the back , and five in the sacrum supporting the hips . The number of tail vertebrae is unknown and varied with individual size ; James Madsen estimated about 50 , while Gregory S. Paul considered that to be too many and suggested 45 or less . There were hollow spaces in the neck and anterior back vertebrae . Such spaces , which are also found in modern theropods ( that is , the birds ) , are interpreted as having held air sacs used in respiration . The rib cage was broad , giving it a barrel chest , especially in comparison to less derived theropods like Ceratosaurus . Allosaurus had gastralia ( belly ribs ) , but these are not common findings , and they may have ossified poorly . In one published case , the gastralia show evidence of injury during life . A furcula ( wishbone ) was also present , but has only been recognized since 1996 ; in some cases <unk> were confused with gastralia . The ilium , the main hip bone , was massive , and the pubic bone had a prominent foot that may have been used for both muscle attachment and as a prop for resting the body on the ground . Madsen noted that in about half of the individuals from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry , independent of size , the pubes had not fused to each other at their foot ends . He suggested that this was a sexual characteristic , with females lacking fused bones to make egg @-@ laying easier . This proposal has not attracted further attention , however . 
 The forelimbs of Allosaurus were short in comparison to the hindlimbs ( only about 35 % the length of the hindlimbs in adults ) and had three fingers per hand , tipped with large , strongly curved and pointed claws . The arms were powerful , and the forearm was somewhat shorter than the upper arm ( 1 : 1 @.@ 2 ulna / humerus ratio ) . The wrist had a version of the semilunate carpal also found in more derived theropods like maniraptorans . Of the three fingers , the innermost ( or thumb ) was the largest , and diverged from the others . The phalangeal formula is 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 @-@ 0 , meaning that the innermost finger ( phalange ) has two bones , the next has three , and the third finger has four . The legs were not as long or suited for speed as those of tyrannosaurids , and the claws of the toes were less developed and more hoof @-@ like than those of earlier theropods . Each foot had three weight @-@ bearing toes and an inner dewclaw , which Madsen suggested could have been used for grasping in juveniles . There was also what is interpreted as the splint @-@ like remnant of a fifth ( outermost ) metatarsal , perhaps used as a lever between the Achilles tendon and foot . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Allosaurus was an allosaurid , a member of a family of large theropods within the larger group Carnosauria . The family name Allosauridae was created for this genus in 1878 by Othniel Charles Marsh , but the term was largely unused until the 1970s in favor of Megalosauridae , another family of large theropods that eventually became a wastebasket taxon . This , along with the use of Antrodemus for Allosaurus during the same period , is a point that needs to be remembered when searching for information on Allosaurus in publications that predate James Madsen 's 1976 monograph . Major publications using the name " Megalosauridae " instead of " Allosauridae " include Gilmore , 1920 , von Huene , 1926 , Romer , 1956 and 1966 , Steel , 1970 , and Walker , 1964 . 
 Following the publication of Madsen 's influential monograph , Allosauridae became the preferred family assignment , but it too was not strongly defined . Semi @-@ technical works used Allosauridae for a variety of large theropods , usually those that were larger and better @-@ known than megalosaurids . Typical theropods that were thought to be related to Allosaurus included Indosaurus , Piatnitzkysaurus , <unk> , Yangchuanosaurus , Acrocanthosaurus , <unk> , <unk> , Stokesosaurus , and <unk> . Given modern knowledge of theropod diversity and the advent of cladistic study of evolutionary relationships , none of these theropods is now recognized as an allosaurid , although several , like Acrocanthosaurus and Yangchuanosaurus , are members of closely related families . 
 Below is a cladogram by Benson et al. in 2010 . 
 Allosauridae is one of four families in Carnosauria ; the other three are <unk> , Carcharodontosauridae and <unk> . Allosauridae has at times been proposed as ancestral to the Tyrannosauridae ( which would make it paraphyletic ) , one recent example being Gregory S. Paul 's Predatory Dinosaurs of the World , but this has been rejected , with tyrannosaurids identified as members of a separate branch of theropods , the Coelurosauria . Allosauridae is the smallest of the carnosaur families , with only Saurophaganax and a currently unnamed French allosauroid accepted as possible valid genera besides Allosaurus in the most recent review . Another genus , Epanterias , is a potential valid member , but it and Saurophaganax may turn out to be large examples of Allosaurus . Recent reviews have kept the genus Saurophaganax and included Epanterias with Allosaurus . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 = = = Early discoveries and research = = = 
 The discovery and early study of Allosaurus is complicated by the multiplicity of names coined during the Bone Wars of the late 19th century . The first described fossil in this history was a bone obtained secondhand by Ferdinand <unk> Hayden in 1869 . It came from Middle Park , near Granby , Colorado , probably from Morrison Formation rocks . The locals had identified such bones as " petrified horse hoofs " . Hayden sent his specimen to Joseph Leidy , who identified it as half of a tail vertebra , and tentatively assigned it to the European dinosaur genus Poekilopleuron as <unk> [ sic ] valens . He later decided it deserved its own genus , Antrodemus . 
 Allosaurus itself is based on YPM 1930 , a small collection of fragmentary bones including parts of three vertebrae , a rib fragment , a tooth , a toe bone , and , most useful for later discussions , the shaft of the right humerus ( upper arm ) . Othniel Charles Marsh gave these remains the formal name Allosaurus fragilis in 1877 . Allosaurus comes from the Greek <unk> / <unk> , meaning " strange " or " different " and sauros / σαυρος , meaning " lizard " or " reptile " . It was named ' different lizard ' because its vertebrae were different from those of other dinosaurs known at the time of its discovery . The species epithet fragilis is Latin for " fragile " , referring to lightening features in the vertebrae . The bones were collected from the Morrison Formation of Garden Park , north of Cañon City . Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope , who were in scientific competition , went on to coin several other genera based on similarly sparse material that would later figure in the taxonomy of Allosaurus . These include Marsh 's Creosaurus and Labrosaurus , and Cope 's Epanterias . 
 In their haste , Cope and Marsh did not always follow up on their discoveries ( or , more commonly , those made by their subordinates ) . For example , after the discovery by Benjamin Mudge of the type specimen of Allosaurus in Colorado , Marsh elected to concentrate work in Wyoming ; when work resumed at Garden Park in 1883 , M. P. Felch found an almost complete Allosaurus and several partial skeletons . In addition , one of Cope 's collectors , H. F. Hubbell , found a specimen in the Como Bluff area of Wyoming in 1879 , but apparently did not mention its completeness , and Cope never unpacked it . Upon unpacking in 1903 ( several years after Cope had died ) , it was found to be one of the most complete theropod specimens then known , and in 1908 the skeleton , now cataloged as AMNH <unk> , was put on public view . This is the well @-@ known mount poised over a partial Apatosaurus skeleton as if scavenging it , illustrated as such by Charles R. Knight . Although notable as the first free @-@ standing mount of a theropod dinosaur , and often illustrated and photographed , it has never been scientifically described . 
 The multiplicity of early names complicated later research , with the situation compounded by the terse descriptions provided by Marsh and Cope . Even at the time , authors such as Samuel Wendell Williston suggested that too many names had been coined . For example , Williston pointed out in 1901 that Marsh had never been able to adequately distinguish Allosaurus from Creosaurus . The most influential early attempt to sort out the convoluted situation was produced by Charles W. Gilmore in 1920 . He came to the conclusion that the tail vertebra named Antrodemus by Leidy was indistinguishable from those of Allosaurus , and Antrodemus thus should be the preferred name because as the older name it had priority . Antrodemus became the accepted name for this familiar genus for over fifty years , until James Madsen published on the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd specimens and concluded that Allosaurus should be used because Antrodemus was based on material with poor , if any , diagnostic features and locality information ( for example , the geological formation that the single bone of Antrodemus came from is unknown ) . " Antrodemus " has been used informally for convenience when distinguishing between the skull Gilmore restored and the composite skull restored by Madsen . 
 = = = Cleveland @-@ Lloyd discoveries = = = 
 Although sporadic work at what became known as the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County , Utah had taken place as early as 1927 , and the fossil site itself described by William J. Stokes in 1945 , major operations did not begin there until 1960 . Under a cooperative effort involving nearly 40 institutions , thousands of bones were recovered between 1960 and 1965 . The quarry is notable for the predominance of Allosaurus remains , the condition of the specimens , and the lack of scientific resolution on how it came to be . The majority of bones belong to the large theropod Allosaurus fragilis ( it is estimated that the remains of at least 46 A. fragilis have been found there , out of at minimum 73 dinosaurs ) , and the fossils found there are disarticulated and well @-@ mixed . Nearly a dozen scientific papers have been written on the taphonomy of the site , suggesting numerous mutually exclusive explanations for how it may have formed . Suggestions have ranged from animals getting stuck in a bog , to becoming trapped in deep mud , to falling victim to drought @-@ induced mortality around a waterhole , to getting trapped in a spring @-@ fed pond or seep . Regardless of the actual cause , the great quantity of well @-@ preserved Allosaurus remains has allowed this genus to be known in detail , making it among the best @-@ known theropods . Skeletal remains from the quarry pertain to individuals of almost all ages and sizes , from less than 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) to 12 meters ( 39 feet ) long , and the disarticulation is an advantage for describing bones usually found fused . 
 = = = Recent work : 1980s – present = = = 
 The period since Madsen 's monograph has been marked by a great expansion in studies dealing with topics concerning Allosaurus in life ( <unk> and <unk> topics ) . Such studies have covered topics including skeletal variation , growth , skull construction , hunting methods , the brain , and the possibility of gregarious living and parental care . Reanalysis of old material ( particularly of large ' allosaur ' specimens ) , new discoveries in Portugal , and several very complete new specimens have also contributed to the growing knowledge base . 
 = = = = " Big Al " and " Big Al Two " = = = = 
 In 1991 " Big Al " ( MOR 693 ) , a 95 % complete , partially articulated specimen of Allosaurus was discovered . It measured about 8 meters ( about 26 ft ) in length . MOR 693 was excavated near Shell , Wyoming , by a joint Museum of the Rockies and University of Wyoming Geological Museum team . This skeleton was discovered by a Swiss team , led by Kirby <unk> . In 1996 the same team discovered a second Allosaurus , " Big Al Two " , which is the best preserved skeleton of its kind to date . 
 The completeness , preservation , and scientific importance of this skeleton gave " Big Al " its name ; the individual itself was below the average size for Allosaurus fragilis , and was a subadult estimated at only 87 % grown . The specimen was described by Breithaupt in 1996 . Nineteen of its bones were broken or showed signs of infection , which may have contributed to " Big Al 's " death . <unk> bones included five ribs , five vertebrae , and four bones of the feet ; several damaged bones showed osteomyelitis , a bone infection . A particular problem for the living animal was infection and trauma to the right foot that probably affected movement and may have also predisposed the other foot to injury because of a change in gait . Al had an infection on the first phalanx on the third toe that was afflicted by an involucrum . The infection was long lived , perhaps up to 6 months . Big Al Two is also known to have multiple injuries . 
 = = Species and taxonomy = = 
 There are currently four valid and one undescribed species of Allosaurus ( A. amplus , A. europaeus , the type species A. fragilis , the as @-@ yet not formally described " A. jimmadseni " , and A. lucasi ) . 
 A. fragilis , " A. jimmadseni " , and A. lucasi are all known from remains discovered in the Kimmeridgian – Tithonian Upper Jurassic @-@ age Morrison Formation of the United States , spread across the states of Colorado , Montana , New Mexico , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Utah , and Wyoming . A. fragilis is regarded as the most common , known from the remains of at least sixty individuals . For a while in the late 1980s and early 1990s it was common to recognize A. fragilis as the short @-@ snouted species , with the long @-@ snouted taxon being A. atrox ; however , subsequent analysis of specimens from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Quarry , Como Bluff , and Dry Mesa Quarry showed that the differences seen in the Morrison Formation material could be attributed to individual variation . A study of skull elements from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd site found wide variation between individuals , calling into question previous species @-@ level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the lacrimal horns , and the proposed differentiation of " A. jimmadseni " based on the shape of the jugal . A. europaeus was found in the Kimmeridgian @-@ age Porto Novo Member of the Lourinhã Formation , but may be the same as A. fragilis . 
 Allosaurus tendagurensis was found in Kimmeridgian @-@ age rocks of Tendaguru , in Mtwara , Tanzania . It was subsequently classified as a more basal tetanuran , before being finally recognized as a carcharodontosaurid , Although obscure , it was a large theropod , possibly around 10 meters ( 33 feet ) long and 2 @.@ 5 metric tons ( 2 @.@ 8 short tons ) in weight . 
 Allosaurus is regarded as a probable synonym of the genera Creosaurus , Epanterias , and Labrosaurus . Most of the species that are regarded as synonyms of A. fragilis , or that were <unk> to the genus , are obscure and were based on scrappy remains . One exception is Labrosaurus ferox , named in 1884 by Marsh for an oddly formed partial lower jaw , with a prominent gap in the tooth row at the tip of the jaw , and a rear section greatly expanded and turned down . Later researchers suggested that the bone was pathologic , showing an injury to the living animal , and that part of the unusual form of the rear of the bone was due to plaster reconstruction . It is now regarded as an example of A. fragilis . 
 Other remains formerly thought to pertain to Allosaurus were described from Australia , and Siberia , but these fossils have been reassessed as belonging to other dinosaurs . 
 The issue of synonyms is complicated by the type specimen of Allosaurus fragilis ( catalog number YPM 1930 ) being extremely fragmentary , consisting of a few incomplete vertebrae , limb bone fragments , rib fragments , and a tooth . Because of this , several scientists have interpreted the type specimen as potentially dubious , and thus the genus Allosaurus itself or at least the species A. fragilis would be a nomen dubium ( " dubious name " , based on a specimen too incomplete to compare to other specimens or to classify ) . To address this situation , Gregory S. Paul and Kenneth Carpenter ( 2010 ) submitted a petition to the ICZN to have the name " A. fragilis " officially transferred to the more complete specimen <unk> ( as a neotype ) . This request is currently pending review . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Allosaurus was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of Western American fossil @-@ bearing rock known as the Morrison Formation , accounting for 70 to 75 % of theropod specimens , and as such was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web . The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons , and flat floodplains . Vegetation varied from river @-@ lining forests of conifers , tree ferns , and ferns ( gallery forests ) , to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria @-@ like conifer Brachyphyllum . 
 The Morrison Formation has been a rich fossil hunting ground . The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae , fungi , mosses , horsetails , ferns , cycads , ginkgoes , and several families of conifers . Animal fossils discovered include bivalves , snails , ray @-@ finned fishes , frogs , salamanders , turtles , sphenodonts , lizards , terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans , several species of pterosaur , numerous dinosaur species , and early mammals such as docodonts , multituberculates , symmetrodonts , and triconodonts . Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods Ceratosaurus , Ornitholestes , and Torvosaurus , the sauropods Apatosaurus , Brachiosaurus , Brontosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus , and the ornithischians Camptosaurus , Dryosaurus , and Stegosaurus . Allosaurus is commonly found at the same sites as Apatosaurus , Camarasaurus , Diplodocus , and Stegosaurus . The Late Jurassic formations of Portugal where Allosaurus is present are interpreted as having been similar to the Morrison but with a stronger marine influence . Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks ( mainly Allosaurus , Ceratosaurus , Torvosaurus , and Stegosaurus ) , or have a close counterpart ( Brachiosaurus and Lusotitan , Camptosaurus and Draconyx ) . 
 Allosaurus coexisted with fellow large theropods Ceratosaurus and Torvosaurus in both the United States and Portugal . The three appear to have had different ecological niches , based on anatomy and the location of fossils . <unk> and <unk> may have preferred to be active around waterways , and had lower , thinner bodies that would have given them an advantage in forest and underbrush terrains , whereas allosaurs were more compact , with longer legs , faster but less maneuverable , and seem to have preferred dry floodplains . Ceratosaurus , better known than Torvosaurus , differed noticeably from Allosaurus in functional anatomy by having a taller , narrower skull with large , broad teeth . Allosaurus was itself a potential food item to other carnivores , as illustrated by an Allosaurus pubic foot marked by the teeth of another theropod , probably Ceratosaurus or Torvosaurus . The location of the bone in the body ( along the bottom margin of the torso and partially shielded by the legs ) , and the fact that it was among the most massive in the skeleton , indicates that the Allosaurus was being scavenged . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The wealth of Allosaurus fossils , from nearly all ages of individuals , allows scientists to study how the animal grew and how long its lifespan may have been . Remains may reach as far back in the lifespan as eggs — crushed eggs from Colorado have been suggested as those of Allosaurus . Based on histological analysis of limb bones , bone deposition appears to stop at around 22 to 28 years , which is comparable to that of other large theropods like Tyrannosaurus . From the same analysis , its maximum growth appears to have been at age 15 , with an estimated growth rate of about 150 kilograms ( 330 lb ) per year . 
 Medullary bone tissue ( <unk> derived , ephemeral , mineralization located inside the medulla of the long bones in gravid female birds ) has been reported in at least one Allosaurus specimen , a shin bone from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Quarry . Today , this bone tissue is only formed in female birds that are laying eggs , as it is used to supply calcium to shells . Its presence in the Allosaurus individual has been used to establish sex and show it had reached reproductive age . However , other studies have called into question some cases of medullary bone in dinosaurs , including this Allosaurus individual . Data from extant birds suggested that the medullary bone in this Allosaurus individual may have been the result of a bone pathology instead . However , with the confirmation of medullary tissue indicating gender in a specimen of Tyrannosaurus , it may be possible to ascertain whether or not the Allosaurus in question was indeed female . 
 The discovery of a juvenile specimen with a nearly complete hindlimb shows that the legs were relatively longer in juveniles , and the lower segments of the leg ( shin and foot ) were relatively longer than the thigh . These differences suggest that younger Allosaurus were faster and had different hunting strategies than adults , perhaps chasing small prey as juveniles , then becoming ambush hunters of large prey upon adulthood . The thigh bone became thicker and wider during growth , and the cross @-@ section less circular , as muscle attachments shifted , muscles became shorter , and the growth of the leg slowed . These changes imply that juvenile legs has less predictable stresses compared with adults , which would have moved with more regular forward progression . Conversely , the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically , increasing in size without changing in proportion . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Paleontologists accept Allosaurus as an active predator of large animals . There is dramatic evidence for allosaur attacks on Stegosaurus , including an Allosaurus tail vertebra with a partially healed puncture wound that fits a Stegosaurus tail spike , and a Stegosaurus neck plate with a U @-@ shaped wound that correlates well with an Allosaurus snout . Sauropods seem to be likely candidates as both live prey and as objects of scavenging , based on the presence of scrapings on sauropod bones fitting allosaur teeth well and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones . However , as Gregory Paul noted in 1988 , Allosaurus was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods , unless it hunted in packs , as it had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth , and was greatly outweighed by contemporaneous sauropods . Another possibility is that it preferred to hunt juveniles instead of fully grown adults . Research in the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century may have found other solutions to this question . Robert T. Bakker , comparing Allosaurus to Cenozoic sabre @-@ toothed carnivorous mammals , found similar adaptations , such as a reduction of jaw muscles and increase in neck muscles , and the ability to open the jaws extremely wide . Although Allosaurus did not have sabre teeth , Bakker suggested another mode of attack that would have used such neck and jaw adaptations : the short teeth in effect became small serrations on a saw @-@ like cutting edge running the length of the upper jaw , which would have been driven into prey . This type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey , with the goal of weakening the victim . 
 Similar conclusions were drawn by another study using finite element analysis on an Allosaurus skull . According to their biomechanical analysis , the skull was very strong but had a relatively small bite force . By using jaw muscles only , it could produce a bite force of 805 to 2 @,@ 148 N , less than the values for alligators ( 13 @,@ 000 N ) , lions ( 4 @,@ 167 N ) , and leopards ( 2 @,@ 268 N ) , but the skull could withstand nearly 55 @,@ 500 N of vertical force against the tooth row . The authors suggested that Allosaurus used its skull like a hatchet against prey , attacking open @-@ mouthed , slashing flesh with its teeth , and tearing it away without splintering bones , unlike Tyrannosaurus , which is thought to have been capable of damaging bones . They also suggested that the architecture of the skull could have permitted the use of different strategies against different prey ; the skull was light enough to allow attacks on smaller and more agile ornithopods , but strong enough for high @-@ impact ambush attacks against larger prey like stegosaurids and sauropods . Their interpretations were challenged by other researchers , who found no modern analogues to a hatchet attack and considered it more likely that the skull was strong to compensate for its open construction when absorbing the stresses from struggling prey . The original authors noted that Allosaurus itself has no modern equivalent , that the tooth row is well @-@ suited to such an attack , and that articulations in the skull cited by their detractors as problematic actually helped protect the palate and lessen stress . Another possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like Allosaurus were " flesh grazers " which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods that were sufficient to sustain the predator so it would not have needed to expend the effort to kill the prey outright . This strategy would also potentially have allowed the prey to recover and be fed upon in a similar way later . An additional suggestion notes that ornithopods were the most common available dinosaurian prey , and that allosaurs may have subdued them by using an attack similar to that of modern big cats : grasping the prey with their forelimbs , and then making multiple bites on the throat to crush the trachea . This is compatible with other evidence that the forelimbs were strong and capable of restraining prey . Studies done by Stephen <unk> et al. from the University of Bristol also indicate Allosaurus could open its jaws quite wide and sustain considerable muscle force . When compared with Tyrannosaurus and the <unk> <unk> in the same study , it was found that Allosaurus had a wider gape than either ; the animal was capable of opening its jaws to a 79 degree angle . The findings also indicate that large carnivorous dinosaurs , like modern carnivores , had wider jaw gapes than herbivores . 
 A biomechanical study published in 2013 by Eric Snively and colleagues found that Allosaurus had an unusually low attachment point on the skull for the longissimus capitis <unk> neck muscle compared to other theropods such as Tyrannosaurus . This would have allowed the animal to make rapid and forceful vertical movements with the skull . The authors found that vertical strikes as proposed by Bakker and Rayfield are consistent with the animal 's capabilities . They also found that the animal probably processed carcasses by vertical movements in a similar manner to falcons , such as kestrels : the animal could have gripped prey with the skull and feet , then pulled back and up to remove flesh . This differs from the prey @-@ handling envisioned for tyrannosaurids , which probably tore flesh with lateral shakes of the skull , similar to crocodilians . In addition , Allosaurus was able to " move its head and neck around relatively rapidly and with considerable control " , at the cost of power . 
 Other aspects of feeding include the eyes , arms , and legs . The shape of the skull of Allosaurus limited potential binocular vision to 20 ° of width , slightly less than that of modern crocodilians . As with crocodilians , this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks . The arms , compared with those of other theropods , were suited for both grasping prey at a distance or clutching it close , and the articulation of the claws suggests that they could have been used to hook things . Finally , the top speed of Allosaurus has been estimated at 30 to 55 kilometers per hour ( 19 to 34 miles per hour ) . 
 Allosaurus could have also used a bone saw technique in which the carnivore would shake its head back and forth vertically and use its serrated teeth to slice through the thick skin and bones of dead animals . It is even possible that all carnosaurs could saw through bone , but at the moment , it is just a hypothesis . 
 A new study on Allosaurus ' skull and how it worked has deemed the hatchet jaw attack unlikely since the animal would be wasting great amounts of energy with each bite . It seems more likely that Allosaurus hunted prey like any typical carnosaur by ripping great chunks of flesh from the animal and letting it bleed to death . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 It has been speculated since the 1970s that Allosaurus preyed on sauropods and other large dinosaurs by hunting in groups . Such a depiction is common in <unk> and popular dinosaur literature . Robert T. Bakker has extended social behavior to parental care , and has interpreted shed allosaur teeth and chewed bones of large prey animals as evidence that adult allosaurs brought food to lairs for their young to eat until they were grown , and prevented other carnivores from scavenging on the food . However , there is actually little evidence of gregarious behavior in theropods , and social interactions with members of the same species would have included antagonistic encounters , as shown by injuries to gastralia and bite wounds to skulls ( the pathologic lower jaw named Labrosaurus ferox is one such possible example ) . Such head @-@ biting may have been a way to establish dominance in a pack or to settle territorial disputes . 
 Although Allosaurus may have hunted in packs , it has been argued that Allosaurus and other theropods had largely aggressive interactions instead of cooperative interactions with other members of their own species . The study in question noted that cooperative hunting of prey much larger than an individual predator , as is commonly inferred for theropod dinosaurs , is rare among vertebrates in general , and modern diapsid carnivores ( including lizards , crocodiles , and birds ) very rarely cooperate to hunt in such a way . Instead , they are typically territorial and will kill and cannibalize intruders of the same species , and will also do the same to smaller individuals that attempt to eat before they do when aggregated at feeding sites . According to this interpretation , the accumulation of remains of multiple Allosaurus individuals at the same site , e.g. in the Cleveland – Lloyd Quarry , are not due to pack hunting , but to the fact that Allosaurus individuals were drawn together to feed on other disabled or dead allosaurs , and were sometimes killed in the process . This could explain the high proportion of juvenile and subadult allosaurs present , as juveniles and subadults are disproportionally killed at modern group feeding sites of animals like crocodiles and Komodo dragons . The same interpretation applies to Bakker 's lair sites . There is some evidence for cannibalism in Allosaurus , including Allosaurus shed teeth found among rib fragments , possible tooth marks on a shoulder blade , and cannibalized allosaur skeletons among the bones at Bakker 's lair sites . 
 = = = Brain and senses = = = 
 The brain of Allosaurus , as interpreted from spiral CT scanning of an endocast , was more consistent with crocodilian brains than those of the other living archosaurs , birds . The structure of the vestibular apparatus indicates that the skull was held nearly horizontal , as opposed to strongly tipped up or down . The structure of the inner ear was like that of a crocodilian , and so Allosaurus probably could have heard lower frequencies best , and would have had trouble with subtle sounds . The olfactory bulbs were large and seem to have been well suited for detecting odors , although the area for evaluating smells was relatively small . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 In 2001 , Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior . Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by the behavior of the animal than other kinds of injury . Stress fractures and tendon avulsions occurring in the forelimb have special behavioral significance since while injuries to the feet could be caused by running or migration , resistant prey items are the most probable source of injuries to the hand . Allosaurus was one of only two theropods examined in the study to exhibit a tendon avulsion , and in both cases the avulsion occurred on the forelimb . When the researchers looked for stress fractures , they found that Allosaurus had a significantly greater number of stress fractures than Albertosaurus , Ornithomimus or <unk> . Of the 47 hand bones the researchers studied , 3 were found to contain stress fractures . Of the feet , 281 bones were studied and 17 found to have stress fractures . The stress fractures in the foot bones " were distributed to the proximal phalanges " and occurred across all three weight @-@ bearing toes in " statistically indistinguishable " numbers . Since the lower end of the third metatarsal would have contacted the ground first while an allosaur was running it would have borne the most stress . If the allosaurs ' stress fractures were caused by damage accumulating while walking or running this bone should have experience more stress fractures than the others . The lack of such a bias in the examined Allosaurus fossils indicates an origin for the stress fractures from a source other than running . The authors conclude that these fractures occurred during interaction with prey , like an allosaur trying to hold struggling prey with its feet . The abundance of stress fractures and avulsion injuries in Allosaurus provide evidence for " very active " predation @-@ based rather than scavenging diets . 
 The left scapula and fibula of an Allosaurus fragilis specimen catalogued as USNM <unk> are both pathological , both probably due to healed fractures . The specimen USNM <unk> preserved several pathological gastralia which preserve evidence of healed fractures near their middle . Some of the fractures were poorly healed and " formed <unk> . " A specimen with a fractured rib was recovered from the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Quarry . Another specimen had fractured ribs and fused vertebrae near the end of the tail . An apparent subadult male Allosaurus fragilis was reported to have extensive pathologies , with a total of fourteen separate injuries . The specimen MOR 693 had pathologies on five ribs , the sixth neck vertebra the third eighth and thirteenth back vertebrae , the second tail vertebra and its chevron , the gastralia right scapula , manual phalanx I left ilium metatarsals III and V , the first phalanx of the third toe and the third phalanx of the second . The ilium had " a large hole ... caused by a blow from above " .The near end of the first phalanx of the third toe was afflicted by an involucrum . 
 Other pathologies reported in Allosaurus include : Willow breaks in two ribs . Healed fractures in the humerus and radius . Distortion of joint surfaces in the foot possibly due to osteoarthritis or developmental issues . <unk> along the <unk> surface of a tibia . Distortions of the joint surfaces of the tail vertebrae possibly due to <unk> or developmental issues . " [ E ] <unk> ' neoplastic ' ankylosis of caudals , " possibly due to physical trauma as well as the fusion of chevrons to centra . <unk> of vertebral centra near the end of the tail . Amputation of a chevron and foot bone , both possibly a result of bites . " [ E ] <unk> <unk> " in the first phalanx of the third toe . Lesions similar to those caused by osteomyelitis in two scapulae . Bone spurs in a premaxilla , ungual , and two metacarpals . <unk> in a pedal phalanx possibly attributable to an infectious disease . A metacarpal with a round depressed fracture . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Along with Tyrannosaurus , Allosaurus has come to represent the quintessential large , carnivorous dinosaur in western popular culture . It is a common dinosaur in American museums , due in particular to the excavations at the Cleveland @-@ Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry ; by 1976 , as a result of cooperative operations , 38 museums in eight countries on three continents had Cleveland @-@ Lloyd allosaur material or casts . Allosaurus is the official state fossil of Utah . 
 Allosaurus has been depicted in popular culture since the early years of the 20th century . It is top predator in both Arthur Conan Doyle 's 1912 novel , The Lost World , and its 1925 film adaptation , the first full @-@ length motion picture to feature dinosaurs . Allosaurus was used as the starring dinosaur of the 1956 film The Beast of Hollow Mountain , and the 1969 film The Valley of Gwangi , two genre combinations of living dinosaurs with Westerns . In The Valley of Gwangi , Gwangi is billed as an Allosaurus , although Ray Harryhausen based his model for the creature on Charles R. Knight 's depiction of a Tyrannosaurus . Harryhausen sometimes confuses the two , stating in a DVD interview " They 're both meat eaters , they 're both tyrants ... one was just a bit larger than the other . " Allosaurus appeared in the second episode of the 1999 BBC television series Walking with Dinosaurs and the follow @-@ up special The Ballad of Big Al , which speculated on the life of the " Big Al " specimen , based on scientific evidence from the numerous injuries and pathologies in its skeleton . Allosaurus also made an appearance in the Discovery Channel series Dinosaur Revolution . Its depiction in this series was based upon a specimen with a smashed lower jaw that was uncovered by paleontologist Thomas Holtz . Allosaurus also appears in the 2011 BBC docu @-@ mini @-@ series Planet Dinosaur in the episode " Fight for Life " . 
 = The Boat Race 2012 = 
 The 158th Boat Race took place on 7 April 2012 . Held annually , The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames in London . Despite Cambridge having the heavier crew , Oxford were pre @-@ race favourites having had a successful preparation period , including a victory over Leander . Cambridge won the toss and chose to start on the Surrey side of the river . Partway through , with the boats level , the race was temporarily halted to avoid injury to protester Trenton Oldfield , who swam in front of the two crews . After the race was restarted , one of the Oxford crew suffered irreparable damage to his blade following a clash of oars with the Cambridge boat , ending Oxford 's chances of victory . The race was eventually won by Cambridge by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , in a consolidated time of 17 minutes 23 seconds . 
 Immediately after completing the race , a member of the Oxford crew collapsed , but later recovered . Oldfield was later jailed for six months for causing a public nuisance , and as a result of the disruption , security for subsequent Boat Races was increased . The reserve race was won by Oxford 's Isis in a record time , while the Women 's Boat Race was won by Cambridge . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the 2012 race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by four lengths in the previous year 's race . However , Cambridge held the overall lead , with 80 victories to Oxford 's 76 . Oxford were pre @-@ race favourites , having beaten Leander , Molesey Boat Club and a German national under @-@ 23 crew in the previous weeks . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames Tideway , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat , has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Thames , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The trial crews competed against one another on 13 December 2011 on The Championship Course . Oxford 's boats were titled Hell and High Water , while Cambridge 's two crews rowed in Cloak and Dagger . Hell and Dagger won their respective races . The official crews were announced at the weigh @-@ in , held on 5 March 2012 at a venue nearby the London 2012 Olympic Stadium . For the first time in Cambridge 's Boat Race history , their boat featured just one British oarsman , Mike Thorp , who , along with stroke David Nelson and Oxford 's number five Karl Hudspith , were the only participants who had featured in the 2011 race . The remainder of the Cambridge crew comprised three Americans , two Australians , a German , a New Zealander and cox Ed Bosson , another Briton . The Oxford crew consisted of a British cox , four British oarsmen , two Americans , a German and a Dutch rower . 
 The Cambridge oarsmen weighed an average of 7 @.@ 9 kilograms ( 17 lb ) more than their Oxford counterparts , with Cambridge 's cox Ed Bosson outweighing Oxford 's Zoe de Toledo by 6 kilograms ( 13 lb ) . Despite the fact that heavier Oxbridge crews were traditionally more successful , Oxford boat club president Hudspith , himself part of the successful 2011 Dark Blue crew which defeated a heavier Cambridge crew , downplayed the disparity , " It 's a big difference but it 's a very long race and you have to have the power to carry that weight down the course " . 
 = = Races = = 
 = = = Women 's and reserves = = = 
 The women 's race , the 66th meeting of Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club and Oxford University Women 's Boat Club , was held at the Henley Boat Races on 25 March . In a close race , Cambridge won by a quarter of a length , in a time of 6 minutes , 38 seconds . Oxford 's Osiris won the women 's reserve race against Cambridge 's Blondie . 
 The reserve race , between Oxford 's Isis and Cambridge 's Goldie , was held thirty minutes before the main race , at 1 : 45pm . Goldie won the toss and elected to start on the Surrey station . Despite rating higher and taking an early lead , Goldie was caught by Isis between Fulham Football Club and Hammersmith Bridge at Barn Elms . Oxford 's reserve boat held a half @-@ length lead by the Mile Post , and extended their lead to over a length by Hammersmith Bridge . Isis continued to pull away and completed the race in a record time of 16 minutes 41 seconds , beating the previous best by seven seconds , five lengths ahead of Cambridge . 
 = = = Main race = = = 
 The race , sponsored by Xchanging , commenced at 2 : 15pm , with conditions overcast and a light rain , and a light wind . The umpire for the race was John Garrett , who had rowed for the Light Blues three times in the 1980s . Cambridge won the toss and chose the Surrey station , leaving Oxford with the longer outside bend from the Middlesex station . The crews were level at Fulham Football Club and Hammersmith Bridge but on the approach to Chiswick Pier , assistant umpire Matthew Pinsent spotted a person in the water and alerted umpire John Garrett , who stopped the race . Trenton Oldfield , a protestor against class elitism , had swum in front of the boats as they headed into the final bend , and narrowly avoided being struck . A representative of the Metropolitan Police noted : " They almost took his head off " . It was the first time the race had been stopped since 2001 , and only the second time in the history of the event . Oldfield was pulled from the water onto the umpire 's boat , handcuffed and arrested . 
 The race was restarted some thirty minutes later , after Garrett had been satisfied that both crews were located as close as possible to where the disruption took place , in rough water caused by the flotilla following the race . Within a minute of the restart , the crews drifted together with Oxford being warned by Garrett , causing a clash of oars which resulted in Oxford 's number six , Hanno <unk> , breaking the shaft of his blade in half . This effectively ended the race as a contest , as Cambridge rowed away from Oxford to win by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths . Cambridge 's winning time was recorded by finish judge Ben Kent as 17 minutes 23 seconds , the consolidation of the times that the crews actually rowed . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Immediately after the race , Oxford 's bow man , Alex Woods , collapsed and lost consciousness . After receiving treatment on the bank of the river , he was taken to Charing Cross Hospital , where he made a complete recovery . Oxford 's coach Sean Bowden suggested that the loss of one of Oxford 's blades had driven Woods to push himself " beyond his limits " . As a result of the disruption and the concern for Woods ' condition , the traditional award ceremony was cancelled . Woods later apologised to the Cambridge crew and coach for his collapse that " prevented their celebrations " while thanking them for their " sportsmanlike behaviour " . Cambridge boat club president Nelson said " I feel bad . Finishing the race there was a lot of raw emotion and some of the celebrations seem pathetic in retrospect " while his coach Steve Trapmore commented " it 's not the way anyone wants to take away the win " . Oxford cox Zoe de Toledo made a request that the race be re @-@ rowed as a result of the broken blade , but the appeal was dismissed by umpire Garrett , who said " I listened to Oxford ’ s complaint but I explained I did not see the clash as being the reason for the eventual result " . 
 The Observer described the race as " one of the most bizarre and dramatic in the competition 's history " , while The Daily Telegraph suggested the event had been " ruined " and described Cambridge 's victory as " hollow " . British Olympic Association chairman and former Blue Colin Moynihan claimed that the race was " effectively destroyed ... by the actions of a crazy guy who was hugely putting his life at risk " . 
 = = = Trenton Oldfield = = = 
 Oldfield , an Australian national , said he was making " a protest against inequalities in British society , government cuts , reductions in civil liberties and a culture of elitism " . Oxford number two , William Zeng , denounced Oldfield and described him as " a mockery of a man " , while Oxford boat club president Karl Hudspith tweeted " my team went through seven months of hell , this was the culmination of our careers and [ Oldfield ] took it from us " . Educated at the Sydney Church of England Grammar School , the University of Sydney and the London School of Economics , and Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts , Oldfield tweeted the day after the race , " Having been deep within elite institutions I have a very good understanding of them . I protest their injustices – ask anyone that knows me " . On his blog , Oldfield compared his actions to those of Emily Davison , the suffragette killed after stepping in front of the King 's horse at the Epsom Derby in 1913 . Despite later stating he had some sympathy for both the rowers and spectators , he said he had no regrets and that he " would have felt less of a man " had he not made the protest . In October 2012 , Oldfield was jailed for six months for causing a public nuisance and ordered to pay £ 750 costs . In June 2013 , he was refused leave to remain in the United Kingdom , the Home Office claiming his presence there was not " conducive to the public good " . Oldfield , whose wife is from India , appealed on the grounds that she would be threatened in Australia , and in December 2013 , the deportation order was overturned . Security for the 2013 race was increased as a result of Oldfield 's actions , with Royal Marines , additional stewards and the Metropolitan Police Marine Policing Unit in attendance . 
 = North Bank Depot Buildings = 
 The North Bank Depot Buildings , located in central Portland , Oregon , United States , are a pair of buildings formerly used as a freight warehouse and passenger terminal for the Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway ( SP & S ) . Formed in 1905 , the SP & S was commonly known as the North Bank Road ( or North Bank road , " road " being short for railroad ) during the period in which these buildings were in use . The Portland buildings ' passenger facilities were also used by the Oregon Electric Railway after that railway was acquired by the SP & S. Located in what is now known as the Pearl District , the buildings were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1996 . They were in use by the SP & S and its successor , Burlington Northern Railroad , from 1908 until the 1980s . Only the east building was used as a passenger station , and this usage lasted from 1908 until 1931 . 
 = = Location = = 
 The two matching , two @-@ story brick buildings face one another on opposite sides of NW 11th Avenue immediately north of Hoyt Street , the east building being at 1029 NW Hoyt Street and the west at 1101 NW Hoyt . Historically , they were known as the East and West <unk> of the Spokane , Portland & Seattle Railway . In references to passenger services , the east building was formally referred to as the North Bank Station ( or North Bank Passenger Station ) , but alternatively was known by various other names , including North Bank depot , Hoyt Street depot , Hoyt Street terminal , 11th & Hoyt Streets depot , 10th & Hoyt depot , or similar . Each building measures 50 feet ( 15 m ) by 200 feet ( 61 m ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The SP & S was formed jointly by the Northern Pacific Railway ( NP ) and Great Northern Railway in 1905 , originally as the Portland & Seattle Railway , to build and ultimately operate new railroad lines connecting Portland with Seattle and with Spokane , but was renamed Spokane , Portland & Seattle Railway in early 1908 , before opening any track sections . The planned new railroad was commonly referred to as the " North Bank road " ( road being short for railroad or railroad line ) , or North Bank line , because the Seattle line would follow the Columbia River 's north bank as far as Kelso and the Spokane line would also follow the north bank , running east from Vancouver . East from Portland , the south bank of the Columbia already had a rail line , owned by the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company ( later absorbed by Union Pacific Railroad ) . 
 By September 1905 , Northern Pacific had already acquired the property for the future terminal buildings and rail yard — a strip of land two blocks wide , from 10th to 12th avenues , and stretching north from Hoyt Street to the Willamette River . Construction of the railroad itself began in early 1906 . The new company needed freight storage and handling facilities in Portland , and to this end it built the two " freight houses " at 11th Avenue and Hoyt Street , in 1908 . SP & S passenger train service was originally expected to terminate at Union Station , located about 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 490 m ) to the east , but lengthy negotiations between SP & S and Union Station 's operator , the Northern Pacific Terminal Company , eventually reached an impasse . The Terminal Company was only partially owned by SP & S parent Northern Pacific Railway , and partially by competing railroads . With only a few weeks to go until passenger service to Portland was to be started , it was reported that SP & S would instead equip one of its new freight houses for use as a passenger station , in place of access to Union Station , at least temporarily . 
 = = Period of active use = = 
 Passenger trains began using the new station — the east building , at 1029 NW Hoyt Street — in November 1908 . The west building , used exclusively for freight , came into use at the same time , as SP & S initiated its operations in Portland . Trains operating from this station served routes within the Pacific Northwest , including to Seattle , Spokane and Seaside via Astoria . The Portland – Spokane train , named the Inland Empire Express , connected in Spokane with Great Northern 's Oriental Limited to and from Chicago and was advertised as the " Portland – Chicago " service . 
 SP & S began shifting some of its passenger trains to Union Station in 1920 , and additional trains were shifted in 1922 , after new platforms and train sheds were constructed at Union Station for this purpose . However , only some trains used Union Station , including the long @-@ distance services to Chicago ( which began carrying through sleeping cars , Portland – Chicago , at this time ) , while other trains continued to use the Hoyt Street station for a time . SP & S inaugurated passenger service between Portland and <unk> in March 1923 , with two round trips per day ; a passenger @-@ only train ran to and from Union Station , but a mixed freight @-@ passenger train operated instead from the Hoyt Street station . 
 In 1912 , Oregon Electric Railway ( OE ) interurban passenger trains began serving the North Bank Depot , after that company laid new track through downtown Portland along Salmon Street and 10th Avenue to reach the terminal . OE was owned by SP & S ( acquired in 1910 ) . Electric interurbans departed from this station on journeys west to Hillsboro and Forest Grove , and south through the Willamette Valley to Salem and Eugene . 
 The last OE service to this station operated on June 19 , 1931 , after the company requested , and received , permission from the Interstate Commerce Commission to abandon that section of route because of declining ridership and worsening traffic congestion . The service was cut back to Front and Jefferson streets the following day , and OE moved its ticket office to that location . The tracks along 10th and Salmon streets were abandoned and soon removed . Just two years later , in May 1933 , the Oregon Electric discontinued all its remaining passenger service , becoming exclusively a freight railroad . 
 SP & S was merged with other railroads in 1970 to form Burlington Northern Railroad ( BN ) . The former North Bank Depot Buildings continued to be used by the railroad for freight purposes until the 1980s , and then were vacant for a time , until at least the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = Preservation and conversion = = 
 During the course of the 1980s , usage of the railroad yards adjacent to and north of the two now @-@ Burlington Northern @-@ owned warehouses declined to the point of their being nearly vacant . Redevelopment of the area as a mixed @-@ use neighborhood with residential and retail uses was envisioned , and in 1989 , the Portland Planning Commission approved a rezoning of a 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) tract , along with a master plan to foster such change . By this time , the Glacier Park Company , a property @-@ development subsidiary of Burlington Resources , had taken over the former North Bank Depot Buildings from BN , and it was reported that the new master plan for the area would include renovation of these two Hoyt Street warehouses . 
 In November 1990 , Glacier Park sold the 40 @-@ acre site to a Portland @-@ based development company , Prendergast & Associates . It was determined that extensive clean @-@ up of contaminated soil from decades of industrial use would be needed before most redevelopment could proceed . Prendergast & Associates were predicting an approximately 20 @-@ year timeframe for redevelopment of the entire area of former railyards and associated buildings . The two former @-@ SP & S <unk> were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1996 , as the North Bank Depot Buildings . At that time , they were vacant and had not yet been renovated . In the late 1990s , they were renovated and converted for residential use . 
 = Hell – Sunnan Line = 
 The Hell – Sunnan Line ( Norwegian : Hell – <unk> ) is a 105 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 65 mi ) railway line between Hell , Stjørdal and Sunnan , Steinkjer in Nord @-@ Trøndelag , Norway . The name is no longer in official use and the line is now considered part of the Nordland Line . The Hell – Sunnan Line branches from the Meråker Line at Hell and runs on the east shore of the Trondheimsfjord passing through the municipalities of Stjørdal , Levanger , Verdal , Inderøy and Steinkjer . 
 The Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) started construction in 1899 and the first part of the line , from Hell to Stjørdalshalsen , opened on 1 February 1902 . The railway opened to Levanger on 29 October 1902 , to <unk> on 1 November 1904 and to Sunnan on 15 November 1905 . Sunnan was chosen as terminus because of its location on the southern end of the lake of Snåsavatnet . The line was further extended to Snåsa in 1926 , after which it has been classified as part of the Nordland Line . The railway is the most heavily trafficked non @-@ electrified line in Norway , with the Trøndelag Commuter Rail running south of Steinkjer . It is also used by intercity passenger and freight trains . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Hell – Sunnan Line constitutes the section of the Nordland Line between Hell , Stjørdal and Sunnan , Steinkjer . At the time of the line 's opening , it was 105 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 65 @.@ 4 mi ) long . The railway is single track , standard gauge , non @-@ electrified , and equipped with centralized traffic control , partial automatic train control , and GSM @-@ R. The railway line is owned and maintained by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 Starting in the south at Hell Station , which is located 31 @.@ 54 kilometers ( 19 @.@ 60 mi ) from Trondheim Central Station ( Trondheim S ) , the Meråker Line branches from the Nordland Line . The latter crosses the river of Stjørdalselva on a 149 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 489 ft ) truss bridge . It passes the closed Sandferhus Station before reaching Trondheim Airport Station ( 33 @.@ 17 km or 20 @.@ 61 mi from Trondheim S ) , which serves as an airport rail link and is situated below the terminal of Trondheim Airport , Værnes . Previously there was a 3 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) spur from Sandferhus to Værnes and Øyanmoen . The mainline continues under the airport 's taxiway and runway in the two Værnes Tunnels , the latter which is 150 meters ( 490 ft ) long , after which the line reaches Stjørdal Station ( 34 @.@ 67 km or 21 @.@ 54 mi ) . 
 The line continues past the closed Vold Station , which was built to serve a mill , to Skatval , through which the line makes a semi @-@ circular detour . Here it serves Skatval Station ( 41 @.@ 90 km or 26 @.@ 04 mi ) and the closed Alstad Station . Alstad was previously an important station as it was conveniently placed for boat access from <unk> . Located at 89 @.@ 6 meters ( 294 ft ) above mean sea level ( AMSL ) , it was the highest elevated station on the line . The line then enters the municipality of Levanger , where it first reaches the closed Langstein Station and then the closed Vudu Station . After Vudu , the line reaches its highest elevation of 99 meters ( 325 ft ) when it crosses over European Road 6 ( E6 ) . The line then reaches Åsen Station ( 61 @.@ 40 km or 38 @.@ 15 mi ) before continuing past the closed <unk> Station to <unk> Station ( 69 @.@ 65 km or 43 @.@ 28 mi ) . 
 Before reaching Skogn Station ( 76 @.@ 01 km or 47 @.@ 23 mi ) , a 2 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) spur branches off to <unk> , serving Norske Skog Skogn . It mainline continues past Eggen Station and over the E6 , past the closed <unk> Levanger Station , which served Levanger Hospital , before reaching Levanger Station ( 83 @.@ 90 km or 52 @.@ 13 mi ) . It then crosses the river <unk> on a 27 @.@ 4 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 90 ft ) bridge . It passes the closed Elberg Station and to reach HiNT Station ( 69 @.@ 65 km or 43 @.@ 28 mi ) , which serves the Levanger campus of Nord @-@ Trøndelag University College . 
 The line continues past the closed Østborg Station and Rinnan Station before entering the municipality of Verdal . After Bergsgrav Station ( 93 @.@ 70 km or 58 @.@ 22 mi ) , which serves the neighborhood of <unk> , a spur branches off to Verdal 's industrial area . The mainline crosses the river of <unk> on a 210 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 690 ft ) truss bridge before reaching Verdal Station ( 96 @.@ 23 km or 59 @.@ 79 mi ) . It is followed by the closed Fleskhus Station and Bjørga Station before entering the municipality of Inderøy at the 103 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 338 ft ) <unk> Tunnel . The only station in Inderøy is Røra Station ( 105 @.@ 47 km or 65 @.@ 54 mi ) ; however the line does not enter Steinkjer before passing through the 385 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 263 ft ) <unk> Tunnel . 
 After passing the closed Vollan Station , the line reaches Sparbu Station ( 112 @.@ 93 km or 70 @.@ 17 mi ) . It then passes the closed Mære Station and Vist Station and crosses over the 46 @-@ meter ( 151 ft ) bridge over <unk> to reach Steinkjer Station ( 125 @.@ 50 km or 77 @.@ 98 mi ) . The line runs over the river of Steinkjerelva on a 96 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 315 ft ) truss bridge . Then come two spurs , to Eggebogen and Byafossen . The line continues past the closed Byafossen Station and Fossemvatnet Station and terminates at the closed Sunnan Station ( 1 @,@ 136 @.@ 66 km or 706 @.@ 29 mi ) . The Nordland Line continues over a bridge across Snåsavatnet . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Planning of a railway to connect Trøndelag and Jämtland , Sweden , started in 1869 , with one of the proposals being to build a line from Trondheim via Verdal to Sweden . However , surveys along the Verdal alternative deemed it unsuitable , and instead the line was built via Stjørdalen and Meråker . To conform with Swedish standards , the line was built with standard gauge instead of the more common narrow gauge . The Meråker Line opened on 22 July 1882 . 
 In Stjørdal , controversy arose over the route . The river of Stjørdalselva creates a barrier just north of Hell , which made it cheaper to build the line on the south shore of the river to Hegra . However , the major population center was located at Stjørdalshalsen , on the north shore of the river . Locally , there were many protests against the line bypassing such a large town , but the cost of the bridge made Parliament choose the southern alternative . This gave residents in the town a considerably longer route to the train , since they had to cross the river to get access to the railway . This decreased the railway 's ability to compete with the steam ships and thus the overall profitability of the line . With the arrival of the railway , transport to Trondheim became much easier than to Stjørdalshalsen and Levanger , helping Trondheim grow as a regional center . 
 The Nordland Line was first publicly proposed by Ole Tobias Olsen in a letter to the editor in Morgenbladet in 1872 , where he argued for a railway between Trondheim and his home county of Nordland . The same year , Nord @-@ Trøndelag County Council voted in favor to start planning of a railway between Trondheim and Namsos . The county council appointed a railway committee in 1875 , who on 23 August 1876 published a report to encourage national authorities to consider the line , which resulted in surveying starting in 1877 . On 27 April 1881 , the committee made its recommendation to the county council and ceased its work . No planning was done the next three years , until three county councilors , Vilhelm Andreas <unk> , Peter Theodor Holst and Bernhard Øverland , made a new proposal . However , it was not until 1889 that the county council appointed a new railway committee , which was led by <unk> . 
 In 1891 , the county 's road committee , led by Øverland , sent an official request to the railway committee , asking for details about their plans , so the appropriate roads could be planned . This spurred the committees work and a cooperation with Nordland County Council was initiated to increase the projects priority by national politicians . On 2 March 1896 , with 87 against 27 votes , Parliament passed legislation approving a railway from Hell to Sunnan . Costs were estimated at 8 @.@ 75 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , of which 15 percent was to be financed with local grants and the remainder by the state . Construction was scheduled to take 15 years . The decision initially called for the railway to be built in two stages , with the split at Rinnan in Levanger — the site of the military camp <unk> . Final approval of construction was made by Parliament on 11 June 1898 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 At Hell , there arose a disagreement about where the Hell – Sunnan Line should branch from the Meråker Line . Initial proposals were to place the branch from a location before Hell Station , thus forcing trains to back up from Hell Station before continuing northwards . The station building at Hell was also too small for the increased traffic , so it was moved to Sunnan Station and a new station building , with capacity for 25 employees , was built at Hell . In Skatval , there was a controversy as to whether the station should be built at Mæhre or Alstad . Mæhre ( later Skatval ) had support from the municipal council and was closer to the larger share of the area 's population . However , the military wanted Alstad , as it was a rally point for the military in case of a Swedish invasion , and gave easy waterway access from <unk> . The station was placed at Mæhre , while a passing loop was built at Alstad . 
 The most difficult work was through <unk> , near Åsen . The ground consisted of quick clay , which the railway was to pass through in a trench . On 5 May 1900 , a landslide filled the trench , killing three navvies . Past the lake of <unk> , there was also weak soil mechanics , resulting in the need for piling . One worker was killed after getting hit by a piling log . In Levanger , there was debate as to whether the station should be on the west or east side of the tracks , with the decision falling on the west side . The 3 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) section from Hell to Stjørdal started revenue service on 1 February 1902 . The 49 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 30 @.@ 7 mi ) section from Stjørdalshalsen to Levanger was officially opened on 27 October 1902 , with ordinary services starting on 29 October . 
 Construction on the line 's second part , from Levanger to Sunnan , started in 1901 . Part of the reason for the early start was to help employ older navvies who were working on the southern section during the summer . By early 1904 , the right @-@ of @-@ way to Fleskhus was completed and the laying of tracks could begin . The bridge over <unk> was built using 473 tonnes ( 466 long tons ; 521 short tons ) of stone , which had to be transported 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from <unk> in Levanger . The superstructure was built by Vulkan of Oslo and was installed between 9 September and 27 November 1903 . 
 In <unk> there again arose a debate over which side of the tracks the station should be on . The townspeople wanted it on the west side , which was on the same side as the town center , while farmers wanted it east side , which was most accessible from the valley . The result was that the station was placed on the east side . The 12 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 7 mi ) section from Levanger to Verdal was opened on 1 November 1904 , although the station building was not completed until 1905 . At the time there were two trains per direction per day , one passenger train and one post train . 
 For the bridge over <unk> in Verdal , which had a main span of only 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 ft 11 in ) , construction started in April 1903 and was completed on 21 November . The area has <unk> clay , so the bridge needed piling . At Røra , a spur was originally planned to Hylla , but this was discarded late in the planning phase . At <unk> in Inderøy the right @-@ of @-@ way had to be moved because of poor soil mechanics . There were similar issues north of the <unk> Tunnel , forcing the tunnel to be extended and a supporting being built . Construction of the tunnel was performed by 40 men during the winter of 1904 and 1905 . It cost NOK 90 @,@ 179 and took 23 @.@ 9 man @-@ hours per meter to build . 
 In the former municipality of Sparbu , there was a contentious debate over both the route and the location of the station . Although the line was built where it had originally been planned , two alternatives were launched , both which saw the line go further east and higher up in the terrain . At the time both the dairy and store were located at Lein . The current villages of Sparbu and Mære had not been established , and locals wanted the railway to go through Lein , which was the de facto municipal center . However , the alternatives were 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) longer and would run through more rolling terrain , so the engineers insisted on the original route . The plans called for a station at <unk> ( today known as Sparbu ) and at Vist , but many locals instead wanted it at Mære , in part to serve the new Mære Agricultural School . On 5 June 1900 , Parliament voted in favor of only one station , at Mære . However , the decision was reverted by Parliament on 24 April 1901 . 
 A support wall was built at <unk> , just south of Steinkjer , after there was a clay landslide . Construction of the bridge over <unk> , just south of Steinkjer , was performed in 1904 . The superstructure was built by Kværner of Oslo and installed between 11 November and 21 December 1904 . The bridge over Steinkjerelva took up a significant portion of the old river port in Steinkjer , resulting in a spur being built to a new port location . The railway ran right through the town center , forcing 20 houses to be demolished and splitting the town in two . The arrival and route of the railway was described by some locals as vandalism . A counter @-@ proposal which saw the line run further up and cross through <unk> and <unk> — and thus avoid the town itself — was discarded because it would wreck the military camp at <unk> and would be located too far from the port . There was also a major debate as to whether the station should be on the south side or north side of the river . The municipal council voted for the south side with the mayor 's double vote being decisive . Construction of the bridge over Steinkjerelva started in August 1902 and was completed on 7 May 1904 . A proposal to build the bridge as a swing bridge was dropped , forcing the railways to pay NOK 45 @,@ 402 in compensation to companies with facilities upstream . 
 Steinkjer is surrounded by a moraine which had to be traversed with a cutting , 85 meters ( 279 ft ) long and up to 21 meters ( 69 ft ) deep . 125 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 4 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of earthwork was removed , half with a steam shovel , and largely used to build reclaimed land for the railway 's right @-@ of @-@ way through Steinkjer . The official opening of the 40 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 25 @.@ 1 mi ) section between Verdal and Sunnan took place on 14 November 1905 . Revenue service started the following day . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The choice of route through Innherred was largely without much debate , as the line naturally went through all the towns and most of the important villages . Sunnan was a natural place to halt construction , as it is located at the foot of the lake of Snåsavatnet , allowing connection with steam ships . Scheduled services on Snåsavatnet started in 1871 with SS Dina , which was replaced with SS Bonden in 1885 . From 1904 to 1921 , Bonden was supplemented with MS St. Olaf , although SS Bonden remained in corresponding service with the train until 1926 . 
 Even before planning of the Hell – Sunnan Line was completed , there arose disagreement as to the route onwards . In a plan from the 1870s , there was consensus that the towns of Stjørdal , Levanger , Steinkjer and Namsos should receive a line , but there was a disagreement as to the route . The Beitstad Line would run from Steinkjer via Beitstad and <unk> to Namsos and from there to Grong , while the Snåsa Line would run from Sunnan via Snåsa to Grong , with a branch from Grong to Namsos . The Beitstad Line would run through the most densely populated areas , while the Snåsa Line was shorter . Parliament decided on the Snåsa Line in 1900 . The railway was extended from Sunnan to Snåsa Station on 30 October 1926 , with the section from Hell to Sunnan becoming classified as part of the Nordland Line . The railway was completed to Bodø on 7 June 1962 . 
 In 1909 , a station was opened at Fossemvatnet , followed by a station at Fleskhus in 1913 . Mære continued to be the dominant center of Sparbu , so in 1915 , the national authorities offered to build a station there . However , the municipality would not grant the necessary NOK 6 @,@ 300 , so the station was funded with private donations . Construction started in 1916 and Mære Station opened on 1 April 1917 . In the original plans for the railway , a spur was planned from north of Steinkjerelva to Eggebogen in Egge . However , in the parliamentary voting for the line , the spur was removed . In 1915 , a public report criticized the railway for not having sufficient access to a proper port in Steinkjer , as <unk> was located on the river and did not have a deep quay . The municipal council voted in favor of a new quay at Eggebogen on 16 May 1916 , which was completed in 1924 . The 2 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) spur to <unk> opened on 15 August 1927 , having cost NOK 139 @,@ 200 . A station was opened at Østborg in 1923 , at Alstad in 1934 , and at <unk> , Eggen and Bergsgrav in 1938 . 
 In 1940 , a 3 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) spur was built to Værnes Air Station and Øyanmoen . A new , wooden station building was built at Åsen in 1943 and 1944 . The section to Værnes was removed in 1947 . Vudu Station opened in 1950 , followed by Vollan in 1952 and Bjørga and Sandferhus in the following year . From June to October 1953 , a station was in use at Bjørga . From 1957 , NSB started replacing steam trains on the line by introducing Di 3 locomotives . In 1956 , NATO granted funding for an expansion of the runway at Trondheim Airport , Værnes . The easiest way was to extend the runway by building it over the road and railway and into the river . Construction started in 1959 and on 1 June 1960 , the Værnes Tunnel was taken into use . A 2 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) spur was built to <unk> in February 1966 . Two years later , Elberg Station wax opened . Fossemvatnet Station was closed in 1972 . 
 The line received centralized traffic control in four phases : from Trondheim to Stjørdal on 11 January 1976 , to Levanger on 9 January 1977 , to Steinkjer on 6 December 1977 and to Snåsa on 23 November 1984 . Bergsgrav Station was opened on 6 December 1977 . In 1981 , Di 4 @-@ locomotives were introduced . The spur to Øyanmoen was taken out of use and removed in October 1982 . NSB introduced Class 92 diesel multiple units in 1985 , cutting travel time on local services between Steinkjer and Trondheim by 25 minutes . In 1989 , the station building at Sunnan was demolished . In 1989 and 1990 , five stations were closed , consisting on Sandferhus , Vold , Vollan , Vist and Sunnan . 
 On 1 September 1993 , NSB launched the Trøndelag Commuter Rail , of which the main service ran from Steinkjer to Trondheim . The initial plans called to the continued use of the Class 92 rolling stock , but saw change in schedules and the upgrading platforms for NOK 15 million . At the same time , the stations of Alstad , Langstein and Fleskhus were closed . The service from Trondheim to Steinkjer had ten daily round trips . After six months operation , the service had experienced a 40 percent growth in patronage . This was further increased with the opening of Trondheim Airport Station on 15 November 1994 , which cost NOK 24 million . The upgrades to the airport also included a new taxiway , which resulted in second Værnes Tunnel being built . A station was also established to serve Levanger Hospital on 20 December 1995 . On 10 November 1994 , the line received automatic train control . NSB was split up on 1 December 1996 and the ownership of the tracks and infrastructure was inherited by the Norwegian National Rail Administration , while the operation of trains was taken over by the new NSB . From 1994 , Di 6 and Di 8 locomotives were introduced , but the Di 6 proved unreliable and returned to the manufacturer . 
 In 2000 , NSB started using Class 93 diesel multiple units on intercity trains , retiring the Di 3 . In March 2000 , NSB announced the closing of several stations for the commuter train service . Fifty percent of the stations were responsible for only two percent of the traffic , and NSB instead wanted buses to transport people to the closest railway station , which would reduce overall transport time for most passengers . From 7 January 2001 , a fixed , hourly headway was introduced on the trains from Steinkjer to Trondheim . Mære , Østborg , Rinnan and Elberg were closed , but HiNT Røstad opened . From June 2001 , NSB introduced additional rush @-@ hour trains between Trondheim and Steinkjer , giving a half @-@ hour headway . The Nordland Line had not received NSB 's first generation of train radio , <unk> , so was among the first lines to receive GSM @-@ R from 1 December 2004 . In 2010 , CargoNet started using Vossloh Euro locomotives . <unk> Levanger Station was closed on 11 December 2010 . Despite generating some 90 @,@ 000 annual patrons and being one of the busiest stations on the line , it was located too close to Levanger Station to meet safety requirements . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The stations were designed by Paul Due ( 1835 – 1919 ) and his son , Paul Armin Due ( 1870 – 1926 ) . Original stations between Stjørdal and Levanger were designed by Paul Due , while those from Rinnan to Byafossen , as well as Hell Station , were designed by Paul Armin Due . The designs are characterized by the transition period between <unk> and Art Nouveau , with early stations dominated more by the former and later stations more by the latter . Norway went through a nationalistic period during the construction , and Paul Due chose to replace his older buildings ' foreign elements with traditional Norwegian elements . Røra and Byafossen were the only stations not custom designed , while Sunnan was designed by Peter Andreas Blix — as it was originally built at Hell in 1881 . 
 At the time of construction , the railways provided a leap in transport for the communities it passed through . NSB saw beautiful and grandeur stations as a way to draw patronage , and chose , in addition to impressive architecture , to build a park adjacent each stations . As construction went by , funding for stations were reduced , resulting in less grandeur further north . Most stations had two stories and an attic , although some of the stations serving lesser places had smaller buildings . From Steinkjer to Skogn , the ground floors were built in random rubble . As construction continued , budgets were reduced and station costs were cut . From Rinnan to Sparbu , the ground floors were instead built in brick , and from Mære and north , the stations have wooden ground floors . In addition to a station buildings , stations consisted of an outhouse and a freight house ; selected stations also featured a water tower and motive power depot . 
 Levanger Station is the most spectacular station on the line and also the best preserved town station . Built entirely in stone , it has a dominant position in town and with a park in front of the station . It was designed in combined Medieval style , with strong elements of Gothic and Romanesque style . Steinkjer Station was the other station entirely built in stone . It has a combined Baroque Revival and Art Nouveau style , and is more anonymous than Levanger Station . Its characteristics were largely lost after it was connected with the bus station . Three stations , Langstein , Skogn and Levanger , have been preserved , while Skatval and Hell have been protected . 
 In 1993 , NSB built new sheds on all stations served by the commuter rail . <unk> Arkitekter designed sheds which combined the existing architectural traditions in material and roof shapes , with modern style . The sheds have a roof , glass walls and a framework in wood . They were optimized to give good protection from various types weather . 
 = = Service = = 
 The main passenger service on the section from Hell to Steinkjer is the Trøndelag Commuter Rail . Operated by the Norwegian State Railways , it runs at a fixed hourly headway — with additional rush @-@ hour services — between Lerkendal Station in Trondheim and Steinkjer , calling at 13 stations on the Hell – Sunnan Line . Travel time from Steinkjer is 24 minutes to Verdal , 37 minutes to Levanger , 1 hour and 24 minutes to Stjørdal and 2 hours and 4 minutes to Trondheim . The services are operated with Class 92 diesel multiple units . 
 NSB also operates intercity services from Trondheim to Bodø on the Nordland Line . These consist of two daily through trains , one day and one night service , with an additional service between Trondheim and Mo i Rana . Stjørdal and Steinkjer are the only stations along the line which remain manned . NSB uses a combination of Class 93 diesel multiple units and Di 4 @-@ hauled trains . CargoNet and Cargolink operate freight trains along the line . CargoNet hauls using Vossloh Euro , while Cargolink uses Di 6 locomotives , respectively . 
 = = Future = = 
 Politicians have signalized that they want to electrify the tracks from Trondheim to Steinkjer along with the Meråker Line . NSB will need to replace the Class 92 trains towards the end the 2010s , and want to coordinate the new stock with electrification . The county municipalities of Nord @-@ Trøndelag and Sør @-@ Trøndelag proposed during the early 2000s that the Nordland Line between Trondheim and Steinkjer be upgraded reduce travel time to one hour . This would require the average speed to be increased to 115 kilometers per hour ( 71 mph ) , mainly through a modernization of the existing line . Specific projects include electrification , double track between Trondheim and Trondheim Airport , additional passing loops , a new bridge over Stjørdalselva and a rearrangement of the tracks at Hell . This would have to be combined with a reduction in the number of stops . The National Rail Administration estimates that the mentioned investments , which would cost between NOK 4 and 6 billion , will allow a travel time of one hour and ten minutes . If a number of curves are straightened , increased capacity is introduced between Stjørdal and Steinkjer and a further number of stops are removed , travel time could be reduced to one hour . 
 Norsk Bane , a lobbyist organization which is suggesting to build a high @-@ speed line from Oslo to Trondheim and onwards to Steinkjer , have proposed building an all @-@ new right @-@ of @-@ way on the route . They estimate that regional trains would , with their infrastructure , be able to operate trains from Steinkjer to Trondheim in 40 minutes . The proposals involves only keeping the stations at Trondheim Airport , Stjørdal , Åsen , Levanger , Verdal , Røra and Steinkjer along the Hell – Sunnan segment . It would involve three services per hour and direct trains to Oslo , with speeds up to 300 kilometers per hour ( 190 mph ) . 
 = The Impossible Astronaut = 
 " The Impossible Astronaut " is the first episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Written by show runner Steven Moffat , and directed by Toby Haynes , the episode was first broadcast on 23 April 2011 in the United Kingdom , as well as the United States and Canada . It also aired in Australia on 30 April 2011 . The episode features alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) , and is the first of a two @-@ part story , which concluded with " Day of the Moon " . 
 In the episode , Amy Pond , Rory and River Song are summoned to Utah , United States , by the Eleventh Doctor , who is killed by a mysterious figure in a space suit . The dead Doctor is revealed to be an older self , after his younger version returns . They try to understand what the future Doctor said and are sent to Washington D.C. The team deals with the Silence , a race of aliens with the ability to make people forget their encounter with them when they look away . 
 The Silence was created to compete with other past aliens in terms of " scariness , " including the Weeping Angels . The episode was partially filmed on location at Lone Rock , Utah ; the first time in Doctor Who that principal photography took place in the United States . Before the broadcast , a fan leaked the plot of the episode following a press screening . The episode was seen by 8 @.@ 86 million viewers in the United Kingdom , and received generally positive reviews from critics . " The Impossible Astronaut " gained an Appreciation Index of 88 – considered excellent . The episode was dedicated to Elisabeth Sladen , known for playing former companion Sarah Jane Smith , who died from cancer on 19 April 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Prequel = = = 
 On 22 March 2011 , a short scene serving as a prequel for the first episode was released on the programme 's website . In the prequel , Nixon receives a phone call from the little girl who keeps calling him in the episode . She begs for the President to look behind him , but he asks how she got that number , which the ' spaceman ' told her . She tells him it is about monsters , to which he replies " Young lady , there are no monsters in the Oval Office . " He then hangs up and leans back . Behind him stands an out @-@ of @-@ focus Silent . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 After a two @-@ month break from their travels with the Doctor , his companions , Amy Pond and her husband Rory Williams , receive a " TARDIS blue " <unk> envelope providing a time , date and set of coordinates leading them to Utah . They arrive to meet River Song ( Alex Kingston ) , who also received an envelope , and the Doctor , now 1 @,@ 103 years old , 194 years older than he was when he last saw them . He takes them to a picnic at a nearby lake , telling them he is taking them on a trip to " Space 1969 . " Amy catches a glimpse of a mysterious figure from a distance , but appears to immediately forget about it after she looks away . Later , a figure in an American astronaut suit emerges from the lake ; the Doctor approaches it but warns his companions not to interfere . The astronaut shoots the Doctor , causing him to begin to regenerate , but his companions are horrified to witness the astronaut shoot him again , killing him before he can fully regenerate . The three are met by Canton Everett Delaware III ( William Morgan Sheppard ) who also received an envelope and was instructed to bring a can of gasoline , which the group then uses to give the Doctor a Viking @-@ style funeral . 
 Regrouping at a diner , Amy , Rory , and River are speculating about who might have sent the envelopes when they are shocked to see the Doctor walking in , 200 years younger again . He reveals that he too was given an envelope , but does not know who sent it to him . Reluctantly his companions decide not to tell the Doctor either about his death or that the sender was his future self . The four do a search on Delaware and " Space 1969 . " The TARDIS travels back to 8 April 1969 , and ends up cloaked in the Oval Office . President Richard Nixon ( Stuart Milligan ) converses with a younger Delaware ( Mark Sheppard ) about a series of phone calls he received from a young girl asking for help . The Doctor quickly gains Delaware 's trust , convincing Nixon to give him a few minutes to locate the girl . 
 While the Doctor works , Amy sees the mysterious figure again , and excuses herself to the restroom . There , the figure , a member of a species known as the Silence , waits for her and kills an innocent woman despite Amy 's pleas . Realising the alien is wiping her memory of their encounters , Amy takes a picture of the alien . When she leaves the restroom , however , she yet again forgets the encounter . By then the Doctor has found the girl 's location , a building near Cape Canaveral , Florida , at the intersection to streets named Jefferson , Adams , and Hamilton . The Doctor and his companions leave in the TARDIS , followed closely by a curious Delaware . 
 Upon arrival , they find pieces of a space suit and alien technology . River and Rory explore a vast network of tunnels that have apparently spread across the planet for centuries , unnoticed by the human population . The two find a control room with a design similar to one seen in " The Lodger " but are unaware they are surrounded by the Silence . Meanwhile , Delaware hears the little girl screaming and gives chase . As Amy and the Doctor follow , Amy tells him she is pregnant . When they find Delaware unconscious , a figure in an astronaut suit appears . Quickly , Amy picks up Delaware 's gun and shoots at the suit . However , she realises too late that the helmet 's visor has opened to reveal the little girl . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The episode ties into the series five story arc phrase , " Silence will fall . " The phrase was first used in the series five premiere , " The Eleventh Hour , " and repeated through that series , but was left unresolved in the series ending to be carried into this series . 
 River Song tells Rory that she and the Doctor are travelling through time " in opposite directions . " She comments that a day is coming when " I 'll look into that man 's eyes , my Doctor , and he won 't have the faintest idea who I am . And I think it 's going to kill me . " In the series four episodes " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead , " the Tenth Doctor meets River for the first time ( from his perspective ) ; at the conclusion of that story , River is killed saving people trapped inside the Library 's core , although only <unk> ; her consciousness is " saved , " preserved in the core , along with those of all her crewmates . 
 The TARDIS had been previously turned invisible by damage to its visual stabiliser in the Second Doctor story The Invasion . When Canton first leaves the TARDIS , the Doctor remarks , " Brave heart , Canton , " a reference to the Fifth Doctor 's recurrent statement to his companion Tegan Jovanka , " Brave heart , Tegan . " When Amy asks the younger Doctor to trust her , he asks her to swear to him on something that matters . After some thought , she smiles and says " Fish fingers and custard , " referring to events in " The Eleventh Hour , " when Amy first meets the Doctor as a little girl . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by Steven Moffat , who took charge of the show in 2010 . Moffat wanted the 2011 season to start with a two @-@ part story in an attempt to begin with more gravity and a wider scope in plot , as well as wanting the episodes to be one of the darker ones in the series . " The Impossible Astronaut " / " Day of the Moon " was the first two @-@ part episode to open a series since the 1985 Sixth Doctor story Attack of the Cybermen . 
 In the Doctor Who Confidential episode following the broadcast of " The Impossible Astronaut , " Moffat stated that in his view , it was one of the darker episodes of the series , but still maintained the same level of humour . The inclusion of the Doctor 's death felt like a series ender for some of the producers , but was actually there to " kick it off . " In writing the death scene of the older version of the Doctor , Moffat wanted to acknowledge to the audience that Time Lords are not invincible , and could still die permanently if killed before regeneration . In creating the Silence , the alien antagonists of the episode , Moffat wanted them to challenge past monsters in terms of " scariness . " He felt these creatures are a " much bigger deal . " The aliens ' design was partially inspired by the figure from the Edvard Munch painting The Scream . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In October 2010 , it was announced that Mark Sheppard , who had appeared in other past science fiction series , including Battlestar Galactica , Firefly , Supernatural , and Warehouse 13 , would make a guest appearance on Doctor Who . Sheppard described playing Canton as a " dream job , " and said he wished to appear in another of Moffat 's works , including Sherlock . Even though Sheppard is an English actor , it was his first appearance in a British @-@ made television show . For the scene depicting the older Canton Delaware , the producers originally planned that Sheppard would appear older using makeup effects . However , Sheppard suggested instead that his father , William Morgan Sheppard , play the role , a suggestion that was accepted . 
 American actor Stuart Milligan was cast as President Nixon , which he said he found exciting , having played other presidents in the past , including Dwight D. Eisenhower . Prosthetic pieces were applied on Milligan 's cheeks , nose , and ears to make him resemble Nixon as much as possible . He also practiced how Nixon would speak , but initially found it difficult since he had to wear fake teeth . Milligan previously appeared in the animated Tenth Doctor special Dreamland as the voice of Colonel Stark . <unk> <unk> , who played Carl , previously appeared in the Seventh Doctor audio drama A Thousand Tiny Wings , where he played Joshua <unk> . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 This pair of episodes marks the first time that Doctor Who has filmed principal photography footage within the United States ; the American @-@ produced TV movie of 1996 was filmed in Canada , and some second unit establishing shots of New York and the Statue of Liberty were filmed on Liberty Island for the episode " Daleks in Manhattan " , but none of the cast of the episode were involved in the shoot . Filming took place in the state of Utah . For the opening shot for the location , director Toby Haynes wanted it to be epic so that the audience could recognise where the episode was set . Scenes on the roadway were filmed on U.S. Route 163 ( several miles east of the coordinates listed on the Doctor 's invitations ) . The crew wanted to add as many American icons as they could into those shots , including a Stetson hat , a 1950s Edsel Villager , and a yellow school bus . Moffat , having enjoyed writing episodes featuring River Song , wanted to give her an impressive entrance . Haynes had Alex Kingston block the sunlight from the camera angle and blow smoke from her revolver . The scenes involving the picnic and the future @-@ Doctor dying took place on the shore of Lake Powell . The suit worn by the future @-@ Doctor 's killer was a fabricated replica of an Apollo space suit . In filming the death scene the filming crew noticed that Karen Gillan was genuinely upset and " was acting her heart out . " In filming the " Viking funeral " scene , Haynes wished to film it during the sunset . However , the sun set over the desert , so was instead filmed during sunrise , as the sun rose over the water . 
 Kingston had to genuinely slap Matt Smith several times in a scene because it was difficult to fake . Kingston recalled that after a few takes , Smith got red cheeked and grew frustrated at having to do the sequence over and over again . The Oval Office set was constructed at Upper Boat Studios in South Wales . Because the production crew had access to several pictures and plans of the real office , they were able to replicate it in almost every detail . The main problem for building the set was the plastering ; the crew normally plaster one wall at a time for normal rooms , but because the Oval Office was round , they had to do the entire set at once . The American @-@ style diner scene when the companions reunite with the Doctor in this episode is actually located in Cardiff Bay . The Laurel and Hardy film The Flying Deuces , in which the Doctor intruded , was done by Smith dancing in front of greenscreen . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ broadcast leak = = = 
 At some point before the broadcast of the episode , it and " Day of the Moon " were released in a press screening , where a number of fans were invited to attend . The production team present asked them not to give away any spoilers . However , following the screening a fan gave away the entire plot of the two episodes on an internet forum . News of this angered Moffat . In an interview on BBC Radio 5 Live , Moffat stated ; 
 Despite this he added that the majority of Doctor Who fans are " spoiler @-@ <unk> , " who refused to go online to be spoiled . 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 " The Impossible Astronaut " was first broadcast on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 23 April 2011 at 6 pm . It began with a still @-@ caption tribute to actress Elisabeth Sladen , who died from cancer on 19 April 2011 . Sladen had previously appeared in the series as companion Sarah Jane Smith , and as the same character on the spin @-@ off series The Sarah Jane Adventures . After the broadcast " The Impossible Astronaut " received preliminary , overnight figures of 6 @.@ 52 million viewers . Final consolidated ratings for the episode increased to 8 @.@ 86 million , with a 43 @.@ 2 per cent audience share . This made the episode the second highest rated programme of the day , behind Britain 's Got Talent on ITV1 . The episode was the third most watched on BBC One , and sixth overall for the entire week ending 24 April . An additional 300 @,@ 000 viewed the episode from BBC iPlayer within two days of its original broadcast . It received an Appreciation Index of 88 , one of the higher scores for the weekend . 
 In the United States the episode aired on BBC America on the same day it was released in the United Kingdom , as was the case in Canada for Space . 1 @.@ 3 million viewers saw " The Impossible Astronaut " on BBC America , making it the highest rated telecast in the history of the channel . It was reportedly up by 71 @,@ 000 from " The Eleventh Hour " . When Live + 7 day DVR ratings were added , the total rose to 1 @.@ 8 million . In Canada , the episode was seen by 538 @,@ 000 , making it the most watched Who episode for the channel , and its most watched telecast in 2011 . It was shown on ABC1 in Australia on 30 April 2011 , and was viewed by 860 @,@ 000 from the five capital cities , matching the ratings from " A Christmas Carol " on Boxing Day 2010 . 
 Audience measurement service Kantar Media reported that " The Impossible Astronaut " is the most recorded television event of all time . Analysis of BARB data revealed that 4 @.@ 11 million people recorded and viewed the programme within a week of broadcast , accounting for 46 % of the episode 's total viewers . A total of 1 @.@ 38 million requests were placed on iPlayer for the month of April , placing it at number one for the month . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was met with generally positive reviews from television critics . Dan Martin of The Guardian reacted positively towards the episode , believing the cast performed better than the previous fifth series . He stated " Steven Moffat has thrown away the rule book and made Doctor Who as , you imagine , he 's pictured it should be his whole life . Killing the Doctor leaves the shape of the series mapped out , raises the bar so that no one is safe , and sees Amy , Rory and River facing a terrible dilemma . " Martin liked that " Amy 's numbed horror ramps things up to a series @-@ finale level on intensity from the off , " and then switches " into an Oval Office comedy of manners , " and " morphs into gothic horror and finally flings you to the ground with its cinematic cliffhanger . " He was also positive towards the American setting , and " our eccentric British foursome bumbling through it , " believing the series raised its game with this . With regards to the Silence , Martin believed it was " a standard Moffat psychological trick , but the most refined to date . " Martin later rated it the second best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . 
 Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy called the episode " a fantastic launch for the sixth series , " adding " the Doctor Who team 's US location shooting has certainly paid off , lending these early scenes a grand scale that the series could scarcely have expected to achieve in 2005 , let alone in 1963 . " Commenting on the future @-@ Doctor 's death , Jeffery said " seven minutes in , a nation 's collective jaw dropped as The Doctor — this show 's lead — is mercilessly gunned down . This plot twist is simply stunning , and it 's difficult to imagine even casual viewers not sitting up to pay attention at this point . " Jeffery also believed that the series regulars were on " top form , " adding " the more abrasive aspects of Amy Pond 's personality seem to have been toned down this year , and Karen Gillan responds with her best , most sympathetic performance to date . Arthur Darvill also lives up to his recent promotion to full @-@ time companion . His comic timing is simply superb , but he excels too in the episode 's darker moments . " Jeffery rated the episode five stars out of five . 
 Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph believed it was " a cracking start to the first part of the 2011 series , with the shocking ending of Amy seemingly shooting a girl making one keen wait for the conclusion next week to see how it all resolves itself , " as well as enjoying the concept of the Silence . Rick Marshall of MTV believed that " Steven Moffat and the Doctor Who crew offer up yet another great episode , " but also said the " big cliffhanger will likely cause more than a few fans ' heads to explode . " In addition , Marshall believed the alien antagonists " give the Weeping Angels a run for their money in scare factor . " Simon Brew of Den of Geek thought the episode was " a triumphant return for Doctor Who , bubbling with confidence and throwing down story strands that hint at an engrossing series . " Brew liked Sheppard 's performance as Delaware and Darvill 's increasing presence as Rory . Brew also complimented Haynes ' work in the United States , saying it was an improvement from " Daleks in Manhattan " , which featured British actors attempting to play with American accents . Tom Phillips of Metro said the 1969 US setting were " beautifully used , " and enjoyed the " spookiness " of the Silence . However Phillips felt the episode would be " a bit hard to get into " for new viewers . Kevin O 'Sullivan The Sunday Mirror was more negative towards the episode , stating it was " impossible to understand , " and for " strictly sci @-@ fi nerds only , " adding that Smith " remains a derivative Doctor who brings nothing new to the party . " 
 = The Tale of the Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan = 
 The Tale of the Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan ( originally , The Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan ) is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , and published by Frederick Warne & Co. in October 1905 . It tells of a cat called Ribby and a tea party she holds for a dog called Duchess . Complications arise when Duchess tries to replace Ribby 's mouse pie with her own veal and ham pie , and then believes she has swallowed a small tin pastry form called a patty @-@ pan . Its themes are etiquette and social relations in a small town . 
 A version of the tale was composed by Potter in 1903 , but set aside to develop other projects . In 1904 , she failed to complete a book of nursery rhymes for Warnes , and the 1903 tale was accepted in its stead . Potter elaborated its setting and storyline , and developed the tale more fully before publication . The illustrations depict the cottages and gardens of Sawrey , a village in the Lake District near Potter 's Hill Top farm , and have been described as some of the most exquisite Potter ever produced . Ribby was modelled on a cat living in Sawrey , Duchess on two Pomeranians belonging to Potter 's neighbour Mrs Rogerson , Tabitha Twitchit on Potter 's cat at Hill Top , and Dr Maggoty on the magpies in the London Zoological Gardens . 
 The tale was published in a larger size than Potter 's previous books , but was reduced in the 1930s to bring it into line with the other books in the Peter Rabbit series . It was given its present title at that time . Potter declared the tale her next favourite to The Tailor of Gloucester . Beswick Pottery released porcelain figurines of the tale 's characters through the latter half of the 20th century , and Schmid & Co. released a music box in the 1980s . 
 = = Development and publication = = 
 The Potter family summered occasionally at Lakefield , a country house in the village of Sawrey . " They came with their servants , their carriage and pair , and Miss Potter with her pony and phaeton , " a village resident recalled . " Miss Potter was about the village sketching everywhere and often came to our house . " 
 Close to Lakefield and off the road in their own enclosure were three dwellings known as Lakefield Cottages . Mr. Rogerson , a gardener and caretaker at Lakefield , lived in one of the cottages , and eventually his wife 's two pedigree Pomeranians – Darkie and Duchess – would become the models for Potter 's fictional Duchess . Darkie had a fine black mane , but Duchess was more intelligent and could sit up with a lump of sugar balanced on her nose . 
 In the summer of 1902 , Potter sketched the interior of the third Lakefield Cottage belonging to a Mrs. Lord . These drawings included a watercolour and pen @-@ and @-@ ink sketches of the living @-@ room , pen @-@ and @-@ ink sketches of the pots of geraniums on the living @-@ room window sill , the entrance passage , the pantry , the stairs , some of the upstairs rooms , and details of the carved oak furniture . In some of the sketches Potter roughly outlined a cat . She also sketched the village including the sloping path down to the Lakefield Cottages and the post office door . These became the backgrounds for The Pie and The Patty @-@ Pan . 
 During a rainy holiday in Hastings at the end of November 1903 , Potter outlined a tale about a cat , a dog , and a tea party she called Something very very NICE . She discussed the Lakefield sketches as backgrounds for the tale with Warne . He proposed a large format volume similar to L. Leslie Brooke 's Johnny Crow 's Garden to do justice to the detail of the illustrations , but the entire project was set aside when The Tale of Benjamin Bunny and The Tale of Two Bad Mice were chosen for development and publication in 1904 . 
 Potter had long wanted to develop a book of nursery rhymes , but such a project left Warne cold . Rhymes were already well represented in the firm 's catalogue , and Warne felt Potter 's unbridled enthusiasm for the genre would make the project a headache for him . In the past , he had tried to discourage Potter 's interest in rhymes , believing her own stories superior , but she persisted . He reluctantly agreed to a book of rhymes for 1905 , but Potter did not have it ready at the end of 1904 , so he accepted the tea party tale instead . Early in 1905 , it was decided the book would be published at the end of the year . 
 By March 1905 , Potter was anxious to begin work on the tale . She thought the 1903 version too thin and rewrote the entire story , retaining Ribby the cat and Duchess the dog as the central characters while elaborating the setting and developing a stronger plot line . It was decided the tale would be published in a format slightly larger than her previous productions with ten full @-@ colour illustrations and other illustrations in pen @-@ and @-@ sepia ink . 
 Like the tale 's companion piece set in the Newlands Valley , The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle , the cat and dog story is set in a real place , Near Sawrey , and is the only Potter tale to refer to Sawrey by name . Tabitha Twitchit disdainfully comments on her cousin 's choice of party guest : " A little dog , indeed ! Just as if there were no CATS in Sawrey ! " The characters in the tale were modelled on real world individuals . Ribby 's counterpart lived in Sawrey , and Tabitha Twitchit 's counterpart lived at Hill Top , though her fictional shop is located in nearby Hawkshead . Dr. <unk> was drawn from magpies in the London Zoological Gardens . Potter made notes in her sketchbook about the bird 's anatomical structure and the colour of its feathers : " Brown black eye , nose a little <unk> than jackdaw , less feathered . " The bird 's tail was over half its total length she noted , and its feathers were " very blue " and parts were green . 
 The illustrations depict the village 's gardens , cottages , and , in the background of the frontispiece , Hill Top . Although the real Duchess lived at Lakefield Cottages , in the tale her home became Buckle <unk> , a picturesque cottage in the village , and Duchess is shown in its garden reading Ribby 's invitation . In the illustration of Duchess leaving home with her veal and ham pie in a basket , Potter took some artistic license and combined the doorway of the village post office with the Buckle <unk> garden . Completely faithful to life in the village , Potter even included the pattens Mrs. Rogerson wore to the pump in the illustration depicting Duchess standing in the Lakefield Cottage porch holding a bouquet . The illustration of Duchess standing on a red sofa cushion was painted at Melford Hall and Potter 's young cousin Stephanie Hyde Parker was permitted to put some red paint on the cushion . She later wondered if Potter removed it . 
 Towards the end of May 1905 , Potter sent the illustrations to Warne for his review , writing , " I think it promises to make a pretty book . " He criticised a picture of the cat and Potter wrote him , " If you still feel doubtful about the little cat — will you post it back to me at once ... I don 't feel perfectly satisfied with the eyes of the large head , but I think I can get it right , by taking out the lights carefully , if you will ask Hentschel not to do it before we have proofs . The drawing is getting much too rubbed . " 
 On 25 May , Warne asked Potter to send him one of the two dummy books she had in her possession in order to check the size of the plates before continuing with the printer 's blocks . He thought there was " too much bend " about the dog 's nose and the division between its legs was unclear . He kept the two plates back for Potter 's inspection before sending them off to make the blocks . On 26 May , he received two more originals and the circular portrait of the cat for the cover . He thought the background of the colour illustration of Ribby and Duchess sitting at the table too light , but liked the pen @-@ and @-@ ink sketches . Potter struggled with the dog illustrations , and sent Warne a photograph of her canine model to prove the dog 's ruff was as large as she had depicted it . 
 One of the illustrations did not coordinated properly with Potter 's text . She altered the drawing and wrote Warne , " I have altered the oven as it will save a good many corrections . I did a good deal to the cat but she is still looking at the top one . I don 't think it signifies as she talks about both ovens ... I don 't think I have ever seriously considered the state of the pie but the book runs some risk of being over cooked if it goes on much longer ! I am sorry about the little dog 's nose . I saw it was too sharp . I think I have got it right . I was intending to explain the ovens by saying the middle handle is very stiff so that Duchess concludes it is a sham ; – like the lowest . I think only two pages want changing ; I think it will come right . " 
 The drawings were finished and in early June 1905 Warne approved . Potter wrote she was glad he liked the drawings , and " if the book prints well , it will be my next favourite to Tailor . She was energized with the completion of the book and wrote Warne she wanted to settle on future work before leaving for a holiday in Wales . In Merioneth she received his letter of proposal on 25 July and accepted , but he died suddenly and unexpectedly on 25 August 1905 before a marriage took place . Potter became deeply depressed and was ill for many weeks . However , she rallied to complete the last two tales she had discussed with him : The Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan and The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher . 
 The Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan was published in October 1905 in a large format , priced at one shilling , and dedicated to Joan , the sixth child of Potter 's former governess Annie Carter Moore , and to Beatrix , Mrs. Moore 's newborn and Potter 's god @-@ daughter : " For Joan , to read to Baby " . The Pie was the first of Potter 's books to be published in a format larger ( 177 mm by 138 mm ) than the standard size ( 139 mm by 104 mm ) of the Peter Rabbit books ; and the first of her books to integrate pen @-@ and @-@ ink and colour illustrations between its boards . 
 The book 's endpapers had been overlooked . Potter wrote to the firm : " I conclude there is no time to get an end @-@ paper design done — unless Mr. Stokoe has already designed one — I do not mind one way or another ; I had begun to scribble something but it looks a bit stiff . " Mr. Stokoe apparently did not design one because the endpapers were either plain white or mottled lavender . Several years later , they were replaced with a design featuring a pie and a patty @-@ pan and the cover illustration changed to Ribby sitting by the fire . In the 1930s , the book 's size was reduced to bring it into line with the rest of the Peter Rabbit books . The title was changed at that time to The Tale of the Pie and the Patty @-@ Pan . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Potter declared the tale her next favorite to The Tailor of Gloucester . The pictures are some of the most beautiful Potter ever created , especially the <unk> of flowers in the doorways and garden plots . The colors in the illustrations are not the muted browns and greens the reader expects in a Potter illustration , nor are they the contrasting colors such as the muted reds and blues Potter uses occasionally to give her illustrations a splash of color Instead , the colors are bright oranges , violets , and yellows seldom seen in her other books . Even Ribby 's lilac dress and Duchess 's black mane illustrate Potter 's concern for color in this book . 
 Potter 's own three @-@ door oven , her <unk> , her indoor plants , her coronation teapot , and her water pump are minutely detailed with more color than in other productions . The large format of the original edition , the captions accompanying the full page color illustrations , and the occasional lack of coordination between picture and text all display Potter 's delight in the pictures , sometimes at the expense of the text . 
 " Once upon a time " , Ribby , a " Pussy @-@ cat " invites a little dog called Duchess to tea with plans to serve her " something so very very nice " baked in a pie dish with a pink rim . Ribby promises Duchess she shall have the entree entirely to herself . Duchess accepts the invitation but hopes she will not be served mouse . " I really couldn 't , couldn 't eat mouse pie . And I shall have to eat it , because it is a party . " 
 Duchess has prepared a ham and veal pie in a pink @-@ rimmed dish ( just like Ribby 's dish ) , and would much rather eat her own pie . " It is all ready to put into the oven , " she says , " Such a lovely pie @-@ crust ; and I put in a little tin patty @-@ pan to hold up the crust . " She reads the invitation again and realizes she will have the opportunity to switch the pies when Ribby leaves on an errand . 
 Ribby has two ovens , one above the other , and she puts her mouse pie in the lower oven . She <unk> the house , sets the table , and leaves to buy tea , marmalade , and sugar . Duchess meantime has left home with her ham and veal pie in a basket , passes Ribby on the street , and hurries on to Ribby 's house . She puts her pie into the upper oven , and searches quickly for the mouse pie ( which she does not find because she neglects to look in the lower oven ) . She slips out the back door as Ribby returns . 
 At the appointed hour , Duchess appears at Ribby 's door and the party begins . Distracted for a moment , Duchess does not see which oven Ribby opens to remove the pie . Duchess eats greedily , believing she is eating her ham and veal pie . She wonders what has happened to the patty @-@ pan she put in her pie , and , not finding it under the crust , is convinced she has swallowed it . She sets up a howl ; Ribby is perplexed and annoyed but leaves to find Dr. Maggoty , a magpie . 
 Duchess is left alone before Ribby 's fire , and discovers her ham and veal pie in the oven . " Then I must have been eating <unk> ! ... No wonder I feel ill , " she muses . Knowing she cannot adequately explain her ham and veal pie to Ribby , she puts it outside the back door intending to sneak back and carry it home after she leaves for home . Ribby and Dr. Maggoty arrive and , after much fuss , Duchess takes her leave , only to find that the magpie ( who has left by the back door ) and a couple of jackdaws have eaten her ham and veal pie . Ribby later finds the remains of the pie dish and the patty @-@ pan outside the back door and declares , " Well I never did ! ... Next time I want to give a party – I will invite Cousin Tabitha Twitchit ! " 
 = = Scholarly commentaries = = 
 M. Daphne Kutzer , Professor of English at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh at the time of her Beatrix Potter : Writing in Code ( 2003 ) believes The Pie and its two immediate predecessors ( the tales of Two Bad Mice and Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle ) are transitional works in Potter 's life and literary career . All three books confront the meaning of domesticity , work , and social hierarchies while exhibiting an underlying restiveness with the unyielding strictures of Victorian domesticity , and a disengagement from the broad political and social concerns of her earlier books to the more narrow political and social concerns of working farmers and rural people . 
 Ruth K. MacDonald of New Mexico State University at the time of her Beatrix Potter ( 1986 ) argues that the theme of The Pie is the very proper social relations between neighbours in a small town . She points to the overly formal quality of the letters exchanged between the heroines as one example of the theme , and another , she indicates , is the manner in which the two pass each other on the street without a word to one another because " they were going to have a party " . Though Duchess probably does not speak to Ribby for fear of revealing her plan to switch the two pies , Ribby probably does not speak to Duchess out of an exaggerated sense of politeness or because she is rushed . At the hour of the party , Duchess is anxious to arrive on time , yet not too early , and <unk> outside Ribby 's cottage before delivering her most " genteel little tap @-@ <unk> " and asking " Is Mrs. <unk> at home ? " MacDonald notes that these instances not only underscore the elaborate codes of behaviour Potter 's fictional animals observe but , by extension , the villagers of Sawrey . For Potter , the result of such elaborate etiquette was nonsensical , distorted behaviour . Nevertheless , the cat and dog remain friends at the end of the story , and , in carefully avoiding any offence , their social pretenses and codes of etiquette are maintained . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Potter asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics , and part of the process in making them so was marketing strategy . She was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales with spinoffs such as a Peter Rabbit doll , an unpublished Peter Rabbit board game , and a Peter Rabbit nursery wallpaper between 1903 and 1905 . Similar " side @-@ shows " ( as she termed the spinoffs ) were conducted over the following two decades . 
 In 1947 , Frederick Warne & Co. gave Beswick Pottery of Longton , Staffordshire rights and licences to produce the Potter characters in porcelain . Ribby coming from the farm with butter and milk was released as a figurine in 1951 ; Duchess with a bouquet of flowers in 1955 ; Duchess holding the ham and veal pie in 1979 ; and Ribby and the broken pie dish in 1992 . A limited edition tableau depicting Duchess and Ribby was produced only in 2000 . 
 Schmid & Co. of Toronto and Randolph , Massachusetts was granted licensing rights to Beatrix Potter in 1977 . A music box playing " Music Box Dancer " and topped with a porcelain figure of Duchess holding a bouquet was released in 1980 . 
 = = Reprints and translations = = 
 As of 2010 , all of Potter 's 23 small format books remain in print , and available as complete sets in presentation boxes , and as a 400 @-@ page omnibus . First edition copies and early reprints of The Pie are offered by antiquarian booksellers . The Pie was available as a hardcover volume but also in paperback , audiobook , and electronic formats . 
 The English language editions of the books still bore the Frederick Warne imprint in 2010 though the company was bought by Penguin Books in 1983 . The printing plates for the Potter books were remade from new photographs of the original drawings in 1985 , and all 23 volumes released in 1987 as The Original and Authorized Edition . 
 Potter 's books have been translated into nearly thirty languages including Greek and Russian . In 1986 , MacDonald observed that the Potter books had become a traditional part of childhood in both English @-@ speaking lands and those in which the books had been translated . 
 = All Things Must Pass ( song ) = 
 " All Things Must Pass " is a song by English musician George Harrison , issued in November 1970 as the title track to his triple album of the same name . Billy Preston released the song originally – as " All Things ( Must ) Pass " – on his Apple Records album Encouraging Words ( 1970 ) , after the Beatles had rejected it for inclusion on their Let It Be album in January 1969 . The composition reflects the influence of the Band 's sound and communal music @-@ making on Harrison , after he had spent time with the group in Woodstock , New York , in late 1968 , while Timothy Leary 's poem " All Things Pass " , a psychedelic adaptation of the Tao Te Ching , provided inspiration for his song lyrics . 
 The subject matter deals with the transient nature of human existence , and in Harrison 's All Things Must Pass reading , words and music combine to reflect impressions of optimism against fatalism . On release , together with Barry Feinstein 's album cover image , commentators viewed the song as a statement on the Beatles ' break @-@ up . Widely regarded as one of Harrison 's finest compositions , its rejection by his former band has provoked comment from biographers and reviewers . Music critic Ian MacDonald described " All Things Must Pass " as " the wisest song never recorded by The Beatles " , while author Simon Leng considers it " perhaps the greatest solo Beatle composition " . The recording was co @-@ produced by Phil Spector in London ; it features an orchestral arrangement by John Barham and contributions from musicians such as Ringo Starr , Pete Drake , Bobby Whitlock , Eric Clapton and Klaus Voormann . 
 Although the Beatles failed to formally record the song , a 1969 solo demo by Harrison appears on their compilation Anthology 3 ( 1996 ) . An early version from the All Things Must Pass sessions was released on Harrison 's posthumous compilation Early Takes : Volume 1 in 2012 . Paul McCartney performed " All Things Must Pass " at the Concert for George tribute in November 2002 , a year after Harrison 's death . Jim James , the Waterboys , Klaus Voormann and Yusuf Islam , and Sloan Wainwright are among the other artists who have covered the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 Like his friend Eric Clapton , George Harrison was inspired by Music from Big Pink , the seminal debut album from the Band , the former backing group for Bob Dylan . Released in July 1968 , Music from Big Pink was partly responsible for Harrison 's return to the guitar , his first instrument , after he had spent two years attempting to master the more complex Indian sitar . Harrison duly shared his enthusiasm with the British music press , declaring Big Pink " the new sound to come from America " , drummer Levon Helm later recalled , thus helping to establish the Band internationally . In appreciation , Robbie Robertson , the Band 's guitarist , extended an invitation to Harrison to stop by in Woodstock , New York , when the opportunity arose . 
 Late in 1968 , after producing sessions in Los Angeles for a solo album by Apple Records signing Jackie Lomax , Harrison spent Thanksgiving and much of December in upstate New York , where he renewed his friendship with a now semi @-@ retired Dylan and took part in informal jam sessions with the Band . According to Helm , they discussed making a possible " fireside jam " album with Clapton and an Apple Films " rock western " called Zachariah , but neither project progressed beyond the planning stage . The bucolic surroundings proved fruitful for Harrison as a songwriter , producing his first collaboration with Dylan , " I 'd Have You Anytime " , and leading him to write " All Things Must Pass " . He later described the latter song as a " Robbie Robertson – Band type of tune " , and said that he always imagined it being sung by Helm . 
 = = Composition = = 
 While discussing " All Things Must Pass " with music journalist Timothy White in 1987 , Harrison recalled that his " starting point " for the composition was Robertson 's " The Weight " – a song that had " a religious and a country feeling to it " . Musically , the verses of " All Things Must Pass " are set to a logical climb within the key of E ; the brief choruses form a departure from this , with their inclusion of a B minor chord rather than the more expected major voicing . Author Ian Inglis notes that the composition incorporates the same " modes , cadences and suspensions " found in Band songs such as " The Weight " and " The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down " . 
 For his lyrics , Harrison drew inspiration from " All Things Pass " , a poem published in Timothy Leary 's 1966 book Psychedelic Prayers after the Tao Te Ching . In his 1980 autobiography , I Me Mine , Harrison refers to the idea for the song originating from " all kinds of mystics and ex @-@ mystics " , including Leary . Like later Harrison compositions such as " Here Comes the Sun " , " So Sad " and " Blow Away " , the lyrical and emotional content is based around metaphors involving the weather and the cycle of nature . Harrison states in the opening lines of verse one : " Sunrise doesn 't last all morning / A cloudburst doesn 't last all day " . 
 According to Harrison biographer Simon Leng , the lyrics reflect " life 's ephemeral character " and the " transitory " nature of love . Inglis suggests that the song is " [ o ] <unk> " about " the end of a love affair " . He and theologian Dale Allison note the optimism offered in Harrison 's words , since , as Leng puts it , " a new day always dawns . " Although " All Things Must Pass " avoids religiosity , Allison writes that its statement on the " all @-@ inclusive " transience of things in the material world explains why so much of its 1970 parent album , All Things Must Pass , " finds hope and meaning only in God , who does not pass away " . The song 's main message is offered in its middle eight : 
 All things must pass 
 None of life 's strings can last 
 So I must be on my way 
 And face another day . 
 Ultimately , the cycle of nature offers " consolation " , Leng writes , as further evidenced in the verse @-@ three lines " Now the darkness only stays at night time " and " Daylight is good at arriving at the right time " . 
 The lyrics underwent some minor changes after Harrison presented the song to the Beatles in January 1969 , when they began working at London 's Twickenham Film Studios for the so @-@ called Get Back project ( released as the Let It Be album and film ) . He had initially written the second line of verse two as the more literal " A wind can blow those clouds away " , but bootlegs from the sessions reveal John Lennon suggesting the word " mind " to introduce a bit of " psychedelia " into the song . Similarly , the repeated line " it 's not always gonna be this grey " was originally " It 's not always been this grey " in verses one and two . 
 = = Pre @-@ All Things Must Pass recording history = = 
 = = = The Beatles ' Get Back rehearsals = = = 
 In contrast with the creative equality he enjoyed with Dylan and the Band in Woodstock , Harrison returned to the Beatles fold and found the same discordant atmosphere that had blighted the White Album sessions in 1968 . Early on during the Get Back rehearsals – and tellingly , music journalist John Harris notes , before the arrival that day of Lennon and his partner Yoko Ono – Harrison enthused with fellow Beatles Ringo Starr and Paul McCartney about the Band 's camaraderie and group ethos , saying : " They 're just living , and they happen to be a band as well . " 
 On 2 January , day one of the Twickenham film shoot , Harrison introduced " All Things Must Pass " , and the band worked on the song intermittently over the next four days of filming . In the search for a suitable musical arrangement , Harrison stressed his preference for a " feel " akin to the Band , a suggestion that resulted in Lennon switching from guitar to Lowrey organ , a keyboard favoured by the Band 's Garth Hudson . During the Twickenham rehearsals , the Beatles also discussed the idea of Harrison performing " All Things Must Pass " solo for inclusion in the proposed film . 
 They returned to the song briefly towards the end of January , by which time the project had moved location to their own Apple Studio , in central London – one of Harrison 's conditions for rejoining the Beatles after his temporary walkout on 10 January . Although the band gave a fair amount of time to " All Things Must Pass " , it was ultimately pushed aside , just as other Harrison compositions including " Old Brown Shoe " , " Isn 't It a Pity " , " Let It Down " and " I Me Mine " received a lukewarm reception , particularly from Lennon . David Fricke of Rolling Stone has referred to this period as a " struggle " for Harrison " against the patronizing restrictions of writing within and for the Beatles " . Doug Sulpy and Ray Schweighardt , authors of Get Back : The Unauthorized Chronicle of The Beatles ' Let It Be Disaster , observe that Lennon and McCartney routinely rejected Harrison 's songs , " even though some were far better than their own " . 
 The Beatles never formally recorded " All Things Must Pass " , and only rehearsal takes circulate on bootleg compilations from the sessions . The Fly on the Wall bonus disc accompanying the McCartney @-@ instigated Let It Be ... Naked album ( 2003 ) includes a snippet of the Beatles indulging in some Band @-@ like <unk> on the song . 
 = = = Harrison 's solo demo = = = 
 During the Beatles ' Apple Studio session on 28 January , Harrison talked with Lennon and Ono about possibly doing a solo album of his unused songs , in order to " preserve this , the Beatle bit , more " . Lennon offered his support for the idea . While author Bruce Spizer has suggested that Lennon was keen to " spare " the band from having to work on Harrison 's songs , Sulpy and Schweighardt consider that Lennon 's enthusiasm was because such a solo project would allow him and Ono to continue their own recording activities " without causing friction within The Beatles " . 
 On 25 February 1969 , his 26th birthday , Harrison entered Abbey Road Studios alone and recorded a demo of the song , along with other recent compositions " Old Brown Shoe " and " Something " . With Ken Scott serving as engineer , he recorded two takes of " All Things Must Pass " , adding extra electric guitar onto the second . This version was eventually released in 1996 on the Beatles ' outtake collection Anthology 3 . 
 = = = Billy Preston 's version = = = 
 Soon after Harrison had begun talking publicly about making a solo album , during the final months of 1969 , he offered " All Things Must Pass " , along with the more recent " My Sweet Lord " , to Billy Preston for the latter 's album Encouraging Words . Through Harrison 's invitation , Preston had played keyboards for the Beatles once the Get Back / Let It Be sessions resumed at Apple Studio , where the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Texan had impressed with his superior musicianship and convivial presence . Preston was soon offered a recording deal with Apple Records , Encouraging Words being the second album under the contract . 
 Co @-@ produced by Harrison , Preston 's reading of " All Things Must Pass " betrays an obvious debt to his former mentor , Ray Charles . While Harrison 's later recording is generally viewed as the definitive version , Bruce Eder of AllMusic considers this treatment of the song the superior of the two . Preston 's version appeared in September 1970 , five months after the Beatles ' break @-@ up . 
 = = All Things Must Pass recording = = 
 While completing his production on Preston 's release , Harrison chose to record the song himself for what became the title track of his post @-@ Beatles solo debut , the triple album All Things Must Pass . In describing " All Things Must Pass " as a " haunting hymn about the mortality of everything " , author Elliot Huntley notes the added poignance in Harrison 's version , due to the death of his mother in July 1970 after a long period of illness . 
 With Phil Spector as his co @-@ producer , Harrison taped the basic track at Abbey Road Studios between 26 May and early in June . Other participants included Clapton , German bassist Klaus Voormann and Starr , the latter another avowed Band fan . Leng credits the song 's piano part to Bobby Whitlock , who also sang backing vocals with Clapton , his future bandmate in Derek and the Dominos . In his 2010 autobiography , Whitlock states that it was Preston who played the piano on " All Things Must Pass " , while his own contribution was pump organ , or harmonium . Although Leng lists both Harrison and Clapton as having played acoustic guitar and Starr and Jim Gordon on drums , according to the personnel that Whitlock offers , neither Clapton nor Gordon played on the song . Among the overdubs on the track , Nashville session musician Pete Drake recorded a pedal @-@ steel guitar part during a brief visit to London , to participate in sessions for Harrison songs such as " Behind That Locked Door " and " I Live for You " . 
 Spector 's erratic behaviour during the All Things Must Pass sessions left Harrison to handle most of the project alone , but in August 1970 , after receiving a tape of Harrison 's early mixes of the songs , Spector provided him with written feedback and guidance . Spector wrote of " All Things Must Pass " , " This particular song is so good that any honest [ vocal ] performance by you is acceptable as far as I 'm concerned " , but he expressed his disapproval of the horns at the start of the track . In the words of authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , " clearer heads prevailed " and Jim Price and Bobby Keys ' horn parts were retained . 
 The recording opens with " <unk> steady " piano chords , Inglis writes , and what Leng terms " sensitive " string orchestration from John Barham , soon joined by the horns and Drake 's pedal steel . Leng highlights this combination as providing the song with its rising and falling musical moods , implying variously light and darkness ; Inglis writes of the musical arrangement mirroring the " competing impressions " of hope and melancholy found in Harrison 's lyrics . True to its Catskill roots , the recording evokes the Band 's " The Weight " and their eponymous second album , the tracks on which were similarly inspired by " the beauty of that autumn in Woodstock " , according to Helm . 
 = = Release and album artwork = = 
 Almost two years after Harrison wrote the song , " All Things Must Pass " was released in November 1970 , closing side three of the triple album in its original LP format . Despite its high retail price , All Things Must Pass was a major commercial success , comfortably outselling concurrent solo releases by Lennon and McCartney . 
 The song 's title was invariably seen as a statement on the demise of the Beatles , as commentators viewed the album as Harrison 's liberation from the artistic constraints imposed on him within the band . The album 's cover image , showing Harrison seated on his Friar Park lawn surrounded by four reclining garden gnomes – thought to represent the Beatles – was also viewed as reflecting this theme . While commenting that " All Things Must Pass " had " accrue [ d ] new layers of relevance " during the album 's creation , particularly with the death of Harrison 's mother , former Mojo editor Paul Du Noyer writes : " Nobody in November 1970 could have mistaken the title 's significance ... As if to cement the association of ideas , the wry cover picture has George in solitary splendour , surrounded by a quartet of gnomes . " In a 2001 interview , photographer Barry Feinstein admitted that the words " All Things Must Pass " had helped inspire his set @-@ up for the photo , saying : " What else could it be ? ... [ It ] was over with The Beatles , right ? And that title ... Very symbolic . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 On release , Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone described " All Things Must Pass " as " eloquently hopeful and resigned " while labelling the album " the music of mountain tops and vast horizons " . Beatles Forever author Nicholas Schaffner noted in 1977 , with reference to Harrison 's commercial and critical dominance over his former bandmates following the break @-@ up : " The very fact that the Beatles had kept George 's flowering talents so under wraps proved to be his secret weapon . " Schaffner named " All Things Must Pass " and " Beware of Darkness " as the two " most eloquent " songs on All Things Must Pass , " musically as well as lyrically " , with " mysterious , seductive melodies , over which faded strings and horns hover like Blue Jay Way fog " . 
 Writing for Rolling Stone in 2000 , Anthony DeCurtis praised the song for its musical demonstration of " the sweet satisfactions of faith " . On a triple album where " nearly every song is excellent " , AllMusic picks " All Things Must Pass " as one of five standout tracks ( or AMG track picks ) , with Richie Unterberger writing of its autumnal theme : " It 's the kind of song that fits the mood in November , when the trees are getting stripped bare of their leaves , the days are getting shorter and colder , and you have to resign yourself to knowing it 's going to be tougher and tougher in those regards for months , also knowing that those hardships will pass away come springtime . " In his book on Harrison , subtitled A Spiritual Biography , Gary Tillery refers to the song as " magisterial " and a " majestic title track " that " leaves even the shallowest listener contemplative " . Michael Gallucci of Ultimate Classic Rock places " All Things Must Pass " third on his list of Harrison 's best solo songs ( behind the two hit singles from All Things Must Pass , " My Sweet Lord " and " What Is Life " ) , and comments : " The album 's title track takes on more poignancy after Harrison 's death [ in 2001 ] , but it 's always been great . " Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham similarly describes the song as " a heart @-@ rending piece of significant prescience which seems to take on more poignancy with every passing year " . 
 Among Harrison 's biographers , Simon Leng considers " All Things Must Pass " a " classic of Harrison 's lyrical ambiguity , in essence a hopeful song , without sounding so " , with a lyric that " approaches Bob Dylan standard " . Ian Inglis also praises the lyrics , writing : " The song contains some of Harrison 's most insightful and pensive words . ' Daylight is good at arriving at the right time ' is a fine example of his ... ability to position the profound within the commonplace . " Elliot Huntley rates it as one of Harrison 's " most beautiful " songs , " if not the very best " , and suggests that the sentiments behind " All Things Must Pass " would have made it a " fitting conclusion " to the final album recorded by the Beatles , Abbey Road ( 1969 ) . 
 Bruce Spizer similarly rates " All Things Must Pass " a highlight of Harrison 's career , while Leng considers it " perhaps the greatest solo Beatle composition " of all . In his book Revolution in the Head , Ian MacDonald describes " All Things Must Pass " as " the wisest song never recorded by The Beatles " . In 2009 , The Guardian included the track in its list of " 1000 Songs Everyone Must Hear " . 
