 = = Performance and later releases = = 
 " All Things Must Pass " was not a track that Harrison ever played in concert , although it appeared on his preliminary setlist for the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh shows . He twice performed the song live in front of TV cameras during the final years of his life , beginning with his appearance with Ravi Shankar on VH1 's Hard Rock Live , filmed in New York on 14 May 1997 . The pair were on the show to promote their recent collaboration , Chants of India , but at host John <unk> 's urging , Harrison accepted an acoustic guitar and performed a brief rendition of " All Things Must Pass " . In late 2000 , Harrison sang " All Things Must Pass " while again seated on a stool on Friar Park 's main lawn , a performance that was included in the press kit for All Things Must Pass 's 30th anniversary reissue early the following year . 
 Coinciding with this 2001 reissue , the song appeared on a promotional single as the B @-@ side to " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " . After being omitted from the " cursory " selection of 1970 – 75 tracks on The Best of George Harrison ( 1976 ) , Inglis writes , the song appeared on Harrison 's 2009 career @-@ spanning compilation Let It Roll . 
 In Martin Scorsese 's 2011 documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , " All Things Must Pass " is the first song featured in the movie , played over footage of German air raids over Britain during World War II . In November that year , a 1970 @-@ recorded demo of the song ( featuring just Harrison , Starr and Voormann ) appeared on the deluxe edition CD accompanying the British DVD release of the film ; this CD was subsequently issued worldwide in May 2012 as Early Takes : Volume 1 . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Steve Wood and Daniel May composed music to the 1998 documentary film Everest incorporating melodies from some of George Harrison 's songs , one of which was " All Things Must Pass " . At the Concert for George tribute to Harrison , held at London 's Royal Albert Hall on 29 November 2002 , Paul McCartney sang " All Things Must Pass " , backed by a large band that included Preston , Clapton , Voormann and Starr . Leng notes the irony in McCartney performing the song , while Beatles biographer Peter Doggett comments : " it wasn 't hard to imagine Harrison 's cynicism as McCartney led the band into a soulful rendition of ' All Things Must Pass ' – one of the songs that the other Beatles had refused to take seriously in January 1969 . " According to Clapton , author Robert Rodriguez writes , McCartney " was humbled at having to relearn it " . 
 Several other artists have recorded " All Things Must Pass " in the years since Harrison 's death . In 2003 , Bobby Whitlock and his wife , CoCo Carmel , included the song on their acoustic live album Other Assorted Love Songs , Live from Whitney Chapel . Jazz guitarist Joel Harrison covered " All Things Must Pass " on his album Harrison on Harrison : Jazz Explanations of George Harrison , released in October 2005 . In 2007 , a live version by the Waterboys appeared on their CD single " Everybody Takes a Tumble " , and the following year Sloan Wainwright included a cover of the song on her album Rediscovery . 
 " All Things Must Pass " was among the Harrison compositions covered by Jim James on his Tribute To EP , recorded in December 2001 but not released until August 2009 . Also in 2009 , Klaus Voormann released a version of the song on his solo album A Sideman 's Journey , with Yusuf Islam on vocals and acoustic guitar . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who performed on Harrison 's All Things Must Pass version of the song are believed to be as follows : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar , backing vocals 
 Eric Clapton – acoustic guitar , backing vocals 
 Pete Drake – pedal steel 
 Billy Preston – piano 
 Bobby Whitlock – harmonium , backing vocals 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums , tambourine 
 Jim Gordon – drums 
 Bobby Keys – saxophone 
 Jim Price – trumpet , trombone , horn arrangement 
 John Barham – string arrangement 
 = 2002 Oman cyclone = 
 The 2002 Oman cyclone ( JTWC designation : 01A , officially known as Cyclonic Storm ARB 01 ) was an uncommon tropical cyclone that struck the Dhofar region of Oman in May 2002 . The first storm of the 2002 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , it developed on May 6 in the Arabian Sea , and it maintained a general west @-@ northwest track for much of its duration . The system reached cyclonic storm status on May 9 , meaning it attained winds of greater than 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , and on May 10 it made landfall near Salalah ; shortly thereafter it dissipated . The storm was rare , in the sense that it was one of only eleven tropical cyclones on record to approach the Arabian Peninsula in the month of May . 
 The storm brought the heaviest rainfall totals to Dhofar in 30 years , causing flooding and creating rivers in wadis , or typically dry riverbeds . Several people drowned after their vehicles were swept away by the flooding . The storm caused locally heavy damage , totaling $ 25 million ( 2002 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of convection developed on May 2 , 2002 near Sri Lanka , associated with a weak and broad circulation center . The system tracked west @-@ northwestward through the Arabian Sea along a trough near the equator . Its thunderstorm activity was enhanced by a ridge to its north , though was also removed from the center . By May 5 , the circulation had become better defined , and concurrently the convection increased over the center . After further organization , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified the system as Depression <unk> on May 6 . Around the same time , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) classified it as Tropical Depression 01A , while located about 1300 km ( 800 mi ) southeast of Salalah , Oman . 
 After becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression turned to a northwest motion before resuming a track to the west @-@ northwest . On May 7 it intensified into a deep depression , and though its winds had increased , the structure became disorganized as the center became exposed from the thunderstorm activity . The convection waned , due to the influence of dry air from the Arabian Peninsula , as well as from wind shear . As a result , the IMD downgraded it to depression status early on May 8 . However , later in the day , convection redeveloped over the western half of the circulation , and it again reached deep depression status , about 830 km ( 515 mi ) southeast of Oman . 
 The storm maintained poleward outflow as it continued west @-@ northwestward . Early on May 9 the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm , estimating winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and a pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Around that time , the storm was estimated by the JTWC to have attained peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 km / h ) , with an atmospheric pressure of 991 mbar . While located a short distance offshore , the storm turned to the northwest and weakened slightly . At about 0900 UTC on May 10 , the storm made landfall near Salalah , Oman . Shortly thereafter , it began dissipation over Oman . Its landfall in the Dhofar region of Oman was uncommon ; in the period from 1891 to 1990 , only 17 tropical depressions or storms struck the region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Along the coastline , the arrival of the storm resulted in strong waves of up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) . The storm dropped heavy rainfall in the vicinity of its landfall , which were the greatest totals in 30 years in the Dhofar region . The city of Salalah reported 58 mm ( 2 @.@ 28 in ) in a 24 ‑ hour period as the storm moved ashore , which was more than 300 % of its average monthly for May . As a result , some flooding was reported in the city , and several wadis , or typically dry riverbeds , became sudden rivers in the area ; one station recorded a discharge of 1146 m3 / s ( 40 @,@ 470 ft3 / s ) . In <unk> , precipitation amounted to 251 mm ( 9 @.@ 88 in ) , which was the highest total in Oman . Severe thunderstorms were reported during its passage , with wind gusts peaking at 106 km / h ( 66 mph ) . In neighboring Yemen , the city of Al <unk> reported light winds of about 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . 
 Damage was severe and widespread , estimated at $ 25 million ( 2002 USD ) . Storm impact included property , crop , transportation , and agricultural damage , with hundreds of cattle drowning during the passage of the storm . Across the Dhofar region of Oman , the storm caused several injuries and a total of nine fatalities ; most of the deaths were drownings , occurring when their vehicles were swept away by flooding in typically dry areas . Two army soldiers and one police officer drowned while saving other people in danger . 
 In the aftermath of the storm , the Omani government received 4 @,@ 000 requests for assistance , and in turn provided financial aid to 500 families ; additionally , the government supplied temporary housing for displaced people . 
 = Temple Israel ( Dayton , Ohio ) = 
 Temple Israel is a Reform congregation located at 130 Riverside Drive in Dayton , Ohio . Formed in 1850 , it incorporated as " Kehillah Kodesh B 'nai Yeshurun " in 1854 . After meeting in rented quarters , the congregation purchased its first synagogue building , a former Baptist church at 4th and Jefferson , in 1863 . Strongly influenced by Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise , it rapidly modernized its services , and , in 1873 , was a founding member of the Union for Reform Judaism . 
 The congregation sold its existing building in 1893 , and constructed a larger one at First and Jefferson , later severely damaged by the Great Dayton Flood of 1913 . In 1927 , the congregation moved to still larger , multi @-@ purpose premises at Salem and Emerson Avenues , outside downtown Dayton , and began to use the name " Temple Israel " , adding a new sanctuary to the building in 1953 . Temple Israel moved to its current building in 1994 . 
 Synagogue membership grew steadily for over 100 years , from 12 families in 1850 to 150 in the early 1900s , 200 by 1927 , and 500 by 1945 , peaking at 1 @,@ 100 in the 1960s . By 1995 , however , membership was down to 800 families . 
 Temple Israel has had a number of long @-@ tenured rabbis who were influential both in the congregation and in the larger Dayton community . These have included David Lefkowitz ( 1900 – 1920 ) , Louis Witt ( 1927 – 1947 ) , Selwyn Ruslander ( 1947 – 1969 ) and P. Irving Bloom ( 1973 – 1997 ) . As of 2011 , the rabbis were David M. Sofian and Karen Bodney @-@ Halasz . 
 = = The early years , at 4th and Jefferson = = 
 What was later to become Temple Israel was originally formed as a Hebrew Society in 1850 by twelve Jewish men under the leadership of Joseph Lebensburger , a German Jew and first permanent Jewish resident of Dayton . The Society met daily for prayers in rented rooms : first above a shop in the old Dayton Bank Building ( which was later the Steele High School , and has since been demolished ) near Monument and Main Streets , and later in larger quarters in a building next to the Cooper building , a block south on Main Street . It also hired its first Torah reader , a " Mr. Wendel " , and purchased — for $ 100 ( today $ 2 @,@ 800 ) — a small piece of land for a cemetery on what is now Rubicon Street . 
 The Society incorporated as " Kehillah Kodesh B 'nai Yeshurun " in 1854 . It moved to larger facilities , first near First and Main Streets in 1860 , and then , in 1863 , to the northeast corner of 4th and Jefferson Streets . There Kehillah Kodesh B 'nai Yeshurun purchased for $ 1 @,@ 500 ( today $ 29 @,@ 000 ) its first owned premises , the building of a Baptist church whose congregation was moving to Main Street . 
 The structure required " extensive remodeling " , and Lebensburger , as building chairman , led the campaign to raise the necessary $ 9 @,@ 000 ( today $ 173 @,@ 000 ) . Funds came not only from the membership but also from non @-@ Jewish members of many local societies , including the Odd Fellows and Masons . Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise assisted B 'nai Yeshurun 's then – religious leader Rev. Mr. <unk> with the dedication of what became " the seventh congregation @-@ owned Jewish House of Worship in Ohio . " 
 = = Move to Reform , and early rabbis = = 
 Influenced by Wise , the congregation implemented many reforms in its services . In 1861 they adopted Wise 's Minhag America prayer book . In that same decade they added an organ , did away with the prayer shawl , and started a religious school . In the 1870s the congregation removed <unk> candles from the sanctuary , and added family pews and a mixed choir ( men and women together ) . In 1873 B 'nai Yeshurun was one of the first thirteen founding members of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations ( UAHC ) , now Union for Reform Judaism . 
 By 1889 B 'nai Yeshurun had outgrown its original cemetery , and the congregation purchased 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) on West Schantz Avenue in Oakwood . Oakwood was a " restricted community " ; Jews were not allowed to reside or own stores there . According to Leonard <unk> , president of the Dayton Jewish Genealogical Society , " if you were dead , you could be buried in Oakwood , but if you were alive , you couldn ’ t live there " . Relatives began moving those buried at the Rubicon cemetery to the new " Riverview Cemetery " , including Lebensburger , who had died by this time . This process was not completed until 1967 . 
 In its first forty years the congregation had a series of generally short @-@ tenured religious leaders . These included <unk> ( 1862 – 63 ) , Moses Bauer ( 1863 – 64 ) , L. Liebman ( 1864 – 67 ) , Abraham Blum ( 1868 – 69 ) , Leon Leopold ( 1870 – 72 ) , Ben Weil ( 1872 – 76 ) , Ephraim Fischer ( 1876 – 81 ) , Godfrey / Gottheil Taubenhaus ( later rabbi of Congregation Beth Elohim of Brooklyn , New York ) ( 1881 – 85 ) , and Israel Saenger ( 1885 – 89 ) . 
 During this period the membership also transformed from immigrant @-@ born to native @-@ born . In 1881 the congregation 's " language of record " was changed from German to English , and in 1889 the synagogue hired its first American @-@ trained rabbi , Max Wertheimer . 
 A graduate of Wise 's Hebrew Union College , Wertheimer had been born in Germany to Orthodox parents . He was popular with the congregation , and Dayton 's Christian community highly respected him . Non @-@ Jews attended his Friday evening sermons , and he in turn was a guest speaker at many Dayton churches . 
 = = First and Jefferson building , and David Lefkowitz as rabbi = = 
 In 1893 the congregation sold its building at 4th and Jefferson , and constructed a new one at First and Jefferson . Wise again assisted with the dedication . 
 Wertheimer 's wife died young , leaving him with two small children . This tragedy made him question his faith ; in 1899 he resigned from the congregation , resigned his membership in the Central Conference of American Rabbis ( <unk> ) , and , in 1900 , converted to Christian Science ; in 1938 David Max Eichhorn wrote that " Mary Baker Eddy herself financed Wertheimer 's study " . Wertheimer later became a Baptist . 
 David Lefkowitz was hired as rabbi in 1900 , when the congregation comprised around 150 families . Born in <unk> , Hungary in 1875 , he had emigrated to the United States with his widowed mother and two brothers around 1881 . Due to financial difficulties , he and one brother grew up in the Hebrew Orphan Asylum of New York , where he later worked to help pay for his schooling . A graduate of both the College of the City of New York and the University of Cincinnati , he was ordained at Hebrew Union College in 1900 . Held in " high regard " by the membership , Lefkowitz was also " an active force in Dayton 's civic and interfaith activities " and an " ambassador of the Jewish Community to the Dayton area " . He was the first president of the Dayton chapter of the Red Cross and served on its Executive Board , and also served as president of the Humane Society . 
 Later president of the <unk> , Lefkowitz was also anti @-@ Zionist . He was one of the prominent Jewish signatories of a petition presented in 1919 by United States Congressman Julius Kahn to President of the United States Woodrow Wilson who " asserted their wish not to see Palestine ' either now or at any time in the future ' become a Jewish state . " In 1942 , he was one of the founders of the American Council for Judaism , " the only American Jewish organization ever formed for the specific purpose of fighting Zionism and opposing the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine . " 
 During Lefkowitz 's tenure , the synagogue building was severely damaged by the Great Dayton Flood of 1913 . Lefkowitz was " in charge of one of the districts outside the flooded area " . There he assisted around 28 @,@ 000 refugees in finding shelter , and " established a bread line to feed them " . However , his suggestion that the congregation move to a larger building in a new location outside downtown Dayton , while taken seriously , was not acted on . 
 Membership had grown to 206 families by 1919 . The congregational school held classes twice a week , and had 8 classes , 10 teachers , and 140 students . That year the synagogue 's total income was $ 10 @,@ 000 ( today $ 136 @,@ 000 ) . In 1920 , Lefkowitz moved to Temple Emanu @-@ El , Dallas 's largest and oldest synagogue . 
 = = Salem and Emerson building = = 
 Samuel S. Mayersberg succeeded Lefkowitz as rabbi . He was " known for his oratorical skills and his crusades for moral and police reforms in Dayton " . His major goal during his ministry was to acquire larger premises outside downtown Dayton , which was realized in 1927 when the congregation moved to a new building at Salem and Emerson Avenues . Besides the main sanctuary , which had seating for 600 people , the structure included a social hall and kitchen , classrooms , and offices . It was at that time that the congregation began to use the name " Temple Israel " . Mayersberg left that year , and became the rabbi of Congregation B 'nai <unk> of Kansas City , Missouri . During his tenure , membership increased to 200 families . 
 Louis Witt succeeded Mayersberg in 1927 . He worked on fostering interfaith relations , and , like his predecessors , was active in community and civic life . A tall man who sometimes wore a swallow @-@ tail coat when conducting services , he was a strong proponent of " Classical Reform " principles , and while he was rabbi , following his preference , no one wore a skullcap in the Temple . 
 In 1929 , at the second UAHC convention , Witt had asserted that America " by its very pleasantness and friendliness lures us away from our ancient loyalties . Its secularism is so delightful , its mutuality so penetrative , its universalism so delightful , that by a sort of sheer spiritual osmosis it incorporates us into itself and makes us look and become more and more like itself " . Witt argued that Jews had to resist this pull . Ten years later , however , in a 1939 article in The Christian Century , he argued that Jews should celebrate Christmas . In his view , Christians were now more liberal and celebrated " the inherent <unk> and universalism " of Christmas , rather than any specifically Christian doctrine . Stating that his children had been deprived of the holiday 's pleasures , Witt asserted that Judaism was already a syncretic religion , and that celebrating the holiday was an ecumenical act which did not indicate that he was " thereby drawn even by the breadth of a hair nearer to the worship of an ecclesiastical Christ " . He concluded by asking " Is it neither treason of Jew nor triumph of Christian but partnership of Jew and Christian in the making of a better world in which the Christ can have part only by energizing and perpetuating and <unk> the partnership ? " 
 During Witt 's tenure , Dayton experienced an influx of Jewish immigration , and the original German @-@ Jewish constituency of the congregation became more diverse . Family membership reached 500 by 1945 . 
 = = New sanctuary during Selwyn Ruslander 's tenure = = 
 Following Witt 's retirement in 1947 , Selwyn D. Ruslander succeeded him . Born in Pennsylvania in 1911 , Ruslander had graduated from the University of Cincinnati in 1931 , and was ordained at Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati in 1935 . He worked at a number of non @-@ rabbinic jobs ( including as an Ordinary Seaman in the U.S. Merchant Marine ) , and several rabbinic positions , including both pulpit and non @-@ pulpit roles . In 1939 he was appointed Director of Youth Education for the UAHC , and also became the first director of the National Federation of Temple Youth ( now North American Federation of Temple Youth ) . In 1942 , during World War II , he took a leave of absence from the UAHC to volunteer for the armed forces as a U.S. Navy chaplain . From 1943 to 1945 he served with the United States Eighth Fleet in the Mediterranean Sea , " the first Jewish chaplain in the history of the Navy to serve with a combat fleet " , and earned a Combat Star for his participation in Operation Shingle . He was released from active duty in December 1946 , and returned briefly to the UAHC , then went to South Shore Temple in Chicago , before taking the role at Temple Israel . 
 Ruslander brought some traditionalism back to the congregation ; he reinstated the Bar Mitzvah and inaugurated the Bat Mitzvah celebrations , and re @-@ organized the religious school and added Hebrew to its curriculum . Like his predecessors , he was very active in Dayton 's civic life , serving on the boards of a large number of community organizations . Ruslander was possibly Dayton 's then " best known clergyman of any faith " , and during his tenure Temple Israel experienced rapid growth . In 1953 , Temple Israel constructed a new sanctuary at its Salem and Emerson location , and connected it to the original building . By the end of the 1960s membership increased to 1 @,@ 100 families , and Temple Israel hired Howard R. Greenstein and Joseph S. Weizenbaum as assistant rabbis . Ruslander died in 1969 , and for several years Greenstein and <unk> served as interim spiritual leaders . In 1972 , Weizenbaum became rabbi of Temple Emanu @-@ El of Tucson , Arizona , where he served until 1993 . Greenstein joined Jacksonville , Florida 's Congregation <unk> Chesed as rabbi in 1973 , and served there until 1995 . 
 = = The move to Riverside Drive , led by P. Irving Bloom = = 
 P. ( Paul ) Irving Bloom joined as rabbi in 1973 . He had previously been a U.S. Air Force chaplain , then rabbi of Congregation Sha 'arai Shomayim in Mobile , Alabama from 1960 to 1973 . Bloom introduced a number of innovations to the synagogue , including joint programs with other Dayton synagogues , a new curriculum for the religious school and Jewish studies classes for adults , and enhanced Friday programs and lay @-@ led services in the summer . Bloom strongly believed that Temple Israel should relocate to a more central location , as the Jewish community of Dayton had by then spread throughout Miami Valley . His vision was realized in 1994 , when the congregation moved to a new building on Riverside Drive , near downtown Dayton . The building at Salem and Emerson was sold to a Baptist church . As noted by Bloom , the congregation had " come full circle " ; it purchased its first building from a Baptist church in downtown Dayton , and had sold its most recent building to a Baptist church in order to return to the area . By 1995 , however , membership was only eight hundred families . 
 Bloom retired in 1997 , and was succeeded by Marc Gruber . A graduate of Brandeis University , Gruber attended Hebrew Union College in Jerusalem and New York , and was ordained in 1981 . A vegetarian , he also wrote a syndicated vegetarian cooking column from 1990 to 1993 . At Temple Israel he reformed the services and introduced Bar and Bat Mitzvah classes for adults . During his tenure , in 2000 , the congregation celebrated its Sesquicentennial , with a number of " religious , cultural , social and social action programs " throughout the year . Gruber also served on the Steering Committee for the UAHC Department of Jewish Family Concerns from 1995 to 2002 , working on " the inclusion of people with disabilities and special needs " . Gruber moved to Central Synagogue of Nassau County in Rockville Centre , New York in 2002 , and Michael <unk> served as interim rabbi . 
 = = Recent events = = 
 David M. Sofian joined as Rabbi in 2003 . A graduate of Hebrew Union College and the University of Missouri , Sofian had served as assistant rabbi at Temple Emanuel in Worcester , Massachusetts , at Temple <unk> Shomayim in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , and at Emanuel Congregation in Chicago , before coming to Temple Israel . Karen Bodney @-@ Halasz , a graduate of Northwestern University , joined as Religious School Director in 2003 and became Director of Education in 2005 . After her rabbinic ordination in June 2007 , she became Rabbi @-@ Educator . 
 Sofian retired in 2014 , <unk> Bogosian was hired as interim senior rabbi and Bodney @-@ Halasz was elevated to associate rabbi . After an eight @-@ month search process , the temple 's search committee unanimously recommended Bodney @-@ Halasz become the next senior rabbi . The temple 's board of directors approved that recommendation in January 2016 , making Bodney @-@ Halasz Temple Israel 's first senior rabbi . She will officially take over July 1 . 
 = County Borough of Leeds = 
 The County Borough of Leeds , and its predecessor , the Municipal Borough of Leeds , was a local government district in the West Riding of Yorkshire , England , from 1835 to 1974 . Its origin was the ancient borough of Leeds , which was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 . In 1889 , when West Riding County Council was formed , Leeds became a county borough outside the administrative county of the West Riding ; and in 1893 the borough gained city status . The borough was extended a number of times , expanding from 21 @,@ 593 acres ( 8 @,@ 738 ha ) in 1911 to 40 @,@ 612 acres ( 16 @,@ 435 ha ) in 1961 ; adding in stages the former area of Roundhay , Seacroft , Shadwell and Middleton parishes and gaining other parts of adjacent districts . In 1971 Leeds was the fifth largest county borough by population in England . The county borough was abolished in 1974 and replaced with the larger City of Leeds , a metropolitan district of West Yorkshire . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Manorial borough 1207 – 1626 = = = 
 The Borough of Leeds was created in 1207 , when Maurice <unk> , Lord of the Manor , granted a charter to the inhabitants of the town of Leeds . They were created " burgesses " , and were given the right to hold half an acre of land , trade as they liked , and transport their goods by land or water , subject to tolls and restrictions paid to the manor . The only officer of the borough was a praetor , appointed annually at the Feast of Pentecost by the Lord of the Borough . The praetor had the duty of administering justice and collecting fines and other revenues . The borough formed only a small area adjacent to a crossing of the River Aire , between the old settlement centred on Leeds Parish Church to the east and the manor house and mills to the west . The borough consisted of a single street with approximately thirty burgage plots . By the seventeenth century the title of praetor had been abandoned in favour of the more customary " bailiff " , but otherwise the government of the town remained in the form introduced in the thirteenth century . An enquiry into the administration of local charities in 1620 disclosed that many of the funds were diverted by the bailiff for his private use . This , and other irregularities , led the inhabitants of Leeds to petition Charles I for a charter of incorporation . 
 = = = Incorporated borough ( 1626 – 1836 ) = = = 
 = = = = Incorporation = = = = 
 A charter of incorporation was granted on 13 July 1626 , incorporating the entire parish of Leeds St Peter as the " Borough of Leedes in the County of York " . The parish and borough consisted of eleven chapelries ( Armley , Beeston , Bramley , Chapel Allerton , <unk> , Headingley cum Burley , Holbeck , Hunslet , Leeds , <unk> and Wortley ) and parts of two more ( Seacroft and Temple Newsam ) . 
 The governing corporation of the borough was styled " The Alderman and Burgesses of the Borough of Leedes in the County of York " , and consisted of one Alderman , nine principal burgesses and twenty assistants . The charter named the members of the first corporation , with Sir John Savile becoming the first alderman . 
 = = = = Charter of Charles II = = = = 
 In January 1643 , during the English Civil War , Leeds fell to parliamentary forces . Royalist members of the corporation were replaced with those loyal to the Commonwealth . With the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , moves were made to reform the borough 's government . The leading merchants of the town submitted a petition to Charles II requesting a new charter as they felt the constitution and operation of the governing body was inadequate to the needs of the town . 
 A second charter was duly granted on 2 November 1661 , with the earlier charter withdrawn . The new corporation thus created consisted of a mayor , twelve aldermen , twenty four assistants , a recorder and a town clerk and was entitled the " Mayor , Aldermen and Burgesses of the Borough of Leedes in the County of York " . The charter named the first mayor as Thomas Danby . The new corporation was given extensive powers to enforce and make laws to regulate trade and ensure the good governance of the town . From 1684 to 1689 the town was governed under a charter of James II which gave the crown power over all appointments to the town council . With the accession of William III and Mary II the 1661 charter was restored to the townspeople , and remained the governing charter until 1836 . 
 = = Municipal borough ( 1836 – 1889 ) = = 
 In 1833 the Whig Government of Lord Grey began enquiries into the government of the various boroughs in England and Wales , with a view to reforming their constitutions and methods of election . Following the recommendations of a Royal Commission , legislation was enacted as the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 . 
 Leeds was among the 178 boroughs reformed by the act , becoming the " Municipal Borough of Leeds " . The reformed borough was initially unchanged in area , and was divided into 12 wards , with a town council of 16 aldermen and 48 councillors , headed by a mayor . Each ward was represented by either three or six directly elected councillors . One third of the councillors retired annually . Aldermen were additional members of the council , there being one alderman for every three councillors : they had a six @-@ year term of office , with half of the aldermanic bench elected by the council itself every three years . 
 It was originally envisaged that the first elections would be held on 1 November 1835 , with the reformed town councils holding their first meetings on 9 November following . However , the process of dividing the boroughs into wards and preparing the burgess roll or electoral register was a lengthy one , and an Order in Council was made delaying the first elections to 26 December , with the new boroughs coming into formal existence on 1 January 1836 . 
 An early focus of the new authority was on policing and crime , with construction of a new borough prison begun in 1842 . The Leeds Improvement Act of 1842 gave the council further powers over markets , streets , street lighting , sewerage , building regulations , public cleansing and smoke regulation in the rapidly growing industrial city . 
 In 1881 the wards were redrawn , so that the borough comprised sixteen wards . The size of the town council remained the same , however , with each new ward returning one alderman and three councillors . 
 = = County borough 1889 – 1974 = = 
 The Local Government Act 1888 created elected county councils to administer services throughout England and Wales . Where a municipal borough had a population of more than 50 @,@ 000 at the 1881 Census it was created a county borough , with the powers and duties of both a borough and county council . 
 As Leeds had an 1881 population of 309 @,@ 119 it duly became a county borough on 1 April 1889 . The borough , while independent of the West Riding County Council for local government , remained part of the county for purposes such as the administration of justice and lieutenancy . 
 The change of status in 1889 made no change to the boundaries of the borough or the size of the council . 
 = = = City status and lord mayoralty = = = 
 Until 1889 the right to the title of " city " in the United Kingdom was linked to the presence of an Anglican cathedral . In that year Birmingham , Dundee and Belfast were granted letters patent raising them to cities by virtue of their population , economic importance and history of good municipal government . 
 In 1892 another borough in the West Riding , Sheffield , announced that it was seeking the grant of city status to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of the town 's incorporation , which was to occur in 1893 . When the members of Leeds Town Council became aware of the application by Sheffield , which was both smaller in population and of more recent creation than Leeds , they immediately began the process of applying for the dignity themselves . A petition was approved on 4 January 1893 , which set out the reasons it was felt that Leeds deserved to become a city : these were the antiquity of the town , its many charters , its large area , its population that was " approaching 400 @,@ 000 " , the fact that it was the largest municipality not to be a city , and its commercial importance for the woollen industry . 
 A delegation from Leeds , including two Members of Parliament ( MPs ) , met with the Home Secretary , H H Asquith on 27 January to press the borough 's case . Along with the claims of the borough as set out in the original petition , the delegation made two more points : Leeds was the only university town not a city , and Leeds and Sheffield were the only boroughs returning five MPs to the House of Commons without the status ( of a city ) . 
 The Home Secretary forwarded the petitions of both boroughs to The Queen on 3 February , recommending that the honour be granted in both cases as they were the " only towns in the United Kingdom with a population exceeding 300 @,@ 000 to which the title of City , enjoyed by many smaller of less important places , has not been granted ; and that both appear to be well fitted by their loyalty , public spirit , and industrial progress , for this mark of your Majesty 's favour . " 
 On 7 February , Sir Godfrey Lushington , permanent secretary to the Home Office , wrote to the mayors of both towns signifying that the applications had been approved . The award was made by letters patent on 13 February , and was announced in the London Gazette on 21 February : 
 The Queen has been pleased , by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom , bearing date the 13th February 1893 , to 
 ordain and declare that the Borough of Leeds shall be a City , and shall be called and styled " The City of Leeds " . 
 Four years later the Diamond Jubilee of the accession of Queen Victoria occurred . As part of the celebrations it was announced on 21 June that the mayor of Leeds " shall in future bear the title of Lord Mayor " . The award which empowered the Lord Mayor to enjoy and use all the rights , privileges , pre @-@ <unk> and advantages to " such degree duly and of right belonging " was made by Letters Patent dated 12 July , and was published in the London Gazette on the following day : 
 The Queen has been pleased , by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , bearing date the 12th July , 1897 to ordain that the Chief Magistrate , now , and for the time being , of the City of Leeds , shall be styled Lord Mayor of Leeds . 
 = = = Parishes to 1912 = = = 
 Townships and chapelries which were separately rated for poor law purposes were formed into civil parishes in 1866 . The borough of Leeds contained eleven parishes and part of two others , and no changes were made to their boundaries until 1894 . The Local Government Act 1894 provided that no parish could lie in more than one local government area , with parishes being divided or amalgamated as required . 
 In Leeds this was effected by constituting the part of Temple Newsam parish within the city a separate parish of <unk> , and merging the portion of Seacroft that lay within the municipal boundaries with the existing parish of <unk> . The number of parishes into which the city was divided was reduced to five in 1904 by the following mergers : A second application was made late in 1911 . The corporation sought to add 4 @,@ 839 acres ( 19 @.@ 58 km2 ) to the north and east of the city : the parishes of Roundhay and Seacroft ( comprising Leeds Rural District ) , the parish of Shadwell ( from Wetherby Rural District ) and the Crossgates area of the parish of Barwick in Elmet ( from Tadcaster Rural District ) . The proposed extension would increase the county borough 's population by 7 @,@ 603 to 452 @,@ 171 . An inquiry was held in January 1912 , at which the strong opposition of the West Riding County Council and all the parish and rural district councils involved was made clear . On 4 May the town clerk of Leeds was informed that the extension had been granted , with the exception of 169 acres ( 0 @.@ 68 km2 ) of agricultural land with an estimated population of 50 to 100 . 
 The extension took effect on 9 November 1912 , with the added areas initially being added to the existing north ward and to the parish of Leeds . 
 = = = 1920 extension = = = 
 In 1919 the city council sought another extension , this time to the south , by taking in the parish of Middleton from Hunslet Rural District . The boundary change took effect on 1 April 1920 , and Middleton formed a 17th ward , electing 3 councillors and 1 alderman to the city council , which was increased in size accordingly . The parish of Middleton was abolished , with its area added to the existing parish of Hunslet . The extra territory was acquired by the county borough for a major scheme of council housing , the construction of which commenced almost immediately . On 1 April 1925 the five parishes in the county borough were united into a single parish of Leeds . 
 = = = 1928 extension = = = 
 In 1927 Leeds Corporation promoted a bill to add further areas to the city , namely Gildersome Urban District , and parts of the rural districts of Hunslet , Tadcaster and Wharfedale ( the parishes of Adel cum Eccup , Alwoodley , Austhorpe – except for a detached part – and <unk> ) . The Leeds Corporation Act 1927 , as passed , omitted Gildersome and most of Austhorpe from the area added to Leeds . The extension , which took effect on 1 April 1928 added approximately 7 @,@ 131 acres ( 28 @.@ 86 km2 ) to the county borough . The area added comprised the parishes of Adel cum Eccup and Alwoodley to the north , and <unk> with 206 acres ( 0 @.@ 83 km2 ) from the parish of Austhorpe to the east . 
 In 1930 the wards of the county borough were redrawn , necessitating a general election of the entire city council . Twenty @-@ six wards were created , each returning 3 councillors and 1 alderman . The membership of the council was increased from 68 ( 51 councillors and 17 aldermen ) to 104 ( 78 councillors and 26 aldermen ) . The twenty @-@ six wards were as follows : 
 On 1 April 1937 the boundary of the county borough with the surrounding areas of the West Riding was adjusted under a county review order . The city exchanged areas with the following districts : 
 In 1950 the city council petitioned for an alteration in the number and boundaries of the municipal wards , and a consequent change in the number of aldermen and councillors . The petition was successful , with an Order in Council made on 28 July dividing the city into twenty @-@ eight wards : 
 The redrawing of wards made a general election of the entire council necessary in May 1951 . The new council had a membership of 112 : 84 councillors and 28 aldermen . 
 = = = 1957 extension = = = 
 Following the Second World War a Local Government Boundary Commission was appointed to review administrative structures throughout England and Wales . While the commission was in existence , local authorities were not permitted to make unilateral proposals for boundary changes . Although the commission recommended that Leeds should form the basis of a new unitary " one tier county " no action was taken . The commission itself was wound up in 1949 , and the final enlargement of the county borough took place under the Leeds Corporation Act 1956 , on 1 April 1957 . 2 @,@ 322 acres ( 9 @.@ 40 km2 ) of Tadcaster Rural District were added to the city . The 1958 commission was disbanded in 1966 , and the Redcliffe @-@ Maud Commission appointed in its place . When their report was published in 1969 , they recommended a system of large unitary authorities . A new Leeds authority was proposed , with an area of 317 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 280 km2 ) and a population of 840 @,@ 000 . The boundaries would have included a large rural area including part of the Yorkshire Dales and the town of Harrogate . The proposal was welcomed by Leeds City Council . Following a change of government , a white paper issued in 1971 rejected the unitary structure and instead proposed a metropolitan county of West Yorkshire , with Leeds forming a district in a two @-@ tier system . During the passing of the subsequent legislation , which was enacted as the Local Government Act 1972 , the boundaries of the Leeds Metropolitan District ( or District 6b ) were altered . Knaresborough and Harrogate were removed ( becoming the basis of a non @-@ metropolitan district in North Yorkshire ) while Rothwell was added from the neighbouring Wakefield district . 
 = = = Metropolitan borough = = = 
 The 1972 legislation came into effect on 1 April 1974 , with the county borough ceasing to exist at midnight on 31 March . The county borough 's area was combined with that of the Municipal Borough of Morley , the Municipal Borough of Pudsey , <unk> Urban District , Horsforth Urban District , Otley Urban District , Garforth Urban District , Rothwell Urban District and parts of Tadcaster Rural District , Wetherby Rural District and Wharfedale Rural District from the West Riding . The new Leeds district was one of five metropolitan districts in West Yorkshire . It was granted a borough and city status to become the City of Leeds . 
 = The Deal ( 2003 film ) = 
 The Deal is a 2003 British television film directed by Stephen Frears from a script by Peter Morgan , based in part upon The Rivals by James Naughtie . The film stars David Morrissey as Gordon Brown and Michael Sheen as Tony Blair , and depicts the Blair @-@ Brown deal — a well @-@ documented pact that Blair and Brown made whereby Brown would not stand in the 1994 Labour leadership election , so that Blair could have a clear run at becoming leader of the party and Prime Minister . The film begins on 9 June 1983 , as Blair and Brown are first elected to Parliament , and concludes in May 1994 at the Granita restaurant — the location of the supposed agreement — with a brief epilogue following the leadership contest . 
 The film was first proposed by Morgan in late 2002 and was taken on by Granada Television for ITV . After Frears agreed to direct , and the cast were signed on , ITV pulled out of it over fears that the political sensitivity could affect its corporate merger . Channel 4 picked up the production and filming was carried out for five weeks in May 2003 . The film was broadcast on 28 September 2003 , the weekend prior to the Labour Party 's annual party conference . 
 The film was critically praised . Morrissey received considerable praise , winning a Royal Television Society award for playing Brown , and Frears was nominated for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Television Movie / Serial by the Directors Guild of Great Britain . The film also nominated for an International Emmy for Best TV Movie / Miniseries . Sheen later reunited with Morgan , Frears , and producer Christine Langan in 2006 to reprise his role as Blair in The Queen , which depicts the aftermath of the death of Princess Diana on 31 August 1997 . Sheen reprised his role once again in 2010 in The Special Relationship , that chronicles the " special relationship " between Blair and US President Bill Clinton up until the inauguration of Clinton 's successor George W. Bush , and was broadcast on BBC Two in the United Kingdom and HBO in North America . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the prologue , opening in medias res , shows Gordon Brown ( David Morrissey ) taking a telephone call from Tony Blair ( Michael Sheen ) to arrange a meeting at the Granita restaurant in Islington . 
 The narrative shifts to 1983 ; in the wake of the Falklands War , Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her Conservative government enjoy huge public popularity as the general election approaches , while Labour 's radical election manifesto loses them key voters . Brown is elected as the new Member of Parliament for Dunfermline East . In London , he is shown to his office in the Houses of Parliament . John Smith ( Frank Kelly ) , a senior Labour MP , introduces Brown to Blair , his new office @-@ mate and the new MP for Sedgefield . Blair makes pleasantries with Brown and , though Brown is not initially impressed , the two become friends . Smith soon introduces the pair to Peter Mandelson ( Paul Rhys ) , Neil Kinnock 's director of communications . Shortly afterwards , Kinnock appoints Blair to be an assistant Treasury spokesman . Brown turns down a promotion to the Scottish Office , hoping a better position will come along . He and Blair discuss their political futures and both agree that , of the two , Brown would make a better leader of the party . 
 Labour is unable to make significant dents in the Conservative majority at the 1987 general election . Kinnock promotes Smith to Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer , with Brown as his " number two " . Three years later , Thatcher resigns as Prime Minister after the Conservative leadership election is not decided on the first ballot . Despite contrary predictions , the Conservatives led by John Major win the 1992 general election . Blair tells Brown that a new approach is needed , and that Brown should stand for the party leadership . Brown refuses to stand against Smith , his friend and mentor . Mandelson privately suggests to Brown that Blair should stand as leader but Brown ridicules the idea . Smith is elected and , over the next two years , Labour gains support as scandals rock the government . Blair , as Shadow Home Secretary , pledges to be " tough on crime , tough on the causes of crime " in the wake of the murder of James Bulger . Smith tells Brown that he sees Blair as his natural successor as leader of the party . 
 A year later , Smith suffers a fatal heart attack . Blair , encouraged by his wife Cherie ( Elizabeth Berrington ) , decides to stand in the leadership contest . He later meets with Mandelson to tell him that he has received support from key Labour frontbenchers . Previously a supporter of Brown , Mandelson switches his allegiance to Blair . Brown is furious that Blair has gone back on their unwritten agreement . Smith 's funeral passes , and Blair 's camp is sure that Brown will run . Charlie Whelan ( Dexter Fletcher ) and Ed Balls ( Matt Blair ) advise Brown that he will receive support from significant trade unions . Blair decides to arrange a meeting with Brown . At Granita , Blair tells Brown that he will run for the leadership , and in return offers Brown unprecedented power as his Chancellor , should they win the next election . Brown asks what Blair 's plan is for Labour 's second term , and Blair tells him that he will step down and offer his support to Brown as Prime Minister . Brown agrees and Mandelson prepares a statement from him , but discards Brown 's alterations . The leadership contest is won by Blair . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The film was commissioned in 2002 by ITV 's head of drama Nick Elliott , who encouraged Peter Morgan to put aside any other projects and start work on a script as soon as possible . Granada was initially sceptical of producing it ; the company 's executive chairman and chief executive — Charles Allen and Simon Shaps respectively — believed that Blair would be forced to resign as Prime Minister over the impending war in Iraq , consequently leaving the story outdated . The project was believed to be " too cerebral " and attempts were made to persuade Morgan to develop a television series to replace Cold Feet , another Granada production . John Whiston and Andy Harries convinced Allen and Shaps otherwise , citing Granada 's history of producing ground @-@ breaking drama and film as reasons for why The Deal should be made . ITV 's director of channels , David Liddiment , who supported the production , resigned in December 2002 and was replaced by Nigel Pickard , who shared the concerns of Allen and Shaps . Peter Morgan wrote his first script draft in the three weeks preceding Christmas 2002 . Recent events such as the 2001 foot and mouth outbreak and the contention surrounding the September Dossier made him believe that the perceived adversity between Brown and Blair was no longer in the public consciousness . His opinion was changed when he watched the 2002 Labour Party Conference and saw a " thunderous expression " on Brown 's face as Bill Clinton praised Blair in his speech ; Morgan realised that the rivalry was not over . This draft was extremely sympathetic to Brown , focusing on what Morgan called " Gordon 's heartbreak " . Subsequent rewrites toned down this approach , though Brown still remained the " main character " . 
 The relationship between Brown and Blair as depicted in the script was based on that between Aaron Altman and Tom <unk> , the characters portrayed by Albert Brooks and William Hurt in Broadcast News . Morgan wanted to set the entire film in the 12 days following the death of John Smith , but the time frame was widened because the Labour Party 's disastrous result at the 1992 general election was " absolutely crucial " to the relationship and motives of the main characters ; Morgan had to show the moment Blair decided to aim to become leader of the party . Morgan and the producers engaged in a lengthy research process during script writing and editing , interviewing 40 to 50 of Brown and Blair 's closest friends and advisors , as well as aides involved in the 1992 and 1997 elections . Significantly , many of the facts in the film are based on the first three chapters of James Naughtie 's book The Rivals : The Intimate Portrait of a Political Marriage . The film briefly adopted The Rivals as a working title , but soon reverted to The Deal . Another title considered by Frears was Bambi and Stalin , based on a line in a speech given by Blair in 1995 . 
 Scenes set in the House of Commons chamber and committee rooms use the actual words as recorded in Hansard . In other scenes Morgan utilised dramatic licence , conceding that there was no evidence to suggest that any of the lines spoken elsewhere in the film were ever said in real life . The relationship between Brown and Blair received many thematic analogies ; Morgan likened Brown 's story to a " tragedy of an over @-@ qualified Scot , who the Labour Party probably rightly felt at the time that it could not have as its leader . " ; Despite the quote at the head of the film referring to Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid , Frears wryly likened Brown and Blair to Beavis and Butt @-@ head . Producer Christine Langan alluded to both Shakespearean and Biblical themes , painting Brown and Blair as Cain and Abel . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 At the time of commissioning , Douglas Henshall and Daniel Craig were considered for the parts of Brown and Blair respectively , though David Morrissey and Michael Sheen were eventually announced as the leads in March 2003 . Morrissey gained two stone for his role and had his hair <unk> and dyed . He researched Brown 's background by travelling to Kirkcaldy — where Brown grew up — and reviewing numerous biographies and information about the Treasury . In comparison to his preparation for the BBC thriller State of Play , Morrissey discovered that no politicians wanted to help him with his research , so he turned to journalists Jon Snow and Simon Hoggart . Director Stephen Frears was unfamiliar with his previous work and had to be convinced by other production staff to cast him . 
 Sheen worked with an accent coach to effectively mimic Blair 's speech style , although he and Morrissey avoided doing simple impersonations of the men they played . Sheen cited Will Smith 's title performance of Ali as a basis for his part ; despite playing a real @-@ life figure , he treated the role as if it were any other character . Sheen had made his film debut in Frears ' Mary Reilly ( 1996 ) , and although he was unsure whether his minor role had " burned into [ Frears ' ] brain " , Frears confirmed that Sheen had remembered from that . Frears ' casting director approached Sheen in the audience of a play , inviting him to appear in " a love story about Tony Blair and Gordon Brown " . An informal meeting was scheduled between Frears and Sheen , at the end of which Sheen was cast as Blair . 
 Paul Rhys studied Donald Macintyre 's 1999 biography of Peter Mandelson and gained an appreciation of the politician 's work on the Northern Ireland peace process , and of his sexuality . Rhys portrayed Mandelson with a " myopic loyalty " and identified him as " remain [ ing ] preposterously loyal to Blair " after his defection from Kinnock and Brown . The representation of Mandelson was compared to both Iago and Pandarus . Other people associated with Blair and Brown who appear in the film are Anji Hunter , Blair 's assistant ( played by Glenna Morrison ) , journalist Sheena McDonald ( played by Valerie Edmond ) , and Sue Nye , Brown 's assistant ( played by Joanna Scanlan ) . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In March 2003 , shortly before filming began , ITV abandoned its plan to screen the film , citing fears that such a politically sensitive film could affect the Granada @-@ Carlton corporate merger , which was due to go before the government 's Competition Commission . Within 24 hours , Channel 4 backed the production . A £ 2 million budget was assigned to the film . Filming was postponed until May to accommodate Sheen 's rehearsal schedule for the play Caligula . Frears ended shooting at 6 p.m. each day , so Sheen could leave the set in time to appear in the play at the Donmar Warehouse . The shoot was scheduled for five weeks . Set design was carried out by Michael Pickwood , a longtime production designer for Granada . The Blairs ' house was " played " by a house formerly owned by Lord Hailsham . 
 Certain personal effects of the characters that were familiar to the public were added to the sets . The prologue and climactic scene in the Granita restaurant was shot on location in the restaurant itself . Frears subdued Berrington 's performance to avoid portraying Cherie as too much of a Lady Macbeth figure ; in the scene where Cherie encourages Blair to stand for the leadership , Frears had Berrington stand with her back towards the camera . Editing and post @-@ production went on until September . Some historical events — such as the Sheffield Rally and footage of the 1997 general election — were too costly to <unk> so archive footage was used instead . Adam Curtis assisted in the editing of the archive footage . 
 = = Release = = 
 After John Yorke recommissioned the film for Channel 4 , it was scheduled as part of a " Tony Blair season " . The Deal aired on 28 September 2003 , the day before the Labour Party Conference began in Bournemouth . Despite heavy media attention , the broadcast was seen by only 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . 
 The film received a screening at the San Francisco Film Festival on 5 May 2007 , following an interview with Peter Morgan . International rights for North America and Australasia were purchased from Channel 4 International by The Weinstein Company in 2007 , who sold it to American cable network HBO . HBO screened The Deal on 8 November 2007 . Channel 4 released it on region 2 DVD on 19 May 2008 under its <unk> brand . Genius Products , an imprint of The Weinstein Company , released The Deal on region 1 DVD on 29 July 2008 . The region 1 edition features an audio commentary by Morgan and Langan , and an interview with Frears . 
 The ending of the film was changed for the American release ; a closing caption that had read " Gordon is still waiting [ for the leadership ] " was replaced by one that says that Brown became Prime Minister in 2007 , thirteen years after the Granita meeting . Despite these changes , the copyright date on the film remains 2003 . HBO promoted it as " a new movie ... from the makers of The Queen " and the DVD was marketed as " The Prequel to The Queen " , even though the film was made and originally released before The Queen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of the film following a press screening were generally positive . The Guardian published a number of reviews by politicians and political aides ; Charlie Whelan called it " enjoyable , if not entirely accurate " , complaining that he was portrayed unsympathetically in comparison to Peter Mandelson — " the Prince of Darkness " . Whelan was highly complimentary of Morrissey 's performance , but criticised Morgan 's script for portraying Brown as he was publicly perceived . Michael Portillo , the Secretary of State for Defence during the time that Blair was Leader of the Opposition , wrote a positive account of the film , using his review as a platform to recall the events surrounding the 1992 general election . Tim Allan , Blair 's deputy press secretary for four years , called it " cracking stuff " , highlighting the leads ' performances and the fact @-@ based nature of the script . 
 Mark Davies , the political reporter for BBC News Online , criticised the script 's bias towards Brown and Sheen 's apparently negative performance ; " Michael Sheen at first plays Blair in the style of Spitting Image 's David Steel puppet : bounding along next to his far superior colleague like an over @-@ eager puppy . The actor later transforms Blair into something more sinister and cynical [ … ] Think Rik Mayall 's Alan B <unk> . " As with other critics , Davies admired Morrissey 's performance , singling out the actor 's grasp of Brown 's physical tics . For the Daily Express , James Rampton singled out the balance of drama and humour . Upon broadcast in the United States — and in retrospect of The Queen — The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert called it " tightly written and effectively acted , and yet it still plays more like a <unk> re @-@ creation than a Shakespearean glimpse at brotherly tension . " Of Morrissey , Gilbert wrote " He brings depth to Brown , a Scot , as a moody , private workaholic whose passion is in ideas and not in performing to the public . " 
 The drama won the British Academy Television Award for Best Single Drama and Morrissey won the RTS Programme Award for Male Actor . It was nominated in the RTS category for Best Single Drama and the International Emmy Award category for Best TV Movie or Miniseries . Frears was nominated in the Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Television Movie / Serial category at the inaugural Directors Guild of Great Britain awards . 
 = = Follow @-@ ups = = 
 = = = The Queen ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Frears had a clause in his contract that allowed him to direct any sequels . The success of The Deal prompted the production team to consider a new film — possibly surrounding Britain 's commitment to the war in Iraq . In 2004 , production was announced that the first follow @-@ up would be produced for a theatrical film release in 2006 , The Queen ; that dramatises the weeks following the death of Princess Diana on 31 August 1997 . Langan described the film as not being a direct sequel , only that it reunited the same creative team . 
 = = = The Special Relationship ( 2010 ) = = = 
 A second follow @-@ up was written by Morgan , The Special Relationship chronicles the " special relationship " between Blair and US President Bill Clinton from 1997 to 2001 . The film was first proposed by Morgan as the third chapter in a " Blair trilogy " , shortly after The Queen was released and Blair 's resignation , and would have covered Blair 's special relationship with Clinton and also George W. Bush . There was early speculation that Left Bank Pictures and BBC Films would be involved in production , as Morgan had " promised " the script to Christine Langan and Andy Harries . By December 2008 , it had been announced that Kathleen Kennedy would be producing and Morgan would be directing . In March 2009 , it was announced that Dennis Quaid would play the role of Clinton and Hope Davis would portray his wife Hillary . Morgan pulled out of directing the film in June 2009 and was replaced by Richard Loncraine . Filming on location in London ran from 20 July to 4 September 2009 . The film , a <unk> Films production for HBO Films and BBC Films was first broadcast on the HBO networks in North America on 29 May 2010 . 
 = = = Possible Brown film = = = 
 In a radio interview with Kate Silverton in August 2010 , Andy Harries spoke of early plans for a television film about " the Brown exit " , though explained that such a film was " two or three years away " . 
 = Todd Bertuzzi = 
 Todd Bertuzzi ( born February 2 , 1975 ) is a Canadian retired professional ice hockey winger of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Known as a power forward , he has played in the NHL for the New York Islanders , Vancouver Canucks , Florida Panthers , Anaheim Ducks , Calgary Flames and Detroit Red Wings . 
 Selected 23rd overall by the New York Islanders in the 1993 NHL Entry Draft , he played at the junior level with the Guelph Storm of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) for four seasons . In 1995 – 96 , he played his rookie season with the Islanders . After two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons with the Islanders , he was traded to the Vancouver Canucks . Bertuzzi enjoyed the most successful seasons of his career with the Canucks — his longest tenured team in the NHL — including NHL First Team All @-@ Star honours in 2003 . 
 After seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons with Vancouver , Bertuzzi was dealt to the Florida Panthers , with whom he briefly played for until being traded again to the Red Wings . He then played single seasons with the Anaheim Ducks and the Calgary Flames before returning to Detroit in 2009 and finishing his career there . Internationally , Bertuzzi has competed for Team Canada at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , as well as the 1998 and 2000 World Championships . 
 In March 2004 , Bertuzzi assaulted Steve Moore during a regular season game , ending Moore 's hockey career . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Guelph Storm ( 1991 – 95 ) = = = 
 After playing for two minor hockey teams based out of Sudbury , Ontario in 1990 – 91 , Bertuzzi was selected in the first round ( fifth overall ) by the Guelph Storm in the 1991 Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) Priority Selection . His future coach with the Vancouver Canucks , Marc Crawford , passed on Bertuzzi during the draft while he was general manager of the Cornwall Royals ; he has recalled not selecting him due to " maturity issues " and that he was " a big kid who hadn 't grown into his body yet . " Bertuzzi started his OHL career for Guelph in 1991 – 92 , recording 21 points over 42 games as a rookie . He missed the last 15 games of the regular season due to suspension as a result of kicking opposing defenceman Brad Barton during a contest between the Storm and Kitchener Rangers . After improving to 58 points over 60 games in 1992 – 93 , he was selected 23rd overall by the New York Islanders in the 1993 NHL Entry Draft . The NHL Central Scouting Bureau described Bertuzzi as a physical and strong player with good skating who checks hard and is offensively effective in close proximity to the net . 
 Following his NHL draft , he underwent surgery for chipped bones in his left elbow in August 1993 . As a result , he was unable to participate in the Islanders ' training camp in September and was returned to the OHL . Playing in his third season for Guelph , he improved to 28 goals and 82 points over 61 games . Bertuzzi competed for an Islanders ' roster spot at their 1994 training camp , but was sent back to his junior team after going scoreless in three exhibition games . 
 During his last campaign with Guelph in 1994 – 95 , he recorded 119 points – sixth overall in the league . His 54 goals established a single @-@ season team record , beating Mike <unk> 's mark , set the previous year , by two goals . The Storm 's forward tandem of Bertuzzi and Jeff O 'Neill , who finished fourth in league scoring , led the club to the best regular season record in the league . He went on to add a team @-@ leading 33 points in 14 playoff games , en route to an OHL Finals loss to the Detroit Junior Red Wings . After four seasons with Guelph , he left the club ranked third all @-@ time in career points with 280 , behind O 'Neill and Martin St. Pierre . 
 = = = New York Islanders ( 1995 – 98 ) = = = 
 Two years after his draft , Bertuzzi and the Islanders had not yet been agreed to a contract . With Bertuzzi eligible to re @-@ enter the draft if the Islanders did not sign him by July 7 , 1995 , general manager Don Maloney made it apparent that he would use the team 's second overall pick in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft to select him again if a contract could not be agreed upon by the required date . Moments before the midnight deadline , the Islanders were able to sign Bertuzzi to a four @-@ year , US $ 4 @.@ 6 million contract . His agent , Pat Morris , had reportedly wanted a similar deal to that of fellow Islanders prospect Brett Lindros – a five @-@ year , $ 6 @.@ 7 million contract signed the previous summer . 
 During training camp in September 1995 , Islanders head coach Mike Milbury heralded Bertuzzi as the team 's best performing forward . Making his NHL debut on October 7 , 1995 , he scored a wrap around goal against goaltender Blaine Lacher in a 4 – 4 tie with the Boston Bruins . Beginning the season on the team 's top line with <unk> <unk> and Travis Green , Bertuzzi finished his rookie year with 18 goals and 39 points over 76 games . The following season , Bertuzzi recorded 23 points in 64 games . The Islanders did not qualify for the playoffs in either of his two full seasons with the club , ranking second @-@ last in the Eastern Conference in 1995 – 96 and 1996 – 97 . 
 Bertuzzi 's playing style as a power forward resulted in comparisons to former Islander Clark Gillies . As a result , the club hired Gillies to personally mentor Bertuzzi . Failing to meet lofty expectations from the club , Gillies once said of Bertuzzi , " If you 're built like a freight train , you can 't drive around like a Volkswagen . " Feeling burdened with the pressure of playing up to the club 's expectations while his offensive production diminished , he requested to be traded away at one point during the 1996 – 97 season . In response , Milbury , who had also taken over general manager duties the previous season , demoted Bertuzzi to the Islanders ' minor league affiliate , the Utah Grizzlies of the International Hockey League ( IHL ) . Playing 13 games in the minors , he registered 10 points before being called back up to the NHL . During the 1997 – 98 campaign , he continued to score below his pace as a rookie . On February 6 , 1998 , he was traded along with defenceman Bryan McCabe and a third @-@ round selection in the 1998 NHL Entry Draft ( Jarkko Ruutu ) to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for veteran forward Trevor Linden . The deal was made prior to the NHL 's roster freeze in preparation for the 1998 Winter Olympics . 
 Bertuzzi and McCabe had both been widely regarded as the players of the future for New York after their respective drafts in 1993 . While Milbury expressed regret at having to trade McCabe , relations between Bertuzzi and the club were strained . Welcoming the trade , Bertuzzi commented that " things weren 't working out [ in New York ] . " 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 1998 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Bertuzzi immediately began producing with Vancouver , tallying 15 points in 22 games after the trade . Combined with his totals from New York , he finished with 23 points over 74 games in 1997 – 98 . Contrasting his strained relationship with Milbury in New York , Canucks head coach Mike Keenan has recalled his experience with Bertuzzi upon his arrival as positive : " He came as a young player and he was very open @-@ minded about learning about the game . " Similar to the Islanders , Bertuzzi joined a struggling club in Vancouver ; the team finished last in the Western Conference in his first two seasons after the trade . 
 After beginning the 1998 – 99 season on the Canucks ' top line , Bertuzzi was limited to 32 games due to injuries , the first of which was a fractured tibia . He suffered the injury on November 1 , 1998 , after a shot by teammate Mattias Öhlund hit him in the leg . His season was later ended with a torn anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) in his left knee , suffered during a game on March 5 , 1999 . He recorded 8 goals and 16 points in 1998 – 99 . In the off @-@ season , Bertuzzi became a restricted free agent and was re @-@ signed by the Canucks to a two @-@ year contract in September 1999 . The deal was reported by The Vancouver Sun to be worth a little over $ 2 million . 
 Returning from injury the following season , Bertuzzi emerged as one of the Canucks ' best offensive contributors , finishing with 25 goals ( second on the team to Markus Näslund ) and 50 points in 1999 – 2000 . At the end of the season , he received the team 's Most Exciting Player Award , as voted by the fans . He received the distinction three more times during his career with the Canucks from 2002 to 2004 ) . Meanwhile , the Canucks began improving as a team , finishing four points out of a playoff spot in the West in 2000 . 
 The following season , Bertuzzi recorded his first career NHL hat trick , recording all three goals on the power play against San Jose Sharks goaltender Evgeni Nabokov in a 6 – 3 win on December 30 , 2000 . Bertuzzi recorded a second consecutive 25 @-@ goal season in 2000 – 01 , adding 30 assists for 55 points , third in team scoring behind Näslund and Andrew Cassels . His <unk> plus @-@ minus rating , however , was a team @-@ worst . The Canucks continued to improve , qualifying for the post @-@ season for the first time in five years . Entering the 2001 playoffs as the final and eighth seed in the West , they were eliminated in the first round by the Colorado Avalanche . Bertuzzi scored two goals and two assists over four games in his first NHL post @-@ season appearance . In the off @-@ season , Bertuzzi filed for salary arbitration after initially failing to come to terms on a new contract with the Canucks . Both sides avoided arbitration by agreeing to a three @-@ year deal on July 26 , 2001 . 
 In the first month of the 2001 – 02 season , Bertuzzi received an automatic 10 @-@ game suspension from the league ( forfeiting $ 118 @,@ 557 in salary ) after leaving the bench to help teammate Ed Jovanovski in a fight . The incident occurred during a game against the Colorado Avalanche in which opposing coach Bob Hartley sent enforcer Scott Parker onto the ice as the extra attacker during a delayed penalty . Parker proceeded to physically engage Jovanovski , at which point Bertuzzi left the bench to help his teammate . Vancouver struggled with him out of the lineup , winning 3 games during the 10 @-@ game span . Two months after returning from suspension , Bertuzzi went 15 consecutive games with at least a point , scoring 7 goals and 12 assists from January 3 – February 4 , 2002 . The streak tied Petr Nedved for the longest in Canucks history . During that span , in a game on January 9 , Canucks head coach Marc Crawford replaced Andrew Cassels with Brendan Morrison , marking the beginning of what was considered by many to be the most effective line combination in the league for several seasons . Bertuzzi had emerged as an effective power forward , able to use his size and strength to position himself in front of the net , with good stickhandling ability . According to Canucks assistant coach Jack <unk> , Bertuzzi 's skill set favourably complemented Näslund 's goal @-@ scoring and Morrison 's playmaking abilities . The trio were dubbed by Vancouver media as the " West Coast Express " , named after the city 's commuter rail service of the same name . 
 Late in the 2001 – 02 season , he recorded his second career hat trick on March 19 , 2002 , during a win against the New York Rangers . He scored his first two goals of the game against Dan Blackburn and his third into an empty net . Despite missing 10 games from his suspension , Bertuzzi finished the 2001 – 02 season third in league @-@ scoring with 85 points , behind Näslund and Calgary Flames forward Jarome Iginla . His 1 @.@ 18 points @-@ per @-@ game average ranked second in the league behind Mario Lemieux , who played 48 fewer games than Bertuzzi . He also improved his plus @-@ minus rating by 39 points from the previous season , finishing a career @-@ high + 21 . Although the Canucks were the league 's highest scoring team , they finished with the final seed in the West for the 2002 playoffs , ranking eighth in their conference . Facing the Detroit Red Wings in the opening round , they were eliminated in six games . Bertuzzi recorded four points during the series . 
 The following season , Bertuzzi appeared in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game . He was joined by fellow Canucks Markus Näslund , defenceman Ed Jovanovski and head coach Marc Crawford , helping the Western Conference to a 6 – 5 shootout win against the East . He played on a line with Näslund and Peter Forsberg . Later in the season , he notched his third career hat trick on March 17 , 2003 , scoring three goals against Ron <unk> in a game against the Dallas Stars . He finished the season with career @-@ highs of 46 goals ( third in the league ) , 51 assists and 97 points ( fifth in the league ) . His 25 power play goals led the league and tied Pavel Bure for the Canucks single @-@ season record . <unk> Näslund and Morrison also recorded personal bests with 104 and 71 points , respectively . Meanwhile , the Canucks emerged as a top team in the West . Losing the Northwest Division title to the Avalanche by one point in the regular season , they finished as the fourth seed in their conference . After going down three @-@ games @-@ to @-@ one in the opening round against the St. Louis Blues , Vancouver won three straight games to advance to the second round . Facing the Minnesota Wild , the Canucks gave up their own three @-@ games @-@ to @-@ one series lead and were eliminated in seven games . During the series , Bertuzzi had reportedly walked by the Xcel Energy Center box office and told Wild fans they would not need their Game 6 tickets because Minnesota would be eliminated by then . In another on @-@ ice incident , he skated by the opposing bench during Game 7 when the Canucks were winning 2 – 0 , telling Wild players to " get [ their ] golf clubs . " Despite his successful regular season , Bertuzzi struggled to score in the playoffs , recording 6 points in 14 games . In the off @-@ season , Bertuzzi was named with Näslund to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team . 
 With Bertuzzi entering the final year of his contract , the Canucks began negotiating a contract extension prior to the 2003 – 04 season . Despite Bertuzzi 's agent , Pat Morris , declaring that they would cease negotiations once the season began , Bertuzzi signed a four @-@ year , $ 27 @.@ 8 million deal with the Canucks on October 23 , 2003 . The contract took effect immediately , erasing the last year on his previous contract , and included a $ 3 million signing bonus ( $ 2 @.@ 5 million paid in the first year and $ 500 @,@ 000 in the second ) . The deal paid him $ 4 @.@ 3 million the first year , $ 6 @.@ 633 million the second year and $ 6 @.@ 933 for the third and fourth . 
 In January 2004 , he was voted by league fans to the starting lineup of the NHL All @-@ Star Game . Representing the Western Conference alongside Näslund and Canucks head coach Marc Crawford , they were defeated by the East 6 – 4 . Bertuzzi had two assists while playing on a line with Näslund and Joe Sakic . Nearing the end of the 2003 – 04 season , Bertuzzi was indefinitely suspended by the NHL for punching Colorado Avalanche forward Steve Moore from behind during a game on March 8 , 2004 . His actions were a retaliation to a hit from Moore on Näslund during a previous game . Sitting out the remainder of the regular season and playoffs due to his suspension , he finished 2003 – 04 with 60 points over 69 games . Vancouver replaced Bertuzzi on the team 's top line with Matt Cooke and went on to their first Northwest Division title , before being eliminated in the first round of the 2004 playoffs by the Calgary Flames . 
 Inactive in 2004 – 05 due to the players lockout and his ongoing suspension , which had been extended internationally , Bertuzzi returned to the Canucks in 2005 – 06 , as the league ended his playing ban . He recorded 25 goals and 71 points , including two hat tricks ( November 13 , 2005 , against the Detroit Red Wings and January 14 , 2006 , against the New York Islanders ) . Though he ranked third in team scoring , Crawford has recalled that by the end of the season , Näslund and Bertuzzi had been eclipsed by Daniel and Henrik Sedin as the team 's offensive leaders . 
 There was speculation that the effects of the Steve Moore incident , which included assault charges and constant media coverage , were negatively affecting his play . While on the road , he was consistently heckled and booed by fans throughout the NHL . Näslund , a close friend of Bertuzzi 's , later expressed sympathy for him , saying in a 2008 interview , " It still bothers me what Todd has had to go through ... There 's no question he was standing up for me ... it all went too far . " 
 Beyond the negative impact on Bertuzzi 's individual play , the media speculated that the fallout from the Moore incident had become a distraction to the organization as a whole . Compounding the situation in Vancouver , the Canucks had missed the playoffs for the first time in four years . As such , general manager Dave Nonis spent the off @-@ season making significant changes to the Canucks lineup . On June 23 , 2006 , he traded Bertuzzi to the Florida Panthers , along with goaltender Alex Auld and defenceman Bryan Allen , in exchange for goaltender Roberto Luongo , defenceman Lukáš Krajíček and a sixth @-@ round selection in the 2006 NHL Entry Draft ( Sergei Shirokov ) . After seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons with the Canucks , Bertuzzi left the club ranked seventh all @-@ time among franchise scoring leaders with 449 points . 
 = = = Florida , Detroit , and Anaheim ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = 
 Instrumental in facilitating the trade to Florida was Bertuzzi 's positive relationship with Panthers general manager Mike Keenan , who was his first coach in Vancouver . Debuting with the Panthers on October 6 , 2006 , Bertuzzi scored a goal and three assists in an 8 – 3 win against the Boston Bruins . He appeared in six more games for Florida , notching seven points total , before being sidelined with back spasms . After being diagnosed with a herniated disc in early @-@ November , Bertuzzi opted for surgery , which kept him out of the lineup for five months . While recovering , the Panthers dealt him to the Detroit Red Wings at the trade deadline in exchange for forward prospect Shawn Matthias and conditional draft picks . Bertuzzi was in the last year of his contract with no guarantee he would re @-@ sign with Florida in the off @-@ season . 
 Bertuzzi returned to action on March 22 , 2007 , debuting with his new team in a 2 – 1 shootout loss to the Columbus Blue Jackets . Eight days later , he scored his first goal as a Red Wing in a 4 – 3 shootout loss to the Dallas Stars . On April 7 , he suffered a neck injury that kept him out of the lineup for the last game of the regular season and the first two games of the 2007 playoffs . He finished the campaign with 11 points in 15 games split between Florida and Detroit . During the playoffs , the Red Wings advanced to the Western Conference Finals , where they lost in six games to the Anaheim Ducks , who went on to win the Stanley Cup . Bertuzzi recorded 7 points in 16 playoff games . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Bertuzzi agreed to a two @-@ year , $ 8 million contract with the Anaheim Ducks on July 2 , 2007 . Signing him was Ducks general manager Brian Burke , who had served as the Canucks general manager during Bertuzzi 's time in Vancouver . Bertuzzi had reportedly been in negotiations to re @-@ sign with Detroit , but the club only wanted a one @-@ year deal . Playing the Red Wings in the Ducks ' first game of the regular season on October 3 , 2007 , he registered a goal and an assist in a 3 – 2 shootout loss . In the first month of the 2007 – 08 campaign , he suffered a concussion and was sidelined for 14 games in October and November 2007 . Bertuzzi returned to the lineup in time for the Ducks ' away game against the Canucks on November 27 , which marked his first NHL game in Vancouver since being traded away . Bertuzzi was received warmly by Canucks fans , as the Ducks lost the game 4 – 0 . Playing in 68 contests over the season , he registered 40 points with Anaheim . Entering the 2008 playoffs as the defending champions , the Ducks were eliminated in the first round four games to two by the Dallas Stars . In six playoff contests , Bertuzzi recorded two assists . 
 = = = Calgary Flames ( 2008 – 09 ) = = = 
 During the subsequent summer , several Ducks players were set to become free agents , including high @-@ profile forward Corey Perry . Requiring additional salary cap space to make room for defenceman Scott Niedermayer , who announced he was returning for another season , Bertuzzi was placed on unconditional waivers with the intention of buying out the remaining year on his contract . Addressing Bertuzzi 's buy out with the media , Burke asserted that he " believe [ d ] [ Bertuzzi ] can still play at the NHL level , " and that the Ducks were merely " handcuffed by [ their ] salary cap situation . " Bertuzzi once again became an unrestricted free agent and signed a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 95 million contract with the Calgary Flames on July 7 , 2008 . Joining Calgary , he was reunited with Flames coach Mike Keenan . Before the start of the 2008 – 09 season , Bertuzzi switched jersey numbers from 4 to 7 , in honour of his boyhood idol , Phil Esposito . The numbers 44 , which Bertuzzi wore in New York , Vancouver and Detroit , and 4 , which he wore in Anaheim , were already taken in Calgary . 
 Bertuzzi scored his first goal with the Flames , deflecting a Dion Phaneuf shot , on October 12 , 2008 , in a 5 @-@ 4 overtime loss to the Vancouver Canucks . While initial fan reaction to Bertuzzi was negative due to his previous role with the division @-@ rival Canucks , as well as his reputation following the Steve Moore incident , he was eventually accepted in Calgary . In January 2009 , he missed five games due to a back injury . Several months later , he was sidelined again with a knee injury and underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair damaged cartilage on March 3 , 2009 . Missing 11 games , he returned in time for the 2009 playoffs , where the Flames were eliminated by the Chicago Blackhawks in the opening round . He finished his only season in Calgary with 44 points in 66 regular season games , while adding a goal and an assist in six playoff contests . 
 = = = Return to Detroit ( 2009 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On August 18 , 2009 , Bertuzzi re @-@ joined the Red Wings by accepting a one @-@ year contract with the club worth $ 1 @.@ 5 million . He recorded 44 points ( 18 goals and 26 assists ) in 2009 – 10 , ranking fifth in team scoring . During the second round of the 2010 playoffs , Bertuzzi recorded a career @-@ high five @-@ point contest ( a goal and four assists ) in a Game 4 victory against the San Jose Sharks . Bertuzzi finished with a playoffs career @-@ high 11 points in 12 games . 
 In the off @-@ season , Bertuzzi signed a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 875 million contract extension with the Red Wings on June 16 , 2010 . During the 2010 – 11 season , he appeared in his 1,000th NHL game on February 20 , 2011 , against the Minnesota Wild . Bertuzzi scored a shootout goal to help Detroit win the game 2 – 1 . Dressing for 81 games that season , he ranked seventh in team scoring with 45 points ( 16 goals and 29 assists ) . During the 2011 playoffs , he added 6 points ( 2 goals and 4 assists ) over 11 games as the Red Wings were eliminated in the second round by the San Jose Sharks . 
 During his time with Detroit , he has earned praise from head coach Mike Babcock and his teammates for adapting his playing style to be more defensively responsible . Bertuzzi credited the influence of teammates Pavel Datsyuk and Henrik Zetterberg , both successful two @-@ way players in the league . 
 = = = Binghamton Senators Tryout and Retirement ( 2015 ) = = = 
 On January 9 , 2015 he signed a professional tryout contract with the Ottawa Senators AHL affiliate the Binghamton Senators in hopes to get a contract with Ottawa . Bertuzzi was released from his professional tryout offer with Binghamton on January 21 , 2015 , after posting no points and a minus @-@ 3 rating in his 2 games played with the Senators . He subsequently retired that year . 
 = = International play = = 
 Bertuzzi debuted internationally for Team Canada at the 1998 World Championships in Switzerland . He was among the youngest players selected to the team , along with Canucks teammate Bryan McCabe and Chicago Blackhawks forward Eric Dazé , who were all born in 1975 ( third @-@ string goaltender Christian <unk> was two years younger , but did not play in any games ) . In six games , he recorded three points , as Canada failed to qualify for the medal rounds . 
 Two years later , Bertuzzi competed at the 2000 World Championships in St. Petersburg , Russia . One of five Canucks players chosen to the national team , he was joined by Adrian Aucoin , Ed Jovanovski , Brendan Morrison and Peter Schaefer . His second tournament appearance was more productive , as he scored nine points in nine games – first among Canadian players and fourth overall – while also leading the tournament in penalty minutes with 47 . Canada did not medal , losing to Finland in the semifinal by a 2 – 1 score . His 63 total penalty minutes from both tournament appearances set an all @-@ time Canadian record for World Championship competitors since 1977 ( when Canada resumed competing in the tournament ) . 
 In December 2005 , Bertuzzi was controversially selected to play for Team Canada at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy . His inclusion , along with that of Dany Heatley and Shane Doan , was discussed at length by the Canadian Olympic Committee ( <unk> ) . The committee had concerns stemming from the Steve Moore incident and Bertuzzi 's probationary status , but subsequently approved his representation of Canada at the Olympics . According to a Canadian Press article , " [ <unk> president ] Chambers said the [ unusual meeting ] was prompted by some media concerns raised over the three athletes participating in the Games . The fact it took the committee so long to approve the list means there was some debate . " 
 Bertuzzi went on to post three points ( all assists ) at the 2006 Olympics , tying for second in team scoring with nine other players . Canada failed to advance past the quarterfinal , losing to Russia by a 2 – 0 score . They finished in seventh place overall after winning gold at the previous Winter Olympics in 2002 . 
 = = Steve Moore incident = = 
 On February 16 , 2004 , during a game between Vancouver and Colorado , Avalanche center Steve Moore checked Markus Näslund in the head , causing a minor concussion and a bone chip in his elbow . Näslund missed three games as a result of the hit . In a rematch , Bertuzzi began following Moore around the ice , attempting to provoke him into another fight . With Moore ignoring him , Bertuzzi grabbed Moore 's jersey from behind and punched him in the back of the head , with Moore 's face hitting the ice as they both fell down . Bertuzzi , as well as several other players from both teams , landed atop Moore as he fell to the ice . Bertuzzi was assessed a match penalty and ejected from the game . Per league rules , he was also suspended indefinitely pending a ruling from Bettman . 
 After lying on the ice for approximately 10 minutes , Moore was removed from the playing surface on a stretcher . He was treated for three fractured vertebrae in his neck , a grade three concussion , vertebral ligament damage , stretching of the brachial plexus nerves , and facial lacerations . He was also suffering from amnesia . Bertuzzi apologized to Moore and his family , as well as to Burke , Canucks owner John McCaw , Jr . , the Canucks organization , his teammates , and the fans in a press conference two days later . 
 On March 11 , 2004 , the league ruled he would remain suspended for at least the remainder of the Canucks ' season , which ultimately cost him the final 13 games of the regular season plus seven playoff games . The Canucks were additionally fined $ 250 @,@ 000 . While the following NHL season was suspended due to the 2004 – 05 lockout , Bertuzzi intended to play in Europe , but the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) extended his NHL suspension to cover their jurisdiction . Bertuzzi remained professionally inactive during the 2004 – 05 season . The IIHF 's sanction also kept him from representing Canada in the 2004 and 2005 World Championships , as well as the 2004 World Cup . 
 Bettman scheduled a reinstatement hearing for Bertuzzi on April 26 , 2005 . The hearing was attended separately by Bertuzzi and Moore . Prior to the 2005 – 06 season , Bettman announced Bertuzzi 's reinstatement on August 8 , citing that " Mr. Bertuzzi ha [ d ] paid a very significant price for his conduct , " adding that he felt Bertuzzi was " genuinely remorseful and apologetic . " Bertuzzi 's 17 @-@ month suspension caused him to miss a total of 20 games — the fourth @-@ longest suspension in NHL history at the time . The suspension accounted for $ 501 @,@ 926 @.@ 39 in forfeited salary , as well as an approximate $ 350 @,@ 000 in lost endorsements . On the day of his reinstatement , Team Canada 's executive director , Wayne Gretzky , offered him a spot on the national team 's summer orientation camp in preparation for the 2006 Winter Olympics . 
 = = = Legal actions = = = 
 After a four @-@ month investigation , the criminal justice branch of the Attorney General of British Columbia announced formal charges of assault causing bodily harm against Bertuzzi on June 24 , 2004 . With the charge , Bertuzzi faced up to one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years in prison . Bertuzzi pleaded guilty to the assault charge on December 22 after arranging a plea bargain with prosecutors . He was given a conditional discharge requiring 80 hours of community service and one year 's probation that additionally prohibited him from playing in any hockey game Moore was competing in . Under Canadian law , Bertuzzi 's successful completion of his probationary period precluded him from a criminal record . Moore expressed disappointment regarding Bertuzzi 's discharge and was upset that he was unable to attend the court date , having to issue a written victim statement instead . Moore 's lawyer , Tim Danson , was given one day 's notice of the court date following Bertuzzi 's plea bargain , which he said was insufficient time for Moore to travel to Vancouver . 
 On February 17 , 2005 , Moore filed a lawsuit in a Colorado court against Bertuzzi , numerous individuals within the Canucks organization , including Brad May ( Bertuzzi 's teammate at the time who was quoted as saying that there would " definitely be a price on Moore 's head " after Moore 's hit on Näslund ) , Brian Burke , Marc Crawford , as well as the Canucks organization as a whole and the Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment company that owned the team . The lawsuit was thrown out in October 2005 , as the Colorado judge ruled the case was better suited for Canadian courts , as Moore and all the defendants were Canadian citizens . Planning to appeal the decision , Danson stated publicly the following month that Moore had begun skating and doing regular workouts , but continued to suffer concussion @-@ related symptoms . 
 On February 16 , 2006 , Moore filed another lawsuit in the Ontario Superior Court against Bertuzzi , the Canucks , and Orca Bay , seeking CAD $ 15 million in pecuniary damages for loss of income , CAD $ 1 million for aggravated damages , and CAD $ 2 million for punitive damages . Moore 's parents , who were watching their son on television when the attack happened , also sued , seeking CAD $ 1 @.@ 5 million for " negligent infliction of nervous shock and mental distress " . In December 2006 , Bettman and top lieutenant Bill Daly facilitated a meeting between Moore 's representatives and the defendants in hopes of agreeing on an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement . An out @-@ of @-@ court settlement was reached in Moore 's lawsuit in October 2014 . Terms of the settlement are confidential . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bertuzzi was born and raised in Sudbury , Ontario . His father , Albert Bertuzzi , is an Italian @-@ Canadian who worked in the window @-@ washing business . When Bertuzzi was a teenager , Albert survived a near @-@ fatal car accident in which he was thrown from the vehicle through the windshield . His father has stated that he was proud of his own local reputation as a " dirty player " and referred to it as a " Bertuzzi trait " . He has said that Bertuzzi takes after him in regards to his toughness and aggression . Bertuzzi 's great @-@ uncle , Larry Bertuzzi , is a Toronto @-@ based lawyer who has done arbitration work for the NHL , including on the Eric Lindros trade . 
 Growing up , Bertuzzi played minor hockey with the Nickel Centre and Sudbury Minor Hockey programs . In 1990 – 91 , Bertuzzi played as an underaged player in the major midget ranks with the Sudbury Capitals AAA team . Physically built as a power forward throughout his youth , he stood 6 feet and 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 metres ) and weighed 195 pounds ( 88 @.@ 5 kilograms ) by age 15 . 
 Bertuzzi and his wife , Julie , were married in July 1996 . They have two children born one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years apart in Vancouver , a son named Tag and a daughter named Jaden . Bertuzzi is a recreational golfer and has credited the sport with allowing him to relax more as a hockey player . During his 10 @-@ game suspension from the NHL in October and November 2001 , he played golf to focus his energy . Afterwards , he made it a custom to go to the driving range before every game . 
 Bertuzzi 's nephew , Tyler Bertuzzi , who currently plays for the Grand Rapids Griffins of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , was drafted 58th overall by the Detroit Red Wings in the 2013 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Records = = 
 Guelph Storm team record ; most goals , single season — 54 in 1994 – 95 ( surpassed Mike <unk> , 52 goals in 1992 – 93 ) 
 Vancouver Canucks team record ; longest point @-@ scoring streak — 15 games ( 7 goals , 12 assists ; January 3 – February 4 , 2003 ) ( tied with Petr Nedved ; November 19 – December 27 , 1992 ) 
 Vancouver Canucks team record ; most powerplay goals , single season — 25 in 2002 – 03 ( tied with Pavel Bure ) 
 = = Transactions = = 
 June 26 , 1993 : Drafted 23rd overall by the New York Islanders 
 July 6 , 1995 : Signed to a four @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 6 million contract with the New York Islanders 
 February 6 , 1998 : Traded to the Vancouver Canucks from the New York Islanders with Bryan McCabe and a 3rd round choice in 1998 ( Jarkko Ruutu ) for Trevor Linden 
 September 1999 : Re @-@ signed to a two @-@ year contract with the Vancouver Canucks 
 October 27 , 2003 : Signed a four @-@ year , $ 27 @.@ 9 million contract extension with the Vancouver Canucks 
 March 11 , 2004 : Suspended indefinitely by the NHL for deliberate injury to Steve Moore in a game versus the Colorado Avalanche 
 August 8 , 2005 : Officially reinstated by the NHL 
 June 23 , 2006 : Traded to the Florida Panthers by the Vancouver Canucks with Bryan Allen and Alex Auld for Roberto Luongo , Lukas <unk> and a sixth @-@ round draft choice in 2006 ( Sergei Shirokov ) 
 February 27 , 2007 : Traded to the Detroit Red Wings by the Florida Panthers for prospect Shawn Matthias and conditional draft picks 
 July 2 , 2007 : Signed a two @-@ year , $ 8 million contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Anaheim Ducks 
 June 28 , 2008 : Placed on waivers by the Anaheim Ducks ; subsequently bought out 
 July 7 , 2008 : Signed a one @-@ year $ 1 @.@ 95 million contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Calgary Flames 
 August 18 , 2009 : Signed a one @-@ year $ 1 @.@ 5 million contract as an unrestricted free agent with the Detroit Red Wings 
 May 10 , 2010 : Signed a two @-@ year , $ 3 @.@ 85 million contract extension with the Detroit Red Wings 
 = Christian interpretations of Virgil 's Eclogue 4 = 
 Eclogue 4 , also known as the Fourth Eclogue is the name of a Latin poem by the Roman poet Virgil . Part of his first major work , the Eclogues , the piece was written around 40 BC , during a time of temporary stability following the Treaty of Brundisium ; it was later published in and around the years 39 – 38 BC . The work describes the birth of a boy , a supposed savior , who once of age will become divine and eventually rule over the world . During late antiquity and the Middle Ages , a desire emerged to view Virgil as a virtuous pagan , and as such , early Christians , such as Roman Emperor Constantine , early Christian theologian Lactantius , and St. Augustine — to varying degrees — reinterpreted the poem to be about the birth of Jesus Christ . 
 This belief persisted into the Medieval era , with many scholars arguing that Virgil not only prophesied Christ prior to his birth but also that he was a pre @-@ Christian prophet . Dante Alighieri included Virgil as a main character in his Divine Comedy , and Michelangelo included the Cumaean Sibyl on the ceiling painting of the Sistine Chapel ( a reference to the widespread belief that the Sibyl herself prophesied the birth of Christ , and Virgil used her prophecies to craft his poem ) . Modern scholars , such as Robin Nisbet , tend to eschew this interpretation , arguing that seemingly Judeo @-@ Christian elements of the poem can be explained through means other than divine prophecy . 
 = = Background = = 
 The scholarly consensus is that Virgil began the hexameter Eclogues ( or <unk> ) in 42 BC and it is thought that the collection was published around 39 – 38 BC , although this is controversial . The Eclogues ( from the Greek word for " selections " ) are a group of ten poems roughly modeled on the bucolic hexameter poetry ( " pastoral poetry " ) of the Hellenistic poet Theocritus . The fourth of these Eclogues can be dated to around 40 BC , during a time when the Roman Civil war seemed to be coming to an end . ‘ ’ Eclogue ’ ’ 4 largely concerns the birth of a child ( puer ) who will become divine and eventually rule over the world . Classicist H. J. Rose notes that the poem “ is in a sense Messianic , since it contains a prophecy ( whether meant seriously or not ) of the birth of a wonder @-@ child of more than mortal virtue and power , who shall restore the Golden Age . ” 
 By the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries AD , Virgil had gained a reputation as a virtuous pagan , a term referring to pagans who were never evangelized and consequently during their lifetime had no opportunity to recognize Christ , but nevertheless led virtuous lives , so that it seemed objectionable to consider them damned . Eventually , some Christians sought to reconcile Virgil 's works with the supposed Christianity present in them . Consequently , during the Late Antiquity and beyond , many assumed that the puer referenced in the Fourth Eclogue was actually Jesus Christ . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early interpretations = = = 
 The first notable person to be fascinated with the supposed prophecy of the Fourth Eclogue and its potential references to Jesus was Constantine the Great , Roman emperor from AD 306 to 337 , and he used part of it in an address he gave to the " Assembly of the Saints " , which was preserved by the Roman historian Eusebius in his work Vita Constantini . Constantine interpreted the entire work himself although he omitted a few lines that overtly reference paganism , such as the last part of line 10 , which names Apollo . Constantine assigned the roles of the virgo in line 6 to the Blessed Virgin Mary , the puer in lines 8 , 18 , 60 , and 62 is Christ , the lions in line 22 to the persecutors of Christians , and the serpent in line 24 to the Serpent of Evil . Constantine argued that the Assyrian flower in line 25 represented the race of people , i.e. the Assyrians , who were " leader [ s ] in the faith of Christ " , and that references in line 30 meant that " those who had borne hardships for the sake of God would perceive that the fruit of their endurance was sweet . " The emperor also interpreted the reference to Achilles fighting against Troy in lines 34 @-@ 36 as a reference to Christ ( the " new " Achilles ) waging a war against the forces of evil ( the " new " Troy ) . Finally , Constantine proposed that the references to the Golden Age in lines 37 @-@ 59 do not refer the birth of a mortal child , but rather a being who " mortal parents have not smiled upon " : in other words , Jesus Christ , who , according to Christian scripture , " had no parents in the usual sense " . 
 Constantine 's primary religious advisor , Lactantius saw references to Jesus in the poem . In fact , he may have actually proposed the idea before Constantine , due to the confusion surrounding the publication date of his book , <unk> Institutiones ( The Divine Institutes ) — felt that the poem referred to " the coming of Christ at the millennium " , and he argued that Virgil penned the poem in accordance with prophecies made by the Cumaean Sibyl ( the priestess presiding over the Apollonian oracle at Cumae ) concerning the birth of Christ . Likewise , St. Augustine believed Virgil was referencing Christ ; he assumed that the poet was writing poetically , since he was writing in the " shadowy " persona of an unnamed narrator , but he was also writing with veracity , since any traces of guilt " could be wiped away only by that Savior concerning whom the verse was written . " Echoing the sentiment of Lactantius , St. Augustine opined that the mention of Cumae in line 4 is a reference to the supposed Sibylline prophecy concerning Christ . Ultimately , St. Augustine felt that Virgil spoke non a se ipse ( " not from himself " ) , which is to say he prophesied the birth and coming of Christ , but did not understand what he himself was writing . 
 The opinion that Eclogue 4 was a reference to the coming of Jesus was not universally held by early members of the early Church , however . St. Jerome , an early Church writer noted for translating the Bible into Latin , specifically wrote that Virgil could not have been a Christian prophet without having accepted Christ , and claimed that anyone that had accepted that Virgil was a pre @-@ Christian prophet was being childish . Classicist Ella Bourne , however , noted that the mere fact that St. Jerome responded to the idea is a testament to the belief 's pervasiveness . 
 = = = Medieval interpretations = = = 
 In the early part of the sixth century , Latin grammarian Fulgentius made a passing reference to the supposed prophetic nature of the eclogue , noting : In <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " In the Fourth [ Eclogue ] , [ Virgil ] takes up the art of prophecy " ) . Yet after this , the historical and scholarly record is silent until the ninth century . According to legend , Donatus , the bishop of Fiesole , quoted the seventh line of the poem to his friars as part of a confession of his faith prior to his death . During the same century , Agnellus , the archbishop of Ravenna , referenced the poem , noting that it was evidence that the Holy Spirit had spoken through both Virgil and the Sybil . The monk Christian <unk> also makes use of the seventh line in his commentary on Matthew 20 : 30 . 
 In the eleventh century , Virgil began appearing in plays , such as one particular Christmas work wherein the poet is the last " prophet " called on to give testimony concerning Christ . According to Bourne , the play was particularly popular , and philologist Du Cange gives mention of similar play performed at Rouen . Virgil and his purported prophecy even found itself in the Wakefield Mystery Plays . Around this time , Eclogue 4 and Virgil 's supposed prophetic nature had saturated the Christian world ; references to the poem are made by Abelard , the Bohemian historian Cosmos , and Pope Innocent III in a sermon . The Gesta Romanorum , a Latin collection of anecdotes and tales that was probably compiled about the end of the 13th century or the beginning of the 14th , confirms that the eclogue was pervasively associated with Christianity . 
 Virgil eventually became a fixture of Medieval ecclesiastic art , appearing in churches , chapels , and even cathedrals , oftentimes depicted holding a scroll with a select passage from the Fourth Eclogue on it . In a similar vein , Michelangelo included the Cumaean Sibyl on the ceiling painting of the Sistine Chapel . According to Paul Barolsky , the Sibyl 's presence " evokes her song in Virgil [ i.e. the Fourth Eclogue ] , prophesying spiritual renewal through the coming of Christ — the very theme of the ceiling . " Barolsky also points out that Michelangelo painted the Sibyl in close proximity to the prophet Isaiah ; thus , the painter drew a visual comparison between their purported prophecies . 
 This association between Virgil and Christianity reached a fever pitch in the fourteenth century , when the Divine Comedy was published ; the work , by Dante Alighieri , prominently features Virgil as the main character 's guide through Hell . Notably , in the second book Purgatorio , Dante and Virgil meet the poet Statius , who , having " read a hidden meaning in lines of Virgil 's own " , was allowed passage into Purgatory , and eventually Heaven . Bourne argued that this reference is proof enough that Dante , like those before him , believed Virgil to have been an unknowing Christian prophet . In the fifteenth century , a popular story concerning <unk> , <unk> and <unk> — who started out as persecutors of Christians during the reign of the Roman emperor Decius — emerged . The story claims that the trio were alarmed by the calm manner in which their Christian victims died , and so they turned to literature and chanced upon Eclogue 4 , which eventually caused their conversions . 
 = = = Later interpretations = = = 
 The French writer René <unk> ( 1621 – 1687 ) was impressed with the potential connection between Virgil and Christianity , and used the Fourth Eclogue as influence , basing many of his lines in his own Sixth Eclogue , concerning two shepherds meeting with a sibyl near the Jordan River , on Virgil 's work . One of the more overt modern references to the Fourth Eclogue , Virgil , and Christianity , appears in Alexander Pope 's 1712 poem , Messiah . Bourne wrote that the work " shows clearly that [ Pope ] believed that Virgil 's poem was based on a Sibylline prophecy " . Robert Lowth seems also to have held this opinion , noting , by way of Plato , that the poem contains references made " not by men in their sober senses , but [ by ] the God himself " . In the mid @-@ 19th century , Oxford scholar John Keble claimed : <unk> si quid <unk> ac <unk> ( quod credo <unk> ) <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " I am silent about whether something more divine and sacred — which is what I , in fact , believe — clings to these prophecies " ) . 
 = = Modern views = = 
 Many modern scholars contend that the seemingly Christian nature of the poem is due to Virgil referencing Eastern oracles , which may have been influenced by Jewish texts and prophecies . For instance , Robin Nisbet , after carefully analyzing the work , ultimately concluded that Virgil probably appropriated some elements used in the poem from Jewish mythology by means of Eastern oracles , and later adapted them towards Western ( which is to say , Roman ) modes of thought . 
 = Tarja Turunen = 
 Tarja <unk> Susanna Turunen @-@ Cabuli ( born August 17 , 1977 ) , generally known as Tarja Turunen or simply Tarja , is a Finnish singer @-@ songwriter . She is a full lyric soprano and has a vocal range of three octaves . 
 Turunen studied singing at Sibelius Academy and Hochschule für Musik Karlsruhe . She is well known as a professional classical lied singer but best known as the former lead vocalist of the Finnish symphonic metal band Nightwish , which she founded with Tuomas Holopainen and <unk> <unk> in 1996 . Their combination of hard and fast guitar riffs with Turunen 's dramatic , " operatic " lead vocals quickly achieved critical and commercial popularity . Their symphonic metal style , soon dubbed " opera metal " , inspired many other metal bands and performers . 
 Turunen was dismissed from the band on October 21 , 2005 ( just after the performance of the band 's End of an Era concert ) for personal reasons . She started her solo career in 2006 with the release of a Christmas album called <unk> <unk> . In 2007 , Turunen released My Winter Storm , an album featuring various styles including symphonic metal , and started the Storm World Tour . Turunen released her third album , What Lies Beneath , in 2010 . She performed several concerts in Europe , playing in metal festivals including the Graspop Metal Meeting and the Wacken Open Air , before starting the What Lies Beneath World Tour , which lasted until April 8 , 2012 . Her first live DVD Act I was filmed during this tour on March 30 and 31 , 2012 in Rosario , Argentina . Act I was released on August 24 , 2012 . Turunen started the Colours in the Dark World Tour on October 17 , 2013 to promote her new album Colours in the Dark . Her second live DVD was filmed during the events of Beauty and the Beat and was released on May 30 . On September 11 , 2015 , Tarja Turunen released her first classical studio album , Ave Maria – En Plein Air . On 5 August 2016 the album The Shadow Self is scheduled to be released , with a prequel album The Brightest Void scheduled for release on June 3 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1977 – 1995 : Early life = = = 
 Tarja Turunen was born in the small village of <unk> , near <unk> , Finland . She has an older brother , Timo , and a younger brother , Toni . Her mother <unk> Sisko <unk> ( <unk> ) worked in the town administration , and her father <unk> Turunen is a carpenter . Her talent for music was first noted when she sang the song " <unk> <unk> " ( the Finnish version of " From Heaven Above to Earth I Come " ) in the <unk> church hall at age three . She joined the church choir and started taking vocal lessons . At age six , she started playing piano . 
 At comprehensive school , Turunen performed as a singer for several projects . Her first piano teacher Kirsti <unk> @-@ Holopainen , " Tarja was in a school that had some very musical people . Even then she got to perform a lot . I think she sang in every school function there was . " Her music teacher , Plamen <unk> , later explained that , " If you gave Tarja just one note , she immediately got it . With the others , you 'd have to practice three , four , five times " . At school she had a tough time , since some girls bullied her because they envied her voice . To solve that problem , <unk> organized projects outside school . At fifteen , Turunen had her first major appearance as a soloist at a church concert in front of a thousand listeners . In 1993 she attended the Senior Secondary School of Art and Music in Savonlinna . 
 For several years Turunen performed various songs including soul music by Whitney Houston and Aretha Franklin . Later she listened to songs from the classical crossover singer Sarah Brightman , especially the song " The Phantom of the Opera " , and decided to focus on that genre of music . At eighteen , she moved to Kuopio to study at the Sibelius Academy . 
 = = = 1996 – 2005 : With Nightwish = = = 
 In December 1996 , former classmate Tuomas Holopainen invited Turunen to join his new acoustic mood music project , and she immediately agreed . At the recording session for the first demo Holopainen discovered that due to her classical singing lessons , Turunen 's voice had become much more powerful than he recalled from their school days . At the following band practices , <unk> <unk> used an electric guitar instead of an acoustic guitar because he felt that it gave a better accompaniment to her voice . Holopainen later explained that the band members had gradually realised that Turunen 's voice had become too dramatic for acoustic mood music and eventually came to the conclusion that the music had to be massive too . Hence Holopainen decided to form Nightwish as a metal band . 
 Nightwish recorded a second demo with " more bombastic , dramatic " songs in September 1997 . Holopainen used this material to convince the Finnish label Spinefarm Records to publish the band 's debut album , Angels Fall First . The success of the first album came as a surprise to the label . As the album hit the top 40 of the Finnish charts , Nightwish started their tour The First Tour of the Angels . That same year , Turunen performed at the Savonlinna Opera Festival for the first time , singing songs from Wagner and Verdi . 
 Due to her commitment to the band , Turunen was not able to concentrate sufficiently on her schoolwork and her academic studies were interrupted . In 1998 , Nightwish published their second album , Oceanborn . This album lacked the earlier elements of folk and ambient music , and instead focused on fast , melodic keyboard and guitar lines and Turunen 's dramatic voice . In addition to the Oceanborn Europe Tour ( 1999 ) , Turunen sang solo in <unk> 's rock @-@ themed ballet <unk> ( also known as <unk> ) in several sold @-@ out performances at the Finnish National Opera . In 2000 and 2001 , Nightwish recorded Wishmaster and Over the Hills and Far Away and toured Europe and South America ( the Wishmaster World Tour ) . During the Wishmaster World Tour , Turunen met Argentine businessman Marcelo Cabuli whom she married in 2003 . 
 Turunen enrolled in 2000 at the German music university Hochschule für Musik Karlsruhe to gain a professional qualification as a soloist with further specialization in art song . In addition to the good reputation of the university , Turunen chose to go to Karlsruhe because some people at the Finnish university did not take her seriously as a classical singer due to her commitment in a metal band . While there , she recorded vocals for Nightwish 's 2002 album Century Child and for Beto Vázquez Infinity . As with the other albums , Holopainen wrote the pieces and sent Turunen the lyrics and a demo recording of the prerecorded instrumental tracks by mail . Using the demo , Turunen designed her vocal lines and the choral passages . 
 In 2002 , Turunen toured South America , performing in the classical Lied concert Noche <unk> ( Scandinavian Night ) to sold @-@ out houses . Following this and an exhausting world tour in support of Century Child ( the World Tour of the Century ) , Nightwish took a hiatus and Turunen returned to Karlsruhe to finish her studies . After the hiatus Nightwish recorded the album Once ; it was released on May 10 , 2004 . The album has sold platinum in Finland and Germany and was the best selling album in all of Europe in July 2004 . The band performed in the supporting Once Upon a Tour throughout 2004 and 2005 . 
 For Christmas 2004 , Turunen released her first solo single , titled " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( One Angel 's Dream ) , which sold gold in her native country of Finland . At Christmas 2005 it made a reentry at position one in the Finnish Charts . In spring 2005 she prepared the duet " Leaving You for Me " , a collaboration with Martin <unk> , accompanied by a video . 
 = = = 2005 : Breakup = = = 
 The first change in the line up of Nightwish was in September 2001 , when bassist Sami Vänskä was fired because Holopainen was no longer able to continue working with him . In the following years the relationship between Holopainen and Turunen 's husband and manager Marcelo Cabuli deteriorated . This had an impact on the relationship between Holopainen and Turunen as well . At a band meeting after the concert in Oberhausen in December 2004 Turunen announced to the band members that she wanted to leave the band , but agreed to record one more album and to participate in the subsequent tour , planned for 2006 / 2007 . According to her husband , Turunen had further agreed not to make her decision public and to release her first solo album after the new studio album from Nightwish . After the last concert of the Once Upon a Tour on October 21 , 2005 ( which was released on video as End of an Era ) , Holopainen gave Turunen a letter signed by himself and the other band members informing her that the band did not want to work with her any more . The open letter was simultaneously published on the band 's website . The media closely covered her very public separation from Nightwish , and due to references in the letter to diva @-@ like behaviour and to greed , even Turunen 's character became the subject of media discussions . 
 To you , unfortunately , business , money , and things that have nothing to do with those emotions have become much more important . 
 Turunen responded through an open letter on her website and through some interviews in which she explained her view . She was upset that after nine years of working together , Holopainen had announced the separation via an open letter . Because of the continuing media interest , Marcelo Cabuli posted a message addressing the situation on the website in February 2006 . He asked that anyone who had questions should email him . In June 2006 , Cabuli posted a lengthy reply to many of the questions he had received . He answered questions related to the greed accusation by explaining that the band had agreed on the distribution of earnings in a contract at the formation of Nightwish . Based on that contract , every band member got a fixed share of 20 % of the band 's income . Marcelo Cabuli stated that , unlike others , Turunen had never fought for additional songwriter royalties . 
 For sure in her case , money is not coming first in her book of life . [ ... ] If we would check which band member earns a lot more money than any other one in the band , you should be surprised . 
 Despite the circumstances of the separation , Holopainen 's appreciation of Turunen as an artist remained . He explained that he did not search for a similarly trained singer as a successor for Turunen because he considers her to be extraordinarily good in her genre and therefore irreplaceable . Turunen said in an interview that she is very proud of her career with Nightwish . She considers the remaining band members extremely talented and wishes all the best for them and their subsequent lead singer Anette <unk> . 
 Between 1997 and 2005 she had toured the world with Nightwish , playing on all the continents except Africa and Antarctica . She performed live for more than 500 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = 2005 – present : Independent career = = = 
 At the end of 2005 , Turunen performed several classical concerts in Finland , Germany , Spain , and Romania . Since she expected to participate in another Nightwish album , several concerts and the release of her Christmas album <unk> <unk> ( officially translated as Breath from Heaven ) were the only activities scheduled for 2006 . Turunen again played at the Savonlinna Opera Festival in July 2006 , this time as the main act ; she sang alongside Finnish tenor Raimo <unk> , supported by the Kuopio Symphonic Orchestra . Turunen performed classical arias like " O mio babbino caro " by Puccini , " <unk> ne ' <unk> <unk> " by Verdi and some songs from Andrew Lloyd Webber — " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " and " Phantom of the Opera " — among other songs . In November she performed at the charity concert " Tomorrow 's Child " with the Tapiola Choir as a benefit for the UNICEF Children 's Fund . On December 6 , 2006 , Turunen performed a big concert at the Sibelius Hall in Lahti , Finland ; it was broadcast live by the Finnish channel YLE TV2 for 450 @,@ 000 viewers . She was nominated for the Finnish Emma Award as Best Soloist of 2006 . The following year , Turunen recorded vocals for the track " In the Picture " on the Nuclear Blast All @-@ stars album Into the Light . 
 In August 2006 she started to work on her next solo album , My Winter Storm , the beginning of her main solo project . It was the first time that Turunen had written songs . She was supported by some professional songwriters . The choir and orchestral arrangements were written by film music composer James Dooley . Turunen released My Winter Storm , an album featuring various styles , including symphonic metal with classical " operatic " lead vocals , in November 2007 . The album took the number one spot on the Finnish charts , and went platinum in Finland double platinum in Russia and gold in Germany . 
 She was nominated for an Echo as best newcomer and an Emma for best Finnish artist . On November 25 , 2007 , Turunen embarked on the Storm World Tour to promote My Winter Storm . She performed 95 concerts throughout Europe , North and South America and ended the tour in October 2009 at the O2 Academy Islington in London . In December 2008 , the EP The Seer was released in the UK and the new extended edition of My Winter Storm released on January 2 , 2009 . 
 She also contributed three songs to the Finnish charity Christmas album <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Finnish for " The World 's Most Beautiful Christmas Songs " ) released on November 18 , 2009 . In December 2009 she recorded her vocal part for the song " The Good Die Young " , a duet with Klaus Meine which is included on the final Scorpions album Sting in the Tail . 
 Turunen recorded her third album , What Lies Beneath , in 2009 and 2010 ; it was released on September 1 , 2010 . The album combined metal with classical " operatic " elements in an out of the box approach . She started the What Lies Beneath World Tour performing in several festivals , including the Wacken Open Air and the Graspop Metal Meeting , with special concerts at Miskolc Opera Festival and at the Masters of Rock , when she performed accompanied by a full orchestra . The tour is scheduled to last until April 2012 . Also in 2010 she supported Alice Cooper on the German leg of his Theatre of Death Tour . On July 17 , 2011 , she sang again at the Savonlinna Opera Festival along with José Cura and accompanied by the Kuopio Symphony Orchestra . 
 On February 27 , 2012 during her What Lies Beneath World Tour concert in Brussels , Turunen announced that she will be working on a new album after completing the tour . During the concert she already presented 2 new songs . 
 In March 2012 , Turunen won the title ' Europe 's best crossover performer ' with over 100 @.@ 000 votes . 
 In May 2013 , Turunen announced the title of her 4th solo album , Colours in the Dark , in which was released on August 30 – on May 31 the song " Never Enough " was released as a teaser . Later this year , in September , it was revealed that Turunen would appear as guest vocalist on the title track and video of Within Temptation 's EP Paradise , released on September 27 . 
 In January 2014 , Turunen revealed through her blog that she would soon return to the studio and record vocals for a couple of songs for her <unk> project together with Torsten <unk> & Walter <unk> . One song has already been recorded and played for the public in Finland two years back . 
 In May 30 , 2014 , it was released the DVD Beauty and the Beat ( Tarja album ) , providing live footage from 3 concerts as part of the Beauty and the Beat World Tour . The DVD shows Tarja performing live with a symphonic orchestra , choir and Mike <unk> on drums , showing an amazing versatility from the singer who easily adapts her vocal techniques to suit a variety of repertoire , ranging from Antonín Dvořák 's " Song to the Moon " - from Rusalka ( opera ) , to Led Zeppelin 's classics such as Kashmir ( song ) , among others , and also including on the setlist , a live version of the rarely performed song - " <unk> " - from the 1998 Nightwish album Oceanborn . On the same year , in July 4 , Left in the Dark ( Tarja album ) was released as an EP containing alternative versions from Tarja 's album Colours in the Dark ( album ) , as well as a studio version of Into the Sun ( Tarja song ) . 
 In October 17 , 2015 , Tarja performed two new songs from her forthcoming album . No Bitter End and Goldfinger which is a cover of a song from a movie with the same name . 
 After the success of Colours ... Tarja now revealed that she is going to release a new album in summer of 2016 . She explains that she has been working hard once again with Tim Palmer to create the heaviest sound so far of her career for her fourth Rock Album .. She also explained that the album will follow in the same footsteps as her other albums but with a new soul and growth . A teaser with a <unk> of two songs was then released on her official <unk> channel . On the 17th of February , 2016 , Tarja also revealed the first letter of the album name which is T. 
 = = Singing style = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Along with visiting the music school in Savonlinna , Turunen began serious classical vocal training at 17 . After school , she began studying music ( with a specialization in church music ) at the Sibelius Academy . Due to her commitment with Nightwish , she had to interrupt her academic studies . 
 From 2001 to 2003 she studied at the music academy Hochschule für Musik Karlsruhe , where she trained as a soloist with further specialization in art song . Turunen originally applied to train as a choir singer . At the audition she attracted the attention of professor Mitsuko Shirai , who encouraged Turunen to apply for soloist training . 
 As a classical singer , Turunen sings with classical vocal technique . She explained that in the early days of Nightwish , it was difficult to combine classical technique with the metal sound in a way that gave her liberty of action without damaging her vocal cords . Classical techniques helped her to play with her voice , so she decided not to pursue extra training in rock / pop singing . 
 Towards the turn of the millennium , the combination of hard and fast guitar riffs with classical female lead vocals attracted a great deal of attention in the metal scene . The new music style of Nightwish quickly achieved critical and commercial popularity ; this symphonic metal style was soon dubbed " opera metal " . Turunen does not see herself as an opera singer . She has sung excerpts from operas at the Savonlinna Opera Festival , but she stresses that singing opera cannot be performed as a side project . She would need special training to perfectly sing an entire opera without a microphone . 
 When asked how the association between the opera and metal genres may have arisen , Turunen said that despite the obvious differences , the two music styles have some similarities : 
 The scenes are very similar . There are many people who would never go to an opera and the same goes for metal . But the real fans are incredibly loyal . And both styles are bombastic and express strong emotions . 
 From the first Nightwish album Angels Fall First ( 1997 ) on , critics described Turunen 's vocals using adjectives such as angelic or <unk> . The Valkyrie image was later fostered by the second video for the single " Sleeping Sun " in which Turunen walks on a battlefield as if she were guiding the dead warriors . 
 On the following albums the singing was technically more complex . On the Nightwish album Oceanborn ( 1998 ) , her classical vocal training was much more noticeable . For the song " Passion and the Opera " , Turunen performed a staccato coloratura reminiscent of the aria " Hell 's vengeance boils in my heart " , sung by the soprano role Queen of the Night in Mozart 's opera The Magic Flute . " Sleeping Sun " required a well @-@ trained breathing technique . Turunen explained in an interview that when they recorded Oceanborn , she had serious doubts , fearing that she was not yet advanced enough in her studies to have mastered the required techniques . 
 A challenge of a different kind was the cover version of Gary Moore 's " Over the Hills and Far Away " ( 2001 ) , as it required a deeper voice , far below the vocal range of an average soprano . In an interview with Breakout magazine , she reported that in the studio , the band members were shaken by a paroxysm of laughter as she tried to warm up for the vocal lines . As a side benefit of her efforts , Turunen gradually expanded her vocal range considerably into the lower range , which manifested even more on the following albums . 
 For the album Century Child ( 2002 ) , she experimented with a more " rock " sounding voice , where she maintained the classical singing technique , but , for example , sang with less vibrato . Turunen was not satisfied that she had successfully transitioned to this new style until the album Once ( 2004 ) . 
 I feel very comfortable with Once because I have tried to change my singing style with Nightwish already since Century Child because Tuomas requested that , the songs requested that ... It has been hard work and I didn 't manage to do that on Century Child , I was not very happy with it . On Once it 's all very natural , how I 'm singing and what I 'm singing . But as I said , it has been really hard work because I 've been a classical singer for the last ten years so it was hard to start over again and think of different styles . Of course I 'm always singing with my classical techniques , I never sing with my poor speaking voice – I cannot do that anymore . 
 This deeper " rock " -sounding voice on Once — as well as on the song " In the Picture " of the album Into the Light — was welcomed by critics as a refreshing change . 
 Her first solo album My Winter Storm ( 2007 ) contains rock and metal songs as well as songs that resemble classical songs . Turunen uses both her classical singing voice and a rock @-@ sounding voice . In many songs she starts with a rock voice , and then switches for widely arching melodies into a distinctly classical singing voice . 
 Tarja 's classically trained voice flies bravely over orchestral sounds and brute guitars . Like a phoenix from the ashes [ ... ] she lifts up again and again for widely arching melodies , sometimes spurred on by multi @-@ voiced female choirs . 
 In an interview , she explained that My Winter Storm was the first album where she had the chance to use her full vocal range . 
 Now that I can use the whole range of my voice , it feels very nice . I have never sung so low as I did on one of the songs on the new record and there 's a song on which I sang my highest notes ever ! I really have used a huge range on this album – around three octaves – because the moods are changing in every song and this reflects that . 
 In the album Colours in the Dark she used her speaking voice for the first time in many years . 
 = = = Register = = = 
 Turunen 's voice type is soprano . Over the course of her career , Turunen has developed a vocal range of three octaves . 
 Her range is apparent on her album My Winter Storm , where the lowest note sung is F3 in the song " The Seer " , while in another song , she aimed for D6 . 
 I sang a repertoire of a mezzo @-@ soprano for many years and because of that , still today , I have rarely quite low register for a lyrical soprano . Nowadays , I see myself as a light lyrical soprano . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Turunen 's voice is described by critics as remarkably powerful and emotional . Sometimes it is stated that her voice is too trained or operatic for metal music , but even critics who do not like classical voices admit that her voice suits the kind of metal songs she sings unusually well . 
 Until the end of their collaboration , Turunen 's singing was a trademark of Nightwish . She was known as the face and voice of Nightwish while bandleader Holopainen was the soul . Turunen was seen as a key to Nightwish 's success . She is respected by other musicians of the metal genre and is an influence on their work ; for instance , Simone Simons of Epica names her as her inspiration to study classical music and apply that vocal style to a metal band . 
 Turunen receives most of her media attention in Europe , especially in her home of Finland . In December 2003 , she was invited by Finnish president Tarja Halonen to celebrate the Finnish Independence Day at the Presidential Palace together with other Finnish celebrities . The event is televised annually live by the state @-@ owned broadcaster , the Finnish Broadcasting Company . In December 2007 , she performed different versions of the Finnish national anthem " <unk> " ( Finnish : " Our country " ) accompanied by the Tapiola Sinfonietta , to celebrate the 90th anniversary of Finnish independence . The concert was televised by the Finnish Broadcasting Company for 2 million Finnish viewers . On December 2013 , Turunen was the invited soloist at the Christmas Peace event in the Turku Cathedral , Finland , with the presence of Finnish president Sauli Niinistö . The concert aired on Yle TV1 at the Christmas Eve . During her solo career , Turunen has sold over 100 @,@ 000 certified records in Finland , which places her among the top 50 of best @-@ selling female soloists . 
 In Europe , her popularity is mainly limited to the hard rock and metal scene . She had a broader exposure on November 30 , 2007 , when she was invited to open the farewell fight of Regina Halmich . Her performance of " I Walk Alone " was televised live by the German television station ZDF for 8 @.@ 8 million viewers . Turunen will be one of the star coaches in the fourth season of The Voice of Finland in the spring of 2015 on Nelonen . After the success of the 2015 edition of The Voice of Finland , Tarja was again chosen to be one of the star coaches for the 2016 edition . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2003 Turunen married Argentine businessman Marcelo Cabuli ; they live in Buenos Aires with their daughter Naomi <unk> Alexia Cabuli Turunen ( born 2012 ) . In an interview Tarja explained that in 2016 they had plans to move back to Europe due to her touring schedule and that their daughter was starting school in the coming year . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Solo career = = = 
 = = = With Nightwish = = = 
 Angels Fall First ( 1997 ) 
 Oceanborn ( 1998 ) 
 Wishmaster ( 2000 ) 
 Over the Hills and Far Away ( 2001 ) 
 Century Child ( 2002 ) 
 Once ( 2004 ) 
 = Italian ironclad San Martino = 
 San Martino was a Regina Maria Pia @-@ class ironclad warship , the second member of her class . She was built for the Italian Regia Marina in the 1860s ; like her three sister ships , she was built in France . San Martino was laid down in July 1862 , was launched in September 1863 , and was completed in November 1864 . The ships were broadside ironclads , mounting a battery of four 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns on the broadside . 
 San Martino saw action at the Battle of Lissa , fought during the Third Italian War of Independence in 1866 . There she was in the center of the action , at the head of the Italian main body . Of the three ships in her division , San Martino was the only vessel to survive the battle . After the war , the ship 's career was uneventful , the result of the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at Lissa . She was rebuilt as a central battery ship some time after Lissa , and was modernized again in the late 1880s . The ship was eventually broken up for scrap in 1903 . 
 = = Design = = 
 San Martino was 81 @.@ 2 meters ( 266 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 24 m ( 50 @.@ 0 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 35 m ( 20 @.@ 8 ft ) . She had a crew of 480 – 485 officers and men . She was a broadside ironclad , and she was initially armed with a main battery of four 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns , though her armament changed throughout her career . The ship was protected by iron belt armor that was 4 @.@ 75 in ( 121 mm ) thick and extended for the entire length of the hull at the waterline . The battery deck was protected by 4 @.@ 3 in ( 110 mm ) of iron plate . 
 San Martino displaced 4 @,@ 201 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 135 long tons ; 4 @,@ 631 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 527 t ( 4 @,@ 456 long tons ; 4 @,@ 990 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 12 @.@ 6 knots ( 23 @.@ 3 km / h ; 14 @.@ 5 mph ) from 2 @,@ 620 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 950 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 3 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ship was initially schooner @-@ rigged to supplement the steam engine , though her masts were later reduced to a barque rig . Ultimately , she lost her sailing rig completely , having it replaced with a pair of military masts with fighting tops . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for San Martino was laid down at the Société Nouvelle des Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in La Seyne , France , on 22 July 1862 . She was launched on 21 September 1863 , and completed on 9 November 1864 . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; several ships did not have their entire armament , and several others had problems with their engines . San Martino was one of the few ironclads fit for action , so she , Castelfidardo , Regina Maria Pia , and Principe di Carignano formed up to prepare to attack Tegetthoff 's ships . Persano held a council of war aboard Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . At that time , San Martino was assigned to the 2nd Division , under Persano , along with the ironclad Re d 'Italia and the coastal defense ship Palestro . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano sent most of his ships to bombard the town of Vis , but Persano was unable to effect the landing . The next morning , Persano ordered another attack ; four ironclads would force the harbor defenses at Vis while San Martino and the rest of the fleet would attempt to suppress the outer fortifications . This second attack also proved to be a failure , but Persano decided to make a third attempt the next day . San Martino and the bulk of the fleet would again try to disable the outer forts in preparation for the landing . 
 Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; the three ships of Admiral Giovanni Vacca 's 1st Division were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . San Martino was at the center of the Italian line . Shortly before the action began , Persano decided to leave his flagship and transfer to Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They there thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . 
 Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , though he failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass . The Austrians then turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and Palestro under heavy fire . San Martino initially engaged the unarmored ships of the Austrian 2nd Division , but as Re d 'Italia became embroiled in the ensuing melee , San Martino 's captain attempted to come to her aid , though the ship was unable to prevent the Austrian flagship , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , from ramming and sinking her . Tegetthoff immediately ordered his crew to lower boats to pick up the men in the water , but with San Martino fast approaching , he could not leave his ship a stationary target . He instead ordered the small aviso Kaiserin Elizabeth to pick up the Italian survivors , but she too came under fire and was forced to abandon the effort . 
 During the battle , San Martino collided with Regina Maria Pia and had her ram bow twisted , causing leaks in her hull . Shortly thereafter , Persano broke off the engagement to consolidate his forces , but his ships , low on coal and ammunition , and with badly demoralized crews , could not be rallied by Persano 's half @-@ hearted attempt to launch an attack . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . San Martino had been hit numerous times , and had her side armor penetrated by one shell , which did not succeed in penetrating the timber backing . Twice during the engagement , the ship was set on fire by Austrian shells , though her crew was able to put the fires out . After the battle , Vacca replaced Persano ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 For the rest of her long career , San Martino served in a variety of roles , both in the main fleet and in Italy 's colonial empire . After the war , the Italian government slashed the naval budget so significantly that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . Some time after 1866 , the ship was rebuilt as a central battery ship , with most of her guns located in a central , armored casemate . Two other guns were placed in the bow as chase guns , with a third mounted as a stern chaser . At this time , her armament was also revised , to two 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) guns in the bow and nine 8 in guns , four on each broadside and the last in the stern . 
 San Martino took part in the annual 1888 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Lepanto , Italia , Caio Duilio , and Enrico Dandolo , one protected cruiser , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Between 1888 and 1890 , the ship had her barque rig replaced with military masts . By this time , she had been rearmed with eight 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns in the casemate and several smaller guns for close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . These included five 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns , four 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns , and eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannons . She also received three torpedo tubes . In 1894 , the ship was assigned to the Third Division of the Italian fleet , along with the newly commissioned protected cruiser Liguria and the torpedo cruiser Confienza . The ship was stricken from the naval register in 1903 and thereafter broken up for scrap . 
 = 1969 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1969 FA Cup Final was the final match of the 1968 – 69 staging of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup , better known as the FA Cup . The match was contested between Leicester City and Manchester City at Wembley Stadium in London on Saturday 26 April 1969 . This was the first FA Cup final since 1951 to take place in the month of April . Three @-@ time winners Manchester City were appearing in their seventh final , whereas Leicester City were seeking to win the competition for the first time , having lost three previous finals . 
 Each team won six ties to reach the final , and overcame one of the 1968 finalists ( West Bromwich Albion and Everton ) at the semi @-@ final stage . As Manchester City were reigning league champions and Leicester City were battling to avoid relegation , the Manchester club were strong favourites . The match finished 1 – 0 to Manchester City . The goal came in the 24th minute , scored by Neil Young . The victory was Manchester City 's fourth FA Cup win . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 As both Leicester City and Manchester City were First Division clubs , they entered the competition in the third round . 
 Leicester City started their cup run against Barnsley , but required a replay to overcome their Third Division opponents 2 – 1 . The first Leicester goal was controversial , as the referee overruled his linesman , who had flagged for a foul . Barnsley equalised with a penalty , but Leicester quickly retook the lead . Later in the second half Leicester claimed a third goal , but the referee adjudged that the ball had not crossed the line . A 1 – 0 win at Millwall followed . 
 In the fifth round , Leicester City faced Liverpool . The match was postponed six times before it eventually took place on 1 March . A 0 – 0 draw meant a replay at Anfield . Andy Lochhead gave the Foxes the lead on 34 minutes . Five minutes later <unk> 's handball gave Liverpool a penalty , but Peter Shilton saved Tommy Smith 's spot @-@ kick . Liverpool attacked for much of the second half , but Leicester held out to win 1 – 0 . The quarter final saw a trip to Mansfield Town , who had knocked out clubs from five different divisions . On a pitch described by The Times ' Geoffrey Green as " resembling a glutinous swamp " , Leicester won 1 – 0 . The goal was a header by Rodney Fern from a Len Glover cross . The semi @-@ final , played at Hillsborough Stadium , was against cup @-@ holders West Bromwich Albion . In a game of few chances , Allan Clarke scored from an Andy Lochhead knockdown with four minutes remaining . Leicester City gained their fourth 1 – 0 win of the competition and reached the final . 
 Manchester City 's first tie was against Luton Town of the Third Division , which City won 1 – 0 , Francis Lee the scorer . In the fourth round , the club were drawn away to Newcastle United , one of only two top @-@ flight clubs with an away draw . The match finished 0 – 0 , and so was replayed at Maine Road . Manchester City won 2 – 0 , but had to play much of the match with 10 men after Mike Summerbee was sent off . Like Leicester 's fifth round tie , Manchester City 's match at Blackburn Rovers ' Ewood Park was delayed multiple times due to poor weather . When it was eventually played Manchester City were comfortable 4 – 1 winners . In the sixth round , Manchester City were drawn at home to Tottenham Hotspur . The match was closely contested ; in his autobiography , City 's Mike Doyle described it as the hardest match of the whole cup run . As in the third round , City won 1 – 0 thanks to a Francis Lee goal . 
 The semi @-@ final , against Everton , was played at Villa Park . Everton were renowned for their powerful midfield of Ball , Harvey and Kendall , but opted to play more defensively than usual . Manchester City nevertheless paid special attention to this area , and instructed David Connor to man @-@ mark Ball . Mike Doyle suffered an injury in the first half , and spent 20 minutes off the field . City had the better of the game , but goalscoring chances were missed by Lee and Young . With little time remaining , Young forced a corner . Young took the corner himself , from which teenager Tommy Booth scored the game 's only goal . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 Manchester City were appearing in the final for the seventh time . They had won the cup three times previously ( in 1904 , 1934 and 1956 ) , and had been beaten in the final three times ( in 1926 , 1933 and 1955 ) . Leicester City were making their fourth cup final appearance , and their third of the decade , having lost on all three previous occasions ( in 1949 , 1961 and 1963 ) . The clubs had met in the FA Cup in each of the preceding three seasons . In 1966 Manchester City won a fifth round tie 1 – 0 after a replay , and won again in the third round in 1967 . In the 1967 – 68 season Leicester finally prevailed . After a 0 – 0 draw at Maine Road , Leicester City came back from 2 – 0 down at Filbert Street to win 4 – 3 . 
 Manchester City manager Joe Mercer named his team for the final several days in advance . Glyn Pardoe missed training on Monday 21st with a leg injury , but after the fitness of Pardoe , Tony Coleman and Alan Oakes was tested in a practice match , all three were passed fit . Leicester City named a 14 @-@ man squad before travelling to a training camp in Bisham on the Tuesday . Manchester City travelled south on the Thursday , staying in Weybridge . Leicester had fitness doubts over Dave Gibson , Len Glover and John Sjoberg , but initially expected all three to be available for the final . However , in a practice match against Brentford , Sjoberg had to leave the field with a groin injury . His place in the team was taken by Alan Woollett . 
 Each club received 16 @,@ 000 tickets for the final from the Football Association . The match was televised live by the BBC and ITV . Both broadcasters devoted several hours to match build @-@ up , incorporating FA Cup @-@ themed versions of other programmes , such as Cup Final It 's a Knockout . 
 As the previous season 's league champions , Manchester City were strong favourites , particularly as Leicester were embroiled in a struggle to avoid relegation from the First Division . The Times correspondent anticipated that the condition of the pitch would influence the match , stating that " if — as it is said — it is in a good , lush state Manchester will be happy . If , on the other hand , it proves to be heavy , then it could suit Leicester the better . " On the day before the game Joe Mercer criticised the pitch , likening it to a cabbage patch . 
 = = Match = = 
 At 21 , Leicester 's David Nish became the youngest ever captain of a cup finalist . His opposite number Tony Book became the third oldest at 35 . Book had missed a large part of season through injury , but upon returning his impact was so great that he shared the award for the 1969 FWA Footballer of the Year . 
 As the teams prepared to leave their dressing rooms , Manchester City deliberately delayed their exit by a short period to play on any nerves the Leicester City players may have had . Manchester City coach Malcolm Allison was not permitted to take his place on the bench , as he was serving a touchline ban . Instead , he had to sit in the stand behind the dugout . Before kick @-@ off , the players were introduced to the guest of honour , Princess Anne . 
 Fears that the contest would be a mismatch proved to be unfounded , with Leicester playing in a more attacking manner than anticipated . The Observer 's Hugh <unk> wrote that " Suggestions that Leicester would attempt to minimise the discrepancy in talents by a concentration on defensive spoiling were exposed as unjust ... ... offering the deceptively languid dribbles of Clarke , the thoughtful passes of Roberts and Gibson and the <unk> running of Lochhead as proof that the skills were not all on one side " . Neil Young and Tony Coleman both had early scoring chances for Manchester City , but missed the target . For Leicester City , a dribbling run by Clarke ended in a shot that was saved by Dowd , and a mishit shot by Len Glover was cleared off the goal @-@ line by a defender . Manchester City scored midway through the first half . Mike Summerbee crossed the ball from wide on the right , and Young hit a left footed shot high into Peter Shilton 's net . Few further chances occurred in the first half . 
 Just after half @-@ time , Leicester City had their strongest scoring chance , when Andy Lochhead received a headed knockdown from Allan Clarke , but Lochhead 's shot went high above the goal . A dominant period by Manchester City then followed , which included a chance for Colin Bell from a free @-@ kick . Len Glover was forced to move into defence with his team under pressure , but was injured shortly afterward and had to be substituted . Defender Malcolm Manley came on in his place . 
 A poll of journalists named Allan Clarke as man of the match . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The Manchester City team returned to Manchester the following evening . They travelled by train to Wilmslow , from where they undertook a 13 @-@ mile parade in an open @-@ topped bus . 25 @,@ 000 people lined the route , with a further 3 @,@ 000 people in Albert Square , where the parade finished . Three days later , the team paraded the cup in front of their supporters before their match against West Ham United at Maine Road . 
 The good conduct of the supporters of both teams was praised in Parliament by MPs Barnett <unk> and Tom Boardman . 
 Manchester City 's cup was their fourth . In winning the trophy , Joe Mercer became the first person to win the league championship and FA Cup as both a captain and a manager . By winning the competition , Manchester City earned the right to compete in the 1969 – 70 European Cup Winners ' Cup . City went on to win the Cup Winners ' Cup , beating Górnik Zabrze 2 – 1 in the final . Leicester City continued to struggle in their remaining league matches and were relegated to the Second Division . Leicester became only the second club to reach a cup final and suffer relegation in the same season . By coincidence , the other club to have done so was Manchester City , who were subject to the same fate in 1926 . 
 = Battle of the Raz de Sein = 
 The Battle of the Raz de Sein was a naval engagement of the blockade of Brest during the French Revolutionary Wars between a French and Royal Navy ships of the line on 21 April 1798 . The British blockade fleet under Admiral Lord Bridport had sailed from St Helens on 12 April and on the morning of 21 April was crossing the Iroise Passage when sails were spotted to the east . Three ships were detached in pursuit , led by the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Mars under Captain Alexander Hood . As the British ships approached their quarry a third sail was sighted to the southeast close to the coastline and moving north towards Brest . 
 This ship was the 74 @-@ gun Hercule under Captain Louis L 'Héritier , newly commissioned at Lorient and sailing to Brest to join the main French fleet and the British squadron immediately changed direction to intercept the new target . Facing overwhelming odds L 'Héritier attempted to escape through the narrow Raz de Sein passage , but found the tide against him and so anchored at the mouth of the passage to await the British attack . At 21 : 15 Mars reached Hercule , coming under heavy fire as Hood manoeuvred into position , bringing his ship crashing alongside the French vessel . For more than an hour the ships fired directly into one another , so close that their guns could not be run out but had to be fired from inside the ships . Damage and casualties were severe on both sides , the latter including Hood who was mortally wounded at the height of the engagement . 
 Ultimately Hercule was forced to surrender after attempts to board Mars failed . Both ships were battered and burnt , with the French suffering at least 290 casualties and the British 90 . Hercule was conveyed to Britain in the aftermath and later repaired and served in the Royal Navy until 1810 . Both L 'Héritier and the deceased Hood were highly praised for their conduct during the battle , which is noted as being a very rare example during this period of an action between two ships of approximately equal strength without any external influence . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the French Revolutionary Wars the Royal Navy had exerted dominance at sea over its continental rivals , most immediately the French Navy with its principal fleet based at Brest on the Breton coast of the Bay of Biscay . To contain this fleet the British practiced a close blockade strategy ; maintaining a fleet off Brest whenever weather conditions permitted to prevent the French fleet from breaking out into the Atlantic Ocean . This blockade force also limited French trade and maritime communications , attacking merchant ships and individual warships seeking to resupply or reinforce the main French fleet . This made French maritime journeys extremely hazardous even in inshore waters : in June 1795 the main French fleet had suffered a defeat at the hands of the blockade force at the Battle of Groix in the approaches to the port of Lorient , while at the Action of 13 January 1797 the independently sailing 74 @-@ gun ship of the line Droits de l 'Homme was driven ashore and destroyed in the approaches to Brest by two frigates of the blockade squadron . 
 On 12 April 1798 the British blockade fleet under the command of Admiral Lord Bridport sailed from its winter anchorage at St Helens on the Isle of Wight for the Breton coast . Bridport mustered ten ships of the line to maintain the watch on Brest , although detachments of the fleet had been cruising in the region since 25 January and with notice he could call on 28 ships of the line . The French fleet had suffered a series of setbacks in the early years of the war : in addition to the losses at Groix , seven ships had been lost at the Glorious First of June in 1795 and more were wrecked during the failed Croisière du Grand Hiver operation of 1795 and the Expédition d 'Irlande in 1796 . To replenish these losses , the French Navy was building new ships at its major fleet bases and in April 1798 a ship had been commissioned at Lorient : the Hercule , a 74 @-@ gun ship of 1 @,@ 876 tons burthen launched in July 1797 and commanded by the experienced Captain Louis L 'Héritier , veteran of the Glorious First of June , and with a crew of 680 , 20 short of a full complement . 
 = = Pursuit = = 
 On 20 April L 'Héritier was ordered to take Hercule on her maiden voyage , the short journey northwest along the coast to join the main fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Morard de Galles at Brest , where the crew would be augmented to reach the full complement . On board were surplus naval supplies , including a full set of rigging for a ship of the line , from the destroyed ship <unk> <unk> which had caught fire at Lorient earlier in the month . L 'Héritier 's crew were inexperienced and the captain did not intend to seek action , remaining close to the coastline during the first day of the journey . As his ship crossed Audierne Bay between Point <unk> 'h and the Pointe du Raz however sails were sighted to the northwest . 
 These sails belonged to three ships of Bridport 's fleet . At 11 : 00 on 21 April the British fleet had been cruising in the Iroise Passage when two sails were sighted approximately 12 nautical miles ( 22 km ) to the east . Bridport ordered his three most easterly ships to detach and investigate the sails : the 74 @-@ gun ships of the line HMS Mars under Captain Alexander Hood , HMS Ramillies under Captain Henry Inman and the 38 @-@ gun frigate HMS Jason under Captain Charles Stirling . The strong winds favoured the large ships of the line as they pursued the strange sails , which were identified as French , until at 14 : 00 they were pulling abreast of them when a third sail was sighted about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) to the southeast , sailing close to the shore . 
 This new sail was much larger than the others sighted earlier in the day , and the detached squadron abandoned their former pursuit and turned towards the new arrival , Hercule . By 17 : 45 , L 'Héritier was in full flight with the British force strung out behind him , the rest of Bridport 's fleet far to the west . Jason had the lead with Mars shortly behind , although Inman on Ramillies had lost his fore topmast and had dropped back . Hood , an experienced officer and a nephew of both Bridport and the veteran Admiral Lord Hood , pressed his ship forwards and gradually gained on both Jason and Hercule . L 'Héritier knew that in open water he would be caught and overwhelmed , and sought instead to escape through the narrow and dangerous channel of the Raz de Sein , a rocky passage between the Île de Sein and the Pointe du Raz : during the Expédition d 'Irlande the French ship of the line Séduisant had been wrecked in the Raz de Sein with 680 lives . 
 As Hercule approached the channel , Hood put Mars on the starboard tack , overtaking Jason and bearing down on the French ship . At 20 : 30 , L 'Héritier recognised that the current was too strong for Hercule to successfully navigate the Raz de Sein and instead anchored at the mouth of the channel with a spring on his cable , a system of attaching the bow anchor that increased stability and allowed L 'Héritier to swing his broadside to face the enemy while stationary , roughly 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) southwest of Pointe de Raz and about 21 nautical miles ( 39 km ) from his destination at Brest . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 20 : 45 , with Jason far behind in the darkness , Mars hauled up and Hood attempted to manoeuvre into an effective position from which to attack the waiting Hercule . The vagaries of the current in the Raz de Sein passage prevented Hood from handling his ship effectively however and instead he resolved on bringing Mars directly alongside and fighting broadside to broadside . At 21 : 15 Mars was in range and L 'Héritier opened fire , Hood replying immediately . For ten minutes , the masts and rigging of Mars came under fire , with damage to the bowsprit and foremast , as Hood continued to attempt to hold his firing position against the current before pulling slightly ahead of Hercule at 21 : 25 and dropping anchor . The port bow anchor became entangled with the starboard anchor on Hercule and the British ship was swung violently into the French ship , the force of the collision <unk> four of the gunports on Mars . 
 Thus locked together , both captains ordered their ships to pour fire into the other . So closely aligned were they that many cannon on both ships could not be run out , and instead had to be fired from inside the ships . The heat from this sustained bombardment was so intense that the wood began to blacken and burn as heavy roundshot smashed gaping holes in the sides of each ship : during the combat the ragged holes torn in the side of Hercule were so extensive that the planking between the gunports was torn away , leaving wide scars along the ship 's sides . Casualties were heavy on both sides : 20 minutes after the action began a musket ball struck Hood in the thigh , severing his femoral artery . Fatally wounded and bleeding profusely , Hood was carried below and command passed to Lieutenant William Butterfield . The French casualties were significantly higher than the British , a result of the much higher rate of fire achieved by Hood 's well @-@ trained crew . 
 Aware that his ship was suffering the worst of the casualties , L 'Héritier ordered his men to attempt to board the British ship of the line , but first one and then another attempt to do so was driven back with heavy casualties . The lighting of Hercule had gone out at the beginning of the engagement , leaving her crew confused , and as a result , only around 40 men answered when L 'Héritier ordered the boarding ; he was himself injured twice , to the head by a sabre and to the thigh by a pike , while leading the assault . At 10 : 30 , after an hour of continual bombardment L 'Héritier surrendered : Hercule 's hull had been torn open , five guns were dismounted with others damaged and more than two fifths of the crew killed or wounded . Jason was approaching fast and the rest of Bridport 's fleet was close enough to see the muzzle flashes from the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 L 'Héritier submitted his sword to Butterfield in surrender and it was presented to the dying Hood , who accepted it before expiring . At 22 : 50 Jason arrived and Stirling took charge of removing prisoners from Hercule and began the long process of extricating the two battered ships of the line from the dangerous Raz de Sein channel . Losses on the French ship were not accurately recorded in the aftermath of the action , but some accounts suggested they were as high as 400 although a more realistic estimate of 290 casualties was made by the surviving French officers . British losses amounted to three officers and 19 men killed , eight men missing ( believed to have drowned after falling overboard resisting L 'Héritier 's boarding attempts ) and another 60 wounded . The weather was fortunately calm , as neither Mars nor Hercule were in a condition to survive a storm , and with great care Hercule was brought into Plymouth on 27 April and repairs were begun with the intention of restoring the ship to active service condition . The cost of these repairs totaled £ 12 @,@ 500 ( the equivalent of £ 1 @,@ 186 @,@ 700 as of 2016 ) , but HMS Hercule was ultimately commissioned into the Royal Navy and served until 1810 . 
 Historian Robert Gardiner has noted that this " classic fight " was unusual in being fought between two single ships of the line of equal force and size without an external influence , and Edward Pelham Brenton wrote in 1823 that " The meeting of two ships of the line is a circumstance of rare occurrence , and its decision in our favour a brilliant ornament to our naval history " : he could only identify three other such incidents in British naval history . Examination of the relative size and strength of the combatants shows that they were well @-@ matched : the respective broadside weights were 984 lbs on Mars to 985 lbs on Hercule ; Hercules at 1 @,@ 876 tons burthen measured only 34 tons more than Mars , and Hercule 's understrength crew of 680 was still 46 more than on board Mars and the British crew had also been active during the Spithead Mutiny in 1797 , during which Hood had been temporarily deposed as captain . Both were relatively new ships , Hercule only 24 hours at sea while Mars was the <unk> of the 1794 Mars class built at the start of the French Revolutionary Wars . In summary , historian William James indicates that the greater experience of Hood 's crew and the nearby presence of other British ships gave Mars a slight advantage , but that " the action of the Mars and Hercule was one that , in the conduct of it throughout , reflected about an equal share of credit upon both the contending parties . " 
 Although some British histories reported that L 'Héritier died of his wounds in the aftermath of the action , this was not the case ; on his return to France following exchange , L 'Héritier faced a court martial for the loss of his ship and was honorably acquitted and received a letter of praising his resistance from Minister of Marine Rear @-@ Admiral Étienne Eustache Bruix . In Britain , Butterfield was promoted to commander , and Hood was posthumously commended , Bridport writing in his official dispatch that " No Praise of mine can add one Ray of <unk> to the distinguished Valour of Captain Alexander Hood " . His body was returned to England and buried near his home in Butleigh , Somerset under a monument provided by his family . 
 = Bill Oakley = 
 Bill Oakley ( born February 27 , 1966 ) is an American television writer and producer , known for his work on the animated comedy series The Simpsons . Oakley and Josh Weinstein became best friends and writing partners at high school ; Oakley then attended Harvard University and was Vice President of the Harvard Lampoon . He worked on several short @-@ term media projects , including writing for the variety show Sunday Best , but was then unemployed for a long period . 
 Oakley and Weinstein eventually penned a spec script for Seinfeld , after which they wrote " Marge Gets a Job " , an episode of The Simpsons . Subsequently , the two were hired to write for the show on a permanent basis in 1992 . After they wrote episodes such as " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , " Bart vs. Australia " and " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , the two were appointed executive producers and showrunners for the seventh and eighth seasons of the show . They attempted to include several emotional episodes focusing on the Simpson family , as well as several high @-@ concept episodes such as " Homer 's Enemy " , " Two Bad Neighbors " and " The Principal and the Pauper " , winning three Primetime Emmy Awards for their work . 
 After they left The Simpsons , Oakley and Weinstein created Mission Hill . The show was plagued by promotional issues and was swiftly canceled . They worked as consulting producers on Futurama , then created The Mullets in 2003 . The two wrote several unsuccessful TV pilots , and were due to serve as showrunners on Sit Down , Shut Up in 2009 . Oakley left the project over a contract dispute . He has since written for The Cleveland Show and Portlandia , without Weinstein . He also served as co @-@ executive producer and writer on Portlandia , sharing a Writers Guild of America Award with his fellow writers in 2013 . Oakley is married to fellow writer Rachel Pulido . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oakley was born William Lloyd Oakley in Westminster , Maryland and raised on a farm in Union Bridge , Maryland . He was a fan of Mad magazine from an early age , which helped shape his comic sensibility . He attended St. Albans High School in Washington D.C. , where he met and became best friends with Josh Weinstein in the eighth grade . The two created the school humor magazine The Alban Antic in 1983 . Such would be the length of their partnership ; the two often finish each other 's sentences . Oakley later attended Harvard University , where he wrote for and served as Vice President of the Harvard Lampoon , working on the famous 1986 USA Today parody issue . He graduated in 1988 after studying American history . 
 = = Career = = 
 Oakley did not land a job on a major comedy series , as previous Harvard graduates who wrote for the Lampoon had done , despite writing numerous spec scripts for shows such as Saturday Night Live and Late Night with David Letterman ; he moved back home . There , he worked in publicity , doing promotion for America 's Most Wanted . In their free time , Oakley and Weinstein wrote for local comedy groups , such as Gross National Product . In 1989 , they moved to New York City after being hired to write for a game show on Ha ! , before writing for a variety show on the network featuring Denis Leary . The two also wrote for the National Lampoon and Spy . An editor of Spy was hired by NBC to run the variety show Sunday Best , and took Oakley and Weinstein to Los Angeles with him in 1991 . When the show was canceled after three episodes , they were unemployed for a lengthy period , and Oakley lived on unemployment benefits . He later considered applying to join the United States Foreign Service . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 = = = = As a writer = = = = 
 After changing their agent , they wrote a spec script for Seinfeld , which was well received . Amongst those who liked it were Al Jean and Mike Reiss , showrunners of The Simpsons . There were no openings on the staff at the time , but Oakley and Weinstein were hired to write the episode " Marge Gets a Job " , based on an idea by Conan O 'Brien . The episode aired as part of season four . Their Seinfeld script and The Simpsons episode caught the attention of Diane English , and they were offered a job on a sitcom . Before they accepted this job , they were told that Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky were leaving The Simpsons , and then joined the writing staff on a permanent basis in 1992 , in the third season of that show . They began as story editors . They were initially quiet and felt " intimidated " , being in the same room as " 10 of the greatest minds in comedy " , but eventually started pitching jokes with confidence . They wrote their scripts together , working side @-@ by @-@ side at a computer . Their first episode as staff writers was " Marge in Chains " , an existing idea that they were assigned . The first draft of the script was based on research about women in prison conducted by Oakley and Weinstein , making it " slightly more realistic " than the final version of the episode , in which many realistic elements were replaced . 
 After season four , most of the original staff left the show . Before David Mirkin arrived to take over as showrunner for season five , Oakley , Weinstein , O 'Brien and Dan McGrath were the only writers working on the show and spent a month mapping out most of the season 's episodes . Oakley and Weinstein wrote several episodes for season five , penning the " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " segment of " Treehouse of Horror IV " , " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " , the show 's 100th episode " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " and " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " . For season six they wrote " Sideshow Bob Roberts " , basing much of the episode on the Watergate scandal , in which they had a great interest . They also wrote " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " , and " Bart vs. Australia " . The writing staff wanted to do an episode in which the Simpsons family traveled to a foreign country ; they selected Australia because they thought that everyone in Australia had a good sense of humor and " would get the jokes " , with the episode being intentionally inaccurate . The episode proved somewhat controversial ; some Australian fans said the episode was a mockery of their country . Shortly after it had aired , the Simpsons staff received over a hundred letters from Australians who were insulted by the episode . The pair wrote the two @-@ part episode " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " , which was initially proposed by series creator Matt Groening . While deciding who the culprit was , Oakley and Weinstein pitched Barney Gumble because he was a character that could go to jail and it could change the dynamic of the show . Mirkin suggested Maggie because he felt it was funnier and wanted the culprit to be a family member . Oakley and Weinstein were initially unsure about having Maggie as the culprit , and it was decided that the episode would end with Maggie shifting her eyes and making it look like it was not a complete accident . 
 = = = = As showrunner = = = = 
 Oakley and Weinstein were appointed executive producers and showrunners of the seventh and eighth seasons . They were chosen partly because they had been with the show since the third season and understood many of its dynamics . The showrunner is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the show 's production . Each episode takes ten months to produce , so the showrunner must " oversee many different episodes in different stages of production all at the same time " , with roles including head writer , making notes on the storyboards and working with the voice actors , animators , editors and composers . Oakley and Weinstein often set two script @-@ rewriting rooms in motion at the same time , delegating leadership in the rooms to writers such as Steve Tompkins and David Cohen . Mirkin , who had suggested that the two take over , remained on the show in an advisory capacity , helping Oakley and Weinstein with technical aspects of the show such as editing and sound mixing . When they took over the series , they wanted many of the episodes to be realistic ones that focused more on the five members of the Simpson family and explored their feelings and emotions towards each other . They wanted to produce Treehouse of Horror episodes , episodes about Sideshow Bob , Itchy & Scratchy and several " format @-@ bending " episodes such as " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , for which Oakley wrote the Principal Skinner and Superintendent Chalmers scene , the latter being his favorite character . They aimed for " at least two episodes per season that ' pushed the envelope ' , [ and ] expanded the definition of what an episode could be . " This was a style they employed for both seasons they produced . Season eight featured several episodes in which focus was given to secondary characters and in which new issues were explored , such as divorce . Their preferred choice of guest stars were those with unique and interesting voices , and several of their guest stars were " old grizzled men with distinctive voices " such as R. Lee Ermey , Donald Sutherland , Kirk Douglas and Lawrence Tierney . Oakley considered season three to be the single greatest comedic season of television ever produced and so attempted to recreate the feel of that season for the two he ran , focusing on stories with real emotions and situations , as well as some off @-@ the @-@ wall episodes . Season three was their basis for Homer : " We liked Homer the way he was in the second and third seasons . That was what we consciously used as our model . Dimwitted , loving , hyper @-@ enthusiastic , creatively goofy , parody of the American father – drawn with real emotions , though admittedly amplified . This was exemplified in " Mother Simpson " , " Lisa the Iconoclast " , " Diddly @-@ Dum @-@ <unk> " , and a couple others . In some of the less reality @-@ based episodes , i.e. the Beer Baron one – usually Swartzwelder 's , we 'd treat this stricture with a certain amount of latitude . " 
 One of their most notable episodes was " Homer 's Enemy " , an episode designed to " push the envelope conceptually . " The idea for " Homer 's Enemy " was first conceived by Oakley , who thought that Homer should have an enemy . This evolved into the concept of a " real world " co @-@ worker who would either love or hate Homer . The writers chose the latter as they thought it would have funnier results . The result was the character of Frank Grimes , a man who has had to work hard all his life with nothing to show for it and is dismayed and embittered by Homer 's success and comfort in spite of his inherent laziness and ignorance . " Homer 's Enemy " explores the comic possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic placed alongside Homer in a work environment . In the episode , Homer is portrayed as an everyman and the embodiment of the American spirit ; in some scenes , his negative characteristics and silliness are prominently highlighted . By the close of the episode , Grimes , a hard working and persevering " real American hero , " is relegated to the role of antagonist ; the viewer is intended to be pleased that Homer has emerged victorious . Oakley says the episode was " hyper @-@ meta " and focused on " parodying to some degree the Homer we don 't like . That 's one of the things that episode is supposed to illustrate – ' Homer gone wrong ' . Although , I would argue that in ' Homer 's Enemy ' he 's not even really even all that excessively stupid or immature , actually . " Weinstein said : " We wanted to do an episode where the thinking was ' What if a real life , normal person had to enter Homer 's universe and deal with him ? ' I know this episode is controversial and divisive , but I just love it . It really feels like what would happen if a real , somewhat humorless human had to deal with Homer . There was some talk [ on NoHomers.net ] about the ending — we just did that because ( a ) it ’ s really funny and shocking , ( 2 ) we like the lesson of ' sometimes , you just can 't win ' — the whole Frank Grimes episode is a study in frustration and hence Homer has the last laugh and ( 3 ) we wanted to show that in real life , being Homer Simpson could be really dangerous and life threatening , as Frank Grimes sadly learned . " When the episode was first broadcast , many fans felt it was too dark , unfunny and that Homer was portrayed as overly bad @-@ mannered . On the DVD commentary , Weinstein considers this episode one of the most controversial of the seasons he ran , as it involves sharp observational humor which many fans " didn 't get . " Weinstein talks about a " generation gap " — the episode was originally panned by viewers , but has since become a favorite among fans who grew up with the show . 
 Other episodes included " Two Bad Neighbors " , which sees Homer meet former President George H. W. Bush , a reference to the show 's feud with the Bushes in the early 1990s . Weinstein said that the episode is often misunderstood . Many audiences expected a political satire , while the writers made special effort to keep the parody apolitical . Oakley stresses that " it 's not a political attack , it 's a personal attack ! " , and instead of criticizing Bush for his policies , the episode pokes fun at his " crotchetiness " . Oakley described the episode as a companion piece to " Homer 's Enemy " , in that a character is juxtaposed alongside Homer and does not get along with him . 
 Oakley considered working on the show to be similar to working in a bubble due to the lack of interference from the Fox network 's executives , as is commonplace on other shows . This allowed them to produce any episodes they wanted , as Weinstein commented : " The great thing about The Simpsons is that we pretty much were able to get away with everything , so there weren 't any episodes we really wanted to do that we couldn 't do . Even the crazy high @-@ concept ones like ' Two Bad Neighbors ' and ' Homer 's Enemy ' we managed to put on the air because honestly there were no network execs there to stop us . " Such was the network 's limited input that , when an executive suggested the staff introduce a new character to live with the Simpsons so as to " liven up the show " , the staff rejected the idea and instead created the episode " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " , inserting the one @-@ time character Roy , with no explanation as to who he was , or why he was living with the family , as a reference to the executive 's proposal . The episode , which marked the point at which The Simpsons surpassed The Flintstones for the number of episodes produced for an animated series , was named by the BBC as one of the ten most memorable episodes of the show . They noted " the writers used the opportunity to pay tribute to the art of animation and rail against network interference in their show . " The intrusion of the network censors was limited : the normal procedure is for an episode 's script to be sent to the censor and then faxed back with a list of lines and words that should be substituted , causing limited problems , as often the offending lines are removed or changed for comedic purposes after animation . The episode " Homer 's Phobia " drew the censor 's objections . Its script came back with two pages of notes about almost every single line . The censors stated that they did not like the use of the word " gay " , or the discussion of homosexuality at all , and closed with a paragraph which stated that " the topic and substance of this episode are unacceptable for broadcast " . The censor problems ultimately came to nothing ; when the episode came back from animation in South Korea , the then @-@ Fox president had just been fired and replaced , with the censors being replaced as well . The new censors sent back merely one line : " acceptable for broadcast " . 
 = = = = Leaving the show = = = = 
 Oakley and Weinstein stood down as showrunners after season eight because they " didn 't want to break [ the show ] . " Oakley said : " We always said we 'd never do a joke that we 'd done before . " They felt the showrunner should not stay for more than two seasons . Due to the pressures of having to work on two seasons at once ( writing season eight , while doing post @-@ production of season seven ) , Oakley said that at least two episodes from season eight would ideally have been rewritten , had there been sufficient time , and that towards the end , they were " treading water " . As they were working on post @-@ production of season eight , they were credited as consulting producers for season nine , which was in its initial writing stages . Oakley stated that they contributed " somewhere between 0 and .0001 % " of the season , only attending the table readings of the scripts . 
 They produced three episodes held over from season eight , which aired as part of season nine : " The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson " , " The Principal and the Pauper " and " Lisa the Simpson " . " The Principal and the Pauper " was negatively received due the sudden revelation that long @-@ time character Seymour Skinner was actually an imposter . For example , in his book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner describes " The Principal and the Pauper " as the " broadcast that marked [ the ] abrupt plunge " from The Simpsons ' " Golden Age " , which he says began in the middle of the show 's third season . He calls the episode " [ one of ] the weakest episodes in Simpsons history " . As such , Oakley considers it the most controversial episode from his tenure as executive producer . He and Weinstein advise viewers to treat " The Principal and the Pauper " as an " experiment " . They surmise that the negative reception was partly due to the fact that it was not immediately apparent to viewers that this was such an episode ( as opposed to , for example , " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " ) . They describe the ending of the episode as an attempt to reset the continuity and allow fans to consider the episode on its own . " Lisa the Simpson " was their final involvement with the show . The duo wanted to end on a good note — Weinstein stated that the episode " was meant to embody the humor , depth , and emotions of The Simpsons , " — and they were pleased with the result . 
 = = = = Awards and critical reaction = = = = 
 Oakley won three Emmys for his work on The Simpsons , and shared them with the other producers . When Oakley was the showrunner and executive producer , " Homer 's Phobia " won the Emmy for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or Less ) in 1997 . The previous year , " Treehouse of Horror VI " was submitted for the award . The staff felt the 3D animation sequence " Homer ³ " would have given it the edge . The episode eventually lost to Pinky and the Brain . Oakley later expressed regret about not submitting an episode with a more emotionally driven plot , such as " Mother Simpson " . In 1996 , during season seven , the show received a Peabody Award . Oakley shared the awards for " Lisa 's Wedding " and " Trash of the Titans " in 1995 and 1998 respectively . Oakley and Weinstein themselves were nominated , along with the show 's composer Alf Clausen , for the Emmy for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and Lyrics for writing " Señor Burns " from " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? ( Part Two ) " . 
 Many of the episodes by Oakley and Weinstein are considered amongst the show 's best . For example , in 2003 , Entertainment Weekly included six episodes they produced ( " Homer 's Phobia " , " A Fish Called Selma " , " The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson " , " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " and " The Itchy and Scratchy and Poochie Show " ) and one episode they wrote ( " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " ) as part of their list of the show 's 25 best episodes . Robert Canning of IGN said the episode " You Only Move Twice " from season eight " may well be the greatest Simpsons episode of all time . In my book , it 's at least tied , " with " Marge vs. the Monorail " . A. O. Scott described their era as " reach [ ing ] a pinnacle of zany self @-@ reference with " 22 Short Films About Springfield " and " Simpsons Spin @-@ off Showcase " . " The two are popular amongst the show 's fans , and in the early days of the Internet , Oakley read and participated in fan discussion of the show on newsgroups such as alt.tv.simpsons. In 2005 and 2006 , they participated in two question @-@ and @-@ answer sessions on the fan message board <unk> 
 = = = Mission Hill and other work = = = 
 After Oakley and Weinstein left The Simpsons , they created Mission Hill in 1997 , a show about a hip , lazy , 24 @-@ year @-@ old cartoonist named Andy French , and sold it to The WB for a fall 1999 debut . They pitched the show in 1998 " as an animated series for young adults with a sophisticated , ' Simpsons ' -style sensibility . " They aimed to make the show about realistic issues affecting young adults , which were too mature for The Simpsons . The network was impressed and initially ordered 13 episodes ; they ordered five more once the first was completed . Oakley explained : " The audience we 're going for is one that 's sophisticated , that likes high and low humor , that 's very savvy in animation . [ But ] this show is definitely a case where a lot of people don 't get it . It 's not setup , setup , setup , punch line . It 's observational humor . It 's jokes told in a weird way , in the background or with a bizarre sound effect . " The show was plagued by " public relations " difficulties , which meant it was " tarnished " from the start . A badly edited two @-@ minute promotional video for the show , sent to advertisers in April 1999 for the annual upfronts , was poorly received . Oakley and Weinstein had been informed that the upfronts did not matter . Similarly , because no episodes were finished in time , journalists were not able to see anything of the show at the network 's schedule presentation in July . Subsequently , as Weinstein commented to the Washington Post , " for seven months , the only impression people had of the show was based on a two @-@ minute tape that looked terrible . Six major publications panned it before they even saw it . " The pilot garnered largely negative reviews from publications such as The Deseret News ; and earned a positive write @-@ up in Variety . Furthermore , the show was forced to change from its originally planned title of The <unk> due to its closeness to an MTV show . All of these factors combined to ensure the show received little attention , and the WB ran only a few commercials for it . Weinstein stated : " I don 't know exactly why America doesn 't know about this show . It 's like Teen People came out with its fall preview , and we 're not even in it . " Mission Hill came at a time when the TV schedules were already saturated with animated shows ; some of the response could be chalked up to its genre . 
 The show was put out on a Friday , a night on which the WB had never broadcast before , at 8 : 00 pm , a time Oakley felt was inappropriate , and aired in front of The Wayans Bros. , The Jamie Foxx Show and The Steve Harvey Show , all shows with which Oakley felt it was " incompatible " . The show 's poor reviews and ratings of an average of 1 @.@ 8 million led to its swift cancellation . Oakley concluded that the pair had been " very naive " with regard to producing the show , and that it " would 've been better on cable anyway because it would never have appealed to a broad enough audience due to the subject matter . " The 13 completed episodes were later aired on Cartoon Network 's adult swim block and the show garnered a worldwide cult following . After lobbying from Oakley and Weinstein , the WB eventually released the series on DVD . 
 From 2001 to 2002 , the two served as consulting producers on Futurama . They worked for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half days a week , contributing jokes and helping with stories . They worked most substantially on the episodes " That 's Lobstertainment ! " and " Roswell That Ends Well " . They produced The Mullets for UPN in 2003 . Oakley and Weinstein have written and produced several television pilots . These include a CBS dramedy entitled 22 Birthdays , Business Class , a comedy for NBC about two traveling salesmen , The Funkhousers , an off @-@ the @-@ wall comedy for ABC about a close @-@ knit family which was directed by Frank Oz and The Ruling Class for Fox , about a high school class who all got along , regardless of their social group . They have written two feature film screenplays : The Optimist for New Line Cinema , in which Seann William Scott was slated to star as a man born with no unhappiness gene , and Ruprecht , a Santa Claus @-@ related comedy for Disney . 
 Along with Weinstein , Oakley was to serve as an executive producer on the Fox television series Sit Down , Shut Up in 2009 . Oakley ended his involvement with the show due to a contract dispute between the staff and Sony Pictures . Sony refused to offer a contract which operated under the complete terms of the Writers Guild of America . Weinstein continued working on the show . His two subsequent projects have been without Weinstein . In late 2009 , NBC commissioned a pilot for Oakley 's sitcom about " the youngest judge in a circuit courthouse . " He wrote the 2010 episode of The Cleveland Show " Gone with the Wind " . Amongst other projects , Oakley planned a live @-@ action show where the characters are all robots , which would be made by the same people who produce the children 's show Yo Gabba Gabba ! . Oakley began writing for the sketch comedy show Portlandia in its second season . He became a co @-@ executive producer from the show 's third season , co @-@ writing every episode with Fred Armisen , Carrie Brownstein and Jonathan Krisel . He and his fellow writers shared the Writers Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Writing Comedy / Variety ( Including Talk ) – Series in 2013 . Oakley and Weinstein will again team up to co @-@ write and co @-@ executive produce 22 Birthdays , the failed pilot they originally produced for CBS , as a pilot for Bravo . Doug Liman and Dave <unk> will also be co @-@ executive producers . It is set to air in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Oakley and his wife Rachel J. Pulido have two daughters Mary and <unk> little Elizabeth ( Bitsy ) , and a son named James . He and his family live in Portland , Oregon . 
 Pulido ( born January 26 , 1967 ) graduated from Harvard , where she was a writer for the Harvard Lampoon . She wrote for The Simpsons and Mission Hill and was the only Hispanic staff writer in the twenty @-@ year history of The Simpsons . She has said that she thinks of herself as Mexican . Pulido wrote the episode " Grade School Confidential " , and the Bumblebee Man segment of " 22 Short Films About Springfield " . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Episodes listed are those Oakley has been credited as writing or co @-@ writing 
 Sunday Best ( 1991 ) – writer 
 The Simpsons ( 1992 – 1998 ) – writer , producer , story editor , supervising producer , consulting producer , executive producer , showrunner ( all episodes with Josh Weinstein ) 
 " Marge Gets a Job " 
 " Marge in Chains " 
 " Treehouse of Horror IV " ( " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " segment ) 
 " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " 
 " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " 
 " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " 
 " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " 
 " Sideshow Bob Roberts " 
 " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " 
 " Bart vs. Australia " 
 " Who Shot Mr. Burns " ( parts 1 & 2 ) 
 " 22 Short Films About Springfield " ( Skinner and Chalmers scene ) 
 Mission Hill ( 1999 – 2002 ) – creator , writer , executive producer , voice of George Bang 
 " Pilot " 
 Futurama ( 2001 – 2002 ) – consulting producer 
 Ruling Class ( 2001 ) – writer 
 The Funkhousers ( 2002 ) – writer 
 The Mullets ( 2003 ) – creator , executive producer 
 22 Birthdays ( 2005 ) – writer 
 Business Class ( 2007 ) – creator , writer 
 The Cleveland Show ( 2010 – 2012 ) – writer 
 " Gone with the Wind " 
 " American Prankster " 
 " All You Can Eat " ( story with Assem Batra ) 
 Regular Show ( 2010 ) - writer 
 " Just Set Up the Chairs " 
 " <unk> Concert Tickets " 
 Portlandia ( 2012 – present ) - writer , consulting producer 
 With Fred Armisen , Carrie Brownstein and Jonathan Krisel , Oakley has co @-@ written every episode since " Brunch Village " 
 = Nauru at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Nauru competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics , that were celebrated in Beijing , China , from August 8 to August 24 , 2008 . Nauru was represented by the Nauru Olympic Committee , and was the only nation out of 204 participating nations and territories that sent only a single athlete , and was one of 117 that won no medals at the Games . The sole athlete to represent the nation was Itte Detenamo , who participated in the weightlifting , and was the flag bearer in both the opening and closing ceremonies . This was the same number of athletes as at the 1996 Olympics , when Marcus Stephen ( who later became President of Nauru ) represented the country in the same sport , but was a decrease from the nation 's last appearance at the Games when three athletes were sent to Athens . Nauru earned a berth for the weightlifting event in the Oceania and South Pacific Olympic Weightlifting Championships in 2008 and a chance to send participants in swimming and athletics events , but chose to send only a weightlifter . Itte Detenamo competed in the Group B of heavyweight class , fifteenth and last event of the weightlifting . He did not earn a medal , but finished with a personal best . 
 = = Delegation = = 
 The delegation of the Nauru for the 2008 Summer Olympics consisted of four men . The first , Itte Detenamo , was the sole athlete and competed in the weightlifting competition . Also in the delegation as a manager of Itte was Yukio Peter — 2004 Olympian — who holds the record for the best placing in any Olympics by any Nauruan , eighth in the lightweight category ( 69 kg ) of the weightlifting event in the 2004 Summer Olympics . Delegation was also accompanied by Vinson Detenamo , father of Itte and the then and first President of the Nauru Olympic Committee . As the former sport minister of Nauru , Vinson had helped in the establishment of Nauru Olympic Committee in 1991 during his term in the Ministry of Sport . The final member of the delegation was Lou Keke as Nauru 's Olympic chef de mission . 
 = = Qualification = = 
 Nauru earned a qualification place in weightlifting in the International Weightlifting Federation 's continental Olympic qualification event — Oceania and South Pacific Olympic Weightlifting Championships — held in Auckland , New Zealand from March 27 to 30 , 2008 . At the event only those National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) of Oceania which had not gained berths for 2008 Olympics in the 2006 and 2007 World Weightlifting Championships got chance to win qualification places . Itte Detenamo was selected over Yukio Peter to fill the earned quota . Nauru could have sent participants in swimming and athletics also , but chose not to as there was no national governing body of swimming and the nation lacked basic infrastructure and competitive athletes in order to complete in athletics . 
 Nauru 's representation of sole athlete in the 2008 Games was the same number of athletes as at the 1996 Olympics , when Marcus Stephen — incumbent President of Nauru , President of the Nauru Olympic Committee and Oceania Weightlifting Federation — represented the country in the same sport . Marcus had previously competed for Western Samoa in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona as Nauru was not recognized by the International Olympic Committee as a National Olympic Committee until 1994 . The attendance at the 2008 games was a decrease from the nation 's previous appearance at the Games when three athletes were sent to Athens . 
 = = Weightlifting = = 
 Itte Detenamo represented Nauru in the super heavyweight class of weightlifting . It was his second Olympics appearance ; he was ranked previously 14th in the same weight category at the 2004 Athens Olympics . The whole competition took place on August 19 , but was divided in two parts due to the number of competitors . Group B <unk> competed at 15 : 30 CST , and Group A , at 19 : 00 CST . The event was the fifteenth and last weightlifting event to conclude . Itte competed in group B of the event ; his highest successfully lifted weight in snatch was 175 kg , out of 165 , 170 and 175 kg , and in clean and jerk his best was 210 kg , out of 205 and 210 kg , he also tried a failed attempt for 215 kg . Itte finished in 10th place in the final standings with a total of 385 kg , setting a personal best . 
 = Traveling Salesmen = 
 " Traveling Salesmen " is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the US version of The Office . The episode was written by Michael Schur , Lee Eisenberg , and Gene Stupnitsky , and was directed by series creator and executive producer Greg Daniels . It first aired on January 11 , 2007 in the United States on NBC . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , the sales team goes out on sales calls , with Michael and Andy , Stanley and Ryan , Phyllis and Karen , and Dwight and Jim pairing up . Andy tries to show Dwight in a bad light to Michael , Karen learns of Jim 's previous crush on Pam , and Angela forgets to hand in some important documents to New York , so secret boyfriend Dwight does it for her . 
 John Krasinski believed " Traveling Salesmen " was the first episode to give a real glimpse into Dwight and Angela 's relationship , and much of the plot centered on the two . It aired to an estimated 10 @.@ 2 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research . It was positively received by television critics . Along with " The Return " , NBC later re @-@ broadcast " Traveling Salesmen " as a combined hour @-@ long episode as part of their sweeps week . As a result , both episodes underwent editing which included the addition of four minutes of previously unseen footage . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Dwight Schrute arrives several hours late to work one morning , due to driving to corporate to help out Angela Martin . 
 Michael announces that the sales department will be pairing up for sales calls . Andy ( Ed Helms ) chooses Michael ( Steve Carell ) , Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) chooses Karen ( Rashida Jones ) , and Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) grudgingly chooses Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) , leaving Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) with Jim ( John Krasinski ) , who used to do sales calls together . Andy learns that Dwight does Michael 's laundry as punishment for meeting with Jan to take over the branch . During their sales call , Andy sabotages the meeting , setting up an opportunity to later apologize to Michael , stating that he had really " <unk> " the situation , a further attempt to deride Dwight . 
 While the salespeople are out , Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) tells Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) a thinly disguised story of how " Kurt " saves " Noelle " ( " Kurt " and " Noelle " being Dwight 's and Angela 's middle names , respectively ) by delivering the quarterly tax forms to New York . 
 At first , Jim 's and Dwight 's sales call appears to be a fiasco , but it is soon clear that the joint force of Jim 's straight @-@ and @-@ honest sales approach , along with Dwight 's aggressive , erratic tactics , is a very successful partnership . Ryan asks Stanley if he could lead on this call so Stanley can critique him , which Stanley obliges . However , Ryan freezes up and fails when he realizes that Stanley 's clients are all black . Stanley laughs at an annoyed Ryan during the entire trip back to the office . Phyllis and Karen first stop at a beauty parlor , emerging with gaudy makeovers . Their sales call is a success because , as Phyllis knew , the client obviously likes women with that kind of look , as evidenced by the photo of his wife . Returning to the office , Phyllis tells Karen that she 's pleased that Jim got over his crush on Pam . Karen confronts Jim with this information , and he reassures her that his crush has passed . 
 Upon returning after the sales call , Andy steals Dwight 's keys , breaks into his car , and finds the toll booth ticket to New York City . Andy gives the evidence to Michael , who then accuses Dwight of disloyalty , and Angela prevents him from clearing his name because it would expose their relationship . Dwight resigns . Andy gloats over his success , but the documentary camera catches Angela in the background glaring at him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Traveling Salesman " was written by Michael Schur , Lee Eisenberg , and Gene Stupnitsky , while co @-@ creator and executive producer Greg Daniels directed . Daniels shot " Traveling Salesmen " and " The Return " in mid @-@ November 2006 before the cast and crew began an eight @-@ week break . 
 John Krasinski enjoyed the episode because he believed it was the first real glimpse of Angela and Dwight 's relationship , with Rainn Wilson noting that the audience gets " to see how Dwight becomes her hero . " As with other Office episodes , a number of scenes in " Traveling Salesmen " were improvised and unscripted , including Angela with the jelly beans and Stanley laughing at Ryan in the car . 
 To create the old picture of Jim and Dwight , an actual high school photograph of Krasinski was photoshopped along with a 1991 image of Wilson while Wilson was on tour with an acting company . While standing in the parking lot , the cast had to pretend to shiver in 85 @-@ degree weather . Krasinski actually slapped Wilson at Wilson 's request , which Krasinski considered " one of the craziest acting experiences I 've ever had . " Before deciding on singing to a melody from Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory , Ed Helms and Daniels shot 50 different versions . Another Willy Wonka reference includes Andy 's mention of a chocolate factory and not wishing " to fall into any chocolate river " . 
 " Traveling Salesmen " was later rebroadcast with " The Return " as a combined hour @-@ long episode on March 15 , 2007 , with four minutes of previously unseen footage added . Greg Daniels explained that it was both an attempt to attract a larger audience and " it 's about giving something extra to our wonderful fans … their loyalty must be rewarded somehow , and we don 't have the budget for 10 million muffin baskets . " As part of the editing process , Pam is seen winning an art contest , four scenes of Andy searching through Dwight 's things were condensed , and an Angela – Pam storyline as well as an extended scene of Andy going to anger management were added . The third season DVD contains a number of deleted scenes , such as Michael using his computer , " Harvey " , to hit on Pam ( this scene was the cold open for " Traveling Salesman " on its original broadcast ; the combined hour @-@ long version of " Traveling Salesman " and " The Return " has no cold open ) . Notable cut scenes included Andy dramatically illustrating to Karen that they are the only two Stamford employees remaining , Jim and Dwight surreptitiously planning their sales tactic , Pam offering to get coffee for her co @-@ workers , and Dwight emotionally giving away selected items to others in the office . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Traveling Salesmen " was first broadcast on January 11 , 2007 in the United States on NBC . According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 10 @.@ 2 million viewers tuned in , making it only a handful of other episodes of The Office to reach over 10 million viewers , the others being the show 's pilot episode , " The Injury " , " The Return , " " Ben Franklin " and " Stress Relief , " of which the latter reached over 20 million viewers . 
 Buddy TV senior writer Oscar Dahl remarked , " It didn 't make me laugh out loud and , yet , I still loved it . " He shed a negative light on Andy 's behavior towards Dwight , calling it " annoying and not that funny . " Dahl hoped Dwight would be reappearing soon , and concluded " Overall , a crucial story episode with a nice cliffhanger . Even if wasn 't as funny as last week or even most episodes this season , The Office still entertains . " AOL TV 's Michael Sciannamea lauded the episode , writing " I cannot remember ever <unk> over every single line in a single sitcom episode as I did watching this one . If the performances in this particular one don 't garner the actors in this show a plethora of Emmys , there ought to be an investigation . " Sciannamea continued that he believed it was Steve Carell 's best series performance thus far because he " displayed the full range of his <unk> , arrogant jerk , charming salesman , sensitive soul , and added a new <unk> . " 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Abby West commented of Dwight 's ouster , " There 's no way Rainn Wilson is off the show , but it was a bold move to let him appear to be bested by the ( slightly ) more Machiavellian Andy . I can 't wait to see how they play out this storyline . " West referred to " Phyllis ' expert psychological move " with the makeovers as her favorite subplot of the night , and appreciated the spotlight on the sales pairings ; she expanded on this latter point , " The trip out of the office was also a great reminder of what these Dunder Mifflin @-@ ers actually do and how good most of them are . Isn 't it interesting that as much as they normally clash , Dwight and Jim make a very effective sales team , while the seeming bond that Michael and Andy share did nothing to keep Andy from punting their pitch ? When Dwight started using the client 's phone , Jim didn 't skip a beat . They 'd either used the ploy ( of dialing the competition 's customer service number and showing how long the wait time was ) before , or Jim is comfortable going with Dwight 's flow , at least in that kind of setting . They essentially played good cop / bad cop ... or good cop / weird cop . " Other television critics also praised the various sales call pairings . 
 = Team ( Lorde song ) = 
 " Team " is a song by New Zealand singer Lorde , taken from her debut studio album , Pure Heroine ( 2013 ) . The song was released on 13 September 2013 as the album 's third single in Australia and New Zealand by Universal Music New Zealand , and the second in the United States and the United Kingdom by Lava and Republic Records . The track was written by Lorde and Joel Little and produced by Little , with additional production from Lorde herself . " Team " is a hybrid of alternative pop and electro @-@ hop featuring synthesiser , bass and snare drum instrumentation over a handclap @-@ based beat . Lyrically , the track is a " tribute to her friends and country " . 
 " Team " was generally well received by most contemporary critics , who praised its musical style , lyrical content and Lorde 's vocal delivery on the track . The single garnered success on charts internationally , peaking at number 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and at number 3 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . In Oceania , it <unk> at number 19 in Australia and debuting and debuted at number 3 in New Zealand . " Team " was certified platinum by both the Australian Recording Industry Association and Recorded Music NZ . 
 A music video for the song was directed by Young Replicant and was released on 4 December 2013 . Filmed in an abandoned building named Red Hook Grain Terminal in Red Hook , Brooklyn , the video 's content was inspired by Lorde 's dream of an own world for teenagers . Upon its release , the clip crashed Vevo 's channel due to a high number of views . To promote " Team " and Pure Heroine , Lorde performed the song on several occasions , including on Late Show with David Letterman and at the ARIA Music Awards of 2013 . It was later featured on a Season 10 episode of Grey 's Anatomy which aired in December 2013 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Team " was written by Lorde and Joel Little while Lorde was travelling the world . The track was recorded , produced and mixed by Little at his Golden Age Studios in Morningside , Auckland , with Lorde providing additional production . The song was produced using the software Pro Tools . On 13 September 2013 " Team " was leaked , justifying an earlier rush out release . Within hours the audio was uploaded on YouTube and Universal Music New Zealand released the digital download single for sale in Australia and New Zealand . On 19 November 2013 , the track was sent to US contemporary hit radio by Lava and Republic Records . " Team " was sent to US rhythmic contemporary radio on 6 January 2014 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Team " is a hybrid of alternative pop and electro @-@ hop . Written in the key of G @-@ flat major , " Team " features synthesiser , bass , and snare drum instrumentation over a handclap @-@ based beat . Amanda Dobbins of New York magazine and Maura Johnston of Spin likened the chorus of the song to that of Lana Del Rey 's " Born to Die " ( 2011 ) , while Drowned in Sound 's Sammy Maine compared the beats to works produced by Timbaland for Missy Elliott . Lorde 's vocal range spans from B ♭ 2 to D ♭ 5 . The song moves at a tempo of 100 beats per minute . 
 Lyrically , " Team " is a " tribute to her friends and country " . During an interview with Billboard , Lorde described the song as " her take on most modern music " and explained , " no one comes to New Zealand , no one knows anything about New Zealand , and here I am , trying to grow up and become a person . " Lorde explained that the line " We live in cities you 'll never see on screen " was " to be speaking for the minority " from small cities . She also expresses distaste in common contemporary popular music lyrics telling listeners to " put your hands in the air " through the verse " I 'm kind of over getting told to throw my hands up in the air " . Writer Lily Rothman for the magazine Time commented that the lyrics " we sure know how to run things " in " Team " were a response to the lyrics " we run things , things don ’ t run we " in Miley Cyrus ' " We Can 't Stop " ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Team " received critical acclaim from music critics . Brenna Ehrlich from MTV News lauded it as an " insanely catchy jam " . The AV Club critic Kevin McFarland labelled " Team " as a " club @-@ ready " and " sparkly thumper " , while Nathan Jolly from The Music Network simply described it " interesting " . John Murphy , in his review of Pure Heroine for musicOMH , commended the lyrics " I 'm kinda over getting told to throw my hands up in the air " for being catchy . Marlow Stern writing for The Daily Beast listed " Team " as the fifth best song of 2013 . 
 On 23 September 2013 , " Team " debuted at number three on the New Zealand Singles Chart , becoming Lorde 's third consecutive top @-@ three single in the country following number @-@ one singles " Royals " and " Tennis Court " . Recorded Music NZ certified the single double platinum due to the sales figure of over 30 @,@ 000 copies in the country . " Team " peaked at number nineteen on the Australian Singles Chart , and was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 Following its impact on US radio stations , " Team " debuted at number thirty @-@ two on the Billboard Rock Airplay , and topped the chart on 7 October 2013 . It also topped the Adult Top 40 , and charted at number two on the Mainstream Top 40 , number two on the Hot Rock Songs and number two on the Alternative Songs . On the Billboard Hot 100 , " Team " peaked at number six , becoming her second US top @-@ ten hit ( following her debut number @-@ one hit " Royals " ) . The song reached over two million in sales in the US by April 2014 . By December 2014 , " Team " has sold 2 @.@ 45 million copies copies in the US . The single also reached number three on the Canadian Hot 100 , and was certified double @-@ platinum by Music Canada , which denotes 160 @,@ 000 downloads . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Team " was directed by Young Replicant . Filmed the disused Red Hook Grain Terminal in Red Hook , Brooklyn , the video was inspired by Lorde 's dream of " teenagers in their own world , a world with hierarchies and initiations , where the boy who was second in command had acne on his face , and so did the girl who was Queen " . The director explained that Lorde was one of the " kids who have a unique look " , which fitted the clip 's " sad story " concept . 
 The video begins with shots of the ocean ; The Daily Beast 's editor Marlow Stern draw comparisons between the shots to Paul Thomas Anderson 's drama film The Master ( 2012 ) . The scene revealed an unseen city with ruins of factories on an island and full of teens " without any parental guidance " . On Lorde 's Facebook account , she further explained that world was " so different to anything anyone had ever seen , a dark world full of tropical plants and ruins and sweat " . Inside the ruins , she is seen as the " self @-@ anointed " queen of the city 's citizens in a " blue , foliage @-@ filled universe " . Stern compared her image to that of The Hunger Games ' fictional character Katniss Everdeen . A young boy is transported to the island ; following his arrival , he must joust on a motorbike to become a part of Lorde 's " team " . He loses ; Lorde commented that " sometimes the person who loses is stronger " . 
 On 4 December 2013 , the video was released on Lorde 's official VEVO channel on YouTube at 10 AM ( New Zealand time ) . Upon its release , the video crashed Vevo 's channel due to a high number of views . Lily Rothman from Time magazine compared the video for " Team " to Miley Cyrus ' " We Can 't Stop " music video for their same " mythical settings " – a party ( " We Can 't Stop " ) and an island ( " Team " ) . 
 = = Live performances , covers and remixes = = 
 On 12 November 2013 , Lorde performed several songs from Pure Heroine during the Late Show with David Letterman to promote the album , including " Team " . The track was also performed by Lorde during the ARIA Music Awards of 2013 . At the 2014 MuchMusic Video Awards , Lorde performed a Goth @-@ influenced medley of " Tennis Court " and " Team " . 
 American alternative rock band Local H recorded a cover version of " Team " at Electrical Audio in Chicago , Illinois . The Local H version was released as a single on 21 April 2014 . 
 J Gramm released a remix of " Team " in December of 2013 . Noisey gave the remix a positive review , stating that J Gramm " turns the ballad up a notch — with some triumphant drums and overall , a more victorious feel for the stories of the cities she 's dreaming up . " 
 A heavily modified , instrumental version of the song is used towards the end of the season eighteen episode of South Park , entitled Gluten Free Ebola . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Team " – 3 : 13 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Varahi = 
 Varahi ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ) is one of the Matrikas , a group of seven or eight mother goddesses in the Hindu religion . With the head of a sow , Varahi is the shakti ( feminine energy , or sometimes , consort ) of Varaha , the boar Avatar of the god Vishnu . In Nepal , she is called Barahi . 
 Varahi is worshipped by all the three major schools of Hinduism : Shaktism ( goddess worship ) ; Shaivism ( followers of the god Shiva ) ; and Vaishnavism ( devotion to Vishnu ) . She is usually worshipped at night , and according to secretive Vamamarga Tantric practices . The Buddhist goddesses <unk> and Marichi are believed to have their origins in the Hindu goddess Varahi . 
 = = Hindu legends = = 
 According to the Shumbha @-@ Nishumbha myth of the Devi Mahatmya from the Markandeya Purana religious texts , the Matrikas goddesses appear as shaktis ( feminine powers ) from the bodies of the gods . The scriptures say that Varahi was created from Varaha . She has a boar form , wields a chakra ( discus ) , and fights with a sword . After the battle described in the myth , the Matrikas dance – drunk on their victim 's blood . 
 According to a latter episode of the Devi Mahatmya that deals with the killing of the demon Raktabija , the warrior @-@ goddess Durga creates the Matrikas from herself and with their help slaughters the demon army . When the demon Shumbha challenges Durga to single combat , she absorbs the Matrikas into herself . In the Vamana Purana , the Matrikas arise from different parts of the Divine Mother Chandika ; Varahi arises from Chandika 's back . 
 The <unk> Purana praises Varahi as a granter of boons and the regent of the northern direction , in a hymn where the Matrikas are declared as the protectors of the directions . In another instance in the same Purana , she is described as riding a buffalo . The Devi Bhagavata Purana says Varahi , with the other Matrikas , is created by the Supreme Mother . The Mother promises the gods that the Matrikas will fight demons when needed . In the Raktabija episode , Varahi is described as having a boar form , fighting demons with her tusks while seated on a preta ( corpse ) . 
 In the Varaha Purana , the story of Raktabija is retold , but here each of Matrikas appears from the body of another Matrika . Varahi appears seated on Shesha @-@ nāga ( the serpent on which the god Vishnu sleeps ) from the posterior of Vaishnavi , the Shakti of Vishnu . Varahi is said to represent the vice of envy ( <unk> ) in the same Purana . 
 The Matsya Purana tells a different story of the origin of Varahi . Varahi , with other Matrikas , is created by Shiva to help him kill the demon Andhakasura , who has the ability – like Raktabija – to regenerate from his dripping blood . 
 = = Associations = = 
 The Devi Purana paradoxically calls Varahi the mother of Varaha ( <unk> ) as well as <unk> , who emerges from <unk> . <unk> means " death personified " and could be an attribute of Varaha or a direct reference to Yama , the god of death . Elsewhere in the scripture , she is called <unk> and described as engrossed in drinking from a skull @-@ cup . Pal theorizes that the name " <unk> " means that Varahi is clearly identified with Yami , the shakti of Yama , who is also known as <unk> . Moreover , Varahi holds a staff and rides a buffalo , both of which are attributes of Yama ; all Matrikas are described as assuming the form of their creator @-@ gods . 
 In the context of the Matrikas ' association to the Sanskrit alphabet , Varahi is said to govern the pa <unk> of consonants , namely pa , pha , ba , <unk> , ma . The Lalita Sahasranama , a collection of 1 @,@ 000 names of the Divine Mother , calls Varahi the destroyer of demon <unk> . In another context , Varahi , as Panchami , is identified with the wife of Sadashiva , the fifth Brahma , responsible for the regeneration of the Universe . The other Panch Brahmas ( " five Brahmas " ) are the gods Brahma , Govinda , Rudra , and Isvara , who are in charge of creation , protection , destruction , and dissolution respectively . In yet another context , Varahi is called <unk> , the bestower of Kaivalya ( " detachment of the soul from matter or further <unk> " ) – the final form of mukti ( salvation ) . The Matrikas are also believed to reside in a person 's body . Varahi is described as residing in a person 's navel , and governs the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> chakras . 
 Haripriya Rangarajan , in her book Images of Varahi — An <unk> Study , suggests that Varahi is none other than Vak devi , the goddess of speech . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 Varahi 's iconography is described in the Matsya Purana and <unk> like the Purva @-@ <unk> and the Rupamandana . The Tantric text Varahi Tantra mentions that Varahi has five forms of Varahi : <unk> Varahi , <unk> Varahi , Mahi Varahi ( Bhairavi ) , <unk> Varahi , and Matsya Varahi . The Matrikas , as shaktis of gods , are described to resemble those gods in form , jewellery , and mount , but Varahi inherits only the boar @-@ face of Varaha . 
 Varahi is usually depicted with her characteristic sow face on a human body with a black complexion comparable to a storm cloud . The scholar Donaldson informs us that the association of a sow and a woman is seen derogatory for the latter , but the association is also used in curses to protect " land from invaders , new rulers , and trespassers " . Rarely , she is described as holding the Earth on her tusks , similar to Varaha . She wears the karaṇḍa mukuṭa , a conical basket @-@ shaped crown . Varahi can be depicted as standing , seated , or dancing . Varahi is often depicted pot @-@ bellied and with full breasts , while most all other Matrikas – except Chamunda – are depicted as slender and beautiful . One belief suggests that since Varahi is identified with the <unk> of Vishnu , who holds the universe in her womb ( <unk> <unk> Jagaddhatri ) , that she should be shown as pot @-@ bellied . Another theory suggests that the pot @-@ belly reflects a " maternal aspect " , which Donaldson describes as " curious " because Varahi and Chamunda " best exemplify " the terrible aspect of the Divine Mother . A notable exception is the depiction of Varahi as human @-@ faced and slender at the sixth @-@ century Rameshvara cave ( Cave 21 ) , the Ellora Caves . She is depicted here as part of the group of seven Matrikas . A third eye and / or a crescent moon is described to be on her forehead . 
 Varahi may be two , four , or six @-@ armed . The Matsya Purana , the Purva @-@ <unk> , and the Rupamandana mention a four @-@ armed form . The Rupamandana says she carries a <unk> ( bell ) , a chamara ( a yak 's tail ) , a chakra ( discus ) , and a gada ( mace ) . The Matsya Purana omits the <unk> and does not mention the fourth weapon . The Purva @-@ Karanagama mentions that she holds the Sharanga ( the bow of Vishnu ) , the hala ( plough ) , and the <unk> ( pestle ) . The fourth hand is held in the Abhaya ( " protection gesture " ) or the Varada Mudra ( " blessing gesture " ) . The Devi Purana mentions her attributes as being sword , iron club , and noose . Another description says her hair is adorned with a garland with red flowers . She holds a staff and drinking skull @-@ cup ( kapala ) . The <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ stotra describes her attributes as a plough , a pestle , a skull @-@ cup , and the abhaya mudra . The Vamana Purana describes her seated on Shesha while holding a chakra and a mace . The Agni Purana describes her holding the gada , shankha , sword , and ankusha ( goad ) . The <unk> mentions she carries a sword , shield , noose , and goad . In Vaishnava images , since she is associated with Vishnu , Varahi may be depicted holding all four attributes of Vishnu — Shankha ( conch ) , chakra , Gada , and Padma ( lotus ) . The <unk> describes her holding a rosary , a khatvanga ( a club with a skull ) , a bell , and a kamandalu ( water @-@ pot ) . 
 The Vishnudharmottara Purana describes a six @-@ armed Varahi , holding a danda ( staff of punishment ) , <unk> ( shield ) , khadga ( sword ) , and pasha ( noose ) in four hands and the two remaining hands being held in Abhaya and Varada Mudra ( " blessing gesture " ) . She also holds a shakti and hala ( plough ) . Such a Varahi sculpture is found at <unk> , depicted with the dancing Shiva . She may also be depicted holding a child sitting on her lap , like Matrikas are often depicted . 
 Matsya Varahi is depicted as two @-@ armed , with spiral @-@ coiled hair and holding a fish ( <unk> ) and a kapala . The fish and wine @-@ cup kapala are special characteristics of Tantric Shakta images of Varahi , the fish being exclusive to Tantric descriptions . 
 The vahana ( vehicle ) of Varahi is usually described as a buffalo ( Mahisha ) . In Vaishnava and Shakta images , she is depicted as either standing or seated on a lotus pitha ( <unk> ) or on her vahana ( a buffalo ) or on its head , or on a boar , the serpent Shesha , a lion , or on Garuda ( the eagle @-@ man vahana of Vishnu ) . In Tantric Shakta images , the vahana may be specifically a she @-@ buffalo or a corpse ( <unk> ) . An elephant may be depicted as her vahana . The goddess is also described as riding on her horse , <unk> . Garuda may be depicted as her attendant . She may also be depicted seated under a <unk> tree . 
 When depicted as part of the Sapta @-@ Matrika group ( " seven mothers " ) , Varahi is always in the fifth position in the row of Matrikas , and thus is called Panchami ( " fifth " ) . The goddesses are flanked by Virabhadra ( Shiva 's fierce form ) and Ganesha ( Shiva 's elephant @-@ headed son and wisdom god ) . 
 = = Worship = = 
 For worship and temples of Varahi as part of the Sapta @-@ Matrika group , see Matrika Worship 
 Varahi is worshipped by Shaivas , Vaishnavas , and Shaktas . Varahi is worshipped in the Sapta @-@ Matrikas group ( " seven mothers " ) , which are venerated in Shaktism , as well as associated with Shiva . 
 Varahi is a <unk> devata ( night goddess ) and is sometimes called <unk> Varahi ( " dark Varahi " ) and Dhumavati ( " goddess of darkness " ) . According to Tantra , Varahi should be worshipped after sunset and before sunrise . <unk> <unk> explicitly states that the time of worship is the middle of the night . Shaktas worship Varahi by secretive Vamamarga Tantric practices , which are particularly associated with worship by panchamakara – wine , fish , grain , meat , and ritual copulation . These practices are observed in the <unk> temple on the bank of the Ganges , where worship is offered to Varahi only in the night ; the shrine is closed during the day . Shaktas consider Varahi to be a manifestation of the goddess Lalita Tripurasundari or as " <unk> " or " Dandanatha " – the commander @-@ general of Lalita 's army . The Sri Vidya tradition of Shaktism elevates Varahi to the status of Para Vidya ( " transcendental knowledge " ) . The Devi <unk> suggests evoking Varahi for longevity . Thirty <unk> and thirty mantras are prescribed for the worship of Varahi and to acquire siddhis by her favour . This , according to the scholar Rath , indicates her power . Some texts detailing her iconography compare her to the Supreme Shakti . 
 Prayers dedicated to Varahi include Varahi <unk> , for her blessing , and Varahi <unk> , for destruction of enemies ; both are composed in Tamil . 
 = = = Temples = = = 
 Apart from the temples in which Varahi is worshipped as part of the Sapta @-@ Matrika , there are notable temples where Varahi is worshipped as the chief deity . 
 India 
 A 9th @-@ century Varahi temple exists at <unk> about 14 km from Konark , Orissa , where Varahi is installed as <unk> Varahi and is worshipped by Tantric rites . The famous <unk> temple , Puri , is associated with and sends offerings to a Barahi temple , which is a centre of Tantric activities . In Varanasi , Varahi is worshipped as Patala Bhairavi . In Chennai , there is a Varahi temple in Mylapore , while a bigger temple is being built near <unk> . Ashadha Navaratri , in the Hindu month of Ashadha ( June / July ) , is celebrated as a nine @-@ day festival in honour of Varahi at the Varahi shrine at Brihadeeswarar temple ( a Shaiva temple ) , Thanjavur . The goddess is decorated with different types of <unk> ( ornaments ) every day . Full moon days are considered sacred to Varahi . An ancient Varahi devi temple worshipped as <unk> <unk> is situated in Gonda District . In Gujarat , there is a Varahi temple in a village named <unk> where the goddess is venerated as the Gotra @-@ devi of a surname " <unk> " Another temple in Gujarat is located in <unk> town of Bhavnagar district where idol of goddess was brought from <unk> village near <unk> The idol of goddess was found by digging in <unk> river in that area . 
 Maha Varahi temple is located in Peelamedu ( 118 , <unk> <unk> ) , Coimbatore , Tamil Nadu . This temple has both Maha <unk> and Goddess <unk> ( <unk> ) , the commander in chief of Goddess Lalitha ( Sri Raja Rajeshwari 's ) army . This temple is run by Sri Varahi <unk> Trust . Varahi <unk> happens here on every <unk> . This temple performs <unk> <unk> ( the 10 cosmic forms of goddess ) . Homa for Goddess Bagalamukhi and Goddess <unk> ( <unk> Varahi ) are done on <unk> ( new moon ) and <unk> ( full moon ) . 
 Nepal 
 A Barahi temple is situated in the middle of <unk> Lake , Nepal . Here , Barahi , as she is known as in Nepal , is worshipped in the <unk> Varahi form as an incarnation of Durga and an <unk> ( " grandmother " ) goddess . Devotees usually sacrifice male animals to the goddess on Saturdays . Jaya Barahi Mandir , Bhaktapur , is also dedicated to Barahi . 
 Other countries 
 Devi Varahi Ambika <unk> is done at the <unk> temple in Pontiac , Michigan , USA on every <unk> ( New moon ) night . Devi Varahi was installed at the Temple in February 2005 by <unk> Prana <unk> . Varahi was installed in Sri Maha Muthu Mariamman temple <unk> , Kedah on 21 February 2014 . That is the only Varahi Amman temple in the Malaysia . 
 = = In Buddhism = = 
 Vajravarahi ( " vajra @-@ hog " or Buddhist Varahi ) , the most common form of the Buddhist goddess Vajrayogini , originated from the Hindu Varahi . Vajravarahi is also known as Varahi in Buddhism . Vajravarahi inherits the fierce character and wrath of Varahi . Both are invoked to destroy enemies . The sow head of Varahi is also seen as the right @-@ side head attached to the main head in one of Vajravarahi 's most common forms . The hog head is described in Tibetan scriptures to represent the sublimation of ignorance ( " <unk> " ) . According to Elizabeth English , Varahi enters the Buddhist pantheon through the <unk> . In the <unk> , Varahi is described initially as a Shaiva <unk> ( " all @-@ mother " ) located in hell , who is converted to the Buddhist mandala by <unk> , assuming the name <unk> ( " vajra @-@ face " ) . Varahi also enters the <unk> @-@ mandala as an attendant goddess . Varahi , along with <unk> ( another form of Varahi ) , appears as the hog @-@ faced attendant of Marichi , who also has a sow face – which may be an effect of the Hindu Varahi . 
 = Climate of the Tampa Bay area = 
 The Tampa Bay area has a humid subtropical climate ( Köppen Cfa ) , with warm and humid summers with frequent thunderstorms and drier winters with freezing temperatures occurring every 2 – 3 years . The area experiences a significant summer wet season , as nearly two @-@ thirds of the annual precipitation falls in the months of June through September . The area is listed by the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) as being in hardiness zone 10 , which is about the northern limit of where coconut palms and royal palms can be grown . Highs usually range between 65 and 95 ° F ( 18 and 35 ° C ) year round . Though known for hot summers , Tampa 's official high has never reached 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) – the city 's all @-@ time record temperature is 99 ° F ( 37 ° C ) . St. Petersburg 's all @-@ time record high is exactly 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . 
 Pinellas County lies on a peninsula between Tampa Bay and the Gulf of Mexico , and much of the city of Tampa lies on a smaller peninsula jutting out into Tampa Bay . This proximity to large bodies of water both moderates temperatures and introduces large amounts of humidity into the atmosphere . In general , the local communities farthest from the coast have larger temperature ranges , both during a single day and throughout the seasons of the year . 
 = = Seasonal weather = = 
 = = = Spring = = = 
 Spring in the Tampa area is usually mild and dry , with highs in the 70s ( around 25 C ) and lows in the 50s ( around 13 C ) . However , the calm is occasionally disturbed by the arrival of late @-@ season cold fronts . The collision of a cold air mass with warm and humid local air can create a squall line which brings brief heavy rain , strong winds , and sometimes small tornadoes to the area . A dramatic example of this was the Storm of the Century in March 1993 , but other smaller @-@ scale events ( such as the brief but intense squall which caused a freighter to strike and partially collapse the original Sunshine Skyway bridge in May 1980 ) occur almost every year . 
 = = = Summer = = = 
 Temperatures are hot from around mid @-@ May through mid @-@ October , which coincides approximately with the rainy season . Summertime weather is very consistent , with highs in the low 90s ° F ( around 32 ° C ) , lows in the mid @-@ 70s ° F ( around 24 ° C ) , accompanied by high humidity and an almost daily chance of afternoon thundershowers . 
 The typical summer weather pattern is for heat @-@ produced thermals , powered by either the Gulf or Atlantic sea breeze ( and occasionally both simultaneously ) , to build puffy white cumulus clouds into threatening <unk> over the interior of the Florida peninsula . Usually , the resulting storms drift slowly westward to the bay area , though they may rain themselves out before reaching Tampa if the easterly winds are light or the sea breeze from the Gulf of Mexico is too strong . Occasionally , the storms survive to move out over the Gulf of Mexico , where they can be seen at night from the beaches as spectacular light shows . Nighttime storms offshore are driven by the land @-@ breeze front which is the dermal counterpart of the daytime sea @-@ breeze front . 
 The afternoon storms typically bring brief periods of heavy rain with frequent cloud @-@ to @-@ ground lightning , and are usually followed by a pleasantly clear and cooler evening . At times , they can grow severe , bringing gusty winds , small hail , and torrential rain , and an occasional tornado . While Florida does rank # 1 in the USA in terms of tornadoes per square mile , the majority of the twisters are small , weak , and short @-@ lived . Waterspouts are relatively common in Tampa Bay and off the gulf coast during strong summer thunderstorms , occasionally moving onshore as a short @-@ lived tornado . 
 Though the Tampa Bay area is sometimes referred to as the " Lightning Capital of the World " , it is more accurately called the “ Lightning Capital of North America ” if measured by average number of days with thunderstorm activity per year . During the summer , west @-@ central Florida receives as much lightning as the world ’ s true lightning leaders such as the Lake Victoria region of Africa and the central Amazon River Basin . However , there are few thunderstorms in the Tampa Bay area from approximately October to May , decreasing the yearly average . 
 Every year , Florida averages 10 deaths and 30 injuries from lightning strikes , with several of these usually occurring in or around Tampa . University of Florida lightning expert Martin A. Uman has calculated that the average resident is within a half @-@ mile of 10 to 15 lightning strikes every year . TECO Energy , the local electric utility , spends over USD $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 annually to repair transformers and other equipment damaged by lightning strikes . 
 = = = Autumn = = = 
 Both the temperature and the average rainfall decline as September turns to October . Highs moderate into the 80s , and the lessening heat leads to lower evaporation @-@ generated humidity and fewer convection @-@ generated thundershowers , which are unusual after around mid @-@ October . While everyday rain is less frequent , the hurricane season extends until the end of November , and the area is sometimes affected by a drenching hurricane or tropical storm during the fall . 
 = = = Winter = = = 
 Winters in the Tampa Bay Area are generally dry and mild ; highs during the season average near 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) with mostly sunny skies . The occasional passage of a cold front will bring rain followed by a few days of cooler temperatures . Lows rarely drop below freezing 32 ° F ( 0 ° C ) , an occurrence which happens , on average , once every other year . While deep freezes are very infrequent , serious cold snaps are a significant concern due to the diverse range of freeze @-@ sensitive agriculture and aquaculture industries in the area . 
 Frozen precipitation is very rare in the area . In the Great Blizzard of 1899 , Tampa suffered its one and only known blizzard , with " bay effect " snow coming off Tampa Bay . 
 The last officially measurable snow in Tampa fell on January 19 , 1977 . While the accumulation amounted to less than 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) , the area is quite unaccustomed to and unprepared for frozen precipitation , so various schools , businesses , and roads closed , at least until the snow melted away that afternoon . Many residents of southern Pinellas County reported a light snowfall on December 23 , 1989 . However , no snow fell at official weather stations , and the weather record indicates that light sleet fell on St. Petersburg that day . 
 The winter of 2009 @-@ 2010 was one of the coldest in local history . Both Tampa and St. Petersburg set records for consecutive days in which the high temperature did not reach 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) , and Tampa experienced ten consecutive days with a low temperature below freezing . Much of the area received a " wintry mix " of rain , sleet , and possibly a few snowflakes on January 9 – 10 . 
 Tampa 's all @-@ time record low temperature is 18 ° F ( − 8 ° C ) and St. Petersburg 's is 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) , both occurring during the same cold snap on December 13 , 1962 . 
 During El Niño , the Tampa Bay area receives cooler and wetter conditions during the dry season while during La Niña , the Tampa Bay area becomes drier and warmer than normal . 
 = = = Precipitation and sunshine trends = = = 
 Due to the frequent summer thunderstorms , Tampa has a pronounced wet season , receiving an average total of 28 inches ( 710 mm ) of rain from June and September but only about 18 inches ( 460 mm ) during the remaining eight months of the year combined . The historical averages during the late summer , especially September , are augmented by tropical cyclones , which can easily deposit many inches of rain in one day . Outside of the summer rainy season , most of the area 's precipitation is delivered by the occasional passage of a weather front . 
 Tampa 's precipitation data falls near the median for the area . Nearby communities to the interior tend to receive a bit more rain every year ; those closer to the coast a bit less . 
 The area receives plentiful sunshine throughout the year , averaging a total of <unk> hours , or 66 @.@ 7 % of the possible total . The daily sunshine amount is highest in May , when the sun 's angle of incidence has increased the hours of daylight and the rainy season has not yet begun . 
 = = Tropical systems = = 
 June through November is hurricane season in the Atlantic Basin and Caribbean Sea , with the most tropical activity occurring between mid @-@ August to mid @-@ October . Rain dropped by tropical systems is an important component of the area 's annual precipitation and is vital for replenishing the water supply of communities around Tampa Bay . 
 The area feels some effect from passing tropical systems almost every year , but direct hits are uncommon . Estimates of the probability of a hurricane making landfall in the Tampa Bay area during any given year range from 1 in 25 to 1 in 50 . While the historical record has shown that the area is vulnerable to a large storm ( such as the Great Gale of 1848 , which destroyed most of the village of Tampa ) , Tampa Bay has not seen the landfall of any hurricane since 1946 , and has not taken a hit from a major hurricane since 1921 . 
 = = = The 2004 Tropical Season = = = 
 The 2004 Atlantic Hurricane Season was historically busy for the Tampa Bay area . The region was affected by a record four hurricanes that year ; Frances , Jeanne , Charley , and to a lesser extent , Ivan . Jeanne and Frances passed over Tampa as tropical storms after making their way across the state from the east coast . Charley was forecast to make a direct hit on Tampa Bay from the south @-@ southwest , which would have been the worst @-@ case scenario for local storm surge flooding . But the storm made a sudden and unexpected turn to the northeast and brought only tropical storm force winds to the region , devastating the Ft . Myers / Port Charlotte area instead . Ivan also threatened the area as it moved north up the eastern Gulf of Mexico . It remained far to the west of central Florida , however , and brought only a bit of rain and wind to Tampa Bay before eventually slamming into coastal Alabama and the Florida Panhandle . 
 = = Tampa and St. Petersburg climate summaries = = 
 = The Little Mermaid ( 1989 film ) = 
 The Little Mermaid is a 1989 American animated musical fantasy film produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation and released by Walt Disney Pictures . Based on the Danish fairy tale of the same name by Hans Christian Andersen , The Little Mermaid tells the story of a beautiful mermaid princess who dreams of becoming human . Written , directed , and produced by Ron Clements and John Musker , with music by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman ( who also served as a co @-@ producer ) , the film features the voices of Jodi Benson , Christopher Daniel Barnes , Pat Carroll , Samuel E. Wright , Jason Marin , Kenneth Mars , Buddy Hackett , and René Auberjonois . 
 The 28th Disney animated feature film , The Little Mermaid was released to theaters on November 17 , 1989 to largely positive reviews , garnering $ 84 million at the domestic box office during its initial release , and $ 211 million in total lifetime gross worldwide . After the success of the 1988 Disney / Amblin film Who Framed Roger Rabbit , The Little Mermaid is given credit for breathing life back into the art of Disney animated feature films after a string of critical or commercial failures produced by Disney that dated back to the early 1970s . It also marked the start of the era known as the Disney Renaissance . 
 A stage adaptation of the film with a book by Doug Wright and additional songs by Alan Menken and new lyricist Glenn Slater opened in Denver in July 2007 and began performances on Broadway January 10 , 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ariel , a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old mermaid princess , is dissatisfied with underwater life and is curious about the human world . With her best friend Flounder , Ariel collects human artifacts and goes to the surface of the ocean to visit Scuttle the seagull , who offers very inaccurate knowledge of human culture . She ignores the warnings of her father King Triton , the ruler of Atlantica , and his adviser and court composer Sebastian that contact between merpeople and humans is forbidden . 
 One night , Ariel , Flounder , and an unwilling Sebastian travel to the ocean surface to watch a celebration for the birthday of Prince Eric on a ship . Ariel quickly becomes enamored with Eric . The birthday celebration is cut short by a violent storm which wrecks the ship and tosses Eric overboard . Ariel saves him from drowning and brings him to shore . She sings to him , but quickly leaves as soon as he regains consciousness to avoid being discovered . Fascinated by the memory of her voice , Eric vows to find who saved and sang to him , and Ariel vows to find a way to join him and his world . Noticing a change in Ariel 's behavior , Triton questions Sebastian about her behavior and learns of her love for Eric . Furious , Triton confronts Ariel in her grotto , where she and Flounder store human artifacts , and destroys the objects with his trident to her dismay . After Triton leaves , two eels named Flotsam and Jetsam convince Ariel to visit Ursula the sea witch . 
 Ursula makes a deal with Ariel to transform her into a human for three days in exchange for Ariel 's voice , which Ursula puts in a nautilus shell . Within these three days , Ariel must receive the " kiss of true love " from Eric . If Ariel gets Eric to kiss her , she will remain a human permanently , otherwise , she will transform back into a mermaid and belong to Ursula . Ariel agrees and is then given human legs and taken to the surface by Flounder and Sebastian . Eric finds Ariel on the beach and takes her to his castle , unaware that she is the one who had saved him earlier . Ariel spends time with Eric , and at the end of the second day , they almost kiss but are thwarted by Flotsam and Jetsam . Angered at their narrow escape , Ursula disguises herself as a beautiful young woman named Vanessa and appears onshore singing with Ariel 's voice . Eric recognizes the song and , in her disguise , Ursula casts a hypnotic enchantment on Eric to make him forget about Ariel . 
 The next day , Ariel finds out that Eric will be married to the disguised Ursula . Scuttle discovers that Vanessa is actually Ursula in disguise , and informs Ariel who immediately pursues the wedding barge . Sebastian informs Triton , and Scuttle disrupts the wedding with the help of various animals . In the chaos , the nautilus shell around Ursula 's neck is broken , restoring Ariel 's voice and breaking Ursula 's enchantment over Eric . Realizing that Ariel is the girl who saved his life , Eric rushes to kiss her , but the sun sets and Ariel transforms back into a mermaid . Ursula reveals herself and kidnaps Ariel . A furious Triton confronts Ursula and demands Ariel 's release , but the deal is inviolable . At Ursula 's urging , Triton agrees to take Ariel 's place as Ursula 's prisoner , giving up his trident . Ariel is released as Triton transforms into a polyp and loses his authority over Atlantica . Ursula declares herself the new ruler , but before she can use the trident , Eric hits her with a harpoon . Ursula tries to strike down Eric , but Ariel interferes , causing Ursula to inadvertently kill Flotsam and Jetsam . Enraged , Ursula uses the trident to grow into monstrous proportions . 
 Ariel and Eric reunite on the surface just before Ursula grows past and towers over the two . She then gains full control of the entire ocean , creating a storm and bringing sunken ships to the surface . Just as Ursula attempts to kill Ariel , Eric steers a wrecked ship towards Ursula , impaling her with the ship 's splintered bowsprit . With Ursula destroyed , Triton and the other polyps in Ursula 's garden revert into their original forms . Realizing that Ariel truly loves Eric , Triton willingly changes her from a mermaid into a human and blesses her marriage to Eric . Ariel and Eric marry on a ship and depart . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jodi Benson as Princess Ariel 
 Christopher Daniel Barnes as Prince Eric 
 Pat Carroll as Ursula 
 Jodi Benson as Vanessa ( Ursula 's human alter @-@ ego ) 
 Samuel E. Wright as Sebastian 
 Jason Marin as Flounder 
 Kenneth Mars as King Triton 
 Buddy Hackett as Scuttle 
 Ben Wright as Grimsby 
 <unk> Edwards as Flotsam and Jetsam 
 Edie McClurg as Carlotta the maid 
 Kimmy Robertson and Caroline <unk> as Ariel 's Sisters 
 Will Ryan as Harold the Seahorse 
 Frank Welker as Max the Sheepdog 
 René Auberjonois as Chef Louis 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 The Little Mermaid was originally planned as part of one of Walt Disney 's earliest feature films , a proposed package film featuring vignettes of Hans Christian Andersen tales . Development started soon after Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in the late 1930s , but was delayed due to various circumstances . 
 In 1985 , Ron Clements became interested in a film adaptation of The Little Mermaid while he was serving as a director on The Great Mouse Detective ( 1986 ) alongside John Musker . Clements discovered the Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale while browsing through a bookstore . Believing the story provided an " ideal basis " for an animated feature film and keen on creating a film that took place underwater , Clements wrote and presented a two @-@ page treatment of Mermaid to Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg at a " gong show " idea suggestion meeting . Katzenberg passed the project over , because at that time the studio was in development on a sequel to their live @-@ action mermaid comedy Splash ( 1984 ) and felt The Little Mermaid would be too similar a project . The next day , however , Katzenberg approved of the idea for possible development , along with Oliver & Company . While in production in the 1980s , the staff found , by chance , original story and visual development work done by Kay Nielsen for Disney 's proposed 1930s Andersen feature . Many of the changes made by the staff in the 1930s to Hans Christian Andersen 's original story were coincidentally the same as the changes made by Disney writers in the 1980s . 
 That year Clements and Musker expanded the two @-@ page idea into a 20 @-@ page rough script , eliminating the role of the mermaid 's grandmother and expanding the roles of the Merman King and the sea witch . However , the film 's plans were momentarily shelved as Disney focused its attention on Who Framed Roger Rabbit and Oliver & Company as more immediate releases . In 1987 , songwriter Howard Ashman became involved with the writing and development of Mermaid after he was asked to contribute a song to Oliver & Company . He proposed changing the minor character Clarence , the English @-@ butler crab , to a Jamaican crab and shifting the music style throughout the film to reflect this . At the same time , Katzenberg , Clements , Musker , and Ashman revised the story format to make Mermaid a musical with a Broadway @-@ style story structure , with the song sequences serving as the <unk> of the film . Ashman and composer Alan Menken , both noted for their work as the writers of the successful Off @-@ Broadway stage musical Little Shop of Horrors , teamed up to compose the entire song score . In 1988 , with Oliver out of the way , Mermaid was slated as the next major Disney release . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 More money and resources were dedicated to Mermaid than any other Disney animated film in decades . Aside from its main animation facility in Glendale , California , Disney opened a satellite feature animation facility during the production of Mermaid in Lake Buena Vista , Florida ( near Orlando , Florida ) , within Disney @-@ MGM Studios Theme Park at Walt Disney World . Opening in 1989 , the Disney @-@ MGM facility 's first projects were to produce an entire Roger Rabbit cartoon short , Roller Coaster Rabbit , and to contribute ink and paint support to Mermaid . Another first for recent years was the filming of live actors and actresses for motion reference material for the animators , a practice used frequently for many of the Disney animated features produced under Walt Disney 's supervision . Broadway actress Jodi Benson was chosen to play Ariel , and Sherri Lynn Stoner , a former member of Los Angeles ' Groundlings improvisation comedy group , acted out Ariel 's key scenes . 
 Mermaid 's supervising animators included Glen Keane and Mark Henn on Ariel , Duncan Marjoribanks on Sebastian , Andreas Deja on King Triton , and Ruben Aquino on Ursula . Originally , Keane had been asked to work on Ursula , as he had established a reputation for drawing large , powerful figures , such as the bear in The Fox and the Hound ( 1981 ) and Professor <unk> in The Great Mouse Detective ( 1986 ) . Keane , however , was assigned as one of the two lead artists on the petite Ariel and oversaw the " Part of Your World " musical number . He jokingly stated that his wife looks exactly like Ariel " without the fins . " The character 's body type and personality were based upon that of Alyssa Milano , then starring on TV 's Who 's the Boss ? and the effect of her hair underwater was based on both footage of Sally Ride when she was in space , and scenes of Stoner in a pool for guidance in animating Ariel 's swimming . 
 The design of the villainous Ursula was based upon drag performer Divine . An additional early inspiration before Divine was Joan Collins in her role as Alexis Carrington in the television show Dynasty , due to a suggestion from Howard Ashman , who was a fan of the series . Pat Carroll was not Clements and Musker 's first choice to voice Ursula ; the original script had been written with Bea Arthur of the Disney @-@ owned TV series The Golden Girls in mind . After Arthur turned the part down , actresses such as Nancy Marchand , Nancy Wilson , Roseanne , Charlotte Rae , and Elaine Stritch were considered for the part . Stritch was eventually cast as Ursula , but clashed with Howard Ashman 's style of music production and was replaced by Carroll . Various actors auditioned for additional roles in the film , including Jim Carrey for the role of Prince Eric , and comedians Bill Maher and Michael Richards for the role of Scuttle . 
 The underwater setting required the most special effects animation for a Disney animated feature since Fantasia in 1940 . Effects animation supervisor Mark <unk> estimated that over a million bubbles were drawn for this film , in addition to the use of other processes such as airbrushing , backlighting , superimposition , and some computer animation . The artistic manpower needed for Mermaid required Disney to farm out most of the underwater bubble effects animation in the film to Pacific Rim Productions , a China @-@ based firm with production facilities in Beijing . An attempt to use Disney 's famed multiplane camera for the first time in years for quality " depth " shots failed because the machine was reputedly in dilapidated condition . The multiplane shots were instead photographed at an outside animation camera facility . 
 The Little Mermaid was the last Disney feature film to use the traditional hand @-@ painted cel method of animation . Disney 's next film , The Rescuers Down Under , used a digital method of coloring and combining scanned drawings developed for Disney by Pixar called CAPS ( Computer Animation Production System ) , which would eliminate the need for cels , the multiplane camera , and many of the optical effects used for the last time in Mermaid . A CAPS prototype was used experimentally on a few scenes in Mermaid , and one shot produced using CAPS — the penultimate shot in the film , of Ariel and Eric 's wedding ship sailing away under a rainbow — appears in the finished film . Computer @-@ generated imagery was used to create some of the wrecked ships in the final battle , a staircase behind a shot of Ariel in Eric 's castle , and the carriage Eric and Ariel are riding in when she bounces it over a ravine . These objects were animated using 3D wireframe models , which were plotted as line art to cels and painted traditionally . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Little Mermaid was considered by some as " the film that brought Broadway into cartoons " . Alan Menken wrote the Academy Award winning score , and collaborated with Howard Ashman on the songs . One of the film 's most prominent songs , " Part of Your World " , was nearly cut from the film when it seemingly tested poorly with an audience of school children , who became rowdy during the scene . This caused Jeffrey Katzenberg to feel that the song needed to be cut , an idea that was resisted by Musker , Clements , and Keane . Both <unk> and Clements cited the similar situation of the popular song " Over the Rainbow " nearly being cut from 1939 's The Wizard of Oz when appealing to Katzenberg . Keane pushed for the song to remain until the film was in a more finalized state . During a second test screening , the scene , now colorized and further developed , tested well with a separate child audience , and the musical number was kept . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was originally released on November 17 , 1989 , followed by a November 14 , 1997 , reissue . After the success of the 3D re @-@ release of The Lion King , Disney announced a 3D re @-@ release of The Little Mermaid scheduled for September 13 , 2013 , but this was cancelled on January 14 , 2013 , due to the under @-@ performances of other Disney 3D re @-@ releases . The 3D version was released on Blu @-@ ray instead , but it did play a limited engagement at the El Capitan Theatre from September to October 2013 . On September 20 , 2013 , The Little Mermaid began playing in select theaters where audiences could bring iPads and use an app called Second Screen Live . The film was also screened out of competition at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In a then atypical and controversial move for a new Disney animated film , The Little Mermaid was released as part of the Walt Disney Classics line of VHS and Laserdisc home video releases in May 1990 , six months after the release of the film . Before Mermaid , only a select number of Disney 's catalog animated films had been released to home video , as the company was afraid of upsetting its profitable practice of theatrically reissuing each film every seven years . Mermaid became that year 's top @-@ selling title on home video , with over 10 million units sold ( including 7 million in its first month ) . This success led future Disney films to be released soon after the end of their theatrical runs , rather than delayed for several years . 
 Following Mermaid 's 1997 re @-@ release in theaters , a new VHS version was released in March 1998 as part of the Masterpiece Collection and included a bonus music video of Jodi Benson singing " Part of Your World " during the end credits , replacing " Under the Sea " as the end credit song . The VHS sold 13 million units and ranked as the third best @-@ selling video of the year . 
 The Little Mermaid was released in a Limited Issue " bare @-@ bones " DVD in 1999 , with a standard video transfer . The film was re @-@ released on DVD on October 3 , 2006 , as part of the Walt Disney Platinum Editions line of classic Walt Disney animated features , including the song " Kiss the Girl " performed by Ashley Tisdale . Deleted scenes and several in @-@ depth documentaries were included , as well as an Academy Award @-@ nominated short film intended for the shelved Fantasia 2006 , The Little Match Girl . The DVD sold 1 @.@ 6 million units on its first day of release , and over 4 million units during its first week , making it the biggest animated DVD debut for October . By year 's end , the DVD had sold about 7 million units and was one of the year 's top ten selling DVDs . The Platinum Edition DVD was released as part of a " Little Mermaid Trilogy " boxed set on December 16 , 2008 . The Platinum Edition of the film , along with its sequels , went on moratorium in January 2009 . The film was re @-@ released on 3 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray / DVD / Digital Copy Combo , a 2 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo and 3D Blu @-@ ray on October 1 , 2013 , as part of the Walt Disney Diamond Editions line . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Early in the production of The Little Mermaid , Jeffrey Katzenberg cautioned Clements , Musker , and their staff , reminding them that since Mermaid was a " girl 's film " , it would make less money at the box office than Oliver & Company , which had been Disney 's biggest animated box office success in a decade . However , by the time the film was closer to completion , Katzenberg was convinced Mermaid would be a hit and the first animated feature to earn more than $ 100 million and become a " blockbuster " film . 
 During its original 1989 theatrical release , Mermaid earned $ 84 @,@ 355 @,@ 863 at the North American box office , falling just short of Katzenberg 's expectations but earning 64 % more than Oliver . The film was theatrically reissued on November 14 , 1997 , on the same day as Anastasia , a Don Bluth animated feature for Fox Animation Studios . The reissue brought $ 27 @,@ 187 @,@ 616 in additional gross . The film also drew $ 99 @.@ 8 million in box office earnings outside the United States and Canada between both releases , resulting in a total international box office figure of $ 211 million . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Little Mermaid received largely positive reviews from critics . Review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film has a 93 % " Certified Fresh " score based on 67 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads " The Little Mermaid ushered in a new golden era for Disney animation with warm and charming hand @-@ drawn characters and catchy musical sequences " . Roger Ebert , film critic for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , was enthusiastic about the film and wrote that , " The Little Mermaid is a jolly and inventive animated fantasy — a movie that 's so creative and so much fun it deserves comparison with the best Disney work of the past . " Ebert also commented positively on the character of Ariel , stating , " ... Ariel is a fully realized female character who thinks and acts independently , even rebelliously , instead of hanging around passively while the fates decide her destiny . " The staff of TV Guide wrote a positive review , praising the film 's return to the traditional Disney musical as well as the film 's animation . Yet they also wrote that the film is detracted by the juvenile humor and the human characters ' eyes . While still giving a positive review , they stated that the film " can 't compare to the real Disney classics ( which appealed equally to both kids and adults ) . " The staff of Variety praised the film for its cast of characters , Ursula in particular , as well as its animation , stating that the animation " proves lush and fluid , augmented by the use of shadow and light as elements like fire , sun and water illuminate the characters . " They also praised was the musical collaboration between Howard Ashman and Alan Menken " whose songs frequently begin slowly but build in cleverness and intensity . " 
 Todd Gilchrist of IGN wrote a positive review of the film , stating that the film is " an almost perfect achievement . " Gilchrist also praised how the film revived interest in animation as it was released at a time when interest in animation was at a lull . Hal Hinson of The Washington Post wrote a mixed review of the film , referring to it as a " likably unspectacular adaptation of the Hans Christian Andersen classic . " Hinson went on to write that the film is average even at its highest points . He wrote that while there is nothing wrong with the film , it would be difficult for children to identify with Ariel and that the characters seemed bland . Hinson concluded his review saying that the film is " accomplished but uninspiring , The Little Mermaid has enough to please any kid . All that 's missing is the magic . " Empire gave a positive review of the film , stating that " [ The Little Mermaid is ] a charmer of a movie , boasting all the ingredients that make a Disney experience something to treasure yet free of all the politically correct , formulaic elements that have bogged down the more recent productions . " 
 In April 2008 – almost 20 years after the film 's initial release in 1989 – Yahoo ! users voted " The Little Mermaid " as No. 14 on the top 30 animated films of all time . Later , when Yahoo ! updated the list in June of the same year , the film remained on the list but dropped six slots to end at # 20 . ( Only three other traditionally animated Disney animated films - Aladdin , Beauty and the Beast , and The Lion King , respectively - scored above it in the poll even after the update . ) In 2011 , Richard Corliss of TIME Magazine named it one of " The 25 All @-@ TIME Best Animated Films " . 
 The Little Mermaid , Disney 's first animated fairy tale since Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) , is an important film in animation history for many reasons . Chief among these are its re @-@ establishment of animation as a profitable venture for The Walt Disney Company , as the company 's theme parks , television productions , and live @-@ action features had overshadowed the animated output since the 1950s . Mermaid was the second film , following Oliver & Company , produced after Disney began expanding its animated output following its successful live action / animated film Who Framed Roger Rabbit , and became Disney 's first animated major box office and critical hit since The Rescuers in 1977 . Walt Disney Feature Animation was further expanded as a result of Mermaid and increasingly successful follow @-@ ups — Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) , Aladdin ( 1992 ) , and The Lion King ( 1994 ) . The staff increased from 300 members in 1988 to 2 @,@ 200 in 1999 spread across three studios in Burbank , California , Lake Buena Vista , Florida , and Montreuil , Seine @-@ Saint @-@ Denis , France . 
 In addition , Mermaid signaled the re @-@ establishment of the musical film format as a standard for Disney animated films . The majority of Disney 's most popular animated films from the 1930s on had been musicals , though by the 1970s and 1980s the role of music had been de @-@ emphasized in the films . 1988 's Oliver & Company had served as a test of sorts to the success of the musical format before Disney committed to the Broadway @-@ style structure of The Little Mermaid . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In January 1990 , The Little Mermaid earned three Academy Award nominations , making it the first Disney animated film to earn an Academy Award nomination since The Rescuers in 1977 . The film won two of the awards , for Best Song ( " Under the Sea " ) and Best Score . The film also earned four Golden Globe nominations , including Best Picture — Comedy or Musical , and won the awards for Best Song ( " Under the Sea " ) and Best Score . 
 In addition to the box office and critical success of the film itself , the Mermaid soundtrack album earned two awards at the 33rd Grammy Awards in 1991 : the Grammy Award for Best Album for Children and the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media . Bolstered by the film 's success and the soundtrack 's Oscars , Golden Globes and Grammy Awards , was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in September 1990 for shipments of two million copies of the soundtrack album , an unheard of feat for an animated film at the time . To date , the soundtrack has been certified six times platinum . 
 The Little Mermaid won two Academy Awards for Best Original Score as well as Best Song for Alan Menken and Howard Ashman 's " Under the Sea " , sung by Samuel E. Wright in a memorable scene . Another song from the film , " Kiss the Girl " , was nominated but lost to " Under the Sea " . The film also won two Golden Globes for Best Original Score as well Best Original Song for " Under the Sea " . It was also nominated in two other categories , Best Motion Picture and another Best Original Song . Menken and Ashman also won a Grammy Award in 1991 for " Under the Sea . " 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Passions — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Ursula — Nominated Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 Under the Sea — Nominated 
 AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals — Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 — Nominated Animated Film 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Controversy arose regarding the artwork for the cover for the Classics VHS cassette when the film was first released on video when close examination of the artwork revealed an oddly shaped structure on the castle , closely resembling a human penis . Disney and the cover designer insist it was an accident , resulting from a late night rush job to finish the cover artwork . The questionable object does not appear on the cover of the second releasing of the movie . A second allegation is that a clergyman is seen with an erection during a scene late in the film . The clergyman is a short man , dressed in Bishop 's clothing , and a small bulge is slightly noticeable in a few of the frames that are actually later shown to be the stubby @-@ legged man 's knees , but the image is small and is very difficult to distinguish . The combined incidents led an Arkansas woman to file suit against The Walt Disney Company in 1995 , though she dropped the suit two months later . 
 = = Live action film = = 
 Deadline reports that Disney are in early development for an Live action version of the film . 
 = Joseph J. Romm = 
 Joseph J. Romm ( born June 27 , 1960 ) is an American author , blogger , physicist and climate expert who advocates reducing greenhouse gas emissions and global warming and increasing energy security through energy efficiency , green energy technologies and green transportation technologies . Romm is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science . In 2009 , Rolling Stone magazine named Romm to its list of " 100 People Who Are Changing America " , and Time magazine named him one of its " Heroes of the Environment ( 2009 ) " , calling him " The Web 's most influential climate @-@ change blogger " . 
 Romm is a Senior Fellow at the Center for American Progress , where he founded their climate blog , Climate Progress , part of their Think Progress website . In 2008 , Time magazine named Romm 's blog one of the " Top 15 Green Websites " . In 2009 , Thomas L. Friedman , in The New York Times , called Climate Progress " the indispensable blog " , and in 2010 , Time included it in a list of the 25 " Best Blogs of 2010 " . Romm has also written for other energy and news sources . 
 In the 1990s , Romm served as Acting Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of Energy . He has published several books on global warming and energy technology . His 2006 book , Hell and High Water summarized observations and forecasts of climate change , discussed technology and policy solutions , and criticized political disinformation used to undermine climate science . Romm 's 2012 book , Language Intelligence , concerns persuasion and the effective use of rhetoric . He is the Chief Science Advisor for documentary series Years of Living Dangerously , which won the 2014 Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Series . His 2015 book , Climate Change : What Everyone Needs to Know , covers basic climate science in a Q & A format . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Romm was born and grew up in Middletown , New York , the youngest of three sons of Al Romm , managing editor of the Times Herald @-@ Record newspaper , and Ethel <unk> Romm , an author , retired project manager , and former CEO of a technology company . Romm 's brother David was the host and producer of Shockwave Radio Theater , and his brother Daniel is a physician . His uncle is physicist Lee <unk> . Romm graduated from Middletown High School in 1978 . 
 Romm then attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 1982 and a Ph.D. in 1987 , both in physics . He pursued part of his graduate work at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography . In 1987 , Romm was awarded an American Physical Society Congressional Science Fellowship for the U.S. House of Representatives , where he provided science and security policy advice on the staff of Representative Charles E. Bennett . 
 From 1988 to 1990 , Romm worked as Special Assistant for International Security at the Rockefeller Foundation . From 1991 to 1993 , he was a researcher at the Rocky Mountain Institute . He co @-@ authored the 1994 Rocky Mountain Institute Report , Greening the Building and the Bottom Line : Increasing Productivity Through Energy @-@ Efficient Design . For the Global Environment and Technology Foundation , he performed the first environmental analysis of a system integrating <unk> fuel cells , fly wheels , and power electronics aimed at achieving very high @-@ availability power . In 1990 and 1991 , Romm taught a course entitled " Rethinking National Security " at Columbia University 's School of International and Public Affairs . 
 In 1992 , Romm published The Once and Future Superpower , a book describing his views on how to spend the peace dividend to restore America 's economic , energy and environmental security . In 1993 , he wrote Defining National Security : The <unk> Aspects , for the Council on Foreign Relations , describing how America 's security depends on non @-@ military factors such as how it obtains energy . In 1994 , Romm published Lean and Clean Management , a book that discussed management techniques that can reduce the impact of manufacturing and other industries on the environment while increasing productivity and profits . He co @-@ authored , with Charles B. Curtis , " <unk> Oil Forever , " the cover story of the April 1996 issue of the Atlantic Monthly , which predicted higher oil prices within a decade and discussed alternative energy strategies . The same year , he co @-@ authored a paper for the ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings on " Policies to Reduce Heat Islands " . In 1999 , Romm published Cool Companies : How the Best Businesses Boost Profits and Productivity by Cutting Greenhouse Gas Emissions , the first book to benchmark corporate best practices for using advanced energy technologies , including fuel cells , to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . 
 = = = Service at the U.S. Department of Energy = = = 
 Romm served as Acting Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of Energy , in charge of the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy during 1997 and as Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary from August 1995 through June 1998 , and Special Assistant for Policy and Planning from 1993 to July 1995 . This office , with an annual budget at the time of $ 1 billion and 550 employees , assists businesses in the industrial , utility , transportation and buildings sectors to develop and use advanced clean energy technologies to cut costs , increase reliability , and reduce pollution . 
 As Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary , Romm was in charge of all policy and technology analysis and programmatic development for the Office , which was then developing <unk> fuel cells , <unk> , advanced cogeneration , superconductivity , building controls , photovoltaics and other renewables , biofuels , and hydrogen production and storage . Among other projects , he initiated , supervised , and publicized a comprehensive technical analysis in 1997 by five national laboratories of how energy technologies can best reduce greenhouse gas emissions cost @-@ effectively , entitled Scenarios of U.S. Carbon Reductions . 
