 = = = 1998 to 2006 = = = 
 After leaving the Department of Energy , Romm was the executive director and founder of the non @-@ profit Center for Energy and Climate Solutions , an organization based in the Washington DC area that helped businesses and U.S. States adopt high @-@ leverage strategies for saving energy and cutting pollution and greenhouse gas emissions . He was also a principal of the Capital E Group , which consulted on technology assessment and sustainable design services for clean energy technologies , and sat on the Advisory Board of Securing America 's Future Energy . While at Capital E Group , Romm was also a registered lobbyist , representing the interests of clients Ion America and <unk> Corp. 
 During these years , Romm wrote widely on global warming and energy technologies that can reduce global warming . His 2004 book , The Hype about Hydrogen , argues that putting off the implementation of current green technologies in favor of waiting for technological breakthroughs in hydrogen cars is a dangerous distraction that will delay urgently needed government action on reducing greenhouse gas emissions . The book was named one of the best science and technology books of 2004 by Library Journal . In reviewing the book , Daniel I. Sperling , a member of Arnold Schwarzenegger 's California Air Resources Board , offered dissenting views . In 2004 , Romm also wrote the National Commission on Energy Policy 's report , " The Car and Fuel of the Future " , which was rated the # 1 Hottest Article on Energy Policy by <unk> . He was also the principal investigator for the National Science Foundation project , Future Directions for Hydrogen Energy Research and Education ( 2004 ) . Romm is interviewed in the 2006 documentary film Who Killed the Electric Car ? , directed by Chris Paine and narrated by Martin Sheen . In the film , Romm gives a presentation intended to show that the government 's " hydrogen car initiative " was a bad policy choice and a distraction that was delaying the exploitation of more promising technologies , such as electric and hybrid cars that could reduce greenhouse gas emissions and increase America 's energy security . As of 2010 , Romm continued to view hydrogen as a " breakthrough technology illusion " . 
 Romm 's 2006 book Hell and High Water projects that humans have a window of opportunity of only about a decade to head off the most catastrophic effects of global warming . It calls upon Americans to demand government action to encourage and require the use of current emission @-@ cutting technologies . Tyler Hamilton , in his review of the book for The Toronto Star , wrote : " Whereas the first third of Romm 's book presents overwhelming and disturbing evidence that human @-@ caused greenhouse gases are the primary ingredients behind global warming , the pages that follow offer alarming detail on how the U.S. public is being misled by a federal government ( backed by conservative political forces ) that is intent on inaction , and that 's also on a mission to derail international efforts to curb emissions . " Technology Review wrote that Hell and High Water " provides an accurate summary of what is known about global warming and climate change , a sensible agenda for technology and policy , and a primer on how political disinformation has undermined climate science . " 
 = = = Climate Progress and recent years = = = 
 Since late 2006 , Romm has been a Senior Fellow at the Center for American Progress , founding their climate blog , Climate Progress , which focuses on climate science , policy and reporting . In 2008 , Time magazine named his blog one of the " Top 15 Green Websites " , writing that it " counters bad science and inane rhetoric with original analysis delivered sharply . ... Romm occupies the intersection of climate science , economics and policy . Resist temptation to lump him in with knee @-@ jerk <unk> . On his blog and in his December 2006 book , Hell and High Water , you can find some of the most cogent , memorable , and deployable arguments for immediate and overwhelming action to confront global warming . " In 2010 , Time magazine wrote , " Viewing climate change through the prism of national security , Romm analyzes breaking energy news and the relevant research , but most important , he challenges the beliefs and conclusions of the mainstream media on climate @-@ change issues . " As of 2016 , Romm continues to contribute to the site . Romm also writes for other top internet energy and news sites , including The Huffington Post , Grist , Slate , CNN , and Salon.com. His July 2012 New York Times opinion piece was called " Without Carbon Controls , We Face a Dust Bowl " . 
 Romm has testified numerous times before congressional committees on energy and global warming issues , offering his views on government action to curb global warming . For example , in July 2012 , he testified before a Natural Resources Subcommittee of the U.S. House of Representatives on the 2012 U.S. drought and wildfires . In March of the same year , he testified before the House Energy & Commerce Committee on the " The American Energy Initiative " and rising gasoline prices . In 2010 , he testified before the House Ways and Means Committee on how to optimize " Energy Tax Incentives Driving the Green Job Economy " , and in 2007 , he testified before the House Committee on Science and Technology on the subject of " Fuels for the Future " , specifically the use of liquid fuel from coal , which he believes would accelerate global warming . He also lectures on energy technology , global warming and how the media portrays climate change . 
 Romm 's 2010 book , Straight Up is " largely a selection of his best blog postings over the past few years related to climate change issues " . TreeHugger describes the book as " a whirlwind tour through the state of climate change , the media that so badly neglects it , the politicians who attempt to address it ( and those who obstruct their efforts and ignore [ the ] science ) , and the clean energy solutions that could help get us out of the mess . " In 2011 , Romm sat on the panel of the Green Car Summit of the Washington Auto Show . His 2012 book , Language Intelligence , concerns persuasion and the effective use of rhetoric . Ed Markey commented on the book , " Joe masterfully ... scripts ways to master the metaphor , and incorporate irony . Solutions the reader can use for speeches , social media , or just winning the debate around the kitchen table . " Romm wrote an article for Time magazine in August 2012 using the research from Language Intelligence to analyze whether Mitt Romney or Barack Obama is the more effective communicator . In speeches and lectures since then , Romm has advocated that scientists use the principles of effective communication outlined in the book ( instead of their usual , technical , neutral style ) to better explain the dangers of , and solutions to , climate change to lay people and the media . 
 Romm is the chief science editor for the documentary TV series Years of Living Dangerously , about the impact of and solutions to climate change . The first season of the series ran in 2014 on the Showtime network . He wrote " Climate Change 101 : An Introduction " , for the series ' website . A second season is scheduled to run in 2016 on the National Geographic Channel . The first season won the 2014 Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Series . In 2015 , The Weather Channel included Romm as one of " the world 's 25 most compelling voices " on climate in its series The Climate 25 . That year , Romm also wrote the book Climate Change : What Everyone Needs to Know , a primer on the topic , in Q & A format . Ralph Benko in Forbes magazine wrote that the " impressive book ... lucidly presents the case both for deep concern and optimism " . 
 = = Media comment and interviews = = 
 Romm is often cited , quoted or interviewed by journalists to explain the impact of public policy and energy technologies and applications on global warming and energy security , or to explain causes and impacts of climate change or the influence of the media . For example , In 2009 , MSNBC relied on him to assess natural gas hydrates , and he was featured on 60 Minutes discussing the scientific evidence that " clean coal " is not clean . In 2010 , MSNBC 's Countdown with Keith Olbermann program interviewed Romm on how the military is taking action on climate change to improve national security ; Guernica Magazine interviewed him on the science and politics of global warming ; The New Yorker asked him to comment on the Koch @-@ funded exhibit on evolution and climate change at the National Museum of Natural History ; and The Atlantic and CBS News each reviewed a media call by Romm concerning the relationship between the January 2010 snowstorms in Washington , DC and global warming . 
 In 2011 , The Washington Post linked with approval to Romm 's review of the scientific literature on climate change . Time magazine explored Romm 's critique of Matthew Nisbet and praised his analysis of the decline of media coverage regarding climate change . National Geographic quoted him about the part that the media has played in the dearth of information about climate reaching the public . The same year , Technology Review quoted Romm regarding the relationship between government @-@ assisted deployment and rapid innovation in energy technologies , and the Toronto Star quoted him regarding President Obama 's 2011 State of the Union address . In 2012 in The New York Times , economist Paul Krugman cited Romm on the connection between drought and Climate change , and The Atlantic interviewed and cited him on the reluctance of the Democrats to discuss climate change . National Geographic quoted him about disappearing arctic ice and the effect of climate change on the polar bear , and Current TV 's Bill Press interviewed Romm about record @-@ breaking heat . 
 In 2014 Businessweek quoted Romm regarding the lack of commercial viability of hydrogen fuel cells for cars , and The Guardian quoted him concerning international cooperation on climate change . In 2015 , The Guardian quoted Romm about historic high global temperatures , and MarketWatch quoted him on actions that Donald Trump might take concerning climate agreements if he were to be elected president . Later that year , Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists interviewed him about nuclear power and climate change . The Wall Street Journal quoted Romm in 2016 about the cost and pace of change in clean energy technology . 
 = = Romm 's views = = 
 The New York Times " Dot Earth " column reviewed Romm 's views on global warming solutions on November 24 , 2008 , including his belief that , to combat global warming , humans cannot wait for new technologies and scientific breakthroughs ; that instead we must " deploy existing and near @-@ term low @-@ carbon technologies as fast as is humanly possible " . In his blog , Romm has described the technology solutions that he believes can control global warming . The New York Times also quoted Romm as stating that , to solve the climate crisis , " We will need a WWII @-@ style approach " . The article noted Romm 's belief that " credible people " and the press should publicly support the notion that government action is needed to help solve the global warming crisis . In particular , the press should explain how current news stories , such as hurricanes , droughts and insect infestations are related to global warming . 
 According to U.S. News & World Report , Romm believes that global warming " is advancing more swiftly than most people think and than the mainstream media usually report . He has called for significantly ramping up government spending on clean energy technology , halting the construction of new coal plants , rapidly increasing the use of energy @-@ efficient technologies , and imposing a cap @-@ and @-@ trade system to sharply limit carbon dioxide emissions " . In 2006 , in a radio interview , Romm stated , " Global warming is going to transform this country and our transportation and the way we live our lives . If we don 't act pretty soon , in an intelligent fashion , then change will be forced upon us by the radically changed climate ... global warming is the issue of the century " . In March 2009 , Romm summarized and updated his views in an " introduction " to his blog , and in another post , setting forth a summary of " global warming impacts " . 
 In 2011 , Romm stated that " Feeding some 9 billion people by mid @-@ century in the face of a rapidly worsening climate may well be the greatest challenge the human race has ever faced . " Romm 's 2010 book , Straight Up notes : " the bottom line is that the economic cost of action is low , whereas the cost of inaction is <unk> greater " . Romm calculates that deployment of existing technologies on the massive scale that can save the climate can be accomplished at the cost of 0 @.@ 12 percent of global GDP per year . He also asks in the book , " will the United States be a global leader in creating jobs and exports in clean energy technologies , or will we be importing them from Europe , Japan , and the likely clean energy leader in our absence , China . " In 2005 , with respect to the U.S. Congress 's actions on climate , including its votes on the XL Pipeline , Romm told The Guardian : " Future generations suffering from the consequences of our inaction will be bewildered that the legislative body of the richest country in the world could devote so little effort to ameliorating the climate problem and so much effort to making it worse . " 
 Romm has been critical of media coverage of global warming . In his 2010 book , Straight Up , he wrote , " Historically , even the most respected newspapers have fallen into the trap of giving the same credence – and often the same amount of space – to a handful of U.S. scientists , most receiving funds from the fossil fuel industry , as they give to hundreds of the world 's leading climate scientists . No surprise that much of the public has ended up with a <unk> about the remarkable strength of our scientific understanding and the need for action " . He concludes , " more and more pieces are being written by senior political reporters , who know very little about global warming " . Romm also believes that scientists and politicians need to be more effective communicators about climate change . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 In 2008 , Romm was elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science for " distinguished service toward a sustainable energy future and for persuasive discourse on why citizens , corporations , and governments should adopt sustainable technologies " . In 2009 , Rolling Stone magazine named Romm to its list of " 100 People Who Are Changing America " , quoting journalist David Roberts as follows : " Joe combines two qualities you don 't often find together . A deep knowledge of technology , policy and science along with genuine moral passion . " Former Houston , Texas mayor Bill White called Romm " the nation ’ s leading expert on energy efficiency . " U.S. News & World Report featured Romm as one of eight " key players " who were " Driving Public Policy in Washington " , calling Romm an " oft @-@ cited expert on climate change issues , and a go @-@ to witness at congressional hearings " . Time magazine named Romm one of its " Heroes of the Environment ( 2009 ) " , writing , " He combines ... intellect with a strong sense of moral outrage . He also possesses a Jon Stewart @-@ like quality for pointing out the absurdity of his opponents . " Time named his blog as one of the " Top 15 Green Websites " , and Technorati ranked it as the leading " Green site " in 2009 . The same year , Thomas L. Friedman , in The New York Times , called Climate Progress " the indispensable blog " . 
 In 2010 , Time included Romm 's blog in a list of the 25 " Best Blogs of 2010 " and one of the " Top Five Blogs TIME Writers Read Daily " . The same year , TreeHugger named Romm 's blog the " Best Politics Website " , adding , " this is the art of blogging at its best " . The UK 's The Guardian ranked Climate Progress at the top of its list of blogs in its " Top 50 Twitter climate accounts to follow " . Reviewing Romm 's 2010 book Straight Up , Bill McKibben wrote that Romm " knows his climate science ... [ and ] has been a persuasive voice for the most important truth about global warming : that it is a far worse problem than either politicians or the general public understand . ... Romm has been consistent in insisting that we have much of the technology necessary to at least begin tackling the problem . " He called Romm " a tireless foil to the ' right @-@ wing disinformation machine ' that has tried – with great success ... to delay action by confusing and disheartening Americans about global warming . ... It requires a thick skin to take on the daily task of dealing with the <unk> , but Romm has the taste for this kind of blood sport , and the talent as well . " In 2011 , The New York Times called Romm " one of the country ’ s most influential writers on climate change " . In 2012 , <unk> wrote that Romm is " considered the world ’ s best blogger on climate science , and politics related to it . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Romm lives in Washington , D.C. He has long had an interest in comedy . From 1994 through 2007 , he was a regular contributor to The Style Invitational , a weekly humor contest run by The Washington Post . His entries appeared 343 times , including 16 winning entries , and he was the first " Rookie of the Year " . Among his submissions was the winning entry of what was later declared to be the best overall week 's results of the Style Invitational 's first decade . ( A discarded first draft of some famous line : " We hold these truths to be , like , du @-@ <unk> . " ) 
 = = = Books by Romm = = = 
 Romm , Joseph ( 1992 ) . The Once and Future Superpower : How to Restore America 's Economic , Energy , and Environmental Security . New York : William Morrow & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 688 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 1993 ) . Defining National Security : The <unk> Aspects . Washington : Council on Foreign Relations . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 135 @-@ 4 . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 1994 ) . Lean and Clean Management : How to Boost Profits and Productivity by Reducing Pollution . New York : Kodansha Amer Inc . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 037 @-@ 1 . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 1999 ) . Cool Companies : How the Best Businesses Boost Profits and Productivity by Cutting Greenhouse Gas Emissions . New York : Island Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 55963 @-@ 709 @-@ 9 . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 2004 ) . The Hype about Hydrogen , Fact and Fiction in the Race to Save the Climate . New York : Island Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 55963 @-@ 703 @-@ X. An updated edition was published in 2005 ( ISBN 1 @-@ 55963 @-@ 704 @-@ 8 ) . The book has also been translated into German as Der <unk> @-@ boom . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 2006 ) . Hell and High Water : Global Warming — the Solution and the Politics — and What We Should Do . New York : William Morrow . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 212 @-@ X. 
 Romm , Joseph ( 2010 ) . Straight Up : America 's Fiercest Climate Blogger Takes on the Status Quo Media , Politicians , and Clean Energy Solutions . New York : Island Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 2012 ) . Language Intelligence : Lessons on Persuasion from Jesus , Shakespeare , Lincoln , and Lady Gaga . CreateSpace . ISBN <unk> . 
 Romm , Joseph ( 2015 ) . Climate Change : What Everyone Needs to Know . Oxford University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Selected journal articles and reports = = = 
 Report : " The Self @-@ Limiting Future of Nuclear Power " <unk> , 2008 
 " The Car and Fuel of the Future " , Energy Policy , 34 ( 2006 ) , pp. <unk> – 14 
 " Future Directions for Hydrogen Energy Research and Education " ( Principal Investigator ) , Report to the National Science Foundation , November 2004 
 " The internet and the new energy economy " , Resources , Conservation and Recycling , p . 36 ( 2002 ) pp. 197 – 210 
 " Combined Heat and Power for Saving Energy and Carbon in Buildings " ( with <unk> , <unk> , Rosenfeld and <unk> ) , Proceedings of 1998 ACEEE Summer Study , Pacific Grove , CA , 1999 
 Report : " The Internet Economy and Global Warming " ( with Arthur H. Rosenfeld and Susan Herrmann ) , Center for Energy and Climate Solutions , The Global Environment and Technology Foundation , 1999 – 2000 
 " Engineering @-@ Economic Studies of Energy Technologies to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions : Opportunities and Challenges " ( with Brown , Levine , Rosenfeld and <unk> ) , Annual Review of Energy and the Environment , 1998 
 " A Roadmap for U.S. Carbon Reductions " ( with Levine , Brown , and Petersen ) , Science , January 30 , 1998 , vol . 279 , no . <unk> , pp. 669 – 70 
 " Cool Communities : Strategies for Heat Island Mitigation and <unk> Reduction " ( with Rosenfeld , Hashem Akbari and Melvin Pomerantz ) , Energy and Buildings 28 ( 1998 ) pp. 51 – 62 
 " Policies to Reduce Heat Islands " " Policies to Reduce Heat Islands " ( with Rosenfeld , Akbari , Pomerantz and Haider G. Taha ) , 1996 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings , Pacific Grove , CA . Vol . 9 , p . 177 
 " Greening the Building and the Bottom Line : Increasing Productivity Through Energy @-@ Efficient Design " ( with Browning ) , Rocky Mountain Institute , November 1994 ( peer @-@ reviewed by U.S. Green Building Council ) ; first published as Proceedings of 1994 ACEEE Summer Study , Pacific Grove , CA 
 = Digimon Racing = 
 Digimon Racing ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a racing video game developed by Griptonite Games and published by Bandai ( now Namco Bandai Games ) for the Game Boy Advance . Part of the Digimon media franchise and video game series , it utilizes Digimon 's characters and elements . Its gameplay largely resembles that of traditional racing games , but also utilizes elements of kart racing and action games . Its eleven playable characters can be increased to over 40 via Digivolution . 
 Digimon Racing uses Mode 7 and voice acting . The game was initially announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2003 and later exhibited at E3 2004 . It was released on April 1 , 2004 in Japan ; April 30 in Europe ; and September 13 in North America . It received mixed reviews from critics upon release , with criticism directed at its resemblance to other kart racers of the time and praise at some aesthetic and gameplay aspects . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Digimon Racing is a racing video game that utilizes characters and elements from Digimon as well as those of traditional racing games . The game follows a group of Digimon competing in a racing tournament within the Digital World , home to all Digimon . The purpose of the grand prix is to determine who is the best racer ; thus , they use specially designed karts that equate all contestants in terms of ability . 
 Digimon Racing 's gameplay largely resembles that of traditional racing games . It focuses on competing against seven CPU @-@ controlled characters in cup races consisting of three laps . The usage of items to attack opponents and improve one 's own condition is an integral part of the gameplay , and adds an element of kart racing games . A new feature in the game is " kart hopping " : using the karts to jump onto opponents , slowing them down . This adds an element of action gameplay . Digivolution , a recurring theme in Digimon , also plays a role in the game . Driving over energy hotspots scattered throughout the tracks increases an energy meter located at the bottom left of the game 's HUD . As the meter increases , the player traverses the Digimon 's evolutionary line , becoming more powerful and ultimately gaining the ability to use a special attack . 
 The game 's fifteen tracks — four of which are available immediately — are based on conventional video game environments such as jungles , volcanoes , and cities . After completing a track for the first time , the player unlocks a time trial mode for this track , and a boss battle . The action @-@ oriented boss battles involve defeating a generally static Digimon using items scattered throughout the areas , which are not designed as race tracks . The player can also compete in single races unrelated to the story in any unlocked tracks . The game uses the Game Boy Advance Wireless Adapter or Game Link Cable accessories for a multiplayer racing mode supporting up to four players . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 The game features eleven Digimon as playable characters . Eight characters are available immediately ; the rest are unlockable by completing cup races . However , the Digivolution mechanic increases the total number of playable Digimon to over 40 . The cast predominantly includes popular Digimon from the Digimon anime . Characters ' racing abilities differ through their ranking in three areas : speed , handling and acceleration . 
 = = Development = = 
 Unlike previous games in the series which were developed by Japanese companies , Digimon Racing 's development was handled by the Kirkland , Washington , United States @-@ based Griptonite Games . However , Digimon series veteran Bandai ( now Namco Bandai Games ) returned to publish the game . It was the first original Digimon game for the Game Boy Advance , since Digimon Battle Spirit and Digimon Battle Spirit 2 were ports of WonderSwan Color games . The game uses the Mode 7 engine to create three @-@ dimensional gameplay on the handheld console otherwise incapable of such a feat . It occasionally uses voice acting during races , uncommon in Game Boy Advance games . The game was initially announced at E3 2003 . It was later exhibited at E3 2004 , with the North American release announced for August 2004 . Upon completion of development , the game received a rating of " E " ( Everyone ) from the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) and " 3 + " from Pan European Game Information ( PEGI ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Digimon Racing 's release fell on April 1 , 2004 in Japan ; April 30 in Europe ; and September 13 in North America . The game received mixed reviews from critics upon release ; it has a score of 62 % at Metacritic and 63 @.@ 67 % at Game Rankings . Critics criticized the game for its close resemblance to other kart racers of the time . IGN 's Craig Harris and 1UP.com 's Garnett Lee stated that Digimon Racing 's gameplay mirrored that of Crash Nitro Kart and the Mario Kart series respectively . Aside from the familiar format , critics praised specific aesthetic points such as the graphics and music ( GameZone 's Michael Lafferty ) and the tracks ' layouts and themes ( Lee ) . Aspects of the gameplay were also praised , such as control ( Harris and Lee ) , multiplayer mode ( Lee ) , replay value , and kart hopping ( Harris ) . Nintendo Power stated that " [ t ] he racing action is similar to that of other kart games , but the Digimon influence adds a fun gameplay edge . " Famitsu 's four reviewers gave the game scores of 5 , 5 , 7 , and 6 out of 10 , respectively , resulting in a total score of 23 out of 40 . Allgame 's T.J. <unk> gave the game three stars out of five , although he did not provide a more thorough review . 
 = Jeffrey Spender = 
 FBI Special agent Jeffrey Frank Spender is a fictional character in the American Fox television series The X @-@ Files , a science fiction show about a government conspiracy to hide or deny the truth of alien existence . Spender ( along with his partner , Diana Fowley ) was in control of the X @-@ Files office after Fox Mulder 's and Dana Scully 's forced leaves in " The Beginning " . The X @-@ Files office is concerned with cases with particularly mysterious or possibly supernatural circumstances that were left unsolved and shelved by the FBI . Portrayed by Canadian actor Chris Owens , Spender was a recurring character during the fifth , sixth and final seasons of The X @-@ Files . 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation Special agent Spender made his first appearance in the fifth season 1998 episode " Patient X " . During his earlier appearances in the series , because of Mulder 's belief in extraterrestrial life , Spender acted unfriendly towards him . But when re @-@ appearing in the ninth season , Spender had moved on to respect and agree with Mulder 's beliefs , which is proven to him in " Two Fathers " , when he sees and helps to kill an alien rebel . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Spender was a skeptic who was assigned to The X @-@ Files after Fox Mulder 's forced leave . Spender is the son of the " Cigarette Smoking Man " , and the " Cigarette Smoking Man 's " ex @-@ wife , multiple abductee Cassandra Spender . Heavily involved in the Syndicate at that time , the " Cigarette Smoking Man " abandoned the family when Spender was 12 years old . Subsequently , his mother was driven insane by what she claims were multiple alien abductions . Shortly after Samantha Mulder was abducted and then returned , Jeffrey and Samantha were raised together by his father in California . Spender met Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully in 1998 . The same year , the " Cigarette Smoking Man " began sending him letters ; however Spender returned them unopened . After his father set fire on The X @-@ Files in " The End " , Spender with Agent Diana Fowley start working on the X @-@ Files . Spender got orders from the " Cigarette Smoking Man " to push and eventually get Mulder and Scully fired from the FBI , which he eventually does in " Two Fathers " . Later on he reinstates Mulder and Scully to The X @-@ Files but is shot in the head and apparently killed by his father in " One Son " . 
 Three years later it is revealed in " William " , that he survived the gunshot , but was subjected to horribly disfiguring experiments at the hand of his father . Posing as Mulder , he infiltrated Scully 's house , and injected William with a magnetite substance to seemingly " cure " the baby of his telekinetic powers . The motivation or repercussions of his actions are never fully explained . He testified for the defense during Mulder 's murder trial in " The Truth " . He also revealed during the trial that Teena Mulder was having an affair with the " Cigarette Smoking Man " , and that he and Fox Mulder are half @-@ brothers . A DNA test conducted on a disfigured Spender in the episode " William " initially led agents Scully , Doggett and Reyes to believe he was Mulder thus lending further credence to Spender 's claim that both he and Mulder are the children of the " Cigarette Smoking Man " . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 = = = Creation and early development = = = 
 Chris Owens had previously portrayed the Cigarette Smoking Man in the episodes , " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " and " Demons " , he had portrayed The Great Mutato in " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " on the show before being cast as Spender . Owens had also landed a guest role on The X @-@ Files spin @-@ off Millennium . Chris Carter and David Duchovny were so pleased with his portrayal of The Great Mutato that he was picked for the role , without making an audition . Most of the crew members reacted positively to the selection . When creating the character of Spender , Carter had no long term plans for Owens involvement , meaning that Spender 's involvement wouldn 't differ much from different previous recurring characters of the show . Michal <unk> made a small cameo appearance in " The Red and the Black " as a young version of Spender . 
 However , as the fifth season 's production period entered its final months , rumors began to circulate – especially among the production crew members in Vancouver , Canada – about the future of the series , particularly concerning whether the show would be moving to Los Angeles , California for the sixth season and whether the new recurring character of Jeffrey Spender was planned ( in case David Duchovny cut back his commitment to the series ) to become a replacement for Duchovny 's character of Fox Mulder – either as a part @-@ time or full @-@ fledged substitute . Other , contradictory rumors that Owens heard were that either he or Duchovny would appear in only eight episodes of the sixth season and that his casting as Spender was a sign that the series would either be leaving Vancouver or staying there . According to the actor himself , he always knew that Duchovny would not be leaving the series but only discovered that The X @-@ Files would indeed be moving to Los Angeles when the official announcement was made . 
 According to Owens , he first learned of Spender 's seeming demise in " One Son " via the usual way – when Chris Carter phoned the actor to discuss his latest script – and , upon Carter telling him that Jeffrey Spender would make an heroic exit from the series ' story arc , Owens questioned himself about this news as he was slightly unable to believe that he was leaving the series so soon . Apparently , the news of Spender 's departure from the series was confirmed for him shortly thereafter , however , when he received the episode 's script . 
 When it came time to film Spender 's final scene in " One Son " , actor William B. Davis became upset , saying that he didn 't want to shoot Owens and adding that he enjoyed working with the actor . On the other hand , Davis had no trouble with slapping Owens , in a scene of " Two Fathers " in which Spender is twice hit by the Cigarette Smoking Man . 
 = = = Later development in Season 9 = = = 
 Three years after Spender had been written out of the series and actor Chris Owens had moved to Toronto , Canada , Owens received an unexpected phone call from David Duchovny , who said that The X @-@ Files ' production crew was filming the series ' finale as well as another episode late in the season , and that he wanted to bring Spender back for these two episodes . Duchovny reassured Owens that Spender 's survival of the shooting years earlier could be explained away via the plot device of an alien injection but mentioned that the experience would not be fun for Owens , as he would be " under all that shit " ; Owens did not realize what Duchovny meant until he got to the studio and saw the makeup for Spender 's disfigured appearance , a sight that shocked Owens . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker called Chris Owens portrayal of Spender " gloriously stiff @-@ necked " . Lon Grahnke from The Chicago Sun @-@ Times responded positively to the character , calling Spender " devious " . Shortly after the premiere of " Terms of Endearment " , Owens started to notice " strange reactions " from people on the street . He assumed their odd expressions were those of " annoyance " with his character because of his actions . One day , one particularly aggravated fan of the series actually shook his finger at Owens and called him a " Paper shredder ! " . 
 = Titan ( moon ) = 
 Titan ( or Saturn VI ) is the largest moon of Saturn . It is the only natural satellite known to have a dense atmosphere , and the only object other than Earth where clear evidence of stable bodies of surface liquid has been found . 
 Titan is the sixth ellipsoidal moon from Saturn . Frequently described as a planet @-@ like moon , Titan 's diameter is 50 % larger than Earth 's natural satellite , the Moon , and it is 80 % more massive . It is the second @-@ largest moon in the Solar System , after Jupiter 's moon Ganymede , and is larger than the smallest planet , Mercury , although only 40 % as massive . Discovered in 1655 by the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens , Titan was the first known moon of Saturn , and the sixth known planetary satellite . 
 Titan is primarily composed of water ice and rocky material . Much as with Venus before the Space Age , the dense opaque atmosphere prevented understanding of Titan 's surface until new information accumulated when the Cassini – Huygens mission arrived in 2004 , including the discovery of liquid hydrocarbon lakes in Titan 's polar regions . The geologically young surface is generally smooth , with few impact craters , although mountains and several possible cryovolcanoes have been found . 
 The atmosphere of Titan is largely nitrogen ; minor components lead to the formation of methane and ethane clouds and nitrogen @-@ rich organic smog . The climate — including wind and rain — creates surface features similar to those of Earth , such as dunes , rivers , lakes , seas ( probably of liquid methane and ethane ) , and deltas , and is dominated by seasonal weather patterns as on Earth . With its liquids ( both surface and subsurface ) and robust nitrogen atmosphere , Titan 's methane cycle is analogous to Earth 's water cycle , although at the much lower temperature of about 94 K ( − 179 @.@ 2 ° C ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Titan was discovered on March 25 , 1655 by the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens . Huygens was inspired by Galileo 's discovery of Jupiter 's four largest moons in 1610 and his improvements in telescope technology . Christiaan , with the help of his brother Constantijn Huygens , Jr . , began building telescopes around 1650 and discovered the first observed moon orbiting Saturn with one of the telescopes they built . 
 He named it simply Saturni Luna ( or Luna Saturni , Latin for " Saturn 's moon " ) , publishing in the 1655 tract De Saturni Luna <unk> Nova ( A New Observation of Saturn 's Moon ) . After Giovanni Domenico Cassini published his discoveries of four more moons of Saturn between 1673 and 1686 , astronomers fell into the habit of referring to these and Titan as Saturn I through V ( with Titan then in fourth position ) . Other early epithets for Titan include " Saturn 's ordinary satellite " . Titan is officially numbered Saturn VI because after the 1789 discoveries the numbering scheme was frozen to avoid causing any more confusion ( Titan having borne the numbers II and IV as well as VI ) . Numerous small moons have been discovered closer to Saturn since then . 
 The name Titan , and the names of all seven satellites of Saturn then known , came from John Herschel ( son of William Herschel , discoverer of Mimas and Enceladus ) in his 1847 publication Results of Astronomical Observations Made at the Cape of Good Hope . He suggested the names of the mythological Titans ( Ancient Greek : <unk> ) , brothers and sisters of Cronus , the Greek Saturn . In Greek mythology , the Titans were a race of powerful deities , descendants of Gaia and Uranus , that ruled during the legendary Golden Age . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Titan orbits Saturn once every 15 days and 22 hours . Like the Moon and many of the satellites of the giant planets , its rotational period is identical to its orbital period ; Titan is thus tidally locked in synchronous rotation with Saturn , and permanently shows one face to the planet . Because of this , there is a sub @-@ Saturnian point on its surface , from which the planet would always appear to hang directly overhead . <unk> on Titan are measured westward , starting from the meridian passing through this point . Its orbital eccentricity is 0 @.@ 0288 , and the orbital plane is inclined 0 @.@ 348 degrees relative to the Saturnian equator . Viewed from Earth , Titan reaches an angular distance of about 20 Saturn radii ( just over 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 750 @,@ 000 mi ) ) from Saturn and subtends a disk 0 @.@ 8 arcseconds in diameter . 
 The small , irregularly shaped satellite Hyperion is locked in a 3 : 4 orbital resonance with Titan . A " slow and smooth " evolution of the resonance — in which Hyperion would have migrated from a chaotic orbit — is considered unlikely , based on models . Hyperion probably formed in a stable orbital island , whereas the massive Titan absorbed or ejected bodies that made close approaches . 
 = = Bulk characteristics = = 
 Titan is 5 @,@ 151 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 201 mi ) in diameter , compared to 4 @,@ 879 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 032 mi ) for the planet Mercury , 3 @,@ 474 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 159 mi ) for the Moon , and 12 @,@ 742 kilometres ( 7 @,@ 918 mi ) for Earth . Before the arrival of Voyager 1 in 1980 , Titan was thought to be slightly larger than Ganymede ( diameter 5 @,@ 262 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 270 mi ) ) and thus the largest moon in the Solar System ; this was an overestimation caused by Titan 's dense , opaque atmosphere , which extends many kilometres above its surface and increases its apparent diameter . Titan 's diameter and mass ( and thus its density ) are similar to those of the Jovian moons Ganymede and Callisto . Based on its bulk density of 1 @.@ 88 g / cm3 , Titan 's bulk composition is half water ice and half rocky material . Though similar in composition to Dione and Enceladus , it is denser due to gravitational compression . 
 Titan is likely differentiated into several layers with a 3 @,@ 400 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @,@ 100 mi ) rocky center surrounded by several layers composed of different crystal forms of ice . Its interior may still be hot and there may be a liquid layer consisting of a " magma " composed of water and ammonia between the ice <unk> crust and deeper ice layers made of high @-@ pressure forms of ice . The presence of ammonia allows water to remain liquid even at a temperature as low as 176 K ( − 97 ° C ) ( for eutectic mixture with water ) . Evidence for such an ocean was uncovered by the Cassini probe in the form of natural extremely @-@ low @-@ frequency radio waves in Titan 's atmosphere . Titan 's surface is thought to be a poor reflector of extremely @-@ low @-@ frequency radio waves , so they may instead be reflecting off the liquid – ice boundary of a subsurface ocean . Surface features were observed by the Cassini spacecraft to systematically shift by up to 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) between October 2005 and May 2007 , which suggests that the crust is decoupled from the interior , and provides additional evidence for an interior liquid layer . Further supporting evidence for a liquid layer and decoupled ice shell comes from the way the gravity field varies as Titan orbits Saturn . Comparison of the gravity field with the RADAR @-@ based topography observations also suggests that the ice shell may be substantially rigid . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The moons of Jupiter and Saturn are thought to have formed through co @-@ accretion , a similar process to that believed to have formed the planets in the Solar System . As the young gas giants formed , they were surrounded by discs of material that gradually coalesced into moons . However , whereas Jupiter possesses four large satellites in highly regular , planet @-@ like orbits , Titan overwhelmingly dominates Saturn 's system and possesses a high orbital eccentricity not immediately explained by co @-@ accretion alone . A proposed model for the formation of Titan is that Saturn 's system began with a group of moons similar to Jupiter 's Galilean satellites , but that they were disrupted by a series of giant impacts , which would go on to form Titan . Saturn 's mid @-@ sized moons , such as Iapetus and Rhea , were formed from the debris of these collisions . Such a violent beginning would also explain Titan 's orbital eccentricity . 
 In 2014 , analysis of Titan 's atmospheric nitrogen suggested that it has possibly been sourced from material similar to that found in the Oort cloud and not from sources present during co @-@ accretion of materials around Saturn . 
 = = Atmosphere = = 
 Titan is the only known moon with a significant atmosphere , and its atmosphere is the only nitrogen @-@ rich dense atmosphere in the Solar System aside from Earth 's . Observations of it made in 2004 by Cassini suggest that Titan is a " super rotator " , like Venus , with an atmosphere that rotates much faster than its surface . Observations from the Voyager space probes have shown that Titan 's atmosphere is denser than Earth 's , with a surface pressure about 1 @.@ 45 atm . It is also about 1 @.@ 19 times as massive as Earth 's overall , or about 7 @.@ 3 times more massive on a per surface area basis . It supports opaque haze layers that block most visible light from the Sun and other sources and renders Titan 's surface features obscure . Titan 's lower gravity means that its atmosphere is far more extended than Earth 's . The atmosphere of Titan is opaque at many wavelengths and a complete reflectance spectrum of the surface is impossible to acquire from orbit . It was not until the arrival of the Cassini – Huygens spacecraft in 2004 that the first direct images of Titan 's surface were obtained . 
 Titan 's atmospheric composition in the stratosphere is 98 @.@ 4 % nitrogen with the remaining 1 @.@ 6 % composed mostly of methane ( 1 @.@ 4 % ) and hydrogen ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 % ) . There are trace amounts of other hydrocarbons , such as ethane , diacetylene , <unk> , acetylene and propane , and of other gases , such as <unk> , hydrogen cyanide , carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , cyanogen , argon and helium . The hydrocarbons are thought to form in Titan 's upper atmosphere in reactions resulting from the breakup of methane by the Sun 's ultraviolet light , producing a thick orange smog . Titan spends 95 % of its time within Saturn 's magnetosphere , which may help shield it from the solar wind . 
 Energy from the Sun should have converted all traces of methane in Titan 's atmosphere into more complex hydrocarbons within 50 million years — a short time compared to the age of the Solar System . This suggests that methane must be replenished by a reservoir on or within Titan itself . The ultimate origin of the methane in its atmosphere may be its interior , released via eruptions from cryovolcanoes . 
 On April 3 , 2013 , NASA reported that complex organic chemicals could arise on Titan , based on studies simulating the atmosphere of Titan . 
 On June 6 , 2013 , scientists at the IAA @-@ CSIC reported the detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the upper atmosphere of Titan . 
 On September 30 , 2013 , propene was detected in the atmosphere of Titan by NASA 's Cassini spacecraft , using its composite infrared spectrometer ( CIRS ) . This is the first time propene has been found on any moon or planet other than Earth and is the first chemical found by the CIRS . The detection of propene fills a mysterious gap in observations that date back to NASA 's Voyager 1 spacecraft 's first close flyby of Titan in 1980 , during which it was discovered that many of the gases that make up Titan 's hazy brown colored haze were hydrocarbons , theoretically formed via the recombination of radicals created by the Sun 's ultraviolet photolysis of methane . 
 On October 24 , 2014 , methane was found in polar clouds on Titan . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Titan 's surface temperature is about 94 K ( − 179 @.@ 2 ° C ) . At this temperature , water ice has an extremely low vapor pressure , so the little water vapor present appears limited to the stratosphere . Titan receives about 1 % as much sunlight as Earth . Before sunlight reaches the surface , about 90 % has been absorbed by the thick atmosphere , leaving only 0 @.@ 1 % of the amount of light Earth receives . 
 Atmospheric methane creates a greenhouse effect on Titan 's surface , without which Titan would be far colder . Conversely , haze in Titan 's atmosphere contributes to an anti @-@ greenhouse effect by reflecting sunlight back into space , cancelling a portion of the greenhouse effect and making its surface significantly colder than its upper atmosphere . 
 Titan 's clouds , probably composed of methane , ethane or other simple organics , are scattered and variable , punctuating the overall haze . The findings of the Huygens probe indicate that Titan 's atmosphere periodically rains liquid methane and other organic compounds onto its surface . 
 Clouds typically cover 1 % of Titan 's disk , though outburst events have been observed in which the cloud cover rapidly expands to as much as 8 % . One hypothesis asserts that the southern clouds are formed when heightened levels of sunlight during the southern summer generate uplift in the atmosphere , resulting in convection . This explanation is complicated by the fact that cloud formation has been observed not only after the southern summer solstice but also during mid @-@ spring . Increased methane humidity at the south pole possibly contributes to the rapid increases in cloud size . It was summer in Titan 's southern hemisphere until 2010 , when Saturn 's orbit , which governs Titan 's motion , moved Titan 's northern hemisphere into the sunlight . When the seasons switch , it is expected that ethane will begin to condense over the south pole . 
 = = Surface features = = 
 The surface of Titan has been described as " complex , fluid @-@ processed , [ and ] geologically young " . Titan has been around since the Solar System 's formation , but its surface is much younger , between 100 million and 1 billion years old . Geological processes may have reshaped Titan 's surface . Titan 's atmosphere is twice as thick as Earth 's , making it difficult for astronomical instruments to image its surface in the visible light spectrum . The Cassini spacecraft is using infrared instruments , radar altimetry and synthetic aperture radar ( SAR ) imaging to map portions of Titan during its close fly @-@ bys . The first images revealed a diverse geology , with both rough and smooth areas . There are features that may be volcanic in origin , disgorging water mixed with ammonia onto the surface . However , there is also evidence that Titan 's ice shell may be substantially rigid , which would suggest little geologic activity . 
 There are also streaky features , some of them hundreds of kilometers in length , that appear to be caused by windblown particles . Examination has also shown the surface to be relatively smooth ; the few objects that seem to be impact craters appeared to have been filled in , perhaps by raining hydrocarbons or volcanoes . Radar altimetry suggests height variation is low , typically no more than 150 meters . Occasional elevation changes of 500 meters have been discovered and Titan has mountains that sometimes reach several hundred meters to more than 1 kilometer in height . 
 Titan 's surface is marked by broad regions of bright and dark terrain . These include Xanadu , a large , reflective equatorial area about the size of Australia . It was first identified in infrared images from the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994 , and later viewed by the Cassini spacecraft . The convoluted region is filled with hills and cut by valleys and chasms . It is criss @-@ crossed in places by dark lineaments — sinuous topographical features resembling ridges or crevices . These may represent tectonic activity , which would indicate that Xanadu is geologically young . Alternatively , the lineaments may be liquid @-@ formed channels , suggesting old terrain that has been cut through by stream systems . There are dark areas of similar size elsewhere on Titan , observed from the ground and by Cassini ; at least one of these , Ligeia Mare , Titan 's second @-@ largest sea , is almost a pure methane sea . 
 = = = Lakes = = = 
 The possibility of hydrocarbon seas on Titan was first suggested based on Voyager 1 and 2 data that showed Titan to have a thick atmosphere of approximately the correct temperature and composition to support them , but direct evidence was not obtained until 1995 when data from Hubble and other observations suggested the existence of liquid methane on Titan , either in disconnected pockets or on the scale of satellite @-@ wide oceans , similar to water on Earth . 
 The Cassini mission confirmed the former hypothesis , although not immediately . When the probe arrived in the Saturnian system in 2004 , it was hoped that hydrocarbon lakes or oceans would be detected from the sunlight reflected off their surface , but no specular reflections were initially observed . Near Titan 's south pole , an enigmatic dark feature named Ontario Lacus was identified ( and later confirmed to be a lake ) . A possible shoreline was also identified near the pole via radar imagery . Following a flyby on July 22 , 2006 , in which the Cassini spacecraft 's radar imaged the northern latitudes ( that were then in winter ) , a number of large , smooth ( and thus dark to radar ) patches were seen dotting the surface near the pole . Based on the observations , scientists announced " definitive evidence of lakes filled with methane on Saturn 's moon Titan " in January 2007 . The Cassini – Huygens team concluded that the imaged features are almost certainly the long @-@ sought hydrocarbon lakes , the first stable bodies of surface liquid found outside of Earth . Some appear to have channels associated with liquid and lie in topographical depressions . The liquid erosion features appear to be a very recent occurrence : channels in some regions have created surprisingly little erosion , suggesting erosion on Titan is extremely slow , or some other recent phenomena may have wiped out older riverbeds and landforms . Overall , the Cassini radar observations have shown that lakes cover only a few percent of the surface , making Titan much drier than Earth . Although most of the lakes are concentrated near the poles ( where the relative lack of sunlight prevents evaporation ) , a number of long @-@ standing hydrocarbon lakes in the equatorial desert regions have also been discovered , including one near the Huygens landing site in the Shangri @-@ La region , which is about half the size of Utah 's Great Salt Lake . The equatorial lakes are probably " oases " , i.e. the likely supplier is underground aquifers . 
 In June 2008 , the Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer on Cassini confirmed the presence of liquid ethane beyond doubt in Ontario Lacus . On December 21 , 2008 , Cassini passed directly over Ontario Lacus and observed specular reflection in radar . The strength of the reflection saturated the probe 's receiver , indicating that the lake level did not vary by more than 3 mm ( implying either that surface winds were minimal , or the lake 's hydrocarbon fluid is viscous ) . 
 <unk> reflections are indicative of a smooth , mirror @-@ like surface , so the observation corroborated the inference of the presence of a large liquid body drawn from radar imaging . The observation was made soon after the north polar region emerged from 15 years of winter darkness . 
 On July 8 , 2009 , Cassini 's VIMS observed a specular reflection indicative of a smooth , mirror @-@ like surface , off what today is called <unk> Lacus , a lake in the north polar region shortly after the area emerged from 15 years of winter darkness . 
 Early radar measurements made in July 2009 and January 2010 indicated that Ontario Lacus was extremely shallow , with an average depth of 0 @.@ 4 – 3 m , and a maximum depth of 3 to 7 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 0 ft ) . In contrast , the northern hemisphere 's Ligeia Mare was initially mapped to depths exceeding 8 m , the maximum discernable by the radar instrument and the analysis techniques of the time . Later science analysis , released in 2014 , more fully mapped the depths of Titan 's three methane seas and showed depths of more than 200 meters ( 660 ft ) . Ligeia Mare averages from 20 to 40 m ( 66 to 131 ft ) in depth , while other parts of Ligeia did not register any radar reflection at all , indicating a depth of more than 200 m ( 660 ft ) . While only the second largest of Titan 's methane seas , Ligeia " contains enough liquid methane to fill three Lake <unk> . " 
 During a flyby on 26 September 2012 , Cassini 's radar detected in Titan 's northern polar region what is likely a river with a length of more than 400 kilometers . It has been compared with the much larger Nile river on Earth . This feature ends in Ligeia Mare . 
 During six flybys of Titan from 2006 to 2011 , Cassini gathered radiometric tracking and optical navigation data from which investigators could roughly infer Titan 's changing shape . The density of Titan is consistent with a body that is about 60 % rock and 40 % water . The team 's analyses suggest that Titan 's surface can rise and fall by up to 10 metres during each orbit . That degree of warping suggests that Titan 's interior is relatively deformable , and that the most likely model of Titan is one in which an icy shell dozens of kilometres thick floats atop a global ocean . The team 's findings , together with the results of previous studies , hint that Titan 's ocean may lie no more than 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) below its surface . On July 2 , 2014 , NASA reported the ocean inside Titan may be as salty as the Dead Sea . On September 3 , 2014 , NASA reported studies suggesting methane rainfall on Titan may interact with a layer of icy materials underground , called an " <unk> , " to produce ethane and propane that may eventually feed into rivers and lakes . 
 = = = Impact craters = = = 
 Radar , SAR and imaging data from Cassini have revealed few impact craters on Titan 's surface . These impacts appear to be relatively young , compared to Titan 's age . The few impact craters discovered include a 440 kilometres ( 270 mi ) wide two @-@ ring impact basin named <unk> seen by Cassini 's ISS as a bright @-@ dark concentric pattern . A smaller , 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) wide , flat @-@ floored crater named <unk> and a 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) crater with a central peak and dark floor named <unk> have also been observed . Radar and Cassini imaging have also revealed a number of " <unk> " , circular features on the surface of Titan that may be impact related , but lack certain features that would make identification certain . For example , a 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) wide ring of bright , rough material known as <unk> has been observed by Cassini . This feature is thought to be an impact crater filled in by dark , windblown sediment . Several other similar features have been observed in the dark Shangri @-@ la and <unk> regions . Radar observed several circular features that may be craters in the bright region Xanadu during Cassini 's April 30 , 2006 flyby of Titan . 
 Many of Titan 's craters or probable craters display evidence of extensive erosion , and all show some indication of modification . Most large craters have breached or incomplete rims , despite the fact that some craters on Titan have relatively more massive rims than those anywhere else in the Solar System . However , there is little evidence of formation of palimpsests through viscoelastic crustal relaxation , unlike on other large icy moons . Most craters lack central peaks and have smooth floors , possibly due to impact @-@ generation or later eruption of cryovolcanic lava . Although infill from various geological processes is one reason for Titan 's relative deficiency of craters , atmospheric shielding also plays a role ; it is estimated that Titan 's atmosphere reduces the number of craters on its surface by a factor of two . 
 The limited high @-@ resolution radar coverage of Titan obtained through 2007 ( 22 % ) suggested the existence of a number of <unk> in its crater distribution . Xanadu has 2 – 9 times more craters than elsewhere . The leading hemisphere has a 30 % higher density than the trailing hemisphere . There are lower crater densities in areas of equatorial dunes and in the north polar region ( where hydrocarbon lakes and seas are most common ) . 
 Pre @-@ Cassini models of impact trajectories and angles suggest that where the impactor strikes the water ice crust , a small amount of ejecta remains as liquid water within the crater . It may persist as liquid for centuries or longer , sufficient for " the synthesis of simple precursor molecules to the origin of life " . 
 = = = Cryovolcanism and mountains = = = 
 Scientists have long speculated that conditions on Titan resemble those of early Earth , though at a much lower temperature . The detection of argon @-@ 40 in the atmosphere in 2004 indicated that volcanoes had spawned plumes of " lava " composed of water and ammonia . Global maps of the lake distribution on Titan 's surface revealed that there is not enough surface methane to account for its continued presence in its atmosphere , and thus that a significant portion must be added through volcanic processes . 
 Still , there is a paucity of surface features that can be unambiguously interpreted as cryovolcanoes . One of the first of such features revealed by Cassini radar observations in 2004 , called Ganesa <unk> , resembles the geographic features called " pancake domes " found on Venus , and was thus initially thought to be cryovolcanic in origin , although Kirk et al. refuted this hypothesis at the American Geophysical Union annual meeting in December 2008 . The feature was found to be not a dome at all , but appeared to result from accidental combination of light and dark patches . In 2004 Cassini also detected an unusually bright feature ( called Tortola Facula ) , which was interpreted as a cryovolcanic dome . No similar features have been identified as of 2010 . In December 2008 , astronomers announced the discovery of two transient but unusually long @-@ lived " bright spots " in Titan 's atmosphere , which appear too persistent to be explained by mere weather patterns , suggesting they were the result of extended cryovolcanic episodes . 
 In March 2009 , structures resembling lava flows were announced in a region of Titan called <unk> <unk> , which appears to fluctuate in brightness over several months . Though many phenomena were suggested to explain this fluctuation , the lava flows were found to rise 200 metres ( 660 ft ) above Titan 's surface , consistent with it having been erupted from beneath the surface . 
 A mountain range measuring 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) long , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) wide and 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) high was also discovered by Cassini in 2006 . This range lies in the southern hemisphere and is thought to be composed of icy material and covered in methane snow . The movement of tectonic plates , perhaps influenced by a nearby impact basin , could have opened a gap through which the mountain 's material upwelled . Prior to Cassini , scientists assumed that most of the topography on Titan would be impact structures , yet these findings reveal that similar to Earth , the mountains were formed through geological processes . In December 2010 , the Cassini mission team announced the most compelling possible <unk> yet found . Named Sotra Patera , it is one in a chain of at least three mountains , each between 1000 and 1500 m in height , several of which are topped by large craters . The ground around their bases appears to be overlaid by frozen lava flows . 
 If volcanism on Titan really exists , the hypothesis is that it is driven by energy released from the decay of radioactive elements within the mantle , as it is on Earth . Magma on Earth is made of liquid rock , which is less dense than the solid rocky crust through which it erupts . Because ice is less dense than water , Titan 's watery magma would be denser than its solid icy crust . This means that cryovolcanism on Titan would require a large amount of additional energy to operate , possibly via tidal flexing from nearby Saturn . The low @-@ pressure ice , overlaying a liquid layer of ammonium sulfate , ascends <unk> , and the unstable system can produce dramatic plume events . Titan is resurfaced through the process by grain @-@ sized ice and ammonium sulfate ash , which helps produce a wind @-@ shaped landscape and sand dune features . 
 In 2008 Jeffrey Moore ( planetary geologist of Ames Research Center ) proposed an alternate view of Titan 's geology . Noting that no volcanic features had been unambiguously identified on Titan so far , he asserted that Titan is a geologically dead world , whose surface is shaped only by impact cratering , fluvial and eolian erosion , mass wasting and other <unk> processes . According to this hypothesis , methane is not emitted by volcanoes but slowly diffuses out of Titan 's cold and stiff interior . Ganesa <unk> may be an eroded impact crater with a dark dune in the center . The mountainous ridges observed in some regions can be explained as heavily degraded scarps of large multi @-@ ring impact structures or as a result of the global contraction due to the slow cooling of the interior . Even in this case , Titan may still have an internal ocean made of the eutectic water – ammonia mixture with a temperature of 176 K ( − 97 ° C ) , which is low enough to be explained by the decay of radioactive elements in the core . The bright Xanadu terrain may be a degraded heavily cratered terrain similar to that observed on the surface of Callisto . Indeed , were it not for its lack of an atmosphere , Callisto could serve as a model for Titan 's geology in this scenario . Jeffrey Moore even called Titan Callisto with weather . 
 = = = Dark terrain = = = 
 In the first images of Titan 's surface taken by Earth @-@ based telescopes in the early 2000s , large regions of dark terrain were revealed straddling Titan 's equator . Prior to the arrival of Cassini , these regions were thought to be seas of liquid hydrocarbons . Radar images captured by the Cassini spacecraft have instead revealed some of these regions to be extensive plains covered in longitudinal dunes , up to 330 ft ( 100 m ) high about a kilometer wide , and tens to hundreds of kilometers long . Dunes of this type are always aligned with average wind direction . In the case of Titan , steady zonal ( eastward ) winds combine with variable tidal winds ( approximately 0 @.@ 5 meters per second ) . The tidal winds are the result of tidal forces from Saturn on Titan 's atmosphere , which are 400 times stronger than the tidal forces of the Moon on Earth and tend to drive wind toward the equator . This wind pattern , it was theorized , causes granular material on the surface to gradually build up in long parallel dunes aligned west @-@ to @-@ east . The dunes break up around mountains , where the wind direction shifts . 
 The longitudinal ( or linear ) dunes were initially presumed to be formed by moderately variable winds that either follow one mean direction or alternate between two different directions . However , subsequent observations indicate that the dunes point to the east although climate simulations indicate Titan 's surface winds blow toward the west . At less than 1 meter per second , they are not powerful enough to lift and transport surface material . Recent computer simulations indicate that the dunes may instead be the result of rare storm winds that happen only every fifteen years when Titan is in equinox . These storms produce strong downdrafts , flowing eastward at up to 10 meters per second when they reach the surface . 
 The " sand " on Titan is likely not made up of small grains of silicates like the sand on Earth , but rather might have formed when liquid methane rained and eroded the water @-@ ice bedrock , possibly in the form of flash floods . Alternatively , the sand could also have come from organic solids produced by photochemical reactions in Titan 's atmosphere . Studies of dunes ' composition in May 2008 revealed that they possessed less water than the rest of Titan , and are thus most likely derived from organic soot like hydrocarbon polymers clumping together after raining onto the surface . Calculations indicate the sand on Titan has a density of one @-@ third that of terrestrial sand . 
 = = Observation and exploration = = 
 Titan is never visible to the naked eye , but can be observed through small telescopes or strong binoculars . Amateur observation is difficult because of the proximity of Titan to Saturn 's brilliant globe and ring system ; an occulting bar , covering part of the eyepiece and used to block the bright planet , greatly improves viewing . Titan has a maximum apparent magnitude of + 8 @.@ 2 , and mean opposition magnitude 8 @.@ 4 . This compares to + 4 @.@ 6 for the similarly sized Ganymede , in the Jovian system . 
 Observations of Titan prior to the space age were limited . In 1907 Spanish astronomer Josep Comas i <unk> observed limb darkening of Titan , the first evidence that the body has an atmosphere . In 1944 Gerard P. Kuiper used a spectroscopic technique to detect an atmosphere of methane . 
 The first probe to visit the Saturnian system was Pioneer 11 in 1979 , which revealed that Titan was probably too cold to support life . It took images of Titan , including Titan and Saturn together in mid to late 1979 . The quality was soon surpassed by the two Voyagers . 
 Titan was examined by both Voyager 1 and 2 in 1980 and 1981 , respectively . Voyager 1 's trajectory was designed to provide an optimized Titan flyby , during which the spacecraft was able to determine the density , composition , and temperature of the atmosphere , and obtain a precise measurement of Titan 's mass . Atmospheric haze prevented direct imaging of the surface , though in 2004 intensive digital processing of images taken through Voyager 1 's orange filter did reveal hints of the light and dark features now known as Xanadu and Shangri @-@ la , which had been observed in the infrared by the Hubble Space Telescope . Voyager 2 , which would have been diverted to perform the Titan flyby if Voyager 1 had been unable to , did not pass near Titan and continued on to Uranus and Neptune . 
 = = = Cassini – Huygens = = = 
 Even with the data provided by the Voyagers , Titan remained a body of mystery — a large satellite shrouded in an atmosphere that makes detailed observation difficult . The mystery that had surrounded Titan since the 17th @-@ century observations of Christiaan Huygens and Giovanni Cassini was revealed by a spacecraft named in their honor . 
 The Cassini – Huygens spacecraft reached Saturn on July 1 , 2004 , and began the process of mapping Titan 's surface by radar . A joint project of the European Space Agency ( ESA ) and NASA , Cassini – Huygens has proved a very successful mission . The Cassini probe flew by Titan on October 26 , 2004 , and took the highest @-@ resolution images ever of Titan 's surface , at only 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 750 mi ) , discerning patches of light and dark that would be invisible to the human eye . Huygens landed on Titan on January 14 , 2005 , discovering that many of its surface features seem to have been formed by fluids at some point in the past . Titan is the most distant body from Earth to have a space probe land on its surface . On July 22 , 2006 , Cassini made its first targeted , close fly @-@ by at 950 kilometres ( 590 mi ) from Titan ; the closest flyby was at 880 kilometres ( 550 mi ) on June 21 , 2010 . Liquid has been found in abundance on the surface in the north polar region , in the form of many lakes and seas discovered by Cassini . 
 = = = = Huygens landing site = = = = 
 The Huygens probe landed just off the easternmost tip of a bright region now called <unk> . The probe photographed pale hills with dark " rivers " running down to a dark plain . Current understanding is that the hills ( also referred to as highlands ) are composed mainly of water ice . Dark organic compounds , created in the upper atmosphere by the ultraviolet radiation of the Sun , may rain from Titan 's atmosphere . They are washed down the hills with the methane rain and are deposited on the plains over geological time scales . 
 After landing , Huygens photographed a dark plain covered in small rocks and pebbles , which are composed of water ice . The two rocks just below the middle of the image on the right are smaller than they may appear : the left @-@ hand one is 15 centimeters across , and the one in the center is 4 centimeters across , at a distance of about 85 centimeters from Huygens . There is evidence of erosion at the base of the rocks , indicating possible fluvial activity . The surface is darker than originally expected , consisting of a mixture of water and hydrocarbon ice . The " soil " visible in the images is interpreted to be precipitation from the hydrocarbon haze above . 
 In March 2007 , NASA , ESA , and COSPAR decided to name the Huygens landing site the Hubert <unk> Memorial Station in memory of the former president of the ESA . 
 = = = Proposed or conceptual missions = = = 
 There have been several conceptual missions proposed in recent years for returning a robotic space probe to Titan . Initial conceptual work has been completed for such missions by NASA , the ESA and JPL . At present , none of these proposals have become funded missions . 
 The Titan Saturn System Mission ( TSSM ) was a joint NASA / ESA proposal for exploration of Saturn 's moons . It envisions a hot @-@ air balloon floating in Titan 's atmosphere for six months . It was competing against the Europa Jupiter System Mission ( EJSM ) proposal for funding . In February 2009 it was announced that ESA / NASA had given the EJSM mission priority ahead of the TSSM . 
 There was also a notional concept for a Titan Mare Explorer ( <unk> ) , which would be a low @-@ cost lander that would splash down in a lake in Titan 's northern hemisphere and float on the surface of the lake for three to six months . 
 Another mission to Titan proposed in early 2012 by Jason Barnes , a scientist at the University of Idaho , is the Aerial Vehicle for In @-@ situ and Airborne Titan Reconnaissance ( <unk> ) : an unmanned plane ( or drone ) that would fly through Titan 's atmosphere and take high @-@ definition images of the surface of Titan . NASA did not approve the requested $ 715 million , and the future of the project is uncertain . 
 Another lake lander project was proposed in late 2012 by the Spanish @-@ based private engineering firm <unk> and the Centro de <unk> in Madrid . The concept probe is called Titan Lake In @-@ situ Sampling Propelled Explorer ( <unk> ) . The major difference compared to the <unk> probe would be that <unk> is envisioned with its own propulsion system and would therefore not be limited to simply drifting on the lake when it splashes down . 
 A Discovery Program contestant for its mission # 13 is Journey to Enceladus and Titan ( JET ) , an astrobiology Saturn orbiter that would assess the habitability potential of Enceladus and Titan . 
 In 2015 , NASA 's Innovative Advanced Concepts ( NIAC ) awarded a Phase II grant to a proposal in order to mature the concept of a submarine to explore the seas of Titan . 
 = = <unk> conditions and life = = 
 Titan is thought to be a prebiotic environment rich in complex organic chemistry with a possible subsurface liquid ocean serving as a biotic environment . 
 Although the Cassini – Huygens mission was not equipped to provide evidence for biosignatures or complex organic compounds , it showed an environment on Titan that is similar , in some ways , to ones theorized for the primordial Earth . Scientists surmise that the atmosphere of early Earth was similar in composition to the current atmosphere on Titan , with the important exception of a lack of water vapor on Titan . 
 = = = Formation of complex molecules = = = 
 The Miller – Urey experiment and several following experiments have shown that with an atmosphere similar to that of Titan and the addition of UV radiation , complex molecules and polymer substances like tholins can be generated . The reaction starts with dissociation of nitrogen and methane , forming hydrogen cyanide and acetylene . Further reactions have been studied extensively . 
 In October 2010 , Sarah Horst of the University of Arizona reported finding the five nucleotide bases — building blocks of DNA and RNA — among the many compounds produced when energy was applied to a combination of gases like those in Titan 's atmosphere . Horst also found amino acids , the building blocks of protein . She said it was the first time nucleotide bases and amino acids had been found in such an experiment without liquid water being present . 
 On April 3 , 2013 , NASA reported that complex organic chemicals could arise on Titan based on studies simulating the atmosphere of Titan . 
 = = = Possible subsurface habitats = = = 
 Laboratory simulations have led to the suggestion that enough organic material exists on Titan to start a chemical evolution analogous to what is thought to have started life on Earth . Although the analogy assumes the presence of liquid water for longer periods than is currently observable , several theories suggest that liquid water from an impact could be preserved under a frozen isolation layer . It has also been theorized that liquid @-@ ammonia oceans could exist deep below the surface . Another model suggests an ammonia – water solution as much as 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) deep beneath a water @-@ ice crust with conditions that , although extreme by terrestrial standards , are such that life could indeed survive . Heat transfer between the interior and upper layers would be critical in sustaining any subsurface oceanic life . Detection of microbial life on Titan would depend on its biogenic effects . That the atmospheric methane and nitrogen might be of biological origin has been examined , for example . 
 = = = Methane and life at the surface = = = 
 It has been suggested that life could exist in the lakes of liquid methane on Titan , just as organisms on Earth live in water . Such organisms would inhale H2 in place of O2 , metabolize it with acetylene instead of glucose , and exhale methane instead of carbon dioxide . 
 Although all living things on Earth ( including methanogens ) use liquid water as a solvent , it is speculated that life on Titan might instead use a liquid hydrocarbon , such as methane or ethane . Water is a stronger solvent than methane . However , water is also more chemically reactive , and can break down large organic molecules through hydrolysis . A life @-@ form whose solvent was a hydrocarbon would not face the risk of its biomolecules being destroyed in this way . 
 In 2005 , astrobiologist Chris McKay argued that if methanogenic life did exist on the surface of Titan , it would likely have a measurable effect on the mixing ratio in the Titan troposphere : levels of hydrogen and acetylene would be measurably lower than otherwise expected . 
 In 2010 , Darrell Strobel , from Johns Hopkins University , identified a greater abundance of molecular hydrogen in the upper atmospheric layers of Titan compared to the lower layers , arguing for a downward flow at a rate of roughly 1025 molecules per second and disappearance of hydrogen near Titan 's surface ; as Strobel noted , his findings were in line with the effects McKay had predicted if methanogenic life @-@ forms were present . The same year , another study showed low levels of acetylene on Titan 's surface , which were interpreted by McKay as consistent with the hypothesis of organisms consuming hydrocarbons . Although restating the biological hypothesis , he cautioned that other explanations for the hydrogen and acetylene findings are more likely : the possibilities of yet unidentified physical or chemical processes ( e.g. a surface catalyst accepting hydrocarbons or hydrogen ) , or flaws in the current models of material flow . Composition data and transport models need to be substantiated , etc . Even so , despite saying that a non @-@ biological catalytic explanation would be less startling than a biological one , McKay noted that the discovery of a catalyst effective at 95 K ( − 180 ° C ) would still be significant . 
 As NASA notes in its news article on the June 2010 findings : " To date , methane @-@ based life forms are only hypothetical . Scientists have not yet detected this form of life anywhere . " As the NASA statement also says : " some scientists believe these chemical signatures bolster the argument for a primitive , exotic form of life or precursor to life on Titan 's surface . " 
 In February 2015 , a hypothetical cell membrane capable of functioning in liquid methane in Titan conditions was modeled . Composed of small molecules containing carbon , hydrogen , and nitrogen , it would have the same stability and flexibility as cell membranes on Earth , which are composed of phospholipids , compounds of carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , and phosphorus . This hypothetical cell membrane was termed an " <unk> " , a combination of " <unk> " , French for nitrogen , and " liposome " . 
 = = = Obstacles = = = 
 Despite these biological possibilities , there are formidable obstacles to life on Titan , and any analogy to Earth is inexact . At a vast distance from the Sun , Titan is frigid , and its atmosphere lacks CO2 . At Titan 's surface , water exists only in solid form . Because of these difficulties , scientists such as Jonathan Lunine have viewed Titan less as a likely habitat for life , than as an experiment for examining theories on the conditions that prevailed prior to the appearance of life on Earth . Although life itself may not exist , the prebiotic conditions on Titan and the associated organic chemistry remain of great interest in understanding the early history of the terrestrial biosphere . Using Titan as a prebiotic experiment involves not only observation through spacecraft , but laboratory experiments , and chemical and photochemical modeling on Earth . 
 = = = Panspermia hypothesis = = = 
 It is hypothesized that large asteroid and cometary impacts on Earth 's surface may have caused fragments of microbe @-@ laden rock to escape Earth 's gravity , suggesting the possibility of <unk> . Calculations indicate that a number of these would encounter many of the bodies in the Solar System , including Titan . On the other hand , Jonathan Lunine has argued that any living things in Titan 's cryogenic hydrocarbon lakes would need to be so different chemically from Earth life that it would not be possible for one to be the ancestor of the other . 
 = = = Future conditions = = = 
 Conditions on Titan could become far more habitable in the far future . Five billion years from now , as the Sun becomes a red giant , its surface temperature could rise enough for Titan to support liquid water on its surface making it habitable . As the Sun 's ultraviolet output decreases , the haze in Titan 's upper atmosphere will be depleted , lessening the anti @-@ greenhouse effect on the surface and enabling the greenhouse created by atmospheric methane to play a far greater role . These conditions together could create a habitable environment , and could persist for several hundred million years . This was sufficient time for simple life to evolve on Earth , although the presence of ammonia on Titan would cause chemical reactions to proceed more slowly . 
 = Kaddish ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Kaddish " is the fifteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by producer Howard Gordon and directed by Kim Manners . The episode originally aired on the Fox network on February 16 , 1997 . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology , or overarching history . The episode received a Nielsen household rating 10 @.@ 3 and was viewed by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers . It received moderately positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Isaac Luria ( Harrison Coe ) , a Jewish man , is killed by a group of teenagers working for a racist shop owner . One of the assailants , however , is soon strangled to death and the fingerprints on his neck are Isaac 's . Despite other factors , Mulder becomes convinced that a Golem is attempting to avenge Isaac 's murder . 
 " Kaddish " was written by Gordon due to his fascination with the legend of the Golem from the Kabbalah . Originally , the script called for the antagonist to be an African American " Louis Farrakhan @-@ like " character , but Fox was concerned that the show 's increasing popularity with black viewers would be damaged by this , and Gordon agreed to make the villains into , in his words , " cartoonish neo @-@ Nazis " . Gastown , Vancouver stood in for many of the exterior shots that were supposed to be Brooklyn . No Jewish synagogue would rent out their space for the episode , so Shaughnessy Heights United Church was renovated to look like one . This included completely redecorating the pews , carpet , and light fixtures , as well as crafting a Jewish altar . The episode 's title is a reference to the Jewish mourning prayer service ( Hebrew : <unk> ) . Furthermore , " Kaddish " has been critically examined for its themes concerning love and hate . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Brooklyn , New York , a group of Hasidic Jews gather at a cemetery for the funeral of Isaac Luria ( Harrison Coe ) , who had been beaten and shot to death by a gang of three young Neo @-@ Nazis . The last to leave is Isaac 's betrothed , Ariel ( Justine Miceli ) , and her father , Jacob Weiss ( David Groh ) . During nightfall , a dark figure enters the cemetery and crafts a man @-@ shaped sculpture out of mud . 
 When one of Isaac 's assailants is found strangled with the dead man 's fingerprints on his body , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are called in to investigate . Scully suggests that the murder was an act of retribution , and argues that the evidence was staged to look like revenge from beyond the grave . When the agents visit Ariel and Jacob , their request for the exhumation of Isaac 's body angers the old man . 
 Mulder and Scully then interview Curt Brunjes ( Jonathan Whittaker ) , a racist owner of a copy shop across the street from the market where Isaac worked . Mulder tells Brunjes that the other two boys , who work for Brunjes , are in danger . Scully mentions that there is a rumor spreading that Isaac has risen from the grave to avenge his death . The two boys , who are eavesdropping on the conversation , are terrified at this prospect . 
 That night , the boys dig up Isaac 's grave and find his body intact . While retrieving tools from the car , one of the boys is brutally murdered . The next morning , Mulder and Scully find a book on Jewish mysticism buried with Isaac 's body ; it mysteriously bursts into flames . On the book is Jacob 's name . The agents search for Jacob , finding him in a synagogue with the hanged body of the last remaining boy . Although Jacob admits to both of the murders , Mulder believes that a Golem — a creature from Jewish mysticism — is the true murderer . 
 Later , Brunjes is found murdered and Mulder and Scully watch the shop 's surveillance tape . They discover that the Golem has features similar to Isaac . Mulder deduces that , because Ariel and Isaac were not officially wed in a Jewish synagogue , Ariel created the Golem out of love to serve as a surrogate for her late husband . The two agents arrive at the synagogue to find Ariel and the creature exchanging wedding vows . After an intense fight , in which Jacob and Mulder are both wounded , Ariel declares her love for Isaac and returns the creature to dust . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Kaddish " was written by producer Howard Gordon and directed by Kim Manners . The episode was dedicated to the memory of Lillian Katz , Gordon 's grandmother . The episode 's title is a reference to the Jewish mourning prayer service . Gordon was inspired to write the episode based on his heritage . He noted , " I was always compelled by the Golem mythology . We had never dealt with the horrors of anti @-@ Semitism and the power of the word [ on The X @-@ Files ] . And because I 'm Jewish , it was something that was really compelling to me personally . " The idea to create a story centering on a Golem , however , had been proposed several times before by " probably every Jewish writer who 's passed through " , according to Gordon . 
 Gordon claimed that he had wanted to write a story like " Kaddish " since the first season , but that the " emotional basis " had eluded him . The inspiration for Gordon was the communal ring featured in the episode . The ring was a real Jewish relic owned by a rabbi who survived the Holocaust . In fact , the rabbi had used it to wed two of Gordon 's friends . During that wedding , Gordon developed a " Romeo and Juliet @-@ like " story that revolved around themes of love and wanting to bring a loved one back from the dead . 
 In order to ensure his story would be chosen to air , Gordon decided to play up the elements of anti @-@ Semitism . Originally , however , the script called for both the protagonists and the antagonists to be African Americans , and the main protagonist to be a " Louis Farrakhan @-@ like " character . Gordon later rewrote the script because he realized " black anti @-@ Semitism is a very subtle and difficult subject and not what I needed in my dramatic structure . " To create the kind of hate propaganda that Brunjes and his <unk> made in the episode , Gordon contacted the Anti @-@ Defamation League and requested samples . The articles that were presented were used in the episode , with only " minor alterations " . 
 = = = Casting and characterization = = = 
 Justine Miceli was chosen to play the role of Ariel ; she based her character 's sorrowful demeanor on the memory of her own father 's death due to cancer . Although she is not Jewish , Miceli was assisted by a friend 's rabbi in order to successfully play the part ; he helped her learn the proper pronunciation for many of the Jewish prayers used in the episode . Gordon was adamant that he did not want Jacob Weiss to be portrayed in a stereotypical way . Initially , he was dismayed when actor David Groh affected a distinct Yiddish accent , for fear that Weiss ' scenes could " lapse into parody rather easily " . Gordon , however , stated that Groh had a " certain verisimilitude " and that it was " the right choice " to have the accent . 
 Many fans on the internet were hoping that the episode would reveal whether or not Mulder is Jewish . In the episode , however , Mulder is unable to identify a Jewish book , states that he does not know Hebrew , and quips that Jesus returned from the dead . When asked whether or not Mulder is Jewish , Gordon said that he did not think that he is , nor did he think he is " even half @-@ Jewish " . He did , however , note that " there 's something about David [ Duchovny ] that could be Jewish or that has a Jewish sensibility . " 
 = = = Filming and music = = = 
 The scene featuring the burning book was difficult to film . For some unknown reason , the pyrotechnics required to create the fire refused to cooperate . David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson ended up spending hours trying to shoot the scene . Gastown , Vancouver — described as " the only area in Vancouver that even remotely resembles residential Queens in New York " — stood in for many of the exterior shots . Shots at the Weiss ' apartment were filmed at the Winter 's Hotel . Originally , the production team was going to remove the hotel 's neon sign , but director Manners , instead , decided to " move the camera another five feet " to prevent " prohibitive " expenses . 
 Unfortunately for the series , no Jewish synagogue would rent out their space for the episode . The scenes in the synagogue were actually filmed at Shaughnessy Heights United Church . The church was chosen because it possessed a " gothic interior " and " stained glass windows " that " resembled many New York synagogues " . The church was booked for two weeks so that the entire interior could be redecorated to look like a legitimate Jewish temple . This included completely redecorating the pews , carpet , and light fixtures , as well as crafting a Jewish altar . During the construction of the altar , a Hebrew translation of the Ten Commandments was scheduled to be created . However , the series ' on @-@ set Hebrew advisor was not available and so , according to art director Gary Allen , the staff ended up " faking " the text . 
 Series composer Mark Snow mixed in " clarinet , violin , and cello solos " to the episode 's score . In addition , he admits to borrowing elements of J.S. Bach 's Fugue in G minor , " Little " , BWV 578 piece . He noted , " the aim was to wind up somewhere between a Klezmer band and Schindler 's List . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Gordon said that love is the central conceit of the episode . Although , in the myth of the Golem , the creature is soulless , Gordon took " some liberties " with the legend . He wanted " Kaddish " to " literally be about resurrection " . Ariel creates an imperfect reflection of her husband by crafting the Golem from mud . In essence , she is trying to play God , a role that Gordon later likened to Victor Frankenstein , the scientist from Mary Shelley 's famous novel Frankenstein ; or , The Modern Prometheus ( 1823 ) . However , Ariel and Frankenstein differ in the fact that Ariel 's flaw was related to her " loving [ Isaac ] too much , not being able to let go , because of the cruelty and injustice of what she suffered . " In this manner , Ariel 's motivation for creating the Golem are " slightly more romantically skewed " . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , analyzed Gordon 's portrayal of racism and anti @-@ Semitism . They wrote that Gordon " makes [ a ] very convincing point " when he argues that hatemongers like Carl Brunjes — who are openly hateful of other cultures but would never , personally , hurt them — are " just as guilty " as openly violent individuals , such as the " three Nazi thugs who beat and shoot a defenceless man . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Kaddish " originally aired on the Fox network on February 16 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on December 17 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 3 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers . 
 The episode received moderately positive reviews from television critics . Andy Meisler , in his book I Want to Believe : The Official Guide to the X @-@ Files Volume 3 , called the episode " one of the best non @-@ mythological episodes of the fourth season " due to its " seamless integration of character development , social commentary and the supernatural . " Juliette Harrisson of Den of Geek named " Kaddish " the best stand @-@ alone episode of season four and called its conceit " absolutely real and utterly tragic " despite being " highly fantastical " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club rated the episode " B + " , claiming that , while it was " the sort of episode that works best if you enjoy it for its style and presentation without getting too caught up in the script " , it felt " appropriate " . Handlen did , however , criticize the episode 's characterization of Scully , noting that her scientific counter @-@ arguments were " becoming less about applying common sense to madness , and more just arguing for arguing 's sake . " 
 Shearman and Pearson awarded the episode three stars out of five and called it " one of [ Gordon 's ] best " . Furthermore , the two praised many aspects of the script , particularly the " real anger " which made the episode " something special " . Despite this , they felt that the plot " offer [ ed ] nothing unexpected " and that its position , after the revelation that Scully has cancer in " Leonard Betts " caused it to look " as if it 's cheating on the consequences of Scully 's illness " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She called it a " flawed yet unusually affecting episode " . Vitaris cited the Golem 's disintegration as " a leitmotif , a reminder of death , a beautiful way to translate into visual terms the depth of Ariel 's grief . " 
 = Walter de Coventre = 
 Walter de Coventre ( died 1371 or 1372 ) was a 14th @-@ century Scottish ecclesiastic . There is no direct evidence of his birthdate , his family , or his family 's origin , although he may have come from the region around Abernethy ( in modern @-@ day Perth and Kinross ) , where a family with the name de Coventre is known to have lived . Walter appeared in the records for the first time in the 1330s , as a student at the University of Paris . From there he went on to the University of Orléans , initially as a student before becoming a lecturer there . He studied the arts , civil law and canon law , and was awarded many university degrees , including two doctorates . His studies were paid for , at least partially , by his benefices in Scotland . Despite holding perhaps more than five benefices at one stage , he did not return to Scotland until the late 1350s . 
 Following his return to Scotland , Walter soon became Dean of Aberdeen Cathedral . From there he became engaged in high @-@ level ecclesiastical affairs with the Scottish church and political affairs with the Earl of Mar. Sometime before June 1361 , the cathedral chapter of Dunblane elected him Bishop of Dunblane . He went to France to secure confirmation from the Pope at Avignon , who authorised his consecration . Walter was bishop for 10 years after returning home to Scotland . Records of his episcopate are thin , but there are enough to allow a modest reconstruction of his activities : he presided over legal disputes , issued a dispensation for an important irregular marriage , attended parliaments , and acted as an envoy of the Scottish crown in England . He died in either 1371 or 1372 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Walter de Coventre was typical of a new class of men in 14th @-@ century Scotland , the university @-@ educated career cleric from the lower nobility . Such men often acquired university education through their family resources , through the patronage of more substantial nobles , or through church influence , particularly support from the pope and his court . Patronage gave access to the resources needed to finance the considerable expense of a 14th @-@ century university education , particularly through the presentation of benefices , gifts of land or income made by the church . 
 Scotland had no universities in de Coventre 's time , requiring travel either to England or Continental Europe to acquire a university education . Continental Europe , particularly France , was the favoured destination , partly because of bad relations between Scotland and England . After their university education , some Scottish graduates chose to remain abroad and teach at a foreign university or to serve the papacy ; most returned to Scotland and offered their services to the king , a magnate , or an ecclesiastical institution . The ultimate reward for such services was a bishopric , which brought wealth , prestige , and a " job for life " . 
 Walter de Coventre 's life is not well documented . There are no biographies , and no histories or chronicles devote any space to him . His activities can be traced only through a small number of incidental references in legal deeds , church documents and papal records . No modern historian has written a monograph about him , and the most extensive attempt to reconstruct his life in modern literature is a two @-@ page entry in D. E. R. Watt 's Biographical Dictionary of Scottish Graduates to A.D. 1410 ( 1977 ) . James Hutchison Cockburn , in his Medieval Bishop of Dunblane and their Church ( 1959 ) devoted seven less extensively sourced pages , but they emphasized the analysis of a few events during de Coventre 's episcopate , and the events of his time . 
 During most of de Coventre 's recorded lifetime Scotland was ruled by King David II . Coming to the throne at age five , King David was driven into exile in France at the age of ten . In the 1330s , civil war raged in Scotland as those loyal to David fought Edward Balliol and his English backers . In some sense , the conflict became a side @-@ show of the Hundred Years ' War , and David resided at Château Gaillard in northern France for much of his exile , until he could return to Scotland in 1341 . In 1346 , in response to a plea from France to come to its aid , David led an army into England only to be taken prisoner at Neville 's Cross ; he remained in captivity until he was ransomed in 1357 . David 's exile in France corresponded with Walter 's own period in that country , prompting one historian to suggest that Walter was part of David 's court while both were in northern France , and that Walter subsequently benefited from the relationship . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origins and personal background = = = 
 James Hutchison Cockburn , a historian of Dunblane 's medieval bishops , assumed that Walter 's surname derived from the town of Coventry in England . D. E. R. Watt has suggested that the medieval settlement of Coventre or <unk> near Abernethy in the diocese of Dunblane was the origin of the name . 
 There is no direct evidence of de Coventre 's family , but two other men bearing the name " de Coventre " are known to have been active during Walter 's lifetime . A " John de Coventre " is found registered as a student at the University of Paris on 21 January 1331 . Before December 1341 , when he resigned , John de Coventre held the parish church of Inverarity , Angus , in the diocese of St Andrews . On 7 December 1345 , a William de Coventre , also from the diocese of Dunblane , held a canonry and prebends ( a cathedral priesthood with stipends ) in the diocese of Ross and the Collegiate Church of Abernethy , when he was granted the church of Inverarity that had previously been held by John de Coventre . William thus appears to have succeeded John ( and later Walter succeeded William ) to all of these benefices . 
 Watt suggested that all three were brothers , John the first @-@ born , William the second @-@ born , and Walter the youngest of the three . He further suggested that the family was probably closely connected to Margaret de Abernethy , heiress of the old lay abbots and lords of Abernethy . Margaret had patronage over both the church of Abernethy and , as probable owner of the barony of Inverarity , the church there . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 De Coventre received a B. A. under John de <unk> from the University of Paris by Lent , 1333 . Although he had probably completed a Licentiate in the Arts and a Master of Arts by 1335 , because of gaps in the Paris records it is not certain that he was a Master until April 1345 . 
 He moved on to study civil law at the University of Orléans , and by 24 March 1337 , he was serving as the proctor of the Scottish Nation in Orléans . By 7 December 1345 , he had received a Licentiate in Civil Law . On 20 December 1348 he was at Avignon as an envoy of his university , and while there he obtained a grace regarding his own benefice holding from Pope Clement VI . On 7 October 1349 , Pope Clement granted an <unk> to Walter allowing him to be absent from his cure while he continued his studies at Orléans . 
 He may already have been a Doctor of Civil Law by that point , because in the following year , on 22 November 1350 , he is found as such acting as the Regent of Orléans presenting a candidate for licence . Having studied civil law for the highest qualification available , de Coventre moved on to canon law . By 28 March 1351 , he possessed a <unk> in Decrees ( canon law ) . This was perhaps why on 16 April 1353 , he obtained from Pope Innocent VI another grace for himself . Precisely when he obtained his doctorate is unclear , but he was D. U. J. ( doctor <unk> juris ) , Doctor of Both Laws , by 4 September 1359 . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Walter 's first known benefices were a canonry ( with prebend ) in the Collegiate Church of Abernethy and a prebend in the diocese of Ross , northern Scotland , which he was holding by 12 April 1345 . None of these benefices , neither parish nor office , are known by name . While Walter would retain his Ross benefice until becoming Bishop of Dunblane , he lost his Abernethy benefice at some point between 20 December 1348 and 28 March 1351 . During that period he obtained another unnamed prebend in exchange for the Abernethy prebend . Walter is only the second known canon of Abernethy Collegiate Church . 
 On 12 April 1345 , he was granted a canonry in the diocese of Dunkeld with expectation of a prebend , but does not appear to have obtained this in practice , although he did obtain a different Dunkeld canonry with prebend on 12 May 1352 . This he retained until his consecration as Bishop of Dunblane in 1361 . Walter also obtained a fourth prebend in this period . He had been pursuing a benefice in the diocese of St Andrews , and while he was granted this on 28 March 1351 , the grant was still not effective by 16 April 1353 , when he was granted a prebend in the diocese of Moray instead . This was not effective either , but Walter did eventually obtain a St Andrews diocese benefice , namely the church of Inverarity in Angus , which had become vacant on the death of its incumbent , William de Coventre , probably Walter 's older brother . On 7 December 1345 , Walter was appointed ( provided ) as Archdeacon of Dunblane , his most substantial benefice to date , but the appointment does not appear to have been carried through . 
 Walter obtained one more benefice during this period . On 20 December 1348 , he was made Dean of Aberdeen Cathedral , a high @-@ ranking office which Walter was not technically eligible to hold without a papal grace , being only a sub @-@ deacon in orders . The deanery had been made vacant by the death of the long @-@ serving Gilbert Fleming . Although in July the Pope had given it as an extra prebend for <unk> de <unk> , Cardinal Bishop of Tusculum , this had been cancelled by 20 December , when it was given to Walter instead . 
 These benefices provided an income without the obligation to perform any pastoral services . Their revenues were assigned to pay for his studies , leaving poorly paid vicars to carry out the pastoral work . Walter remained as a teacher and official at Orléans , perhaps without returning to Scotland at all , until the late 1350s , by when he would have been absent from his native country for more than 25 years . In an Aberdeen document dated 12 July 1356 , it was noted that he was still absent from his post . 
 = = = Bishop of Dunblane = = = 
 = = = = Return to Scotland and episcopal election = = = = 
 Walter cannot be traced back in Scotland with certainty before his appearance as a witness to a charter of Thomas , Earl of Mar , on 9 July 1358 . He may have returned a year earlier , as a document dated sometime between November 1357 and April 1359 records him in the sheriffdom of Forfar ( royal demesne in Angus ) assisting a justice ayre . He appears again on 4 September 1359 , witnessing another charter of Earl Thomas at the latter 's residence of Kildrummy Castle . 
 Following the death in 1361 of William de Cambuslang , Bishop of Dunblane , Walter was elected by the Dunblane cathedral chapter to be the new bishop . On his election , Walter possessed no benefices in the diocese , and had had none since giving up his Abernethy prebend a decade before . However , it was probably the diocese of his birth , and he had almost become archdeacon of the diocese in 1345 . 
 Walter , bishop @-@ elect , travelled to the papal court at Avignon , and was provided ( appointed ) as bishop by Pope Innocent on 18 June 1361 . The papal letter of provision expressed displeasure that the chapter ( by electing ) and Walter ( by accepting the election ) were ignoring a previous papal reservation of the bishopric . Pope Innocent quashed the election , but nevertheless agreed to appoint ( provide ) Walter to the bishopric . 
 Walter may have been consecrated soon after , probably by 23 August . It was on that date that he presented a roll of petitions to the Pope on behalf of several Scotsmen , including Michael de Monymusk , future Bishop of Dunkeld . On 20 September , Bishop Walter made a " promise of services " to the papacy , the first payment of which was delivered to Avignon in 1363 by Walter 's proctor . 
 = = = = Early episcopate = = = = 
 Walter had returned to Scotland by 30 June 1362 , when his presence is attested at Partick near Glasgow . The document in which Walter is mentioned recorded that William Rae , Bishop of Glasgow , along with his cathedral chapter , agreed to put a dispute to arbitration . 
 The remainder of his episcopate is not well documented . His only surviving episcopal deed was issued at Abernethy on 8 February 1365 . The deed authorised the reduction of canons at Abernethy Collegiate Church from ten to five , adding the consent of the patroness Margaret , Countess of Angus . These details are also recorded in a papal letter to the Bishop of St Andrews in 1373 : 
 Recently a petition of the secular Prior and Chapter [ of Abernethy ] for confirmation described how the [ Collegiate ] Church was founded by lay patrons for a prior and five canons . At a later date some of the patrons were eager to augment its rents , and the number of canons was hopefully raised to ten . No such augmentation took place , and because of wars , fires and ruin the Prior and Chapter were brought to straits . Bishop Walter , therefore , with the assent of the patrons and King David , reduced the canons to five . 
 The changes were confirmed by the Pope on 31 October 1375 , several years after Bishop Walter 's death . 
 A document of Inchaffray Abbey , preserved in the original ( as opposed to a later copy ) , recorded that Bishop Walter had been involved in settling a dispute involving Inchaffray , an abbey which lay in his diocese . Inchaffray 's dispute was with Naomhán Mac <unk> ( Nevin MacEwen ) and his wife Mairead ( Mariota ) . Under Abbot Symon de Scone , previous Abbot of Inchaffray , the abbey had given some lands in exchange for 40 marks to Mairead 's father Maol <unk> ( <unk> ) of <unk> . 
 Under the new abbot , Abbot John , the abbey sought the return of those lands . The case appears to have gone to Bishop Walter 's <unk> court , which he held at the chapel of <unk> . Here Naomhán and Mairead agreed to accept a payment of 40 marks in exchange for returning the documents of ownership given to them by the abbot and for acknowledging the abbey 's ownership . The couple pledged to honour the agreement by swearing an oath on the chapel 's Gospels . The case then proceeded to a hearing held under Robert Stewart , Earl of Strathearn and High Steward of Scotland ( later King Robert II ) , at Perth , where the couple were forced under the threat of severe penalties to swear again never to renew their claim . The decision was sealed by the witnesses , including Bishop Walter , at a Perth church on 30 November 1365 . 
 = = = = Final years = = = = 
 On 13 March 1366 , Walter was commissioned by the papacy to authorise dispensation for the irregular marriage between John Stewart , Earl of Carrick ( much later King Robert III ) and Annabella Drummond . 
 Bishop Walter attended at least five meetings of the Scottish national parliament during his episcopate . He was present at the Scone parliament of 27 September 1367 , which discussed royal revenues and relations with the English crown . He was also present at the Scone parliament of June 1368 , and the Perth parliament of 6 March 1369 ; the latter discussed royal business , relations with the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Norway , and law and order in the Scottish Highlands . Robert Stewart , Thomas , Earl of Mar , Uilleam III , Earl of Ross , and other Highland lords , were ordered to impose greater control in their regions . Bishop Walter took part in two parliamentary committees , the first a clerical committee devoted to general business , and the second a judicial committee authorised to review earlier legal judgments in the kingdom . 
 The parliament 's discussions on Anglo @-@ Scottish relations preceded peace negotiations later in the year , at which Bishop Walter was one of the Scottish envoys . There was some urgency behind the matter , in view of the impending end to the five @-@ year Anglo @-@ Scottish truce agreed by King Edward III of England on 20 May 1365 . King David travelled to London , where he resided in May and June , in order to take part in the negotiations . Walter and the rest of the embassy , which included four other bishops , were in London by June 1369 , the month in which Edward agreed to a new truce . When it was ratified by the Scots at Edinburgh on 20 July , Bishop Walter was again present , as a witness . 
 Walter attended the Perth parliament of 18 February 1370 , and was named as one of the members of a special committee " for the deliberation concerning the consideration of common justice " . He is mentioned for the last time swearing fealty to the new king , Robert II , at his accession parliament at Scone on 27 March 1371 . Walter de Coventre must have died later in 1371 or in very early 1372 , because on 27 April 1372 , the Pope appointed Andrew Magnus to the vacant bishopric of Dunblane . 
 = Darrun Hilliard = 
 Darrun Hilliard II ( born April 13 , 1993 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Detroit Pistons of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He attended Liberty High School in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania , where he was a two @-@ time Associated Press first @-@ team selection . As a senior in high school , he averaged 19 @.@ 7 points per game . Hilliard committed to play college basketball for the Villanova Wildcats and coach Jay Wright . He showed steady improvement every year , going from 4 @.@ 8 points per game as a freshman to 14 @.@ 3 points per game as a senior as he helped Villanova reach the NCAA Tournament in three straight seasons . As a senior , he was named to the first @-@ team All @-@ Big East and was honored as Big 5 Player of the Year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hilliard was born on April 13 , 1993 to Charlene Jenkins and Darrun Hilliard . His mother is a representative for an insurance company . His father played basketball at the high school level and first introduced his son to the sport when he was five years old . The younger Hilliard also played football growing up , but preferred basketball . His favorite NBA player was Allen Iverson . He used to bike to Philadelphia Eagles practices as a kid . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Hilliard attended Liberty High School in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania , where he was a two @-@ time Associated Press first @-@ team selection . Despite eating , writing , and throwing a football right handed , Hilliard shoots left @-@ handed . As a freshman , he measured 6 ' 1 . His parents split up after his freshman year , and he developed a unique bond with Liberty assistant coach Mike Bachman . As a junior , he averaged 18 points and six rebounds per game and shot 52 percent from the field . Hilliard led the Hurricanes to PIAA state semifinals , where Liberty lost to Penn Wood . In the loss to Penn Wood , Hilliard had 26 points . He was named Morning Call player of the year as a junior . In addition , he was selected to the First Team Class AAAA . 
 Hilliard averaged 19 @.@ 7 points per game as a senior . He was named Express @-@ Times player of the year after leading the Hurricanes to the second round of the PIAA playoffs . Hilliard scored 1 @,@ 413 points in his high school career , finishing second in Liberty history to Warren West . He committed to Villanova in November 2010 . When Hilliard informed his mother he was receiving a full scholarship to Villanova , she did not understand and was trying to figure how much she would have to pay for her son 's education . In addition to his basketball prowess , Hilliard was the quarterback on his high school football team and could throw the ball 65 yards . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Villanova coach Jay Wright considered redshirting Hilliard in his freshman season , but Wright decided against it after a rash of injuries to his players . He had 13 points in back @-@ to @-@ back games against Penn and Missouri in December 2011 . As a freshman , Hilliard averaged 4 @.@ 8 points , 2 @.@ 5 rebounds and 18 @.@ 1 minutes per game in 29 games and shot 29 @.@ 2 percent from behind the 3 @-@ point arc . During the season , he reached out to his family and friends to see if he made the right decision to come to Villanova . He said , " Freshman year was probably my toughest year of basketball " , due to difficulties in adjusting to a new coach and teammates . He described himself as a mentally unstable 17 @-@ year @-@ old . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 In his sophomore season ( 2012 – 13 ) , he averaged 11 @.@ 4 points in just under 30 minutes a game . This proved to be his breakout season and he would go on to start all 34 games that year . He helped Villanova defeat a few top five teams that season . In a comeback win over # 5 Louisville on January 22 , he made a 3 @-@ point play after making a steal at halfcourt which helped spark the rally . In a 75 – 71 overtime victory over # 3 Syracuse on January 26 , 2013 , he had 25 points and six assists in 38 minutes . As a result of his play against Syracuse , Hilliard was honored as Big East Player of the Week and Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week . He also helped them beat then # 5 Georgetown on March 6 by the score of 67 – 57 . In that game , he had 14 points and three steals . 
 Villanova enjoyed a 20 – 14 season after a down year and reached the NCAA Tournament where they were seeded ninth and matched up with eight seed North Carolina in the first round . Hilliard had a strong showing in a 78 – 71 loss to North Carolina , scoring 18 points . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Hilliard improved in most offensive categories in the 2013 – 14 season , his junior year . He averaged 14 @.@ 3 points per game that season and improved his three @-@ point shooting percentage to 41 @.@ 4 percent ( up from 31 @.@ 5 percent the year before ) . He made 70 three @-@ pointers that year out of 169 attempts . Hilliard scored 20 points on 8 @-@ of @-@ 13 shooting against Marquette in a 94 – 85 victory on January 25 , 2014 . In an 82 – 79 win over Providence , he hit a crucial 3 @-@ pointer with a minute left in overtime . In a 73 – 56 win over Marquette on March 2 at the Wells Fargo Center , he established a new career high with 26 points on 7 @-@ of @-@ 11 shooting from the field . 
 Villanova compiled a 29 – 5 record and won the Big East regular season championship and Battle for Atlantis title despite not being ranked in the preseason . In the 2014 NCAA Tournament , Hilliard scored 16 points to help Villanova get past Milwaukee . Villanova lost to eventual national champion Connecticut in the Round of 32 , with Hilliard adding 13 points in the 77 – 65 loss . He was an honorable mention all @-@ Big East selection at the conclusion of the regular season . He shared Big East Most Improved Player award with teammate Daniel <unk> . Hilliard joined teammate Ryan Arcidiacono on the All @-@ Big 5 Second Team . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Coming into the 2014 – 15 season , Hilliard was named to the Preseason Second Team All @-@ Big East . He averaged 14 @.@ 3 points , 3 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 1 assists per game as a senior . Villanova was ranked in the top ten for most of the season thanks to a balanced offense . Hilliard scored 23 points on December 20 in an overtime victory over Syracuse , hitting 9 @-@ of @-@ 17 shots . He hit two free throws to give the Wildcats the first lead of the game in overtime before being kicked in the face and tested for concussion @-@ like symptoms . Against Creighton on January 25 , 2015 , he scored 24 points and made 6 @-@ of @-@ 10 three @-@ pointers in a 71 – 50 victory at home . On February 14 , in a 78 – 75 victory over Butler , Hilliard scored a career @-@ high 31 points and also set a career high with 8 three @-@ pointers made out of 13 attempts . He also hit the game @-@ winning three @-@ pointer with 1 @.@ 5 seconds to play in the game . Eight of his nine field goals in that game were three @-@ pointers , and his eight rebounds were one short of a career @-@ high . He averaged 18 @.@ 7 points during a nine @-@ game stretch that included the Butler game . 
 Hilliard led the Wildcats to a 33 – 3 season . His final game at Villanova was a 71 @-@ 68 upset at the hands of N.C. State in the NCAA Tournament Round of 32 , despite contributing 27 points . Hilliard finished his Villanova career with 1 @,@ 511 points , 18th highest in school history ; 400 rebounds ; and 176 steals . Hilliard was a 2014 – 15 Men 's All @-@ District II Team selection by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association . The Sporting News selected him to be a Second Team All American . Hilliard was one of three players , along with <unk> <unk> and Kris Dunn , to be named to the All Big East First Team . He was named to the First Team All @-@ District V by the National Association of Basketball Coaches , and was named Big 5 Player of the Year . After the season he was invited to the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Detroit Pistons ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 Prior to the 2015 NBA draft , Hilliard signed with James Dunleavy as his agent . He was listed in the 55 @-@ 70 range among NBA Draft prospects by several media agencies . On June 25 , 2015 , Hilliard was selected 38th overall by the Detroit Pistons in the second round of the draft . Hilliard attributed the decision to a productive workout with the team . After averaging 9 @.@ 4 points per game in Orlando Summer League play , on July 20 , Hilliard signed a three @-@ year deal with the Pistons , with one year being guaranteed . Coach Stan Van Gundy praised Hilliard 's shooting prowess , despite a poor showing in the Summer League . 
 He broke his nose during training camp after engaging in a pickup game . The injury required surgery and he needed to wear a mask . On November 23 , he made his NBA debut in a 109 – 88 loss against the Milwaukee Bucks , recording two points and three rebounds in 12 minutes . During his rookie season , he received multiple assignments to the Grand Rapids Drive , the Pistons ' D @-@ League affiliate . 
 On June 30 , 2016 , Hilliard was ruled out of the 2016 NBA Summer League after he suffered a stress fracture of the lower back . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = Upper Pine Bottom State Park = 
 Upper Pine Bottom State Park is a 5 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) Pennsylvania state park in Lycoming County , Pennsylvania in the United States . The park is in Cummings Township on Pennsylvania Route 44 and is surrounded by the Tiadaghton State Forest . It is on Upper Pine Bottom Run , which gave the park its name and is a tributary of Pine Creek . Upper Pine Bottom State Park is in the Pine Creek Gorge , where the streams have cut through five major rock formations from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods . 
 The earliest recorded inhabitants of the area were the Susquehannocks , followed by the Iroquois , Lenape , and Shawnee . Upper Pine Bottom Run was the site of a furnace for pig iron in 1814 , the first sawmill was built on it in 1815 , and in 1825 an earlier bridle path across its headwaters became a turnpike . The lumber industry led to the clearcutting of the area in the 19th century . The state forest was started in 1898 and the park was formed from it in the early 1920s as a Class B public camp . The Civilian Conservation Corps had a camp on the run and improved the park in the 1930s , but it was not transferred to the Bureau of State Parks until 1962 . Though it began as a public campsite and once had a picnic pavilion , as of 2009 it is for day use only and its only facilities are a few picnic tables and a parking area . 
 Upper Pine Bottom State Park is one of the smallest state parks in Pennsylvania , and is maintained by staff from nearby Little Pine State Park . In addition to picnics , its chief use is as a parking area for local hunters , anglers , hikers , cross @-@ country skiers , snowmobilers , and all @-@ terrain vehicle riders . Upper Pine Bottom Run is state @-@ approved and stocked for trout fishing in season . Second @-@ growth forest now covers the region ; the surrounding state forest and park are home to a variety of flora and fauna 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Humans have lived in what is now Pennsylvania since at least 10 @,@ 000 BC . The first settlers were Paleo @-@ Indian nomadic hunters known from their stone tools . The hunter @-@ gatherers of the Archaic period , which lasted locally from 7000 to 1000 BC , used a greater variety of more sophisticated stone artifacts . The Woodland period marked the gradual transition to semi @-@ permanent villages and horticulture , between 1000 BC and 1500 AD . Archeological evidence found in the state from this time includes a range of pottery types and styles , burial mounds , pipes , bows and arrows , and ornaments . 
 Upper Pine Bottom State Park is in the West Branch Susquehanna River drainage basin , the earliest recorded inhabitants of which were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . They were a matriarchal society that lived in stockaded villages of large long houses . Upper Pine Bottom Run is at the southern end of the Pine Creek Gorge , and the mountains surrounding the gorge were " occasionally inhabited " by the Susquehannocks . Their numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . 
 After this , the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois . They lived in long houses , primarily in what is now New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . The Iroquois and other tribes used the Pine Creek Path through the gorge , traveling between a path on the Genesee River in modern New York in the north , and the Great Shamokin Path along the West Branch Susquehanna River in the south . The Seneca tribe of the Iroquois believed that the Pine Creek Gorge was sacred land and never established a permanent settlement there , though they did use the path through the gorge and had seasonal hunting camps along it . 
 To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle in the West Branch watershed , including the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) . The valleys of Pine Creek and its tributaries in Cummings Township were used by the Iroquois and <unk> tribes as a hunting ground . Historians believe that there may have been a Shawnee village and burial ground just to the north of Little Pine State Park on Little Pine Creek , just a few miles from what became Upper Pine Bottom State Park . 
 The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) led to the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin . In October 1784 , the United States acquired a large tract of land , including what is now Upper Pine Bottom State Park , from the Iroquois in the Second Treaty of Fort Stanwix ( this acquisition is known as the Last Purchase in Pennsylvania ) . In the years that followed , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania ; however some isolated bands of natives remained in the Pine Creek Gorge until the War of 1812 . 
 = = = Lumber and turnpike = = = 
 The land that became Cummings Township was first settled by European Americans in 1784 . Lycoming County was formed from a part of Northumberland County on April 13 , 1795 . Upper Pine Bottom Run was originally " famed for the wonderful white pine forest that clothed all the bottomlands " , and the region was covered with eastern white pine and eastern hemlock trees , which lumbermen harvested . To accommodate larger @-@ scale lumber operations and the large quantities of pine logs which these floated downstream to the West Branch Susquehanna River , the Pennsylvania General Assembly declared Pine Creek a public highway on March 16 , 1798 . 
 The area surrounding Upper Pine Bottom State Park has been a wilderness for much of its history . In 1806 – 1807 a bridle path was cut through the woods just west of the source of Upper Pine Bottom Run as part of a 72 @-@ mile ( 116 km ) path between Jersey Shore ( to the south , at the mouth of Pine Creek ) and Coudersport ( to the northwest , on the Allegheny River in Potter County ) . The bridle path was widened to a road to accommodate wagons in 1812 . 
 The new road soon brought industry to the region . The discovery of iron ore along the road led seven men to form a company to manufacture iron . In 1814 they built a furnace to produce pig iron on Upper Pine Bottom Run . It took one to two days to haul the ore to the furnace , and other supplies had to be transported 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the furnace on steep mountain roads . These costs were too high , and the furnace lost almost $ 7 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 104 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) before closing in 1817 . The ruins of the iron furnace were visible through much of the 19th century . 
 The first two sawmills were built on Upper Pine Bottom Run in 1815 and 1817 . In 1817 , Michael and Henry Wolf also arrived in the area from Berks County and built a sawmill near the mouth of Little Pine Creek , which is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) downstream along Pine Creek from the mouth of Upper Pine Bottom Run . The <unk> ' sawmill and the land they cleared for farming helped establish the unincorporated village of Waterville , which became the most significant population center in Cummings Township , and is about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) southeast of Upper Pine Bottom State Park . 
 The Jersey Shore and Coudersport Turnpike was built along the former bridle path between 1825 and 1834 . The turnpike , which operated until 1860 , had toll booths every 5 miles ( 8 km ) and charged a horse @-@ drawn wagon $ 1 @.@ 68 to travel the entire road . A post office was established in nearby Waterville in 1849 ; the early businesses included two stores and a hotel , which still stands . Pennsylvania Route 44 , which passes through the park , still follows the course of the former path and turnpike between Haneyville ( at the western end of Upper Pine Bottom Run ) and Coudersport . 
 Economic development and increased settlement led the Pennsylvania General Assembly to establish Cummings Township in 1832 from land taken from parts of Mifflin and Brown Townships . The new township was named for John Cummings , who was an associate judge in the local court system at the time . Early industry in the township included lumber and quarries for flag and building stone . In 1839 Clinton County was formed from the western part of Lycoming County , with much of the eastern border of the new county formed by the turnpike . 
 In 1851 the Susquehanna Boom opened on the West Branch Susquehanna River at Williamsport . The log boom , a series of artificial islands with chains between them to catch logs , led to an expansion of the lumber industry and to Williamsport 's nickname , " Lumber Capital of the World " . In 1852 , the 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) upstream of the mouth of Upper Pine Bottom Run were made a public highway by the state legislature , and by 1888 the West Branch Lumber Company owned the headwaters of Upper Pine Bottom Run . 
 The lumber era did not last ; the old @-@ growth forests were clearcut by the early 20th century and the Pine Creek Gorge was stripped bare . Nothing was left except the discarded , dried @-@ out tree tops , which became a fire hazard , so much of the land burned and was left barren . In the spring of 1894 a fire burned in what is now Tiadaghton State Forest along Route 44 to near Haneyville . In the summer of 1908 the area around the park burned again , in a fire that stretched from Galeton to Jersey Shore . The soil was depleted of nutrients , fires baked the ground hard , and jungles of blueberries , blackberries , and mountain laurel covered the clearcut land , which became known as the " Pennsylvania Desert " . Disastrous floods swept the area periodically and much of the wildlife was wiped out . 
 = = = State forest and park = = = 
 As the timber was exhausted and the land burned , many companies simply abandoned their holdings . Conservationists like Joseph Rothrock became concerned that the forests would not regrow if they were not managed properly . They called for the state to purchase land from the lumber companies and for a change in the philosophy of forest management . In 1895 Rothrock was appointed the first commissioner of the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters , the forerunner of today 's Department of Conservation and Natural Resources . In 1897 the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed legislation which authorized the purchase of " unseated lands for forest reservations " and the first Pennsylvania state forest lands were acquired the following year . 
 On July 13 , 1898 , the state bought a 409 @-@ acre ( 166 ha ) tract of land in Cummings Township for $ 72 @.@ 99 ( $ 2076 in 2016 terms ) . This was the first purchase for what became Tiadaghton State Forest , which surrounds Upper Pine Bottom State Park . Most of the major purchases for it were made between 1900 and 1935 . As of 2009 , the Tiadaghton State Forest covered 146 @,@ 500 acres ( 59 @,@ 300 ha ) , chiefly in Lycoming County with small tracts in Clinton , Potter , Tioga , and Union Counties . The largest section of the state forest is in the Pine Creek valley . 
 Upper Pine Bottom State Park traces its existence to the early 1920s , when the Pennsylvania Department of Forestry built 31 campsites on state forest land between 1921 and 1925 . The park was originally established as " Upper Pine Bottom Class B Public Camp " and named for the stream that flows through it . Class B camps were on secondary highways and were " used primarily by hikers , hunters , fishermen , <unk> , and <unk> who desire to go far into the woods and make their stay comfortable " . Each Class B camp had a lean @-@ to shelter for camping , potable water , picnic tables , a fireplace , garbage can , and a latrine . There was no charge to use any of the camps , but stays were limited to two consecutive nights . 
 During the Great Depression , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) set up nine camps in Tiadaghton State Forest . The camps included two near Upper Pine Bottom State Park : CCC Camp S @-@ 82 @-@ Pa ( Waterville , also known as Haneyville ) was on Upper Pine Bottom Run about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) west of the park and operated from May 1933 to 1941 ; CCC Camp S @-@ 129 @-@ Pa ( Little Pine ) was at the site of nearby Little Pine State Park and operated from 1933 to 1937 . The CCC planted large numbers of trees in the state forest , did work in the park , and built a pavilion at the site in 1936 . Although the roof of a structure was still visible in the park in a 1959 aerial photo , as of 2009 there are no pavilions or other buildings in the park . The United States ' entry into the Second World War led to the end of the CCC and all its camps were closed by the summer of 1942 . 
 In 1950 the park was known as " Upper Pine Bottom State Forest Picnic Area " and was mentioned in a New York Times article on the Pine Creek Gorge . On November 11 , 1954 , the Pennsylvania Geographic Board made the picnic area name official . The Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry 's Division of State Parks became the Bureau of State Parks in 1962 and Upper Pine Bottom ( and all state parks and picnic areas ) were transferred to it from Forestry that year . In 1972 , Upper Pine Bottom was one of 10 state forest picnic areas kept by the Bureau of State Parks ( 35 were transferred to the Bureau of Forestry ) , and Forrey 's 1984 History of Pennsylvania 's State Parks referred to it as a state forest picnic area . The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( Penn DOT ) 1990 map still called it a picnic area , but <unk> 's 1993 Our Priceless Heritage : Pennsylvania 's State Parks 1893 – 1993 called it a state park , as did the Penn DOT 2002 map . 
 As of 2016 Upper Pine Bottom State Park is a roadside park for day use only , with a small parking lot and a few picnic tables . In addition to picnics , its chief use is as a parking area for local hunters , anglers , hikers , cross country skiers , and snowmobilers . Staff from nearby Little Pine State Park maintain Upper Pine Bottom , and it is one of the smallest state parks in Pennsylvania . Prouty Place State Park , a picnic area to the northwest in Potter County , is also 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) . Only Sand Bridge State Park , another picnic area to the south in Union County , is smaller , at 3 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 Although the rock formations exposed in Upper Pine Bottom State Park and the Pine Creek Gorge are at least 300 million years old , the gorge itself formed about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , in the last ice age . Pine Creek had flowed northeasterly until then , but was dammed by rocks , soil , ice , and other debris deposited by the receding Laurentide Continental Glacier . The dammed creek formed a lake near what would later be the village of Ansonia in Shippen Township in Tioga County , and the lake 's glacial meltwater overflowed the debris dam , reversing the flow of Pine Creek . The creek flooded to the south and quickly carved a deep channel on its way to the West Branch Susquehanna River . 
 The land on which Upper Pine Bottom State Park sits was part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America about 300 million years ago , in the Pennsylvanian subperiod . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a buildup of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found today in the Pine Creek drainage basin : sandstone , shale , conglomerates , limestone , and coal . 
 The park is at an elevation of 938 feet ( 286 m ) on the Allegheny Plateau , which formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when the part of Gondwana that became Africa collided with what became North America , forming Pangaea . Although the gorge and its surroundings seem to be mountainous , the area is a dissected plateau . Years of erosion have cut away the soft rocks , forming the valleys , and left the hardest of the ancient rocks relatively untouched on the top of sharp ridges , giving them the appearance of " mountains " . 
 Five major rock formations from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods are present in Upper Pine Bottom State Park and Cummings Township . The youngest of these , which forms the highest points in the township , is the early Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal . Low @-@ sulfur coal was once mined at three locations within the Pine Creek watershed , and there is a coal deposit between the headwaters of Upper Pine Bottom and Lower Pine Bottom Runs . Below this is the late Mississippian Mauch Chunk Formation , which is formed with grayish @-@ red shale , siltstone , sandstone , and conglomerate . 
 Next below these is the Mississippian Burgoon Sandstone , which is buff colored with shale , coal , and conglomerate inclusions . Below this is the late Devonian and early Mississippian Huntley Mountain Formation , which is made of relatively soft grayish @-@ red shale and olive @-@ gray sandstone . The lowest and oldest layer is the red shale and siltstone of the Catskill Formation , some 375 million years old . This layer is relatively soft and easily eroded , which helped to form the Pine Creek Gorge . The source of Upper Pine Bottom Run is on Mauch Chunk rock , and the stream cuts deeper as it flows east to Pine Creek . In the park Upper Pine Bottom Run has cut through layers of Burgoon sandstone and Huntley Mountain rock , and downstream of the park to its mouth the deepest parts of the valleys are made of the Catskill Formation . 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges ( difference between the daily high and low ) of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . The mean annual precipitation for the Pine Creek watershed is 36 to 42 inches ( 914 to 1 @,@ 070 mm ) . January is the coldest month at Upper Pine Bottom State Park , July the warmest , and June the wettest . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 104 ° F ( 40 ° C ) in 1988 , and the record low was − 19 ° F ( − 28 ° C ) in 1982 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Descriptions from early explorers and settlers give an idea of what the Pine Creek Gorge was like before it was clearcut . The forest was up to 85 percent hemlock and white pine ; hardwoods made up the rest . The Pine Creek watershed , which Upper Pine Bottom Run is part of , was home to large predators such as wolves , lynx , wolverines , panthers , fishers , bobcats and foxes ; all except the last three are locally extinct as of 2007 . The area had herds of American bison , elk and white @-@ tailed deer , and large numbers of black bears , river otters , and beavers . Rattlesnakes and insects plagued early explorers and settlers in the region . 
 The virgin forests cooled the land and streams , and centuries of accumulated organic matter in the forest soil caused slow percolation of rainfall into the creeks and runs so that they flowed more evenly year @-@ round . Pine Creek and its tributaries were home to large numbers of fish , including trout , but dams downstream on the Susquehanna River have eliminated the shad and eels once found here by blocking their migrations . Habitat for land animals was destroyed by the clearcutting of forests , but there was also a great deal of hunting , with bounties paid for large predators . 
 Upper Pine Bottom Run 's virgin white pines were all clearcut , but in 1925 the Department of Forests and Waters reported " thrifty young growth has now taken in its place " . In the 1920s chestnut blight killed almost all the American chestnut trees in the Tiadaghton State Forest , and oak trees suffered from oak leaf tier moths in the 1950s and oak leaf roller moths in 1967 . Gypsy moths defoliated the state forest between 1978 and 1982 . As of 2009 the surrounding state forest is " dominated by mixed oak forests " , along with hardwoods such as ash , beech , birch , cherry , and maple , as well as hemlock and pine . The Pine Creek Gorge is home to over 225 species of wildflowers , plants and trees , 40 species of mammals , 245 species of birds , and 26 species of fish . Common animals include deer , squirrels , bear , eagles , wild turkey , and ravens . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 As of 2009 recreational opportunities within the 5 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) Upper Pine Bottom State Park were limited to <unk> and fishing . Although the park was established in the early 1920s as a campground with a latrine , the park today has no campsites or sanitary facilities . Upper Pine Bottom Run was listed in a guide for trout and bass fishing in 1885 , and in 1925 the Department of Forests and Waters said there was good fishing and hunting in the camp . Brown trout over 20 inches ( 51 cm ) long were reported in the stream in 1994 . In 2009 , all of Upper Pine Bottom Run has been designated as approved trout waters by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission , which means that it is stocked with trout and may be fished during trout season . 
 Upper Pine Bottom State Park also serves as a parking area and access point for the surrounding state forest , where recreational opportunities include hiking and hunting . The most common game animals are black bear , ruffed grouse , white @-@ tailed deer , and wild turkey . The state forest trails are also open to mountain biking and horseback riding , and in winter are used for cross @-@ country skiing and snowmobiling . Just north of the park is the 19 @-@ mile ( 31 km ) Haneyville ATV Trail system for all @-@ terrain vehicles . The parking area for the trail is on PA 44 at the site of the former CCC camp S @-@ 82 @-@ Pa , and the history of the stream is reflected in the names of three of the trails in the system : Furnace Trail ( for the iron furnace ) , CCC Trail , and Plantation Loop ( for the plantations of trees planted by the CCC ) . 
 = = Nearby state parks = = 
 The following state parks are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Upper Pine Bottom State Park : 
 = SpongeBob 's Last Stand = 
 " SpongeBob 's Last Stand " is the eighth episode of the seventh season and the 134th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on April 22 , 2010 , in celebration of Earth Day . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , SpongeBob and Patrick protest the construction of a highway that would destroy Jellyfish Fields . 
 The episode was written by Aaron Springer , Steven Banks , and Derek Iversen , and was directed by Andrew Overtoom and Tom Yasumi . Upon release , the episode met positive reviews . On March 16 , 2010 , the episode became available on DVD . 
 Similar to that of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , the episode was originally planned to be the final episode of the series , but Nickelodeon decided to keep it on afterwards . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Early one day , SpongeBob and Patrick become the first visitors to a new section of Jellyfish Fields . As they wander in the area , they discover a sign that states that a " super highway " will be built through Jellyfish Fields . Believing that the highway will pollute and ultimately destroy Jellyfish Fields , SpongeBob resolves to prevent the highway 's creation . 
 SpongeBob asks Mr. Krabs for assistance , but he supports the highway , as it can bring more customers to the Krusty Krab . SpongeBob then shows Mr. Krabs the highway 's blueprint , which shows that the highway with concrete columns will run over the Krusty Krab and end directly at the Chum Bucket , revealing that Plankton is responsible for the highway 's development . Mr. Krabs thus decides to support SpongeBob . They both go to the Chum Bucket and ask Plankton to not develop the highway , but he states that , already , the whole rest of the town has unanimously voted to build the highway . 
 Refusing to give up , SpongeBob and Patrick peacefully petition to stop the highway . Nobody listens to them , however , and they are quickly exiled for their actions . Shortly after arriving there , they see a parade meant to commemorate the groundbreaking of the highway . It is rapidly built and , as SpongeBob predicted , it turns Jellyfish Fields into a wasteland . 
 A few days later , the Krusty Krab 's business quickly dwindles due to the highway . Believing that no one will come to the Krusty Krab , Mr. Krabs decides to finally give Plankton the Krabby Patty formula . Mere seconds before he does , however , the jellyfish from Jellyfish Fields invade Bikini Bottom and start attacking civilians . Seeing this as an opportunity to demolish the highway , SpongeBob makes an appeal to the people , who agree to destroy it . Everybody in Bikini Bottom turns against Plankton and destroys the pavement and the columns of the highway ( Plankton , who thinks his highway is <unk> , tries to save it but gets run over ) . Jellyfish Fields is restored instantly to its natural state . 
 = = Production = = 
 " SpongeBob 's Last Stand " was written by Aaron Springer , Steven Banks , and Derek Iversen . Springer also served as storyboard director . Directed by Andrew Overtoom and Tom Yasumi , the episode was part of Nickelodeon 's 2010 Earth Day celebration . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on April 22 , 2010 , following a two @-@ hour marathon of nature @-@ themed SpongeBob episodes . A tie @-@ in game to the episode was released online prior to its television airing . According to Nickelodeon , " [ kids will ] learn about the environment through different levels at different Bikini Bottom locales . " 
 Nickelodeon officially announced the episode on a press release on April 5 , 2010 . According to the network , " SpongeBob and Patrick learn the ' Shelly Super Highway ' is coming to Bikini Bottom - right through Jellyfish Fields ! They must find a way to galvanize their neighbors , or it could be the end for Jellyfish Fields forever . " It was promoted as SpongeBob 's campaign to save the jellyfish . Writer Banks told that the episode never set out to teach environmental lessons . He said " When you entertain someone and make it funny , sometimes you can get a message across [ ... ] Not that we 're out here to send messages everywhere . " The episode featured two musical numbers , including " Give Jellyfish Fields a Chance " , a salute to the 1960s protest songs with similarities to John Lennon 's " Give Peace a Chance " . Banks , on the song , said that " [ It is a ] sort of Bob Dylan meets John Lennon . " 
 On March 16 , 2010 , prior to the episode 's television airing , the episode was released on the DVD compilation of the same name in the United States and Canada , on July 18 , 2011 in region 2 , and on June 6 , 2011 in region 4 . The DVD features six other episodes including " Pet or Pests " , " <unk> Overload " , " <unk> Pants " , " Overbooked " , " No Hat for Pat " , and " Toy Store of Doom " . It was also released on the series ' season seven DVD compilation , alongside 25 other episodes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , Nickelodeon averaged 2 @.@ 1 million total viewers . SpongeBob SquarePants was ranked as the number @-@ one program on broadcast and basic cable in April and scored the number @-@ one telecast , " SpongeBob 's Last Stand " , with kids 2 @-@ 11 for the month . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . Paul Mavis of DVD Talk said " [ the episode have ] a nicely worked @-@ out story and strong , integrated gags . He added " it 's a particularly well @-@ crafted entry . " C. S. <unk> of The Numbers said " There are a number of funny gags on this double @-@ length short , but it feels padded . It 's also heavy @-@ handed . I do like that they have a message to go with the jokes , but it would have been more effective if it were more subtle . " Josh Rode of DVD Verdict described the episode as " decent " . Shannon Gosney of The Mommy @-@ Files said " there were many parts where my boys just burst out laughing . Even I found myself laughing at times . " 
 = Texas Giant = 
 The New Texas Giant is a steel roller coaster located at Six Flags Over Texas in Arlington , Texas . The ride opened in 2011 after an 18 @-@ month refurbishment of the former Texas Giant wooden roller coaster . Manufactured by Rocky Mountain Construction , the New Texas Giant stands 153 ft ( 47 m ) tall and features a 79 ° drop stretching 147 ft ( 45 m ) . The ride also features multiple turns banked up to 115 ° and over 4 @,@ 506 feet ( 1 @,@ 373 m ) of track . 
 The original Texas Giant was manufactured by Dinn Corporation and designed by Curtis D. Summers . For more than a decade after its opening in 1990 , the Texas Giant remained popular , ranking in the Golden Ticket Awards as the number one wooden roller coaster in 1998 and 1999 . However , throughout the 2000s the ride 's popularity declined as a result of the ride becoming rougher . Despite maintenance attempts by the park , Six Flags Over Texas announced the ride 's closure in 2009 . Much of the original wooden structure was kept , with the track being replaced with steel . 
 After the ride 's relaunch in 2011 as the New Texas Giant , its popularity returned , winning Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Award for Best New Ride of 2011 and ranking highly in industry polls . On July 19 , 2013 , a woman died after falling from the ride , resulting in modifications and additions to the ride 's restraint system . 
 = = History = = 
 The Texas Giant was originally constructed by Dinn Corporation , with Curtis D. Summers as the designer . The ride was made up of over 900 @,@ 000 board feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m3 ) of wood . The trains were manufactured by Philadelphia Toboggan Coasters . The Texas Giant officially opened on March 17 , 1990 . At opening , the ride was the world 's tallest wooden roller coaster , standing 143 feet ( 44 m ) high . 
 Following the ride 's opening it had several modifications and renovations , which included reprofiling parts of the ride , shortening the seven @-@ car trains to six @-@ car trains , and performing maintenance on the wooden track . Six Flags Over Texas performed over 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) of trackwork on the ride in the 2008 – 2009 offseason , with the ultimate aim of improving the ride 's smoothness . Although the maintenance did improve the ride , park officials needed a more permanent solution . Initial speculation indicated the ride would be removed entirely from the park ; however , Six Flags Over Texas denied any intention or consideration to do so . In March 2009 , the park announced the closure of Texas Giant prior to a $ 10 million renovation . Following Fright Fest for that year , the ride closed on November 1 , 2009 . 
 Renovations began almost immediately and involved the removal of all of the wooden track and modifications to some of the support structure . On March 3 , 2010 , Six Flags Over Texas and Rocky Mountain Construction ( RMC ) unveiled the steel I @-@ Box track which would be used on the refurbished ride . The track was developed over the course of three years by RMC owner Fred Grubb , and Ride Centerline , LLC engineers Alan Schilke and Dody <unk> . The steel track was designed to be a replacement for any existing wooden track structure , with the rail shape , approximate weight , and dimensions remaining the same . Schilke designed the layout for the New Texas Giant , giving specifications to Grubb for manufacturing at RMC 's Idaho plant . There , two @-@ dimensional plates of steel were machine @-@ welded to form the three @-@ dimensional track parts . The redevelopment saw much of the track get reprofiled ; the lift hill was increased by 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , the first drop was steepened to 79 degrees , and several overbanked turns ( ranging from 90 ° to 115 ° ) were added . The renovated ride , dubbed the New Texas Giant , reopened on April 4 , 2011 . 
 = = = 2013 accident = = = 
 On July 19 , 2013 , a 52 @-@ year @-@ old woman fell to her death while riding the Texas Giant . A park official released a statement saying , " We are committed to determining the cause of this tragic accident and will utilize every resource throughout this process ... When we have new information to provide , we will do so . Our thoughts , prayers and full support remain with the family . " The ride was closed indefinitely pending further investigation . On September 10 , 2013 , Six Flags Over Texas released a statement stating that the park has finished its investigation on the recent incident , with several parties ruling out mechanical failure . The New Texas Giant reopened on September 14 , 2013 , with all three trains featuring re @-@ designed restraint bar pads and seat belts . The incident saw Six Flags introduce seat belts as secondary restraints on other roller coasters within their chain . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 As the name suggests , New Texas Giant is located within the Texas section of Six Flags Over Texas . It was Rocky Mountain Construction 's first installation of I @-@ Box track . New Texas Giant operates with three trains manufactured by Gerstlauer . The trains are themed to 1961 Cadillac <unk> . Each train is made up of six cars , each seating riders in two rows of two . Riders are restrained through the use of an individual hydraulic lap bar and a seat belt . 
 The table below compares the original Texas Giant , with the updated New Texas Giant ride . The original ride by Dinn Corporation was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) smaller than its Rocky Mountain Construction counterpart . As a result , the refurbished ride features a steeper and longer first drop , and thus achieves a faster speed . Additionally , a 540 ° helix after the mid @-@ course brake run was converted into a 180 ° turnaround resulting in the track length of the ride being shortened by approximately 400 feet ( 120 m ) . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The New Texas Giant begins with a right turn out of the station . This leads directly to a 153 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 47 m ) chain lift hill . Once at the top , riders drop 147 feet ( 45 m ) at an angle of 78 ° . A double up leads into a 90 ° overbanked turn , a dip and a 95 ° overbanked turn . Another dip and rise leads the train into a 115 ° overbanked turn . The exit from the overbanked turn leads into a small air @-@ time hill , which delivers the greatest negative g @-@ force on the ride , before ascending up into the mid @-@ course brake run . The train drops from the brake run and continues through a series of low @-@ to @-@ the @-@ ground air @-@ time hills and directional changes . This runs through three separate tunnels , finishing with the final brake run and short path back to the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original Texas Giant was well received , though its popularity had declined towards the end of its operation . Following its 2010 renovation , the ride 's popularity returned . 
 In Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards Texas Giant ranked as the number one wooden roller coaster for 1998 and 1999 . Its ranking slowly declined to position 32 in 2009 , its final year of operation as a wooden roller coaster . Following its 2010 renovation , the New Texas Giant again ranked highly in the Golden Ticket Awards ( this time amongst steel roller coasters ) , achieving ranks of 6 and 5 in 2011 and 2012 , respectively . The ride also won a Golden Ticket Award for being the Best New Ride of 2011 . 
 = Rings of Neptune = 
 The rings of Neptune consist primarily of five principal rings and were first discovered ( as " arcs " ) in 1984 in Chile by Patrice Bouchet , Reinhold <unk> and Jean <unk> at La Silla Observatory ( ESO ) during an observing program proposed by André <unk> and Bruno <unk> from Paris Observatory , and at Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory by F. Vilas and <unk> <unk> for a program led by William Hubbard . They were eventually imaged in 1989 by the Voyager 2 spacecraft . At their densest , they are comparable to the less dense portions of Saturn 's main rings such as the C ring and the Cassini Division , but much of Neptune 's ring system is quite tenuous , faint and dusty , more closely resembling the rings of Jupiter . Neptune 's rings are named after astronomers who contributed important work on the planet : Galle , Le Verrier , Lassell , Arago , and Adams . Neptune also has a faint unnamed ring coincident with the orbit of the moon Galatea . Three other moons orbit between the rings : Naiad , Thalassa and Despina . 
 The rings of Neptune are made of extremely dark material , likely organic compounds processed by radiation , similar to that found in the rings of Uranus . The proportion of dust in the rings ( between 20 % and 70 % ) is high , while their optical depth is low to moderate , at less than 0 @.@ 1 . Uniquely , the Adams ring includes five distinct arcs , named Fraternité , Égalité 1 and 2 , Liberté , and Courage . The arcs occupy a narrow range of orbital longitudes and are remarkably stable , having changed only slightly since their initial detection in 1980 . How the arcs are stabilized is still under debate . However , their stability is probably related to the resonant interaction between the Adams ring and its inner shepherd moon , Galatea . 
 = = Discovery and observations = = 
 The first mention of rings around Neptune dates back to 1846 when William Lassell , the discoverer of Neptune 's largest moon Triton , thought he had seen a ring around the planet . However , his claim was never confirmed and it is likely that it was an observational artifact . The first reliable detection of a ring was made in 1968 by stellar occultation , although that result would go unnoticed until 1977 when the rings of Uranus were discovered . Soon after the Uranus discovery , a team from Villanova University led by Harold J. <unk> began searching for rings around Neptune . On 24 May 1981 , they detected a dip in a star 's brightness during one occultation ; however , the manner in which the star dimmed did not suggest a ring . Later , after the Voyager fly @-@ by , it was found that the occultation was due to the small Neptunian moon Larissa , a highly unusual event . 
 In the 1980s , significant occultations were much rarer for Neptune than for Uranus , which lay near the Milky Way at the time and was thus moving against a denser field of stars . Neptune 's next occultation , on 12 September 1983 , resulted in a possible detection of a ring . However , ground @-@ based results were inconclusive . Over the next six years , approximately 50 other occultations were observed with only about one @-@ third of them yielding positive results . Something ( probably incomplete arcs ) definitely existed around Neptune , but the features of the ring system remained a mystery . The Voyager 2 spacecraft made the definitive discovery of the Neptunian rings during its fly @-@ by of Neptune in 1989 , passing by as close as 4 @,@ 950 km ( 3 @,@ 080 mi ) above the planet 's atmosphere on 25 August . It confirmed that occasional occultation events observed before were indeed caused by the arcs within the Adams ring ( see below ) . After the Voyager fly @-@ by the previous terrestrial occultation observations were reanalyzed yielding features of the ring 's arcs as they were in 1980s , which matched those found by Voyager almost perfectly . 
 Since Voyager 's fly @-@ by , the brightest rings ( Adams and Le Verrier ) have been imaged with the Hubble Space Telescope and Earth @-@ based telescopes , owing to advances in resolution and light @-@ gathering power . They are visible , slightly above background noise levels , at methane @-@ absorbed wavelengths in which the glare from Neptune is significantly reduced . The fainter rings are still far below the visibility threshold . 
 = = General properties = = 
 Neptune possesses five distinct rings named , in order of increasing distance from the planet , Galle , Le Verrier , Lassell , Arago and Adams . In addition to these well @-@ defined rings , Neptune may also possess an extremely faint sheet of material stretching inward from the Le Verrier to the Galle ring , and possibly farther in toward the planet . Three of the Neptunian rings are narrow , with widths of about 100 km or less ; in contrast , the Galle and Lassell rings are broad — their widths are between 2 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 km . The Adams ring consists of five bright arcs embedded in a fainter continuous ring . Proceeding counterclockwise , the arcs are : Fraternité , Égalité 1 and 2 , Liberté , and Courage . The first three names come from " liberty , equality , fraternity " , the motto of the French Revolution and Republic . The terminology was suggested by their original discoverers , who had found them during stellar occultations in 1984 and 1985 . Four small Neptunian moons have orbits inside the ring system : Naiad and Thalassa orbit in the gap between the Galle and Le Verrier rings ; Despina is just inward of the Le Verrier ring ; and Galatea lies slightly inward of the Adams ring , embedded in an unnamed faint , narrow ringlet . 
 The Neptunian rings contain a large quantity of micrometer @-@ sized dust : the dust fraction by cross @-@ section area is between 20 % and 70 % . In this respect they are similar to the rings of Jupiter , in which the dust fraction is 50 % – 100 % , and are very different from the rings of Saturn and Uranus , which contain little dust ( less than 0 @.@ 1 % ) . The particles in Neptune 's rings are made from a dark material ; probably a mixture of ice with radiation @-@ processed organics . The rings are reddish in color , and their geometrical ( 0 @.@ 05 ) and Bond ( 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 02 ) albedos are similar to those of the Uranian rings ' particles and the inner Neptunian moons . The rings are generally optically thin ( transparent ) ; their normal optical depths do not exceed 0 @.@ 1 . As a whole , the Neptunian rings resemble those of Jupiter ; both systems consist of faint , narrow , dusty ringlets and even fainter broad dusty rings . 
 The rings of Neptune , like those of Uranus , are thought to be relatively young ; their age is probably significantly less than that of the Solar System . Also , like those of Uranus , Neptune 's rings probably resulted from the collisional fragmentation of onetime inner moons . Such events create moonlet belts , which act as the sources of dust for the rings . In this respect the rings of Neptune are similar to faint dusty bands observed by Voyager 2 between the main rings of Uranus . 
 = = Inner rings = = 
 The innermost ring of Neptune is called the Galle ring after Johann Gottfried Galle , the first person to see Neptune through a telescope ( 1846 ) . It is about 2 @,@ 000 km wide and orbits 41 @,@ 000 – 43 @,@ 000 km from the planet . It is a faint ring with an average normal optical depth of around 10 − 4 , and with an equivalent depth of 0 @.@ 15 km . The fraction of dust in this ring is estimated from 40 % to 70 % . 
 The next ring is named the Le Verrier ring after Urbain Le Verrier , who predicted Neptune 's position in 1846 . With an orbital radius of about 53 @,@ 200 km , it is narrow , with a width of about 113 km . Its normal optical depth is 0 @.@ 0062 ± 0 @.@ 0015 , which corresponds to an equivalent depth of 0 @.@ 7 ± 0 @.@ 2 km . The dust fraction in the Le Verrier ring ranges from 40 % to 70 % . The small moon Despina , which orbits just inside of it at 52 @,@ 526 km , may play a role in the ring 's confinement by acting as a shepherd . 
 The Lassell ring , also known as the plateau , is the broadest ring in the Neptunian system . It is the namesake of William Lassell , the English astronomer who discovered Neptune 's largest moon , Triton . This ring is a faint sheet of material occupying the space between the Le Verrier ring at about 53 @,@ 200 km and the Arago ring at 57 @,@ 200 km . Its average normal optical depth is around 10 − 4 , which corresponds to an equivalent depth of 0 @.@ 4 km . The ring 's dust fraction is in the range from 20 % to 40 % . 
 There is a small peak of brightness near the outer edge of the Lassell ring , located at 57 @,@ 200 km from Neptune and less than 100 km wide , which some planetary scientists call the Arago ring after François Arago , a French mathematician , physicist , astronomer and politician . However , many publications do not mention the Arago ring at all . 
 = = Adams ring = = 
 The outer Adams ring , with an orbital radius of about 63 @,@ 930 km , is the best studied of Neptune 's rings . It is named after John Couch Adams , who predicted the position of Neptune independently of Le Verrier . This ring is narrow , slightly eccentric and inclined , with total width of about 35 km ( 15 – 50 km ) , and its normal optical depth is around 0 @.@ 011 ± 0 @.@ 003 outside the arcs , which corresponds to the equivalent depth of about 0 @.@ 4 km . The fraction of dust in this ring is from 20 % to 40 % — lower than in other narrow rings . Neptune 's small moon Galatea , which orbits just inside of the Adams ring at 61 @,@ 953 km , acts like a shepherd , keeping ring particles inside a narrow range of orbital radii through a 42 : 43 outer Lindblad resonance . Galatea 's gravitational influence creates 42 radial wiggles in the Adams ring with an amplitude of about 30 km , which have been used to infer Galatea 's mass . 
 = = = Arcs = = = 
 The brightest parts of the Adams ring , the ring arcs , were the first elements of Neptune 's ring system to be discovered . The arcs are discrete regions within the ring in which the particles that it comprises are mysteriously clustered together . The Adams ring is known to comprise five short arcs , which occupy a relatively narrow range of longitudes from 247 ° to 294 ° . In 1986 they were located between longitudes of : 
 247 – 257 ° ( Fraternité ) , 
 261 – 264 ° ( Égalité 1 ) , 
 265 – 266 ° ( Égalité 2 ) , 
 276 – 280 ° ( Liberté ) , 
 284 @.@ 5 – 285 @.@ 5 ° ( Courage ) . 
 The brightest and longest arc was Fraternité ; the faintest was Courage . The normal optical depths of the arcs are estimated to lie in the range 0 @.@ 03 – 0 @.@ 09 ( 0 @.@ 034 ± 0 @.@ 005 for the leading edge of Liberté arc as measured by stellar occultation ) ; the radial widths are approximately the same as those of the continuous ring — about 30 km . The equivalent depths of arcs vary in the range 1 @.@ 25 – 2 @.@ 15 km ( 0 @.@ 77 ± 0 @.@ 13 km for the leading edge of Liberté arc ) . The fraction of dust in the arcs is from 40 % to 70 % . The arcs in the Adams ring are somewhat similar to the arc in Saturn 's G ring . 
 The highest resolution Voyager 2 images revealed a pronounced clumpiness in the arcs , with a typical separation between visible clumps of 0 @.@ 1 ° to 0 @.@ 2 ° , which corresponds to 100 – 200 km along the ring . Because the clumps were not resolved , they may or may not include larger bodies , but are certainly associated with concentrations of microscopic dust as evidenced by their enhanced brightness when backlit by the Sun . 
 The arcs are quite stable structures . They were detected by ground @-@ based stellar occultations in the 1980s , by Voyager 2 in 1989 and by Hubble Space Telescope and ground @-@ based telescopes in 1997 – 2005 and remained at approximately the same orbital longitudes . However some changes have been noticed . The overall brightness of arcs decreased since 1986 . The Courage arc jumped forward by 8 ° to 294 ° ( it probably jumped over to the next stable co @-@ rotation resonance position ) while the Liberté arc had almost disappeared by 2003 . The Fraternité and Égalité ( 1 and 2 ) arcs have demonstrated irregular variations in their relative brightness . Their observed dynamics is probably related to the exchange of dust between them . Courage , a very faint arc found during the Voyager flyby , was seen to flare in brightness in 1998 ; it was back to its usual dimness by June 2005 . Visible light observations show that the total amount of material in the arcs has remained approximately constant , but they are dimmer in the infrared light wavelengths where previous observations were taken . 
 = = = Confinement = = = 
 The arcs in the Adams ring remain unexplained . Their existence is a puzzle because basic orbital dynamics imply that they should spread out into a uniform ring over a matter of years . Several theories about the arcs ' confinement have been suggested , the most widely publicized of which holds that Galatea confines the arcs via its 42 : 43 co @-@ rotational inclination resonance ( CIR ) . The resonance creates 84 stable sites along the ring 's orbit , each 4 ° long , with arcs residing in the adjacent sites . However measurements of the rings ' mean motion with Hubble and Keck telescopes in 1998 led to the conclusion that the rings are not in CIR with Galatea . 
 A later model suggested that confinement resulted from a co @-@ rotational eccentricity resonance ( CER ) . The model takes into account the finite mass of the Adams ring , which is necessary to move the resonance closer to the ring . A byproduct of this theory is a mass estimate for the Adams ring — about 0 @.@ 002 of the mass of Galatea . A third theory proposed in 1986 requires an additional moon orbiting inside the ring ; the arcs in this case are trapped in its stable Lagrangian points . However Voyager 2 's observations placed strict constraints on the size and mass of any undiscovered moons , making such a theory unlikely . Some other more complicated theories hold that a number of moonlets are trapped in co @-@ rotational resonances with Galatea , providing confinement of the arcs and simultaneously serving as sources of the dust . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 The rings were investigated in detail during the Voyager 2 spacecraft 's flyby of Neptune in August 1989 . They were studied with optical imaging , and through observations of occultations in ultraviolet and visible light . The <unk> observed the rings in different geometries relative to the Sun , producing images of back @-@ scattered , forward @-@ scattered and side @-@ scattered light . Analysis of these images allowed derivation of the phase function ( dependence of the ring 's reflectivity on the angle between the observer and Sun ) , and geometrical and Bond albedo of ring particles . Analysis of Voyager 's images also led to discovery of six inner moons of Neptune , including the Adams ring shepherd Galatea . 
 = = Properties = = 
 * A question mark means that the parameter is not known . 
 = Now You Know ( Desperate Housewives ) = 
 " Now You Know " is the fourth season premiere episode of the American comedy @-@ drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 71st episode overall . The episode premiered on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on September 30 , 2007 . It was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by Larry Shaw . 
 In the episode , Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) learns that she is expecting a child while Bree ( Marcia Cross ) continues to fake her own pregnancy . Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) begins an affair with her ex @-@ husband , Carlos ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) and Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) tries to conceal her cancer from her friends and children . The episode also introduces Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) , Susan 's old friend who returns to the neighborhood after being away for 12 years . 
 " Now You Know " drew over 19 million viewers , becoming the fourth most watched program of the week across all networks . Nevertheless , it was the least watched Desperate Housewives season premiere at the time . The episode received positive reviews from critics , who agreed that the episode showed significant improvement over the show 's third season . Critics also praised the addition of Delany to the cast . ABC and the show 's producers received viewer backlash due to an alleged slur against Filipino doctors included in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the residents living in the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . In previous episodes , Bree Hodge ( Marcia Cross ) sends her pregnant teenage daughter , Danielle ( Joy Lauren ) , to a convent and fakes her own pregnancy . Bree plans to raise Danielle 's child as her own . Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) is diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma . Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) and Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) marry while Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) breaks up with Edie Britt ( Nicollette Sheridan ) , leading her to seemingly hang herself . Gabrielle Solis ( Eva Longoria ) marries Mayor Victor Lang ( John Slattery ) ; however , after overhearing him confess that he only married her to secure the Latino vote for his potential candidacy in the election for governor , she seeks comfort with Carlos , her ex @-@ husband . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 Edie 's suicide attempt is revealed to be a ploy to manipulate Carlos into staying in their relationship ; however , when Carlos does not show up in time to rescue her , she almost dies . He brings her to the hospital and is forced to call off plans to run away with Gabrielle . 
 One month later , former Wisteria Lane resident Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) moves back to the neighborhood after twelve years of absence with her husband , Adam ( Nathan Fillion ) , and teenage daughter , Dylan ( Lyndsy Fonseca ) . Katherine had known Susan before moving away under mysterious circumstances . Susan 's daughter , Julie ( Andrea Bowen ) , is puzzled to learn that Dylan has no recollection of their childhood friendship or of her life on Wisteria Lane . Later , in a cryptic conversation , Adam asks Katherine if they made a mistake in moving back , and Katherine reminds him that they did not have a choice . 
 Lynette and her husband , Tom ( Doug Savant ) , have been keeping her cancer a secret from their children and friends . She wears a wig to hide her baldness from the chemotherapy . Muriel ( Julia Campbell ) , an uptight PTA mother , nags Lynette to organize a school event , forcing Lynette to reveal her illness to everyone . After recovering from her suicide attempt , Edie discovers that Carlos has $ 10 million in an offshore bank account . She promises he can trust her with the secret , just as she can trust him not to break her heart . Meanwhile , Victor confronts Gabrielle about her unwillingness to sell her house and commit to their marriage . Dissatisfied with their relationships , Carlos and Gabrielle reignite an affair . 
 Bree and her husband , Orson ( Kyle MacLachlan ) , find it increasingly difficult to stage her fake pregnancy . Their hoax is almost revealed at a neighborhood barbecue when a fork stabs her pregnancy stomach pads . Orson suggests coming clean to avoid the humiliation if their lies were to be discovered , but Bree tells him that this child is her second chance at successfully raising a child . Meanwhile , Susan worries that Mike is dissatisfied with their marriage , especially after Adam , her new gynecologist , reveals that she may be entering menopause . However , Adam later informs Susan that his earlier assessment was a mistake and that she is pregnant . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Now You Know " was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by Larry Shaw . The episode featured the debut of Dana Delany as Katherine Mayfair , a former Wisteria Lane resident who moves back to the neighborhood . Cherry describes the character as " a woman who was clearly different in the past ... an alpha female who goes up against all @-@ out women , especially Bree . " Cherry developed Katherine with the intention of making her " a character everyone loves to hate , " citing J. R. Ewing ( Larry Hagman ) from Dallas and Amanda Woodward ( Heather Locklear ) from Melrose Place as inspirations . Cherry ensured that character would have " a comedic point of view , " unlike the Betty Applewhite ( Alfre Woodard ) character from the series ' second season , stating : " In the second season we went to the mystery that was just kind of dark and stopped the action . [ This time ] we 're using humor , drama , pathos , everything [ the <unk> ] have to offer . " 
 Delany auditioned for the role of Bree for the series ' pilot episode in 2004 . Cherry offered her the role three times , but she rejected it , and Marcia Cross was hired soon after . Delany turned down the role because she believed the Bree character was too similar to her character on Pasadena . Cherry acknowledged that while Delany captured the slyness he had originally intended for the character , Cross ultimately became the better choice : " Marcia , who will be the first to tell you , ' I 'm not funny , I never get the joke , ' her Bree was kind of oblivious to her own <unk> . Interestingly enough , when we went forward with the show , it became a much funnier character than I envisioned . " While developing the Katherine character , Cherry immediately offered the role to Delany . " That 's unusual in Hollywood , " Delany commented . " Usually when you say ' no , ' they hold it against you for the rest of your career . I 've experienced that . " 
 Cherry offered Nathan Fillion the role of Katherine 's second husband , Adam . Fillion was asked to choose what type of doctor his character would be . He recalled , " I said I 'd be a gynecologist so I could interact with all the women . " Known mostly for his work in the sci @-@ fi genre , Fillion considered his role on Desperate Housewives a return to his roots , as he had acted on the soap opera One Life to Live earlier in his career . Tuc Watkins auditioned for the role and was cast as Bob Hunter on the series a few weeks later . Lyndsy Fonseca joined the cast as Katherine 's daughter , Dylan . Fonseca stated that her character 's mother keeps Dylan " on a rigorous schedule and a short leash . Almost like a dog . " 
 The episode continued Lynette 's cancer storyline , which Cherry intended to be both emotional and comical . He notes , " we established from very early on that she 's suffering from non @-@ Hodgkin 's lymphoma , so we never once let the audience think she 's going to die . It 's more about examining how your friends and family react to you when you 're sick . " " We don 't want to do some ridiculous she @-@ might @-@ die thing . That 's not our point in dealing with the disease . It was mostly to see what being sick does to you and the people around you . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Marcia Cross submitted this episode for consideration of her work for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards . She was placed in the Top 10 , but did not garner a nomination . 
 = = = Viewership and ratings = = = 
 According to ABC , " Now You Know " was watched by 19 @.@ 32 million viewers . It held a 12 @.@ 2 rating / 18 share , the night 's best rating across all networks , and placed as the fourth most @-@ watched program of the week , behind CSI on CBS , and Dancing with the Stars and Grey 's Anatomy on ABC . " Now You Know " was the least @-@ watched season premiere of Desperate Housewives at the time , drawing about five million fewer viewers than the third season premiere a year earlier , a 23 percent decrease in viewership . According to The New York Times , viewership was down due to an increase in DVR usage . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack praised the Bree storyline , calling its scenes the best of the episode . He was critical of the Lynette storyline and highlighted its implausibility , calling it " a cop @-@ out and just an excuse for drama . " However , he appreciated the scene in which Lynette reveals her cancer to her friends . Stack enjoyed the addition of the Mayfair family , stating that although he was not a fan of Delany 's acting , " seems perfect for this role and looks to be a choice adversary for Bree . " He also praised the set @-@ up for their mystery storyline . Stack was critical of the Edie character , opining : " She used to be funny and sexy , but now she 's just a big loon . " He dismissed Susan 's storyline as " lame " and deemed the character " obnoxious . " He also noted the significant absence of the Gabrielle character . Robert Bianco of USA Today declared that the show was " back in fine form . " He called the episode amusing , opining that the episode " launched a plethora of promising stories while introducing welcome new residents Dana Delany and Nathan Fillion . " TV Guide 's Matt Roush enjoyed the episode , complimenting the addition of the new cast members . Regarding the Katherine character , he wrote , " while she 's obviously harboring a dark secret , at least there 's no one trapped in the basement , " referencing the Betty Applewhite storyline from the second season . He identified the Susan and Mike storyline as problematic , as " She 's so annoying , and he 's so boring . " Roush also noted that Felicity Huffman was " making the most of her cancer storyline . " 
 = = = Filipino controversy = = = 
 Following the episode 's broadcast , the show 's producers and ABC were criticized for including an alleged racial slur in the episode . In the scene in which the Susan character is informed she may be entering menopause , she replies : " OK , before we go any further , can I check these diplomas ? Just to make sure they aren 't , like , from some med school in the Philippines ? " Viewers called ABC to complain and an online petition had gathered 30 @,@ 000 signatures by October 3 , 2007 , three days after the episode 's original broadcast . Several politicians and medical professionals of Filipino descent , including Health Secretary Francisco Duque III on Manila , condemned ABC for airing the line . On October 4 , ABC announced that the episode had been removed from online platforms in order for the line to be removed ; the line was also removed from future broadcasts and DVD productions of the episode . Nevertheless , network boycotts and other forms of protest continued . 
 = Wadsworth Jarrell = 
 Wadsworth Aikens Jarrell is an African @-@ American painter , sculptor and printmaker . Born in Albany , Georgia , he moved to Chicago , Illinois , where he attended the Art Institute of Chicago . After graduation , he became heavily involved in the local art scene and through his early work he explored the working life of blacks in Chicago and found influence in the sights and sounds of jazz music . In the late 1960s he opened WJ Studio and Gallery , where he , along with his wife , Jae , hosted regional artists and musicians . 
 Mid @-@ 1960s Chicago saw a rise in racial violence leading to the examination of race relations and black empowerment by local artists . Jarrell became involved in the Organization of Black American Culture , a group that would serve as a launching pad for the era 's black art movement . In 1967 , OBAC artists created the Wall of Respect , a mural in Chicago that depicted African American heroes and is credited with triggering the political mural movement in Chicago and beyond . In 1969 , Jarrell co @-@ founded AFRICOBRA : African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists . AFRICOBRA would become internationally acclaimed for their politically themed art and use of " coolade colors " in their paintings . 
 Jarrell 's career took him to Africa in 1977 , where he found inspiration in the Senufo people of Ivory Coast , Mali and Burkina Faso . Upon return to the United States he moved to Georgia and taught at the University of Georgia . In Georgia , he began to use a bricklayer 's trowel on his canvases , creating a textured appearance within his already visually active paintings . The figures often seen in his paintings are abstract and inspired by the masks and sculptures of Nigeria . These Nigerian arts have also inspired Jarrell 's totem sculptures . Living and working in Cleveland , Jarrell continues to explore the contemporary African American experience through his paintings , sculptures , and prints . His work is found in the collections of the National Museum of African American History and Culture , High Museum of Art , The Studio Museum in Harlem and the University of Delaware . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Jarrell was born in Albany , Georgia , in 1929 to Solomon Marcus and Tabitha Jarrell . Named after the poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , he was the youngest of six children . A year after Jarrell 's birth the family moved to a 28 @-@ acre farm near Athens , Georgia , where they grew vegetables and cotton . Jarrell 's father was a carpenter and furniture maker who had his own business , the S.M. Jarrell Furniture Store . All three Jarrell boys worked there , one of them learning to cane chairs . Their father 's artistic ability and mother 's skill as a quilt @-@ maker contributed to the entire family 's love for art . As a child , Jarrell first attended a one @-@ room schoolhouse where he was encouraged by his teacher , Jessie Lois Hall , to explore his artistic side . He then went to a private Baptist school starting in the seventh grade before transferring to Athens High in the tenth grade . In high school his talent for art was apparent as he started creating his own comic strip , cartoons for the school paper , and illustrations for sports events , finally taking up oil painting . As a young man interested in art during the late 1930s and early 1940s he learned about painting and illustration through magazines such as the Saturday Evening Post and Collier 's . Unable to figure out the distinction between illustration and painting , Jarrell thought " artists eventually got rich - but it was illustrators making the large sums of money . " 
 Jarrell 's relationship with his mother became closer once his father and one of his brothers left to work at a shipyard during World War II . His father died of malaria while working there . While in high school , Jarrell helped his mother tend the farm , but did not like the work . After graduating from high school , he joined the Army , was stationed at Fort Polk , Louisiana and served briefly in Korea . At Fort Polk he became company artist and made extra money designing shirts and making paintings for fellow soldiers . 
 = = = Higher education and current life = = = 
 After military service , Jarrell moved to Chicago where his sister Nellie attended Northwestern University . It was in Chicago where Jarrell would have his first museum experiences . Growing in up Georgia , African Americans were not allowed to visit museums until the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , therefore these early museum visits made a major impression on him . A year later he enrolled at the Art Institute of Chicago for advertising art and graphic design , where he attended night classes . His days were spent working at the International Paint company where he mixed paint . He also took classes at the Ray Vogue School for Commercial Arts . He began attending the Art Institute full @-@ time in 1954 . Jarrell eventually lost interest in commercial art and focused on classes about painting and drawing , gaining inspiration from instructor Laura McKinnon and her ideas about spatial relationship theory . In 1958 , he graduated with his original major ( s ) , retaining a strong desire to pursue the life of a fine artist . At this time he also met artist Jeff Donaldson , who became a friend who influenced his career . In 1959 , the year of his first marriage , he became an advertising photographer , taking photos of type and lettering styles . The couple would divorce shortly after the marriage . 
 In 1963 , Jarrell met Elaine Annette Johnson , known as Jae , who ran a clothing boutique , the woman who became his second wife on June 2 , 1967 . They spent their honeymoon in Nassau and on January 7 , 1968 , Wadsworth Jr. was born . During the pregnancy Jae closed her boutique and moved into Jarrell 's studio , running a mail order service instead . As the social and economic world of Chicago declined , gang violence threatened the family 's neighborhood . After their second child , Jennifer , was born the family decided to move to the New York area . In May 1971 , they made the move , first heading to Waterbury , Connecticut , then New Haven before spending three months in Boston . The family then moved to Washington , D.C. where Jarrell began teaching at Howard University in 1971 , recruited by Jeff Donaldson . At Howard he pursued his MFA , focusing on African culture , specifically the Senufo people . The couple would have another daughter , Roslyn Angela , in 1972 . S 
 Struggling to fit in at Howard , unable to make tenure , and with concerns about the increasing crime rates in Washington , in 1977 the family decided to move once again , this time to Athens , Georgia . Shortly after the move Jarrell became an assistant professor at the University of Georgia . He and his wife started a high @-@ end educational toy company that stemmed from their children 's love for similar toys when living in Washington , D.C .. They opened a small shop called Tadpole Toys and Hobby Center in Athens to great reception . However , as a result of poor sales in May 1982 they were forced to close it . Soon afterwards , Jarrell received tenure at the University . In 1988 , he retired from his position and from teaching as a whole in order to focus on his creative work . By 1994 all three children were grown ; the two daughters attended the Art Institute of Chicago , and Wadsworth Jr. became a seafarer . That year , Jae and daughter Jennifer moved to New York to find a place to live , settling in SoHo , where they were joined by Jarrell a few months later . Currently , Jarrell and Jae live and work in Cleveland , Ohio . 
 = = Artistic career = = 
 " Every year you are reminded of George Washington 's birthday ... my kids learn about this at school , but nothing is said about black heroes . If white Americans can engage in what I call repetitious advertising , then I feel justified in advertising for black Americans . " - Wadsworth Jarrell , 1978 
 = = = Chicago = = = 
 After graduation from the Art Institute , Jarrell lived off his wages from mixing paint and furthered his skills in his studio for a year . He started to submit his work to competitions , being accepted at the Chicago Show at the Navy Pier and the Union League Show . Jarrell produced artworks inspired by theories learned in school and scenes of everyday life in black Chicago . With an interest in horse racing , jazz clubs and bars , he often took a sketchpad on his explorations , eventually creating paintings like Neon Row ( 1958 ) , a street scene , Shamrock Inn ( 1962 ) , a bar scene , and The Jockeys # 1 ( 1962 ) , from a visit to a horse racing track . These themes would recur throughout his career . His early works display the " two @-@ dimensional illusionism " he learned in school : linear and geometric perspective with overlapping objects receding to a vanishing point on the horizon . Color is used to depict movement and stability , a contrast seen in Shamrock Inn and The Jockeys # 1 , however , Jarrell 's palette had evolved into brighter and bolder color combinations , at times contrasting in their final execution . The influence of post @-@ impressionism is evident in these earlier works , in line with art education trends at the time . 
 A notable turning point for his career came in 1963 when a watercolor ( similar to Jazz Giants # 1 ( 1962 ) ) was accepted for the Art Institute 's " 2nd Biennial Drawing , Watercolor and Print Exhibition . " The exhibit earned him prizes , media attention , and the opportunity to exhibit his work at other galleries throughout the Midwest . He moved to a large studio in the Hyde Park neighborhood and continued expanding on his work and focusing on musical and sport related themes . His pigment application became rapid , whether he was depicting a jazz musician or a jockey on his horse , allowing the image to express strong movement . <unk> ( 1965 ) shows the evolution of Jarrell 's work : intense color bands , swirls , and at times a psychedelic appearance to the bird in focus , a style that became a mainstay in his work . 
 Influenced by his honeymoon in the Caribbean , Jarrell became interested in the effects of man @-@ made and natural sunlight on the environment . Experimentation with pigments , media , imagery and design allowed him to create artworks that fully expressed his intended messages . Referring to works such as Nassau ( 1968 ) and Sign of the Times ( 1966 ) , Jarrell commented : " The colors of the Bahamas influenced my use of color and my approach to my work . " With Sign of the Times he shows a street scene , his first attempt at a painting involving social interaction . In 1968 , Jarrell became art director at Sander Line Graphics , only to quit shortly thereafter to become self @-@ employed . Aside from creating his art he also started a successful mail @-@ order photo processing business . Soon after Jarrell and Jae decided to open a gallery space below their studio : WJ Studio and Gallery . While the studio and gallery flourished , Jarrell taught part @-@ time art classes at Wadsworth Elementary School and considered moving to New York , seeking refuge in the heart of the art world . 
 = = = = Wall of Respect = = = = 
 In 1964 Chicago experienced two major race riots . Triggered by Civil Rights struggles and angst , more riots followed in subsequent years and the Black Power movement came into fruition . Artists began to explore ways to express black pride , self @-@ determination and self @-@ reliance leading in 1966 to the Organization of Black American Culture ( OBAC ) . Artist Norman Parish asked Jarrell to attend a meeting for OBAC 's Artists ' Workshop . The meetings would consist of artists bringing their work to be critiqued and reflect on ideas of the black experience in art , leading to the concept behind Wall of Respect . The mural consisted of African American heroes and personalities , each artist deciding who should be depicted in their section . Sylvia Abernathy designed the layout , giving Jarrell a 12 × 14 foot space to share with photographer Bill Abernathy . Jarrell focused on a favorite theme , rhythm and blues , and featured portrayals of James Brown , B.B. King , Billie Holiday , Muddy Waters , Aretha Franklin and Dinah Washington . The Artists ' Workshop would sour towards the end of the project : there were controversies stemming from the painting in Norman Parish 's section , conflicts regarding copyrights being sold without permission , disagreements on law enforcement involvement , as well as deceit . Nevertheless the Wall was considered a success , triggering the creation of liberation themed murals in Chicago and beyond . 
 = = = = WJ Studio and Gallery = = = = 
 In 1968 , Jarrell and his wife opened WJ Studio and Gallery , below their home and studio . The space not only showcased the couple 's work and that of other artists but went on to display the talents of Chicago poets and musicians . Jarrell 's love for blues and jazz music made it easy for him to access the city 's talent and his involvement with OCAC provided him with contacts in the poetry world . Artists such as <unk> Richard Abrams , John Stubblefield , Henry Threadgill , Anthony Braxton and the Chicago Art Ensemble would perform at the space . The gallery also served as a gathering place for the likes of Jeff Donaldson , Barbara Jones @-@ <unk> , Gerald Williams and others , who would come to discuss concepts of a relevant black art aesthetic . The group struggled : Jarrell described the search as an attempt to find " a collective concept that would say ' black art ' at a glance . " Eventually , the group made a breakthrough while listing principles and ideas regarding the concept of black art ; the term " coolade colors " was contributed by a fabric designer . The term covered the bright fashion of stylish African American men of the time , which Jarrell described as " loud lime , pimp yellows , hot pinks , high @-@ key color clothing . " The final concept for their aesthetic search would be message oriented art , revolving around socially aware content . African design would be included and meaningfulness for black people would be a necessity . This group 's formation would be considered one of the best aligned and organized collectives in the Black Arts Movement . This group went on to form COBRA . 
 = = = = COBRA and the black aesthetic = = = = 
 Like many African American grass roots organizations , Jarrell 's gallery group struggled to carry the torch after the deaths of Martin Luther King , Jr. and Malcolm X. Jarrell and his fellow Chicago artists took the path of non @-@ violence by way of their artistic talents and a sense of ownership through their contributions at WJ Studio and Gallery . With these ideals backing them and their new aesthetic philosophy , the group took on the name COBRA – Coalition of Black Revolutionary Artists . With the creation of COBRA , Jarrell completed his first work that conceptualized the concept behind the group , Black Family ( 1969 ) , which utilized the color scheme of the coolade colors such as light blue and orange contrasting with white areas , which heightened the bright colors ' intensity . This technique allowed Jarrell to create what he described as an " intuitive space , " drawing the viewer 's attention towards the family on the canvas : a caring mother , protective father and two relaxed children . With a father depicting strength and honesty , and what Robert Douglas describes as a " heroic quality , " to the painting , Jarrell expresses important aspects of the COBRA ideal . Writing also appears on the canvas , with the word " blackness " represented by the letter B. The group decided to go from focusing on themed exhibitions to encouraging artworks that " portray the general problems of black people or attempt to visualize some solutions to them . " 
 = = = = AFRICOBRA 's beginnings = = = = 
 " AFRICOBRA artists are visual griots of the African American community , an imagery that illuminates the beauty and glory of the Africans ' experience in the West . They present to us an iconography bestowed on them by the pressing and always exciting culture of the African American . " - Larry Neal 
 In 1969 , COBRA revised their philosophy and artistic concept to expand their concern for black liberation and civil rights on an international level . Inspired by the words of Malcolm X , " All black people , regardless of their land base , have the same problems , the control of their land and economics by Europeans or Euro @-@ Americans . " , they changed their name to <unk> : African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists . Jarrell 's work had evolved to bring the focus figure to the foreground of his paintings , as seen in <unk> Lester ( 1970 ) , a portrait of musician Lester Lashley . Letters make another appearance : D ( down ) , B ( black ) , F ( fine ) and Q ( question ) . The work is described as a " humanistic portrayal of the genius of Africans in the creation of jazz . " Other works by Jarrell at the time became politically and socially charged with the aesthetics put forth by <unk> . Homage to a Giant ( 1970 ) is Jarrell 's first tribute to Malcolm X. This work is used by Jarrell to speak for the black struggle against oppression and the death of student protestors fighting for that cause . Four images of Malcolm X are painted alongside those of Huey Newton , Jesse Jackson and <unk> Carmichael . " B " makes its usual appearance representing " blackness " and " badness " as well as a quote from Ossie Davis 's eulogy at Malcolm 's funeral . This piece , along with <unk> Lester , appeared in AFRI @-@ COBRA 's first exhibition in 1970 at the Studio Museum in Harlem : " AFRI @-@ COBRA I : Ten in Search of a Nation . " The response to the show was one of misunderstanding by many viewers , with the result that the concepts presented were interpreted as " protest art . " 
 " AFRICOBRA II " was held in 1971 at the Studio Museum in Harlem before it traveled to five other museums and galleries . Jarrell exhibited Revolutionary and Black Prince ( both 1971 ) at the show . These two portraits are described by art historian Robert Douglas as displaying " Jarrell 's masterful understanding of portraiture , rendered through a chiaroscuro technique employing a multitude of meticulously painted B 's in different sizes and coolade hues . " Revolutionary is a homage to Angela Davis . She wears a Revolutionary Suit that was designed by Jae Jarrell for the AFRICOBRA II exhibition . Prints were made of the work . However , in the original , the cartridge belt is attached to the canvas , an idea of Jae 's . The words " love " , " black " , " nation " , " time " , " rest " , " full of shit " , " revolution " , and " beautiful " burst out of her head on the canvas . The message " I have given my life in the struggle . If I have to lose my life , that is the way it will be , " travels down her chest and left arm . " B " , as usual , represents " blackness " " bad " and in this painting " beautiful " . The work epitomizes the goal by AFRICOBRA artists to use all space possible in their creations , described as " jam @-@ packed and jelly tight . " Revolutionary was reviewed by Nancy Tobin Willig as " a portrait of a young black woman screaming slogans – with a <unk> loaded with real bullets slung over her shoulder . Jarrell 's painting is an overstatement . It is not art as the weapon . It is the weapon as art . " Black Prince is Jarrell 's second tribute to Malcolm X. " B " appears in the painting , as well as " P " ; " <unk> " and " BLACK " which travel throughout Malcolm 's face and hand . The quote " I believe in anything necessary to correct unjust conditions , political , economic , social , physical . Anything necessary as long as it gets results , " is painted across his chest and arm . Their second show , " AFRICOBRA III " , opened in 1973 . Critics were more aware of the aesthetic and movement at this show ; critic Paul Richard commented that the works of Nelson Stevens , Jeff Donaldson and Jarrell " together contradict something I have long believed : that art that is so blatantly political is not art at all . " 
 = = = Out east = = = 
 Despite the offers for a position he received from Jeff Donaldson , who was running Howard University 's art department , Jarrell sought to remain independent and the family moved to New York . Jarrell obtained work as a photographer in Boston , eventually choosing to accept Donaldson 's offer , moving the family in time for Jarrell to teach photography classes during the fall semester . During this time " AFRICOBRA II " traveled to Howard and Jarrell exhibited Together We Will Win ( 1973 ) , showing black " warriors , " children , women and workers " offering solutions to African people 's problems , " and Liberation Soldiers , ( 1972 ) , depicting the Black Panthers . Both works included the use of aluminum and gold foil glued to the canvas . In 1973 the final AFRICOBRA show , " AFRICOBRA III " was held . However , members still continued to meet and practice the ideals put forward by the group . 
 = = = = African influences = = = = 
 Jarrell 's studies of African art and the Senufo people appeared as a major influence during the mid @-@ 1970s . Paintings such as Prophecy , <unk> and <unk> depict human figures that appear blended with Senufo sculptures . <unk> ( 1974 ) shows a seated woodcarver , holding a staff he works on , appearing to be made of wood himself . He wears clothing of and is surrounded by coolade colors . The face is that of Jarrell 's father , manipulated into a Senufo sculptural style . In the triptych Prophecy Jarrell shows African women as Senufo figures holding sculptures of the Yoruba deity Shango , and is described as " jam @-@ packed " with imagery , making it hard to decipher in a short time . 
 In winter of 1977 Jarrell and Jae visited Lagos , Nigeria , as part of the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture , making this the couple 's first international exhibition . Other AFRICOBRA members journeyed there as well . Jarrell was influenced heavily by the bronze lost @-@ wax castings of Benin and the woodcarving and textile arts of <unk> , which he believed solidified the mission of AFRI @-@ COBRA 's symbolic work through " intuitive space . " Jarrell also revisited his passion for horse racing , attending the Grand Durbar in Kaduna . On Jarrell 's return , AFRI @-@ COBRA formed their next show " AFRI @-@ COBRA / <unk> " ; <unk> inferring " black world " in Mandinka . The exhibit , at the African American Museum in Philadelphia , featured two works by Jarrell created as a response to his journey to Africa : Mojo Workin and Soweto ( both 1977 ) . Mojo Workin featured a contribution from his then six @-@ year @-@ old eldest daughter , Jennifer . She created the drawing The Magic Lady and with Jarrell 's painting it was believed that mojo was expressed when others encountered the work . This is one of the first times Jarrell uses a stained canvas . Soweto reflects the struggles of African people , specifically those suffering from the apartheid in South Africa . The painting is named after the city of Soweto , where a massacre of students occurred in 1976 . Continuing to be inspired by his travels to Nigeria , Jarrell completed the work Zulu Sunday which was created to express similarities between African Americans and Nigerians through a celebration of a Sunday afternoon social affair . The painting shows Zulus dressed in ornate traditional dress , socializing on the street , unified by a sunburst . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 In 1977 the <unk> moved from Washington , D.C. to Athens , Georgia . With his children getting older and the couple 's toy company struggling to stay afloat , Jarrell became assistant professor at the University of Georgia . His position at the university assured him studio space . In 1979 he had two solo shows and participated in three AFRICOBRA exhibitions . His work continued to be socially and politically aware with paintings like Festival # 1 ( 1978 ) showing brilliant Senufo figures , a work supporting South Africans at war . African imagery became more apparent in his paintings with zigzag patterns and lizards appearing , representing " that Africans , as the first people , have the right to speak on their own behalf , " as seen in Midnight Poet at 125th Street & Lenox ( 1979 ) . In 1979 Jarrell received grant money to create a 52 x 31 foot mural at the East Athens Community Center . A team of art students helped Jarrell and Jae to complete the work , titled Ascension , which remains in Athens today . 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s Jarrell was being represented by the Fay Gold Gallery in Atlanta . In 1984 the family moved to Atlanta when Jae accepted a teaching position at The Lovett School . Jarrell continued to commute to Athens to teach . The move to Atlanta provided more income for the family while allowing Jarrell to sell more work and spark relationships with potential customers , galleries and museums in the region . Jarrell became the painting professor for the University 's Studies Abroad Program in 1986 . For two months he lived in Cortona , Italy with Jae and his two daughters , while Wadsworth Jr. remained in Atlanta finishing high school . The opportunity allowed him to explore the country , visiting historic sites throughout Italy and the Venice Biennale . Upon his return he was promoted to full professor at the university in February 1987 , but he resigned in 1988 . 
 During the 1990s Jarrell continued to explore aspects of black life in his paintings . Dudes on the Street ( 1991 ) is a depiction of black life in the city ; two cartoon @-@ like men and two women stand on the street with an expired parking meter next to them . The background features a ribs restaurant and a record shop , with coolade colors drenching the entire landscape . Robert Douglas compared the piece to Chicken Shack by Archibald Motley , stating " both artists have fulfilled the mission of celebrating black life . " Two paintings about boxing were created during this time as well : Stride of a Legend / Tribute to Papa Tall , a tribute to Muhammad Ali and textile designer Papa Tall of Senegal , and The Champion ( 1991 ) a portrayal Evander Holyfield . 
 = = = = Horse racing revisited = = = = 
 While in Georgia Jarrell revisited his interest in horse racing . He became interested in African American jockeys , creating the paintings The Jocks # 2 ( 1981 ) and Master Tester ( 1981 ) and Homage to Isaac Murphy ( 1981 ) . The Jocks # 2 is a group portrait of James " Soup " Perkins , William Walker , Jimmy <unk> and Isaac Murphy . The figures appear like a Kemetic wall painting with hints of green and light blue . At the center is Isaac Murphy , a legendary jockey of the Kentucky Derby , wearing a glowing crown . A full tribute to Murphy is seen in Homage to Isaac Murphy , a large polyptych consisting of four canvasses . Cut out leaf motifs are adhered to the canvas and applied with acrylic stains , which make the motif 's appear as negative space on the surface of the painting . Zigzags are prominent , a lizard appears to represent speed , a lawn jockey , and the dates of Murphy 's wins , titles and horse names are at the top . The painting is finished with a stylized portrait of Murphy and cowry shells are glued to the canvas representing the money won by Murphy during his career . Master Tester is an abstract of horse trainer Marshall Lilly , riding a horse , wearing a derby hat . In 1993 Jarrell would have a solo show , titled " Edge Cutters , " at the Kentucky Derby Museum in Lexington , Kentucky . 
 = = = = The bricklayer 's trowel & jazz tributes = = = = 
 In December 1982 Jarrell was commissioned by Westinghouse Electric Company to create a three @-@ hundred @-@ foot mural in their Athens headquarters , to boost the morale of the employees . The mural was the first time he used a bricklayer 's trowel in his work , a tool introduced to him by <unk> Cowans . The Apple Birds and The Return of the Apple Birds , from 1983 , show his dramatic use of the trowel . The paintings were inspired by a drawing by his daughter , Jennifer , at the age of two . The Apple Birds were drawn by and talked about by Jennifer as having apple @-@ shaped heads with stems at the top , long arms and short bodies . Zigzags , geometric shapes and layers make up the environment that the Apple Birds live in on the canvas . The trowel is used throughout to create 3 @-@ D layers and overlaps . 
 Jarrell created many jazz tributes starting in the 1980s . Cookin ' n Smokin ' ( 1986 ) is a tribute to jazz musician Oscar Peterson , who is shown playing piano with a sunburst design around his head . To the left of Peterson is bass player Ray Brown . Both figures have large heads , their faces have exaggerated features similar to African masks , and are described as being " midpoint between naturalism and abstraction " by Robert Douglas . The trowel is used throughout to blend color . Jazz Giants ( 1987 ) , another jazz tribute , shows Dizzy Gillespie , Harry Carney , Johnny Hodges and Cootie Williams performing . Leaf patterns and circles common in Jarrell 's work are seen throughout . The trowel is used to create recognizable portraits of the musicians , with the paint on a white background appearing as if a woodcut . Priestess ( 1988 ) depicts another jazz icon , Nina Simone , who appears twice - playing piano and singing solo , backed by a band . 1979 's I Remember Bill is a memorial to Jarrell 's friend guitarist Bill Harris , originally of The <unk> . Jarrell occasionally traveled with Harris , hanging his paintings behind Harris as he performed . The painting is a large mixed @-@ media polyptych of shaped canvas , and a painted six @-@ stringed guitar sits on the top of the work . The painting features glued on photographs of Harris and two painted portraits of the musician , surrounded by Jarrell 's signature symbols , designs and patterns . 
 Other works include : Corners of Jazz ( 1988 ) , a large mural featuring Ray Charles , Lester Young , and Billie Holiday , Shon <unk> ( 1989 ) , featuring Ray Charles , At the Three Deuces ( 1991 ) with Miles Davis , Charlie Parker and Sam Potter , Basie at the Apollo ( 1992 ) with Count Basie 's orchestra , The Empress ( 1992 ) for Bessie Smith , and Lady & Prez # 2 , showing Holiday and Young performing together . 
 = = = Sculpture = = = 
 Inspired by his trip to Italy , Jarrell created the sculpture Tribute to <unk> Bellows , a conical @-@ shaped painted tribute to the <unk> people , which would be the basis for a new shift in his work , towards sculpture . The new works would be categorized by their heavy spiritual nature , reflective of African culture and heritage . Hausa Space - a Village ( 1993 ) represents the villages Jarrell visited in Nigeria . The houses that he saw were decorated with icons and symbols of spiritual and ritual meaning , painted in bright colors . These decorations are used to fight evil spirits , while Jarrell 's pieces speak for peace . Many of the sculptures blend elements of African art and design ; Sorcerer ( 1993 ) and Messenger of Information ( 1993 ) show his earlier influences from Senufo art and other inspirations related to the design , spirituality and people of Africa . Totem – like sculptures began to be created in 1995 . The three sculptures making up the Ensemble series ( 1995 ) each stand over five feet tall and are painted with brilliant colors , topped off with a small animal . For the first time , in Days of the Kings ( 1995 ) , horse racing appears in Jarrell 's sculptures . Sixteen totems serve as tributes to African Americans in horse racing , reminiscent of the designs of the <unk> and Alberto Giacometti . Epiphany ( 1996 ) memorializes the Million Man March , held in Washington , D.C. the previous year , an event that Jarrell described as one of the most important of that century . This piece , and other works , were later exhibited at the 1996 Summer Olympics . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Dr. Stacy Morgan , association professor in the department of American Studies at the University of Alabama , describes Jarrell 's work as " a remarkable body of vibrant , stylistically innovative and politically engaged art . " 
 = = Notable awards = = 
 First prize , 1988 , Atlanta Life Invitational Exhibition , Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art 
 Cover , 1985 , Art Papers 
 Excellence in painting award , 1985 , Southern Home Shows Exposition 
 Award , 1974 , District of Columbia Commission on the Arts 
 Artist @-@ in @-@ Residence , 1974 , District of Columbia Public Schools 
 = = Notable exhibitions = = 
 = = = Solo exhibitions = = = 
 Edge Cutters . 1993 , Kentucky Derby Museum . 
 Large Format . 1987 , Southwest Atlanta Hospital . 
 Paintings and Sculptures , Wadsworth Jarrell . 1987 , Albany Museum of Art . 
 The Power and the Glory . 1979 , University of Georgia . 
 Going Home . , 1976 , Howard University . 
 = = = Group exhibitions = = = 
 AFRI @-@ COBRA : No Middle Ground . 1992 , Museum of Science and Industry , Chicago , Illinois . 
 Twelfth Annual Atlanta Life Invitational Exhibition . 1992 , Herndon Plaza , Atlanta . 
 Vital Signs . 1991 , Atlanta Contemporary Art Center . 
 AFRI @-@ COBRA : The First Twenty Years . 1990 , Florida A & M University . 
 Horse Flesh . 1990 , Kentucky Derby Museum . 
 Beaches Annual Exhibition . 1989 , Museum of Contemporary Art Jacksonville . 
 Artists in Georgia 1988 . , 1988 Atlanta Contemporary Art Center . 
 The Art in Atlanta . 1988 , Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art . 
 Birmingham Biennial . 1987 , Birmingham Museum of Art . 
 AFRICOBRA USA . 1987 , <unk> Gallery , Fort @-@ de @-@ France , Martinique . 
 Ot Och In . 1986 , Malmö konstmuseum . 
 Artists in Georgia . 1985 , Georgia Museum of Art . 
 Atlanta in France . 1985 , Chapelle de la Sorbonne . 
 U.S.A. Volta Del Sud . 1985 , Palazzo Venezia . 
 Commemoration to Soweto . AFRI @-@ COBRA , 1980 , United Nations Headquarters . 
 Directions and Dimensions . 1980 , Mississippi Museum of Natural Science . 
 Artists in Georgia . 1980 , High Museum of Art . 
 Artists in Schools . 1976 , Delaware Art Museum . 
 Directions in Afro @-@ American Art. 1974 , Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art . 
 = = Notable collections = = 
 High Museum of Art 
 Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia 
 National Museum of African American History and Culture 
 Nortel 
 The Studio Museum in Harlem 
 University of Delaware 
 = Injection moulding = 
 Injection moulding is a manufacturing process for producing parts by injecting material into a mould . Injection moulding can be performed with a host of materials , including metals , ( for which the process is called <unk> ) , glasses , <unk> , confections , and most commonly thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers . Material for the part is fed into a heated barrel , mixed , and forced into a mould cavity , where it cools and hardens to the configuration of the cavity . After a product is designed , usually by an industrial designer or an engineer , moulds are made by a <unk> ( or <unk> ) from metal , usually either steel or aluminum , and precision @-@ machined to form the features of the desired part . Injection moulding is widely used for manufacturing a variety of parts , from the smallest components to entire body panels of cars . Advances in 3D printing technology , using <unk> which do not melt during the injection moulding of some lower temperature thermoplastics , can be used for some simple injection moulds . 
 Parts to be injection moulded must be very carefully designed to facilitate the moulding process ; the material used for the part , the desired shape and features of the part , the material of the mould , and the properties of the moulding machine must all be taken into account . The versatility of injection moulding is facilitated by this breadth of design considerations and possibilities . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Injection moulding is used to create many things such as wire spools , packaging , bottle caps , automotive parts and components , <unk> , pocket combs , some musical instruments ( and parts of them ) , one @-@ piece chairs and small tables , storage containers , mechanical parts ( including gears ) , and most other plastic products available today . Injection moulding is the most common modern method of manufacturing plastic parts ; it is ideal for producing high volumes of the same object . 
 = = Process characteristics = = 
 Injection moulding uses a ram or screw @-@ type plunger to force molten plastic material into a mould cavity ; this solidifies into a shape that has conformed to the contour of the mould . It is most commonly used to process both thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers , with the volume used of the former being considerably higher . Thermoplastics are prevalent due to characteristics which make them highly suitable for injection moulding , such as the ease with which they may be recycled , their versatility allowing them to be used in a wide variety of applications , and their ability to soften and flow upon heating . Thermoplastics also have an element of safety over thermosets ; if a thermosetting polymer is not ejected from the injection barrel in a timely manner , chemical crosslinking may occur causing the screw and check valves to seize and potentially damaging the injection moulding machine . 
 Injection moulding consists of high pressure injection of the raw material into a mould which shapes the polymer into the desired shape . Moulds can be of a single cavity or multiple cavities . In multiple cavity moulds , each cavity can be identical and form the same parts or can be unique and form multiple different geometries during a single cycle . Moulds are generally made from tool steels , but stainless steels and aluminum moulds are suitable for certain applications . Aluminum moulds typically are ill @-@ suited for high volume production or parts with narrow dimensional tolerances , as they have inferior mechanical properties and are more prone to wear , damage , and deformation during the injection and clamping cycles ; however , aluminum moulds are cost @-@ effective in low @-@ volume applications , as mould fabrication costs and time are considerably reduced . Many steel moulds are designed to process well over a million parts during their lifetime and can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars to fabricate . 
 When thermoplastics are moulded , typically <unk> raw material is fed through a hopper into a heated barrel with a reciprocating screw . Upon entrance to the barrel the temperature increases and the Van der Waals forces that resist relative flow of individual chains are weakened as a result of increased space between molecules at higher thermal energy states . This process reduces its viscosity , which enables the polymer to flow with the driving force of the injection unit . The screw delivers the raw material forward , mixes and <unk> the thermal and viscous distributions of the polymer , and reduces the required heating time by mechanically shearing the material and adding a significant amount of frictional heating to the polymer . The material feeds forward through a check valve and collects at the front of the screw into a volume known as a shot . A shot is the volume of material that is used to fill the mould cavity , compensate for shrinkage , and provide a cushion ( approximately 10 % of the total shot volume , which remains in the barrel and prevents the screw from bottoming out ) to transfer pressure from the screw to the mould cavity . When enough material has gathered , the material is forced at high pressure and velocity into the part forming cavity . To prevent spikes in pressure , the process normally uses a transfer position corresponding to a 95 – 98 % full cavity where the screw shifts from a constant velocity to a constant pressure control . Often injection times are well under 1 second . Once the screw reaches the transfer position the packing pressure is applied , which completes mould filling and compensates for thermal shrinkage , which is quite high for thermoplastics relative to many other materials . The packing pressure is applied until the gate ( cavity entrance ) solidifies . Due to its small size , the gate is normally the first place to solidify through its entire thickness . Once the gate solidifies , no more material can enter the cavity ; accordingly , the screw reciprocates and acquires material for the next cycle while the material within the mould cools so that it can be ejected and be dimensionally stable . This cooling duration is dramatically reduced by the use of cooling lines circulating water or oil from an external temperature controller . Once the required temperature has been achieved , the mould opens and an array of pins , sleeves , strippers , etc. are driven forward to <unk> the article . Then , the mould closes and the process is repeated . 
 For a two shot mold , two separate materials are incorporated into one part . This type of injection molding is used to add a soft touch to knobs , to give a product multiple colors , to produce a part with multiple performance characteristics . 
 For thermosets , typically two different chemical components are injected into the barrel . These components immediately begin irreversible chemical reactions which eventually crosslinks the material into a single connected network of molecules . As the chemical reaction occurs , the two fluid components permanently transform into a viscoelastic solid . Solidification in the injection barrel and screw can be problematic and have financial repercussions ; therefore , minimizing the thermoset curing within the barrel is vital . This typically means that the residence time and temperature of the chemical precursors are minimized in the injection unit . The residence time can be reduced by minimizing the barrel 's volume capacity and by maximizing the cycle times . These factors have led to the use of a thermally isolated , cold injection unit that injects the reacting chemicals into a thermally isolated hot mould , which increases the rate of chemical reactions and results in shorter time required to achieve a solidified thermoset component . After the part has solidified , valves close to isolate the injection system and chemical precursors , and the mould opens to eject the moulded parts . Then , the mould closes and the process repeats . 
 Pre @-@ moulded or machined components can be inserted into the cavity while the mould is open , allowing the material injected in the next cycle to form and solidify around them . This process is known as Insert moulding and allows single parts to contain multiple materials . This process is often used to create plastic parts with protruding metal screws , allowing them to be fastened and <unk> repeatedly . This technique can also be used for In @-@ mould labelling and film lids may also be attached to moulded plastic containers . 
 A parting line , sprue , gate marks , and ejector pin marks are usually present on the final part . None of these features are typically desired , but are unavoidable due to the nature of the process . Gate marks occur at the gate which joins the melt @-@ delivery channels ( sprue and runner ) to the part forming cavity . Parting line and ejector pin marks result from minute <unk> , wear , gaseous vents , clearances for adjacent parts in relative motion , and / or dimensional differences of the mating surfaces contacting the injected polymer . Dimensional differences can be attributed to non @-@ uniform , pressure @-@ induced deformation during injection , machining tolerances , and non @-@ uniform thermal expansion and contraction of mould components , which experience rapid cycling during the injection , packing , cooling , and ejection phases of the process . Mould components are often designed with materials of various coefficients of thermal expansion . These factors cannot be simultaneously accounted for without astronomical increases in the cost of design , fabrication , processing , and quality monitoring . The skillful mould and part designer will position these aesthetic <unk> in hidden areas if feasible . 
 = = History = = 
 American inventor John Wesley Hyatt together with his brother Isaiah , Hyatt patented the first injection moulding machine in 1872 . This machine was relatively simple compared to machines in use today : it worked like a large hypodermic needle , using a plunger to inject plastic through a heated cylinder into a mould . The industry progressed slowly over the years , producing products such as collar stays , buttons , and hair combs . 
 The German chemists Arthur Eichengrün and Theodore Becker invented the first soluble forms of cellulose acetate in 1903 , which was much less flammable than cellulose nitrate . It was eventually made available in a powder form from which it was readily injection moulded . Arthur Eichengrün developed the first injection moulding press in 1919 . In 1939 , Arthur Eichengrün patented the injection molding of plasticized cellulose acetate . 
 The industry expanded rapidly in the 1940s because World War II created a huge demand for inexpensive , mass @-@ produced products . In 1946 , American inventor James Watson Hendry built the first screw injection machine , which allowed much more precise control over the speed of injection and the quality of articles produced . This machine also allowed material to be mixed before injection , so that colored or recycled plastic could be added to virgin material and mixed thoroughly before being injected . Today screw injection machines account for the vast majority of all injection machines . In the 1970s , Hendry went on to develop the first gas @-@ assisted injection moulding process , which permitted the production of complex , hollow articles that cooled quickly . This greatly improved design flexibility as well as the strength and finish of manufactured parts while reducing production time , cost , weight and waste . 
 The plastic injection moulding industry has evolved over the years from producing combs and buttons to producing a vast array of products for many industries including automotive , medical , aerospace , consumer products , toys , plumbing , packaging , and construction . 
 = = Examples of polymers best suited for the process = = 
 Most polymers , sometimes referred to as resins , may be used , including all thermoplastics , some thermosets , and some <unk> . Since 1995 , the total number of available materials for injection moulding has increased at a rate of 750 per year ; there were approximately 18 @,@ 000 materials available when that trend began . Available materials include alloys or blends of previously developed materials , so product designers can choose the material with the best set of properties from a vast selection . Major criteria for selection of a material are the strength and function required for the final part , as well as the cost , but also each material has different parameters for moulding that must be taken into account . Common polymers like epoxy and phenolic are examples of thermosetting plastics while nylon , polyethylene , and polystyrene are thermoplastic . Until comparatively recently , plastic springs were not possible , but advances in polymer properties make them now quite practical . Applications include buckles for anchoring and disconnecting outdoor @-@ equipment webbing . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Injection moulding machines consist of a material hopper , an injection ram or screw @-@ type plunger , and a heating unit . Also known as presses , they hold the moulds in which the components are shaped . Presses are rated by tonnage , which expresses the amount of clamping force that the machine can exert . This force keeps the mould closed during the injection process . Tonnage can vary from less than 5 tons to over 9 @,@ 000 tons , with the higher figures used in comparatively few manufacturing operations . The total clamp force needed is determined by the projected area of the part being moulded . This projected area is multiplied by a clamp force of from 1 @.@ 8 to 7 @.@ 2 tons for each square centimeter of the projected areas . As a rule of thumb , 4 or 5 tons / in2 can be used for most products . If the plastic material is very stiff , it will require more injection pressure to fill the mould , and thus more clamp tonnage to hold the mould closed . The required force can also be determined by the material used and the size of the part ; larger parts require higher clamping force . 
 = = = Mould = = = 
 Mould or die are the common terms used to describe the tool used to produce plastic parts in moulding . 
 Since moulds have been expensive to manufacture , they were usually only used in mass production where thousands of parts were being produced . Typical moulds are constructed from hardened steel , pre @-@ hardened steel , aluminum , and / or beryllium @-@ copper alloy . The choice of material to build a mould from is primarily one of economics ; in general , steel moulds cost more to construct , but their longer lifespan will offset the higher initial cost over a higher number of parts made before wearing out . Pre @-@ hardened steel moulds are less wear @-@ resistant and are used for lower volume requirements or larger components ; their typical steel hardness is 38 – 45 on the Rockwell @-@ C scale . Hardened steel moulds are heat treated after machining ; these are by far superior in terms of wear resistance and lifespan . Typical hardness ranges between 50 and 60 Rockwell @-@ C ( HRC ) . Aluminum moulds can cost substantially less , and when designed and machined with modern computerized equipment can be economical for moulding tens or even hundreds of thousands of parts . Beryllium copper is used in areas of the mould that require fast heat removal or areas that see the most shear heat generated . The moulds can be manufactured either by CNC machining or by using electrical discharge machining processes . 
 Injection moulding die with side pulls 
 = = = = Mould design = = = = 
 The mould consists of two primary components , the injection mould ( A plate ) and the ejector mould ( B plate ) . These components are also referred to as moulder and <unk> . Plastic resin enters the mould through a sprue or gate in the injection mould ; the sprue bushing is to seal tightly against the nozzle of the injection barrel of the moulding machine and to allow molten plastic to flow from the barrel into the mould , also known as the cavity . The sprue bushing directs the molten plastic to the cavity images through channels that are machined into the faces of the A and B plates . These channels allow plastic to run along them , so they are referred to as runners . The molten plastic flows through the runner and enters one or more specialized gates and into the cavity geometry to form the desired part . 
 The amount of resin required to fill the sprue , runner and cavities of a mould comprises a " shot " . Trapped air in the mould can escape through air vents that are ground into the parting line of the mould , or around ejector pins and slides that are slightly smaller than the holes retaining them . If the trapped air is not allowed to escape , it is compressed by the pressure of the incoming material and squeezed into the corners of the cavity , where it prevents filling and can also cause other defects . The air can even become so compressed that it ignites and burns the surrounding plastic material . 
 To allow for removal of the moulded part from the mould , the mould features must not overhang one another in the direction that the mould opens , unless parts of the mould are designed to move from between such overhangs when the mould opens ( using components called <unk> ) . 
 Sides of the part that appear parallel with the direction of draw ( the axis of the cored position ( hole ) or insert is parallel to the up and down movement of the mould as it opens and closes ) are typically angled slightly , called draft , to ease release of the part from the mould . Insufficient draft can cause deformation or damage . The draft required for mould release is primarily dependent on the depth of the cavity : the deeper the cavity , the more draft necessary . <unk> must also be taken into account when determining the draft required . If the skin is too thin , then the moulded part will tend to shrink onto the cores that form while cooling and cling to those cores , or the part may warp , twist , blister or crack when the cavity is pulled away . 
 A mould is usually designed so that the moulded part reliably remains on the ejector ( B ) side of the mould when it opens , and draws the runner and the sprue out of the ( A ) side along with the parts . The part then falls freely when ejected from the ( B ) side . Tunnel gates , also known as submarine or mould gates , are located below the parting line or mould surface . An opening is machined into the surface of the mould on the parting line . The moulded part is cut ( by the mould ) from the runner system on ejection from the mould . Ejector pins , also known as knockout pins , are circular pins placed in either half of the mould ( usually the ejector half ) , which push the finished moulded product , or runner system out of a <unk> ejection of the article using pins , sleeves , strippers , etc. may cause undesirable impressions or distortion , so care must be taken when designing the mould . 
 The standard method of cooling is passing a coolant ( usually water ) through a series of holes drilled through the mould plates and connected by hoses to form a continuous pathway . The coolant absorbs heat from the mould ( which has absorbed heat from the hot plastic ) and keeps the mould at a proper temperature to solidify the plastic at the most efficient rate . 
 To ease maintenance and venting , cavities and cores are divided into pieces , called inserts , and sub @-@ assemblies , also called inserts , blocks , or chase blocks . By substituting interchangeable inserts , one mould may make several variations of the same part . 
 More complex parts are formed using more complex moulds . These may have sections called slides , that move into a cavity perpendicular to the draw direction , to form overhanging part features . When the mould is opened , the slides are pulled away from the plastic part by using stationary “ angle pins ” on the stationary mould half . These pins enter a slot in the slides and cause the slides to move backward when the moving half of the mould opens . The part is then ejected and the mould closes . The closing action of the mould causes the slides to move forward along the angle pins . 
 Some moulds allow previously moulded parts to be reinserted to allow a new plastic layer to form around the first part . This is often referred to as <unk> . This system can allow for production of one @-@ piece tires and wheels . 
 Two @-@ shot or multi @-@ shot moulds are designed to " <unk> " within a single moulding cycle and must be processed on specialized injection moulding machines with two or more injection units . This process is actually an injection moulding process performed twice and therefore has a much smaller margin of error . In the first step , the base color material is moulded into a basic shape , which contains spaces for the second shot . Then the second material , a different color , is injection @-@ moulded into those spaces . <unk> and keys , for instance , made by this process have markings that cannot wear off , and remain legible with heavy use . 
 A mould can produce several copies of the same parts in a single " shot " . The number of " impressions " in the mould of that part is often incorrectly referred to as cavitation . A tool with one impression will often be called a single impression ( cavity ) mould . A mould with 2 or more cavities of the same parts will likely be referred to as multiple impression ( cavity ) mould . Some extremely high production volume moulds ( like those for bottle caps ) can have over 128 cavities . 
 In some cases multiple cavity tooling will mould a series of different parts in the same tool . Some <unk> call these moulds family moulds as all the parts are related . Examples include plastic model kits . 
 = = = = Mould storage = = = = 
 Manufacturers go to great lengths to protect custom moulds due to their high average costs . The perfect temperature and humidity level is maintained to ensure the longest possible lifespan for each custom mould . Custom moulds , such as those used for rubber injection moulding , are stored in temperature and humidity controlled environments to prevent warping . 
 = = = Tool materials = = = 
 Tool steel is often used . Mild steel , aluminum , nickel or epoxy are suitable only for prototype or very short production runs . Modern hard aluminum ( <unk> and 2024 alloys ) with proper mould design , can easily make moulds capable of 100 @,@ 000 or more part life with proper mould maintenance . 
 = = = Machining = = = 
 Moulds are built through two main methods : standard machining and EDM . Standard machining , in its conventional form , has historically been the method of building injection moulds . With technological development , CNC machining became the predominant means of making more complex moulds with more accurate mould details in less time than traditional methods . 
 The electrical discharge machining ( EDM ) or spark erosion process has become widely used in mould making . As well as allowing the formation of shapes that are difficult to machine , the process allows pre @-@ hardened moulds to be shaped so that no heat treatment is required . Changes to a hardened mould by conventional drilling and milling normally require annealing to soften the mould , followed by heat treatment to harden it again . EDM is a simple process in which a shaped electrode , usually made of copper or graphite , is very slowly lowered onto the mould surface ( over a period of many hours ) , which is immersed in paraffin oil ( kerosene ) . A voltage applied between tool and mould causes spark erosion of the mould surface in the inverse shape of the electrode . 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 The number of cavities incorporated into a mould will directly correlate in moulding costs . Fewer cavities require far less tooling work , so limiting the number of cavities in @-@ turn will result in lower initial manufacturing costs to build an injection mould . 
 As the number of cavities play a vital role in moulding costs , so does the complexity of the part 's design . Complexity can be incorporated into many factors such as surface finishing , tolerance requirements , internal or external threads , fine detailing or the number of undercuts that may be incorporated . 
 Further details , such as undercuts or any feature causing additional tooling , will increase the mould cost . Surface finish of the core and cavity of molds will further influence the cost . 
 Rubber injection moulding process produces a high yield of durable products , making it the most efficient and cost @-@ effective method of moulding . Consistent vulcanization processes involving precise temperature control significantly reduces all waste material . 
 = = Injection process = = 
 With injection moulding , granular plastic is fed by a forced ram from a hopper into a heated barrel . As the granules are slowly moved forward by a screw @-@ type plunger , the plastic is forced into a heated chamber , where it is melted . As the plunger advances , the melted plastic is forced through a nozzle that rests against the mould , allowing it to enter the mould cavity through a gate and runner system . The mould remains cold so the plastic solidifies almost as soon as the mould is filled . 
 = = = Injection moulding cycle = = = 
 The sequence of events during the injection mould of a plastic part is called the injection moulding cycle . The cycle begins when the mould closes , followed by the injection of the polymer into the mould cavity . Once the cavity is filled , a holding pressure is maintained to compensate for material shrinkage . In the next step , the screw turns , feeding the next shot to the front screw . This causes the screw to retract as the next shot is prepared . Once the part is sufficiently cool , the mould opens and the part is ejected . 
 = = = Scientific versus traditional moulding = = = 
 Traditionally , the injection portion of the molding process was done at one constant pressure to fill and pack the cavity . This method , however , allowed for a large variation in dimensions from cycle @-@ to @-@ cycle . More commonly used now is scientific or decoupled moulding , a method pioneered by <unk> Inc . In this the injection of the plastic is " decoupled " into stages to allow better control of part dimensions and more cycle @-@ to @-@ cycle ( commonly called shot @-@ to @-@ shot in the industry ) consistency . First the cavity is filled to approximately 98 % full using velocity ( speed ) control . Although the pressure should be sufficient to allow for the desired speed , pressure limitations during this stage are undesirable . Once the cavity is 98 % full , the machine switches from velocity control to pressure control , where the cavity is " packed out " at a constant pressure , where sufficient velocity to reach desired pressures is required . This allows part dimensions to be controlled to within thousandths of an inch or better . 
 = = = Different types of injection moulding processes = = = 
 Although most injection moulding processes are covered by the conventional process description above , there are several important moulding variations including , but not limited to : 
 Die casting 
 Metal injection moulding 
 Thin @-@ wall injection moulding 
 Injection moulding of liquid silicone rubber 
 A more comprehensive list of injection moulding processes may be found here : [ 1 ] 
 = = Process troubleshooting = = 
 Like all industrial processes , injection moulding can produce flawed parts . In the field of injection moulding , troubleshooting is often performed by examining defective parts for specific defects and addressing these defects with the design of the mould or the characteristics of the process itself . Trials are often performed before full production runs in an effort to predict defects and determine the appropriate specifications to use in the injection process . 
 When filling a new or unfamiliar mould for the first time , where shot size for that mould is unknown , a technician / tool setter may perform a trial run before a full production run . He starts with a small shot weight and fills gradually until the mould is 95 to 99 % full . Once this is achieved , a small amount of holding pressure will be applied and holding time increased until gate freeze off ( solidification time ) has occurred . Gate freeze off time can be determined by increasing the hold time , and then weighing the part . When the weight of the part does not change , it is then known that the gate has frozen and no more material is injected into the part . Gate solidification time is important , as it determines cycle time and the quality and consistency of the product , which itself is an important issue in the economics of the production process . Holding pressure is increased until the parts are free of sinks and part weight has been achieved . 
 = = = Moulding defects = = = 
 Injection moulding is a complex technology with possible production problems . They can be caused either by defects in the moulds , or more often by the moulding process itself . 
 Methods such as industrial CT scanning can help with finding these defects externally as well as internally . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Moulding tolerance is a specified allowance on the deviation in parameters such as dimensions , weights , shapes , or angles , etc . To maximize control in setting tolerances there is usually a minimum and maximum limit on thickness , based on the process used . Injection moulding typically is capable of tolerances equivalent to an IT Grade of about 9 – 14 . The possible tolerance of a thermoplastic or a thermoset is ± 0 @.@ 200 to ± 0 @.@ 500 millimeters . In specialised applications tolerances as low as ± 5 µm on both diameters and linear features are achieved in mass production . Surface finishes of 0 @.@ 0500 to 0 @.@ 1000 µm or better can be obtained . Rough or pebbled surfaces are also possible . 
 = = Power requirements = = 
 The power required for this process of injection moulding depends on many things and varies between materials used . Manufacturing Processes Reference Guide states that the power requirements depend on " a material 's specific gravity , melting point , thermal conductivity , part size , and molding rate . " Below is a table from page 243 of the same reference as previously mentioned that best illustrates the characteristics relevant to the power required for the most commonly used materials . 
 = = Robotic moulding = = 
 Automation means that the smaller size of parts permits a mobile inspection system to examine multiple parts more quickly . In addition to mounting inspection systems on automatic devices , multiple @-@ axis robots can remove parts from the mould and position them for further processes . 
 Specific instances include removing of parts from the mould immediately after the parts are created , as well as applying machine vision systems . A robot grips the part after the ejector pins have been extended to free the part from the mould . It then moves them into either a holding location or directly onto an inspection system . The choice depends upon the type of product , as well as the general layout of the manufacturing equipment . Vision systems mounted on robots have greatly enhanced quality control for insert moulded parts . A mobile robot can more precisely determine the placement accuracy of the metal component , and inspect faster than a human can . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = John Mylne ( 1611 – 1667 ) = 
 John Mylne ( 1611 – 24 December 1667 ) , sometimes known as " John Mylne junior " , or " the Younger " , was a Scottish master mason and architect , who served as Master Mason to the Crown of Scotland . Born in Perth , he was the son of John Mylne , also a master mason , and Isobel Wilson . 
 Practising as a stonemason , he also took on the role of architect , designing as well as building his projects . He was one of the last masters of Scottish Renaissance architecture , before new styles were imported by his successors . Alongside his professional career , he also served as a soldier and politician . He married three times but had no surviving children . 
 = = Career = = 
 Mylne learned his trade from his father , assisting him with projects including the sundial at Holyrood Palace . In 1633 Mylne was made a burgess of the royal burgh of Edinburgh , and was admitted to the Edinburgh lodge of masons , both due to his father 's position . He was first appointed to the town council in 1636 and , in the same year , was appointed master mason to the Crown , succeeding his father . 
 His building projects were concentrated in Edinburgh , where , from 1637 , he served as principal master mason to the city . For ten years he was involved in the construction of the Tron Kirk on the High Street , which opened in 1647 . The Tron was built to house the congregation of St Giles ' , which had been raised to cathedral status , and was laid out in the new T @-@ plan form with the pulpit in the centre , to suit reformed worship . The design was informed by contemporary Dutch architecture and , in particular , by the work of Hendrick de Keyser whose Architectura Moderna showcased his church designs in the Netherlands . Mylne worked on the building with master wright John Scott who was responsible for the timber work . The building was executed in a Dutch influenced style with both gothic and classical details . The church was not fully complete before Mylne 's death and was subsequently remodelled in the 18th century . A new spire was added in the 19th century following a fire , but Mylne 's work can be seen in the body of the kirk . The carved tympanum was executed by Mylne 's brother Alexander . 
 From 1637 to 1649 he was also engaged on the design of <unk> 's Hospital in Stirling , which was executed by Stirling mason James <unk> . Mylne also carved the statue of its founder for the facade . In 1642 , Mylne surveyed the crumbling remains of Jedburgh Abbey , for which services he was made a burgess of Jedburgh . He built the choir , steeple , and north aisle of Airth Old Church , commencing 15 July 1647 . 
 From 1643 to 1659 , he served as master mason for the construction of Heriot 's Hospital ( now a school ) , succeeding William Aytoun . The building had been started in 1628 by William Wallace , and would not be finally completed until 1700 ; Mylne rebuilt one or two of the towers in 1648 . Also in 1648 , Mylne was engaged to repair the crown steeple of St. Giles ' . 
 Projects in the 1650s included the building of fortifications in Leith , and the addition of artillery emplacements to Edinburgh 's town wall . He undertook a division of Greyfriars Kirk , to serve two congregations , and constructed a professor 's house for Edinburgh University , which was demolished in the 18th century . 
 Following the Restoration of Charles II , Mylne was reconfirmed in his post of Royal Master Mason , and was commissioned in 1663 to survey the upper floors of Holyrood Palace . The resulting plans are the earliest surviving architectural drawings from Scotland , and are held in the Bodleian Library in Oxford . His design for the completion of the palace went unexecuted , with the work eventually being carried out by Sir William Bruce in the 1670s . 
 In 1666 John Mylne designed and was engaged to build Panmure House , near Forfar , for the 2nd Earl of Panmure . After his death , the work was continued by Alexander Nisbet , possibly with the assistance of William Bruce . This house , demolished in 1950 , resembled Heriot 's Hospital and other Scottish 17th @-@ century buildings , rather than looking forward to the new classical styles which would be introduced by Bruce . During the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War of 1665 – 1667 , Mylne designed and built fortifications at Lerwick , which were later reconstructed as Fort Charlotte . He provided a design for Linlithgow 's tolbooth in 1667 , but following his death another mason was sought , and a different design built . Another scheme was for Leslie House , carried out after his death by Robert Mylne , again with the advice of Bruce . 
 Mylne 's architectural works are in the Scottish Renaissance tradition , which combined gothic and classical elements , together with mannerist ornament , often derived from imported pattern books . Colvin describes Mylne as " the leading master of the last phase of Scottish mannerism " . By the 1660s , Mylne 's work was becoming old @-@ fashioned , as the European @-@ inspired Palladian began to be imported by William Bruce . 
 = = Political and military service = = 
 In 1640 , Mylne joined the Scottish army which invaded northern England during the Second Bishop 's War . He was promoted in 1646 to Captain of Pioneers , and Master Gunner of Scotland . 
 As well as serving on Edinburgh 's town council from 1636 to 1664 , Mylne played several other political roles in his life . In 1652 , he served as part of a commission sent to the English Parliament in London , to discuss a possible Treaty of Union . From 1654 to 1659 he represented Edinburgh at the Convention of Royal Burghs , and in 1662 he was elected a burgh commissioner for Edinburgh , attending Charles II 's first Scottish parliament . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1667 Mylne was in discussions with the town of Perth for construction of a new market cross . However , he died at Edinburgh in December . He was buried in Greyfriars Kirkyard , Edinburgh , where a monument , erected by his nephew and apprentice Robert Mylne , still stands . Another memorial was erected by the Freemasons at their meeting place , St. Mary 's Chapel , although this former church was demolished in the 18th century . His portrait hangs in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery . Robert Mylne succeeded him as master mason to the crown . 
 = Hurricane Gracie = 
 Hurricane Gracie was a major hurricane that formed in September 1959 , the strongest during the 1959 Atlantic hurricane season and the most intense to strike the United States since Hurricane Hazel in 1954 . The system was first noted as an area of thunderstorms east of the Lesser Antilles which moved just north of the Greater Antilles , quickly intensifying into a hurricane on September 22 . Gracie was a storm that was very difficult to forecast , with its movement unpredictable . After five days of erratic motion , Gracie became a major hurricane which struck South Carolina , and weakened as it moved up the Appalachians , bringing much needed rain to a drought @-@ plagued region . Much of the destruction related with Gracie was centered on Beaufort , South Carolina . Gracie became an extratropical cyclone on September 30 while moving through the Eastern United States . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of squally weather was first noted a few hundred miles east of the Lesser Antilles on September 18 . The convective area organized into a tropical depression near the north coast of Hispaniola on September 20 . After moving west @-@ northwestward for a day , it turned northeastward , where upper level winds were very favorable and steering currents were very weak . On September 22 Gracie was named as a tropical depression before it developed into Tropical Storm Gracie , followed by reaching hurricane strength later that night . It turned to the east on September 25 , and turned back west to west @-@ northwest on September 27 as a stable anticyclone built in to its north . 
 Gracie quickly strengthened and reached its peak of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) winds on September 29 , but cooler air and land interaction weakened it to a 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) Category 3 major hurricane at the time of its landfall at 1625 UTC over St. Helena Sound near the south end of Edisto Island in South Carolina . After landfall , Gracie moved inland and north and became extratropical on September 30 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 A hurricane watch was issued for the coast of the United States from Savannah , Georgia to Wilmington , North Carolina at 1600 UTC on September 28 , which were quickly updated to hurricane warnings by 1900 UTC the same day . By 1900 UTC , gale warnings were in effect from Daytona Beach , Florida to Savannah , Georgia as well as from Wilmington to Morehead City , North Carolina . At 1200 UTC on September 29 , gale warnings were dropped south of Brunswick , Georgia . At 2200 UTC , gale warnings were extended northward to Cape May , New Jersey , including Chesapeake Bay and Delaware Bay . At 0400 UTC on September 30 , all warnings south of Cape Hatteras were dropped , leaving gale warnings in effect from Cape Hatteras northward . At 1000 UTC , small craft were advised to remain in port from Cape May northward to Block Island , Rhode Island . By 1600 UTC , due to Gracie 's continued weakening , all remaining gale warnings were downgraded to small craft warnings . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Georgia and South Carolina = = = 
 Storm surge flooding was minimal due to the storm 's landfall near the time of low tide . However , Charleston still recorded their highest tide since 1940 . Along the coast of southern South Carolina , the storm tide was measured up to 11 @.@ 9 feet ( 3 @.@ 6 m ) above mean lower low water ( the average level of the lowest low tide each day ) . The United States Coast Guard vessel Bramble evacuated people stranded in Savannah and Charleston on September 30 . Gracie killed 10 people in South Carolina and Georgia , mainly due to wind and rain @-@ induced automobile accidents , falling trees and electrocution by live wires . The Garden Club of South Carolina replaced numerous trees after the storm . Wind damage was quite significant across South Carolina , particularly the city of Beaufort , South Carolina , with many downed trees , telephone poles , and streetlights . Also , numerous windows were shattered and shingles were torn off of roofs . A number of creeks overflowed causing floodwaters that , in areas , were several feet deep . The opening of the Beaufort Center of the University of South Carolina was delayed due to Gracie . It would be 30 years before another major hurricane struck South Carolina ; Hurricane Hugo in September 1989 . 
 = = = Elsewhere in the United States = = = 
 Heavy rains fell well ahead of the storm along an inverted trough extending north of the storm , causing 6 @.@ 79 inches ( 172 mm ) between the mornings of September 28 and September 29 at Norfolk , Virginia . The highest rainfall amount measured during the storm was 13 @.@ 20 inches ( 335 mm ) at Big Meadows . The storm spawned seven tornadoes in all . A few of the tornadoes which accompanied the dissipating storm through Virginia killed twelve people near Charlottesville , Virginia . Other tornadoes touched down in the Carolinas and Pennsylvania . For the most part , rainfall from Gracie was beneficial as it moved up the Appalachians since the area had been in a drought preceding the cyclone . 
 = = Long @-@ term impact = = 
 Edisto Beach , South Carolina was changed forever by Gracie , due to human efforts to <unk> the beach after its passage . Most of the shell hash beach currently at Edisto was placed there after Gracie . In order to expand the beach , an inland marsh was excavated and moved to the shoreline . This created highly desirable beach front property which led to new development along the coast seaward of Palmetto Boulevard , but also created an environmental catastrophe along the nearby ocean floor . A species of isopod which grows in coastal estuaries , the <unk> <unk> , disappeared after the passage of this hurricane from the <unk> River in South Carolina . The Kermadec petrel , a bird , was swept to Lookout Mountain Sanctuary in Pennsylvania during Gracie , marking the first time it appeared in North America . 
 = All Singing , All Dancing = 
 " All Singing , All Dancing " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 4 , 1998 . In the fourth clip show aired by The Simpsons , Homer claims he hates singing , so Marge shows family videos of musical numbers from the previous seasons of the series . The original material was directed by Mark Ervin and written by Steve O 'Donnell . It was executive produced by David Mirkin . It features guest appearances from George Harrison , Patrick Stewart , and Phil Hartman , although these are all clips and none of them recorded original material for the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Bart rent the film Paint Your Wagon , expecting it to be a shoot @-@ em @-@ up Western . Homer is dismayed to find out that it is actually a musical , and expresses his distaste for such films . Marge is baffled by this , saying that he ironically loves singing . The family starts delivering their dialogue in song form , and Marge decides to prove that Homer loves to sing by showing family videos . Several clips are shown of various songs from past episodes , but Homer is not convinced . At this moment , Snake breaks into their house and holds them hostage . However once he hears them singing , Snake decides that they would not make good hostages and leaves . 
 The family continues to sing and more videos are shown . Snake again breaks into the house and claims that he got a song stuck in his head and the only way to get rid of it is to kill the Simpsons . He tries to shoot them , but discovers that his gun is out of ammunition and leaves again . 
 After more clips , Snake returns for a final time , with ammunition , and aims his gun at them , but the family reveals that they are done singing . Snake declares that he has no problems with them and leaves . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The clip show features several full songs from previous episodes of The Simpsons . 
 Many of them are among the most popular songs from the show . " Who Needs The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? " and " We Do " had previously been nominated for best song at the Primetime Emmy Awards , and " We Put the Spring in Springfield " won the award in 1997 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode is the fourth and penultimate clip show episode of The Simpsons . It was put together by Steve O 'Donnell , who wrote this episode and " The Joy of Sect " ( which , in production order , preceded this episode ) . Executive producer David Mirkin hated doing clip shows and " wouldn 't do them if we had a choice " and this is referenced at the end of the episode . The episode contains two " screw the audience act breaks " in which a major problem is presented before the commercial but suddenly ends after the break . The episode also had problems with the censors as they objected to scenes of Snake pointing his shotgun at the Simpsons ' baby daughter , Maggie . In spite of this , " All Singing , All Dancing " is one of the few episodes of The Simpsons that has been given a G @-@ rating on American television . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Clint Eastwood is dressed as the Man with No Name from the Dollars Trilogy films . The film Paint Your Wagon is referenced at the beginning of the episode . The film does star Eastwood and Lee Marvin and was directed by Joshua Logan , but the writers did not base their parody or the song on the film at all . The man in the film that confronts Clint Eastwood is modelled after Lee Van Cleef . 
 Several of the songs featured in the episode are references to actual musicals . " Springfield , Springfield " , sung by Bart and Milhouse , is a reference to " New York , New York " , from On the Town . Krusty 's " Send in the Clowns " uses different lyrics than the original version by Stephen Sondheim . Lyle Lanley 's " The Monorail Song " takes references from a performance by character Professor Harold Hill in The Music Man , including Lanley 's costume and " the crowd 's mindless acceptance of his deceitful proposal " . " See My Vest " is a parody of the song " Be Our Guest " , sung by Angela Lansbury in the 1991 film Beauty and the Beast . While at the First Church of Springfield , Bart substitutes the lyrics from Iron Butterfly 's " In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida " to " In the Garden of Eden " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " All Singing , All Dancing " finished 26th in ratings for the week of December 29 , 1997 – January 4 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 9 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files . 
 Although he normally hates clip shows , David Mirkin liked this episode because of the singing and dancing and called the clips " truly wonderful " . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote " for a clips show , it 's not bad . The only one missing really is " Dr Zaius " from " A Fish Called Selma " . In his book Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner wrote , " when songs spring up one at a time , you might notice a clever line or two , or the way that they serve the same kind of plot @-@ advancing or energy @-@ generating purposes they do in Singin ' in the Rain or Cats , but piled together in [ " All Singing , All Dancing " ] , they amount to a sort of <unk> side project : Springfield : The Musical . And ... it 's a very impressive side project at that . " The episode was nominated for a 1998 Emmy Award , in the " Music Direction " category . A review of The Simpsons season 9 DVD release in the Daily Post noted that it includes " super illustrated colour commentaries " on " All Singing , All Dancing " and " Lost Our Lisa " . Isaac Mitchell @-@ Frey of the Herald Sun cited the episode as a " low moment " of the season , noting it " recycles parts of previous episodes " . 
 Michael Dunne analyzed the episode in his book American Film Musical Themes and Forms , and gave examples from it while explaining that singing and dancing performances are generally not seen as acceptable in the television medium . He notes that Homer calls singing " fruity " and " the lowest form of communication " during the episode . However , Dunne also notes the fact that Homer himself sings " his objection that musicals are fake and phony " . Dunne describes the frame narrative as establishing Marge as " more favorably disposed toward musicals than the males in her house " . Dunne concluded that " musicals come out on top in this episode , but the victory is marginal at best " . Of the episode itself , Dunne wrote that " the parodies contained in the show demonstrate that its creators are familiar enough with various forms of musical performance to echo them and confident enough that their viewers will catch the references " . 
 = Audition Day = 
 " Audition Day " is the fourth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 62nd overall episode of the series . The episode was written by supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on November 5 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Craig Castaldo , Nick Fondulis , Daniel Genalo , Marceline Hugot , Angela Grovey , Michael <unk> , David Perlman , and Brian Williams . There are cameos by Gilbert Gottfried , Martin Scorsese , and Christopher Walken , though , the three did not appear as themselves , but provided their voices in the episode . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) attempt to rig The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) auditions to guarantee that their preferred candidate ( Fondulis ) will be selected by their boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) . Meanwhile , Jack learns a valuable lesson about humanity when he becomes infected with bedbugs . 
 " Audition Day " has received generally good reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 5 @.@ 940 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Writer Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) of the show TGS with Tracy Jordan have decided to rig the TGS auditions — in which they are in search of a new cast member on the show — by planning to add bad actors so that their preferred choice , Jayden Michael Taylor ( Nick Fondulis ) , gets hired by their boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) . TGS cast member Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) learns that the auditions are taking place and worries that her position on the show will be lessened with the arrival of a new actor . Although Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , the star of the show , reassures Jenna that the two have nothing to worry about , she remains uneasy . Later , Jenna discovers that Liz and Pete want Jayden to be cast , but she pleads with Liz to pull Jayden out of his audition . Jenna hates him for humiliating her after working together on a play , but Liz does not change her mind about Jayden . Jenna eventually figures out what Liz and Pete are scheming , so she and Tracy go out and find people ( Angela Grovey and David Perlman ) and bring them to the TGS auditions . 
 Meanwhile , Jack learns from NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) that he has bedbugs . As a result of being ostracized due to his condition , and now feeling compassionate , Jack tells Liz to give everyone a chance to audition , after catching her trying to get rid of people trying out . During the audition process , Jack , Liz , and Pete witness auditions from TGS staff writers Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , J.D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) , NBC news anchor Brian Williams , Kathy Geiss ( Marceline Hugot ) , the daughter of General Electric ( GE ) CEO Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) , " Dot Com " Slattery ( Kevin Brown ) , former TGS cast member Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) , and a robot street performer ( Daniel Genalo ) . During Jayden 's audition , Liz realizes that Jayden 's supposed references — Gilbert Godfried , Martin Scorsese , and Christopher Walken — were not legit and that Jayden impersonated them . She confronts him about this , however , Jayden plans to blackmail Liz with a camera marked by her fingerprints — that features provocative photos of Jayden , to make it look like Liz would only hire him if he would let her take pictures of his genitals . Liz tries to stop Jack from casting Jayden , though Jack has made up his mind in hiring the robot street performer . Jack casts him after he shook his hand without being concerned that Jack had bedbugs . 
 = = Production = = 
