 " Audition Day " was written by 30 Rock supervising producer Matt Hubbard , his first episode for the fourth season , and his eighth writing credit overall . The episode was directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , making it her eighth for the series . " Audition Day " originally aired in the United States on November 5 , 2009 , on NBC as the fourth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 62nd overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on October 29 , 2009 . 
 Actress Marceline Hugot made her seventh appearance on the show as Kathy Geiss , the daughter of GE CEO Don Geiss , after appearing in the episodes " Jack Gets in the Game " , " Succession " , " Sandwich Day " , " Cooter " , " Do @-@ Over " , and " Reunion " . News anchor Brian Williams , of NBC Nightly News , made his second appearance as himself with this episode , in which he auditions to become a cast member of TGS . He first appeared in the season three episode " The Ones " . In one scene of " Audition Day " , a homeless man keeps his distance from Jack Donaghy after Jack said he had bedbugs . The homeless man was credited as Moonvest and played by Craig Castaldo , or known as Radio Man . Castaldo has made numerous appearances on 30 Rock . At the end of the credits , Gilbert Gottfried , Martin Scorsese , and Christopher Walken are credited as doing their actual voices on Liz Lemon 's phone . 
 Jack hiring the robot street performer in " Audition Day " was first introduced in the fourth season premiere episode " Season 4 " . Actor Cheyenne Jackson made his 30 Rock debut as Danny Baker in " The Problem Solvers " , the next episode . Jackson did not play the robot in this episode , instead actor Daniel Genalo played the character . This is the last episode to feature Lonny Ross as Josh Girard until the 100th episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of this episode , Jack tells Liz " That 's what I 'm talking about . Human empathy , it 's as useless as the Winter Olympics ... this February on NBC . " Realizing Kenneth might know what is going on with the TGS auditions , Jenna floats towards him with the wind in her hair , and when Kenneth sees her he calls her " Vampyr ! " . Later , Jenna reveals to Liz that she has been brought into auditions , similar to what Liz and Pete are doing with rigging the TGS auditions , to make actress Kim Cattrall seem grounded and human . 
 Jenna mentions that she met Jayden 20 years ago . The scene then flashes back to Jenna getting dissed by a young Jayden . The costume she is wearing is essentially the same costume that Jane Krakowski wore 20 years previously in the Broadway musical Starlight Express . In addition , Jayden is dressed similar to the street urchin Gavroche in Les Misérables because the young boy playing that role on Broadway was also providing the voice of Control in Starlight . 
 During her audition , Kathy sings as Scottish amateur singer Susan Boyle who gained worldwide attention for her performance of the song " I Dreamed a Dream " from the musical Les Misérables on the reality show Britain 's Got Talent . Kathy 's performance ( sung by operatic soprano Lisette Oropesa ) gets Liz and Jack <unk> up , similar to Boyle 's performance on Britain 's Got Talent . It is revealed that Dot Com once portrayed the character Boris Alexeyevich Trigorin in Anton Chekhov 's play The Seagull . When Kenneth refuses to embrace him , Jack asks him " Et tu , Kenneth ? " , prompting Kenneth to explain in Latin why he will not embrace Jack due to his bedbugs . 
 During his meeting with fellow GE executives , in which Jack is not allowed to be with them due to his bedbugs condition , a telepresence system — a television screen in which the executives can be seen — is placed in Jack 's office to witness the meeting . One of the executives ( Michael <unk> ) asks Jack if he likes the Cisco Systems equipment , which he does , calling it " the gold standard by which all business technology is judged . Cisco : The Human Network " , then after an argument with the executives , they mute him , prompting Jack to say " Did you just mute me ! ? Did you just use Cisco 's cutting edge <unk> ™ technology to mute me ! ? " Some reviewers wondered whether or not 30 Rock continued doing more product placement with the addition of Cisco Systems , as they have done in the past with Snapple , Verizon , and <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Audition Day " was watched by 5 @.@ 940 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode constituted a six percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Stone Mountain " . During its original broadcast , " Audition Day " ranked third in its 9 : 30 p.m. slot , behind CBS ' CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger noted " I use the phrase ' funny forgives a lot ' in my 30 Rock reviews when an episode fails to cohere but is still entertaining . [ ... ] That changed with ' Audition Day ' , which still wasn 't 30 Rock at its peak but which had one perfect , hilarious sequence that almost singlehandedly redeemed the episode for me . " He enjoyed Jack 's scene in the subway , calling it " the funniest moment " from the episode , and " one of the funniest things Alec Baldwin has done on the show in a long time " . TV Squad 's Bob Sassone wrote that he did not enjoy Jack 's plot , explaining that the <unk> bit " got to be a little too much " , and much preferred Jenna and Tracy 's storyline " because it fit in with the auditioning plot . " Time contributor James Poniewozik opined that this was an " amusing episode overall " , and was glad that it gave Scott Adsit 's Pete " something to do " here . Los Angeles Times 's Meredith Blake was favorable towards " Audition Day " , writing it was a " fine return to form " , following the airing of " Stone Mountain " , which she disliked . IGN contributor Robert Canning said this episode of 30 Rock had fun , comedic chaos , and that it " worked well , but never quite reached the hilarity tipping point . " He disliked that Brian Williams ' cameo was ruined by the promos " because the surprise of the bit would have been far funnier than what the bit actually turned out to be . " Canning said the auditions were " fun , though not a complete knockout " , enjoyed the fact that Kathy participated in the auditions and her Susan Boyle reference " had great timing " , and was " let down " by the revelation that Jayden was psychotic , noting it " [ s ] <unk> like a bit of a cop out to the story as a whole . " In conclusion , Canning gave this episode an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 rating . 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin said he did not laugh much during the broadcast of " Audition Day " , but admitted he grinned during the closing segment of the episode in which Jack is in the subway along with a group quartet . Rabin said he enjoyed Brian Williams 's " array of characters " , during his audition , and gave this episode a B- grade rating . Sean Gandert of Paste wrote that the episode " had a good premise ... but I wasn 't really feeling the whole thing . " Gandert reported that the new cast member angle was " predictable and not too interesting , as well as the audition process in general . " 
 = In Utero ( album ) = 
 In Utero is the third and final studio album by the American rock band Nirvana , released on September 21 , 1993 , by DGC Records . Nirvana intended the record to diverge significantly from the polished production of its previous album , Nevermind ( 1991 ) . To capture a more abrasive and natural sound , the group hired engineer Steve Albini to record In Utero during a two @-@ week period in February 1993 at Pachyderm Studio in Cannon Falls , Minnesota . The music was recorded quickly with few studio embellishments , and the song lyrics and album packaging incorporated medical imagery that conveyed frontman Kurt Cobain 's outlook on his publicized personal life and his band 's newfound fame . 
 Soon after recording was completed , rumors circulated in the press that DGC might not release the album in its original state , as the record label felt that the result was not commercially viable . Although Nirvana publicly denied the statements , the group was not fully satisfied with the sound Albini had captured . Albini declined to alter the album further , and ultimately the band hired R.E.M. producer Scott Litt to make minor changes to the album 's sound and remix the singles " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " and " All Apologies " . 
 Upon release , In Utero entered the Billboard 200 chart at number one and received critical acclaim as a drastic departure from Nevermind . The record has been certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , and has sold 15 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nirvana broke into the musical mainstream with its major label debut album Nevermind in 1991 . Despite modest sales estimates — the band 's record company , DGC Records , forecast sales of 50 @,@ 000 copies — Nevermind became a huge commercial success popularized the Seattle grunge movement and alternative rock in general . Nevertheless , all three members of Nirvana — singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain , bassist Krist Novoselic , and drummer Dave Grohl — later expressed dissatisfaction with the sound of the album , citing its production as too polished . Early in 1992 , Cobain told Rolling Stone that he was sure that the band 's next album would showcase " both of the extremes " of its sound , saying " it 'll be more raw with some songs and more candy pop on some of the others . It won 't be as one @-@ dimensional [ as Nevermind ] " . Cobain wanted to start work on the album in the summer of 1992 , but the band was unable as Cobain and his bandmates lived in different cities , and the singer and his wife Courtney Love were expecting the birth of their daughter Frances Bean . DGC had hoped to have a new album by the band ready for a late @-@ 1992 holiday season release ; since work on it proceeded slowly , the label released the compilation album Incesticide in December 1992 . 
 In a Melody Maker interview published in July 1992 , Cobain told the English journalist Everett True he was interested in recording with Jack Endino ( who had produced the group 's 1989 debut album Bleach ) and Steve Albini ( former frontman of the noise rock band Big Black and producer for various independent releases ) . Cobain said he would then choose the best material from the sessions for inclusion on the group 's next album . In October 1992 , Nirvana recorded several songs ( mainly as instrumentals ) during a demo session with Endino in Seattle ; they later re @-@ recorded many of these songs for In Utero . Endino recalled that the band did not ask him to produce its next record , but noted that the band members constantly debated working with Albini . The group recorded another set of demos while on tour in Brazil in January 1993 . One of the recordings from this session , the long improvisational track " Gallons of Rubbing Alcohol Flow Through the Strip " , was included as a hidden track on non @-@ US copies of In Utero . 
 Nirvana ultimately chose Albini to record its third album . Albini had a reputation as a principled and opinionated individual in the American independent music scene . While there was speculation that the band chose Albini to record the album due to his underground credentials , Cobain told Request magazine in 1993 , " For the most part I wanted to work with him because he happened to produce two of my favorite records , which were Surfer Rosa [ by Pixies ] and Pod [ by The Breeders ] . " Inspired by those albums , Cobain wanted to utilize Albini 's technique of capturing the natural ambiance of a room via the usage and placement of several microphones , something previous Nirvana producers had been averse to trying . Months before the trio had even approached Albini about the recording , rumors circulated that he was slated to record the album . Albini sent a disclaimer to the British music press denying involvement , only to get a call from Nirvana 's management a few days later about the project . Although he considered the group to be " R.E.M. with a fuzzbox " and " an unremarkable version of the Seattle sound " , Albini told Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad he accepted because he felt sorry for the band members , whom he perceived to be " the same sort of people as all the small @-@ fry bands I deal with " , at the mercy of their record company . Before the start of recording sessions , the band sent Albini a tape of the demos it had made in Brazil . In return , Albini sent Cobain a copy of the PJ Harvey album Rid of Me to give him an idea of the acoustics at the studio where they would record . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The members of Nirvana and Albini decided on a self @-@ imposed two @-@ week deadline for recording the album . Wary of interference by DGC , Albini suggested the band members pay for the sessions with their own money , which they agreed to . Studio fees totaled US $ 24 @,@ 000 , while Albini took a flat fee of $ 100 @,@ 000 for his services . Despite the suggestions of Nirvana 's management company Gold Mountain , Albini refused to take percentage points on record sales , even though he stood to earn about $ 500 @,@ 000 in royalties . While a common practice among producers in the music industry , Albini refused to take royalties because he considered it to be immoral and " an insult to the artist " . 
 In February 1993 , Nirvana traveled to Pachyderm Studio in Cannon Falls , Minnesota , to record the album . Albini did not meet the band members until the first day of recording , though he had spoken to them beforehand about the type of album they wanted to make . Albini observed that " they wanted to make precisely the sort of record that I 'm comfortable doing " . The group stayed in a house located on the studio grounds during the recording sessions . Novoselic compared the isolated conditions to a gulag ; he added , " There was snow outside , we couldn 't go anywhere . We just worked . " For most of the sessions , the only people present were the band members , Albini , and technician Bob Weston . The band made it clear to DGC and Gold Mountain that it did not want any intrusion during the album production , going as far as not playing any of the work in progress for its record label A & R representative . To prevent the group 's managers and label from interfering , Albini instituted a strict policy of ignoring everyone except for the band members ; the producer explained that everyone associated with the group aside from the musicians themselves were " the biggest pieces of shit I ever met " . 
 The album sessions began slowly but would ultimately gain momentum ; the band arrived at Pachyderm Studio without their equipment , and spent much of the first three days there waiting for it to arrive by mail . However , once recording began on February 13 , work moved quickly . On most days the group began work around midday , took breaks for lunch and dinner , and continued work through midnight . Cobain , Novoselic , and Grohl recorded their basic instrumental tracks together as a band . The group utilized this set @-@ up on all songs except for faster compositions like " Very Ape " and " Tourette 's " , where the drums were recorded separately in a nearby kitchen due to its natural reverb . Albini surrounded Grohl 's drum kit with about 30 microphones . Cobain added additional guitar tracks to about half the songs , then added guitar solos , and finally vocals . The band did not discard takes , and kept virtually everything it captured on tape . Albini felt he was more an engineer than a producer ; despite his personal opinions , he ultimately let the band judge which were decent takes . He said , " Generally speaking , [ Cobain ] knows what he thinks is acceptable and what isn 't acceptable [ ... ] He can make concrete steps to improve things that he doesn 't think are acceptable . " Cobain reportedly recorded all his vocal tracks in six hours . The band completed recording in six days ; Cobain had originally anticipated disagreements with Albini , whom the singer heard " was supposedly this sexist jerk " , but called the process " the easiest recording we 've ever done , hands down " . The only disruption occurred a week into the sessions , when Courtney Love arrived because she missed Cobain . The band , Love , and Albini refused to go into specifics , but Weston 's girlfriend ( who served as the studio 's chef ) stated that Love created tension by criticizing Cobain 's work and being confrontational with everyone present . 
 The album was mixed over five days . This rate was quick by Nirvana 's standards , but not for Albini , who was used to mixing entire albums in a day or two . On occasions when work on a song mix was not producing desired results , the band and Albini took the rest of the day off to watch nature videos , set things on fire , and make prank phone calls for amusement . The sessions were completed on February 26 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Albini sought to produce a record that sounded nothing like Nevermind . He felt the sound of Nevermind was " sort of a standard hack recording that has been turned into a very , very controlled , compressed radio @-@ friendly mix [ ... ] That is not , in my opinion , very flattering to a rock band . " Instead , the intention was to capture a more natural and visceral sound . Albini refused to double @-@ track Cobain 's vocals and instead recorded him singing alone in a resonant room . The producer noted the intensity of the singer 's vocals on some tracks ; he said , " There 's a really dry , really loud voice at the end of ' Milk It ' ... that was also done at the end of ' Rape Me ' , where [ Cobain ] wanted the sound of him screaming to just overtake the whole band . " Albini achieved the album 's sparse drum sound by simply placing several microphones around the room while Dave Grohl performed , picking up the natural reverberation of the room . Albini explained , " If you take a good drummer and put him in front of a drum kit that sounds good acoustically and just record it , you 've done your job . " 
 Azerrad asserted in his 1993 biography Come as You Are : The Story of Nirvana that the music of In Utero showcased divergent sensibilities of abrasiveness and accessibility that reflected the upheavals Cobain experienced prior to the album 's completion . He wrote , " The Beatlesque ' Dumb ' happily coexists beside the all @-@ out frenzied punk graffiti of ' Milk It , ' while ' All Apologies ' is worlds away from the apoplectic ' <unk> Apprentice . ' It 's as if [ Cobain ] has given up trying to meld his punk and pop instincts into one harmonious whole . Forget it . This is war . " Cobain believed , however , that In Utero was not " any harsher or any more emotional " than any of Nirvana 's previous records . Novoselic concurred with Azerrad 's comments that the album 's music leaned more towards the band 's " arty , aggressive side " ; the bassist said , " There 's always been [ Nirvana ] songs like ' About a Girl ' and there 's always been songs like ' Paper Cuts ' ... Nevermind came out kind of ' About a Girl ' -y and this [ album ] came out more ' Paper Cuts ' " . Cobain cited the track " Milk It " as an example of the more experimental and aggressive direction the band 's music had been moving in the months prior to the sessions at Pachyderm Studio . Novoselic viewed the album 's singles " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " and " All Apologies " as " gateways " to the more abrasive sound of the rest of the album , telling journalist Jim DeRogatis that once listeners played the record they would discover " this aggressive wild sound , a true alternative record " . 
 Several of the songs on In Utero had been written years prior to recording ; some of them dated back to 1990 . With tracks like " Frances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle " , Cobain favored long song titles in reaction to contemporary alternative rock bands that utilized single @-@ word titles . Cobain continued to work on the lyrics while recording at Pachyderm Studio . Nonetheless , Cobain told Darcey <unk> in Spin in 1993 that in contrast to Bleach and Nevermind , the lyrics were " more focused , they 're almost built on themes . " Michael Azerrad asserted that the lyrics were less impressionistic and more straightforward than in previous Nirvana songs . Azerrad also noted that " [ v ] irtually every song contains some image of sickness and disease " . In a number of songs Cobain made reference to books he had read . " Frances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle " was inspired by <unk> , a 1978 biography of actress Frances Farmer , whom Cobain had been fascinated with ever since he read the book in high school . The song " <unk> Apprentice " was written about Perfume : The Story of a Murderer , a historical horror novel about a perfumer 's apprentice born with no body odor of his own but with a highly developed sense of smell , and who attempts to create the " ultimate perfume " by killing virgin women and taking their scent . 
 Cobain stated in a 1993 interview with The Observer that " for the most part [ In Utero ] ' s very impersonal " . The songwriter also told Q that year that the abundance of infant and childbirth imagery on the album and his newfound fatherhood were coincidental . However , Azerrad argued that much of the album contains personal themes , noting that Grohl held a similar view . Grohl said , " A lot of what he has to say is related to a lot of the shit he 's gone through . And it 's not so much teen angst anymore . It 's a whole different ball game : rock star angst . " Cobain downplayed recent events ( " I really haven 't had that exciting a life " ) and told Azerrad that he did not want to write a track that explicitly expressed his anger at the media , but the author countered that " Rape Me " seemed to deal with that very issue . While Cobain said the song was written long before his troubles with drug addiction became public , he agreed that the song could be viewed in that light . " Serve the Servants " contains comments about Cobain 's life , both as a child and as an adult . The opening lines " Teenage angst has paid off well / Now I 'm bored and old " were a reference to Cobain 's state of mind in the wake of Nirvana 's success . Cobain dismissed the media attention given to the effect his parents ' divorce had on his life with the line " That legendary divorce is such a bore " from the chorus , and directly addressed his father with the lines " I tried hard to have a father / But instead I had a dad / I just want you to know that I don 't hate you anymore / There is nothing I could say that I haven 't thought before " . Cobain said he wanted his father to know he did not hate him , but had no desire to talk to him . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 Cobain originally wanted to name the album I Hate Myself and I Want to Die , a phrase that had originated in his journals in mid @-@ 1992 . At the time , the singer used the phrase as a response whenever someone asked him how he was doing . Cobain intended the album title as a joke ; he stated he was " tired of taking this band so seriously and everyone else taking it so seriously " . Novoselic convinced Cobain to change the title due to fear that it could potentially result in a lawsuit . The band then considered using Verse Chorus Verse — a title taken from its song " Verse Chorus Verse " , and an earlier working title of " Sappy " — before eventually settling on In Utero . The final title was taken from a poem written by Courtney Love . 
 The art director for In Utero was Robert Fisher , who had designed all of Nirvana 's releases on DGC . Most of the ideas for the artwork for the album and related singles came from Cobain . Fisher recalled that " [ Cobain ] would just give me some loose odds and ends and say ' Do something with it . ' " The cover of the album is an image of a Transparent Anatomical <unk> , with angel wings superimposed . Cobain created the collage on the back cover , which he described as " Sex and woman and In Utero and vaginas and birth and death " , that consists of model fetuses , a turtle shell and models of turtles , and body parts lying in a bed of orchids and lilies . The collage had been set up on the floor of Cobain 's living room and was photographed by Charles Peterson after an unexpected call from Cobain . The album 's track listing and re @-@ illustrated symbols from Barbara G. Walker 's The Woman 's Dictionary of Symbols and Sacred Objects were then positioned around the edge of the collage . 
 = = Production controversy and remixing = = 
 After the recording sessions were completed , Nirvana sent unmastered tapes of the album to several individuals , including the president of DGC 's parent company Geffen Records Ed Rosenblatt and the group 's management company Gold Mountain . When asked about the feedback he received , Cobain told Michael Azerrad , " The grown @-@ ups don 't like it . " He said he was told his songwriting was " not up to par " , the sound was " unlistenable " , and that there was uncertainty that mainstream radio would welcome the sound of Albini 's production . There were few people at Geffen or Gold Mountain who wanted the band to record with Albini to begin with , and Cobain felt he was receiving an unstated message to scrap the sessions and start all over again . Cobain was upset and said to Azerrad , " I should just rerecord this record and do the same thing we did last year because we sold out last year — there 's no reason to try and redeem ourselves as artists at this point . I can 't help myself — I 'm just putting out a record I would like to listen to at home . " However , a number of the group 's friends liked the album , and by April 1993 Nirvana was intent on releasing In Utero as it was . According to Cobain , " Of course , they want another Nevermind , but I 'd rather die than do that . This is exactly the kind of record I would buy as a fan , that I would enjoy owning . " 
 The band members began to have doubts about the record 's sound . During this time Cobain admitted , " The first time I played it at home , I knew there was something wrong . The whole first week I wasn 't really interested in listening to it at all , and that usually doesn 't happen . I got no emotion from it , I was just numb . " The group concluded that the bass and lyrics were inaudible and approached Albini to remix the album . The producer declined ; as he recalled , " [ Cobain ] wanted to make a record that he could slam down on the table and say , ' Listen , I know this is good , and I know your concerns about it are meaningless , so go with it . ' And I don 't think he felt he had that yet ... My problem was that I feared a slippery slope . " The band attempted to fix its concerns with the record during the mastering process with Bob Ludwig at his studio in Portland , Maine . Novoselic was pleased with the results , but Cobain still did not feel the sound was perfect . 
 Soon afterward , in April 1993 Albini remarked to the Chicago Tribune that he doubted Geffen would release the completed album . Albini commented years later that in a sense he felt he spoke about the situation " from a position of ignorance , because I wasn 't there when the band was having their discussions with the record label . All I know is ... we made a record , everybody was happy with it . A few weeks later I hear that it 's unreleasable and it 's all got to be redone " . While Albini 's remarks in the article drew no immediate reply from the group or its label , Newsweek ran a similar article soon afterwards that did . Nirvana denied there was any pressure from its label to change the album 's sound , sending a letter to Newsweek that said that the article 's author " ridiculed our relationship with our label based on totally <unk> [ sic ] information " ; the band also reprinted the letter in a full @-@ page ad in Billboard . Rosenblatt insisted in a press release that Geffen would release anything the band submitted , and label founder David Geffen made the unusual move of personally calling Newsweek to complain about the article . 
 Nirvana wanted to do further work on the recorded tracks , and considered working with producer Scott Litt and remixing some tracks with Andy Wallace ( who had mixed Nevermind ) . Albini vehemently disagreed , and claimed he had an agreement with the band that it would not modify the tracks without his involvement . Albini initially refused to give the album master tapes to Gold Mountain , but relented after a phone call from Novoselic . The band decided against working with Wallace and chose to remix and augment the songs " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " and " All Apologies " with Litt at Seattle 's Bad Animals Studio in May 1993 . Furthermore , a remix of " Pennyroyal Tea " by Scott Litt ( at Bad Animals on November 22 , 1993 ) appears on the censored Wal @-@ Mart and Kmart versions of In Utero ; this remix is also available on the band 's 2002 best @-@ of compilation , Nirvana , and is the same mix that appeared on the single . One song , " I Hate Myself and Want to Die " , was omitted from the final track listing as Cobain felt there were too many " noise " songs on the album . The rest of the album was left unaltered aside from a remastering which sharpened the bass guitar sound and increased the volume of the vocals by approximately three decibels . Albini was critical of the album 's final mix ; he said , " The end result , the record in the stores doesn 't sound all that much like the record that was made . Though it 's still them singing and playing their songs , and the musical quality of it still comes across . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 To avoid over @-@ hyping the album , DGC Records took a low @-@ key approach to promoting In Utero ; the company 's head of marketing told Billboard before the album 's release that the label was taking a promotional strategy similar to that of Nevermind , and explained that the label would " set things up , duck , and get out of the way " . The label aimed its promotion at alternative markets and press , and released the album on vinyl record as part of this strategy . In contrast to the previous album , the label did not release any of In Utero 's singles commercially in the United States . DGC sent promo copies of the album 's first single " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " to American college , modern rock , and album @-@ oriented rock radio stations in early September , but the label did not target Top 40 radio . Despite the label 's promotion , the band was convinced that In Utero would not be as successful as Nevermind . Cobain told Jim DeRogatis , " We 're certain that we won 't sell a quarter as much , and we 're totally comfortable with that because we like this record so much . " 
 In Utero was released on September 13 , 1993 on vinyl record and cassette tape in the United Kingdom , and on September 14 on vinyl in the United States , with the American vinyl pressing limited to 25 @,@ 000 copies . Although the album was issued on compact disc in the UK on September 14 , a full domestic release did not occur until September 21 . In Utero debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 album chart , selling 180 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . Meanwhile , retail chain stores Wal @-@ Mart and Kmart refused to sell the album . According to The New York Times , Wal @-@ Mart claimed it did not carry the album due to lack of consumer demand , while Kmart representatives explained that the album " didn 't fit within our merchandise mix " . In truth , both chains feared that customers would be offended by the artwork on the album 's back cover . DGC issued a new version of the album with reworked packaging to the stores in March 1994 . This version featured edited album artwork , listed the name of " Rape Me " as " <unk> Me " , and included a Scott Litt remix of " Pennyroyal Tea " . A spokesperson for Nirvana explained that the band decided to edit the packaging because as kids Cobain and Novoselic were only able to buy music from the two chain stores ; as a result they " really want to make their music available to kids who don 't have the opportunity to go to mom @-@ and @-@ pop stores " . 
 In Utero received acclaim from critics , although some reviews were mixed . Time 's Christopher John Farley stated in his review of the album , " Despite the fears of some alternative @-@ music fans , Nirvana hasn 't gone mainstream , though this potent new album may once again force the mainstream to go Nirvana . " Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke said that the album is " a lot of things – brilliant , corrosive , enraged and thoughtful , most of them all at once . But more than anything , it 's a triumph of the will . " Entertainment Weekly reviewer David Browne commented " Kurt Cobain hates it all " , and noted that the sentiment pervades the record . Browne argued , " The music is often mesmerizing , cathartic rock & roll , but it is rock & roll without release , because the band is suspicious of the old @-@ school rock cliches such a release would evoke . " NME magazine 's John Mulvey had doubts about the record ; he concluded , " As a document of a mind in flux – dithering , dissatisfied , unable to come to terms with sanity – Kurt [ Cobain ] should be proud of [ the album ] . As a follow @-@ up to one of the best records of the past ten years it just isn 't quite there . " Ben Thompson of The Independent commented that in spite of the album 's more abrasive songs , " In Utero is beautiful far more often than it is ugly " , and added , " Nirvana have wisely neglected to make the unlistenable punk @-@ rock nightmare they threatened us with . " Q magazine felt that the album showcases Cobain 's songwriting abilities and wrote , " If this is how Cobain is going to develop , the future is lighthouse @-@ bright " . Several critics ranked In Utero as one of the best releases of the year . It placed first and second in the album categories of the Rolling Stone and Village Voice Pazz & Jop year @-@ end critics ' polls , respectively . Additionally , The New York Times included it on its list of the top ten albums of the year . The album was nominated for Best Alternative Music Album at the 1994 Grammy Awards . 
 That October , Nirvana embarked on its first American tour in two years to promote the album . A second single , a split release that featured " All Apologies " and " Rape Me " , was issued in December in the United Kingdom . The band began a six @-@ week European leg of the tour in February 1994 , but it was cancelled after Cobain suffered a drug overdose in Rome on March 6 . Cobain agreed to enter drug rehabilitation , but the singer went missing soon afterwards , and on April 8 he was found dead in his Seattle home as the result of suicide by a shotgun blast . The intended third single from In Utero , " Pennyroyal Tea " , was cancelled in the wake of Cobain 's death and the subsequent dissolution of Nirvana ; limited promotional copies were released in Britain . Three days after Cobain 's body was discovered , In Utero moved back up the Billboard charts , from number 72 to number 27 . 
 In the ensuing years , In Utero has continued to perform commercially and gather critical praise . In a 2003 Guitar World article that commemorated the tenth anniversary of the album 's release , Cobain biographer Charles R. Cross argued that In Utero was " a far better record [ than Nevermind ] and one that only 10 years later seems to be an influential seed spreader , judging by current bands . If it is possible for an album that sold four million copies to be overlooked , or underappreciated , then In Utero is that lost pearl . " That same year , Pitchfork Media placed In Utero at number 13 on its list of the 100 best albums of the 1990s . In 2004 Blender ranked it at number 94 in its " 100 Greatest American Albums of All Time " list , while in 2005 , Spin placed it at number 51 on its " 100 Greatest Albums 1985 – 2005 " retrospective . Rolling Stone has ranked it at number 435 on its list " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , and number 7 on its list the " 100 Best Albums of the Nineties " . In 2005 , In Utero was ranked number 358 in Rock Hard magazine 's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time . In Utero has been certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of over five million units , and has sold 4 @,@ 258 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . To commemorate the album 's 20th anniversary , DGC reissued In Utero in several different formats in September 2013 . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Bonus track on non @-@ American pressings 
 " Gallons of Rubbing Alcohol Flow Through the Strip " ( Cobain , Grohl , Novoselic ) – 7 : 28 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Nirvana 
 Kurt Cobain - guitar , lead vocals , art direction , design , photography 
 Krist Novoselic - bass guitar 
 Dave Grohl - drums , backing vocals 
 Additional personnel 
 Steve Albini – producer , engineer 
 Robert Fisher – art direction , design , photography 
 Alex Grey – illustrations 
 Adam Kasper – second engineer 
 Michael Lavine – photography 
 Scott Litt – mixing 
 Bob Ludwig – audio mastering 
 Karen Mason – photography 
 Charles Peterson – photography 
 Kera <unk> – cello on " All Apologies " and " Dumb " 
 Neil Wallace – photography 
 Bob Weston – technician 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Battle of Tawahin = 
 The Battle of Tawahin ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> , " Battle of the Mills " ) was fought in 885 between the forces of the Abbasid Caliphate under Abu 'l @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Muwaffaq ( the future Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tadid ) and the autonomous Tulunid ruler of Egypt and Syria , Khumarawayh . The battle took place near Ramlah ( modern Israel ) and ended with a Tulunid victory . 
 Following Khumarawayh 's ascension to power in 884 , the Abbasid central government decided to reassert its control over the provinces ruled by him and invaded northern Syria that year . By early 885 the conflict was proceeding favorably for the Abbasids , forcing Khumarawayh to personally take the field and try to stop their advance toward Egypt . In the battle that followed , the Abbasid troops initially defeated the Tulunids and plundered Khumarawayh 's camp , but were then ambushed by a Tulunid reserve force and routed in turn . 
 As a result of the battle , the Abbasid forces were forced to withdraw from Syria , and Tulunid control over the province was reaffirmed . In the following year the Abbasid government agreed to a treaty which formally recognized Khumarawayh 's rule over both Egypt and Syria . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ahmad ibn Tulun , a Turkish soldier , had managed to become governor of Egypt in 868 . By using the country 's immense wealth to raise an army of his own , and exploiting the instability of the central Abbasid government , over the next years he became de facto autonomous , although he continued to acknowledge the suzerainty of the Abbasid caliph — for most of his reign the powerless al @-@ Mu 'tamid — and to forward some tax revenue to the central government . Ibn Tulun 's power made him a major rival to the real power behind the Abbasid throne , al @-@ Mu 'tamid 's brother and regent al @-@ Muwaffaq . The latter tried in 877 to wrest Egypt from Ibn Tulun , but the attempt failed spectacularly , and in the following year Ibn Tulun extended his area of control over Syria up to the border zone with the Byzantine Empire in the north and up to al @-@ Raqqah in the western Jazira in the east , immediately adjacent to the Abbasid metropolitan province of Iraq . 
 Relations between Ibn Tulun and al @-@ Muwaffaq were further strained when al @-@ Mu 'tamid tried to play off the two men against each other to regain his own authority and independence . In 882 the caliph attempted to escape from his brother 's control by fleeing to Ibn Tulun 's domain , but he was apprehended en route by Ishaq ibn Kundaj , the governor of the Jazira and Mosul , and was sent back to Iraq . This led to a formal breach in relations ; al @-@ Muwaffaq ordered that Ibn Tulun be publicly cursed in mosques throughout the empire and stripped of his governorships in favour of Ishaq ibn Kundaj , while Ibn Tulun similarly had al @-@ Muwaffaq publicly cursed , declared him deposed from his position as al @-@ Mu 'tamid 's second heir and proclaimed a " holy war " against him . 
 When Ibn Tulun died in May 884 , he was succeeded by his second son , Khumarawayh , with the approval of the Tulunid grandees but not the Abbasid court . Immediately al @-@ Muwaffaq ended the ongoing negotiations that he had been conducting with Ibn Tulun , and refused to recognize Khumarawayh 's rule over Egypt and Syria . A prominent Tulunid general , Ahmad ibn Muhammad al @-@ <unk> , then defected to al @-@ Muwaffaq , and urged him to make war on the " young and inexperienced " Khumarawayh and recover the latter 's provinces for the central government . 
 = = Prelude : Abbasid invasion of Syria = = 
 The initial Abbasid invasion was led by Ishaq ibn Kundaj , appointed as the nominal governor of Syria and Egypt , and another general , Muhammad ibn <unk> Abu 'l @-@ Saj . After receiving encouragement from al @-@ Muwaffaq , who promised to send them reinforcements , the two commanders marched into Syria in mid @-@ 884 . The Tulunid governor of Damascus soon defected to their side , and they were able to take control of Antioch , Hims and Aleppo . Upon learning of the Abbasid advance , Khumarawayh sent troops to Syria . The Tulunid army first proceeded to Damascus , where they succeeded in forcing its rebel governor to flee , and then advanced to Shayzar on the Orontes . The onset of winter , however , resulted in a lull in hostilities , and both sides remained in their camps to wait out the season . 
 Eventually the reinforcements that al @-@ Muwaffaq had promised arrived from Iraq , under the command of his own son , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas . The combined Abbasid forces advanced to Shayzar , where the Tulunid army was still encamped . The latter was caught completely by surprise and was defeated ; many of the Egyptians were killed in the fighting . The survivors fled to Damascus , but upon learning that the Abbasid army was headed for them they abandoned the city , allowing the Abbasids to retake it in February 885 . The Tulunid forces continued south to Ramlah in the district of Palestine , where they wrote to Khumarawayh of what had transpired . Khumarawayh now decided to personally lead his troops against the Abbasids , and departed from Egypt for Syria . 
 At the same time , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas set out from Damascus and headed for Ramlah , during which he learned of Khumarawayh 's arrival in Syria . At this point , however , the Abbasid offensive was hampered by a dispute between its commanders , which was caused when Abu 'l @-@ Abbas accused Ishaq ibn Kundaj and Ibn Abu 'l @-@ Saj of cowardice . In response to this insult , the two generals decided to abandon the campaign , and left Abu 'l @-@ Abbas to face Khumarawayh 's forces by himself . 
 = = Battle of Tawahin = = 
 The two armies met at a village called at @-@ Tawahin ( " the Mills " ) , situated between Ramlah and Damascus , on 5 / 6 April 885 ( although later Egyptian sources like al @-@ Maqrizi give the date , probably erroneously , as 7 August ) . Khumarawayh reportedly had a significant numerical advantage , thanks in part to the departure of Ishaq ibn Kundaj and Ibn Abu 'l @-@ Saj ; according to al @-@ Kindi , the Tulunid army numbered 70 @,@ 000 while Abu 'l @-@ Abbas had only 4 @,@ 000 men . Despite this , the first engagement between the two armies went favorably for the Abbasids . Khumarawayh quickly lost his nerve and fled , according to al @-@ Tabari , " on the back of a donkey " back to Egypt with part of his army . 
 Believing that they had won the battle , the Abbasid troops proceeded to plunder the Tulunid camp , with Abu 'l @-@ Abbas installing himself in Khumarawayh 's own tent . A part of the Tulunid army , however , under Sa 'd al @-@ Aysar , had remained behind and prepared to ambush Abu 'l @-@ Abbas ' forces . Once the Abbasids , secure in their success , " had already laid down their arms and settled in their quarters " , Sa 'd al @-@ Aysar 's men attacked and routed them , inflicting severe casualties and killing several senior commanders . Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , who mistakenly thought that Khumarawayh had returned to the fight , decided to flee with what men he had left , and the Tulunids plundered his camp in turn . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the battle , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas and a " very few " of his men who had managed to escape made a disorganized retreat to the north . They first reached Damascus , whose inhabitants refused to allow him entry , and then proceeded to Tarsus near the Byzantine frontier . After spending some time at Tarsus , they were ousted from the city by its residents in mid @-@ 885 , at which point Abu 'l @-@ Abbas decided to withdraw from Syria and return to Iraq . 
 Khumarawayh learned of the outcome of the battle in Egypt . <unk> upon hearing of Sa 'd al @-@ Aysar 's victory , he quickly sent back his forces to Syria and re @-@ established his authority over it . A large part of the Abbasid army was captured and transported to Egypt , where Khumarawayh , in a gesture aimed at reconciliation with the caliphal government , allowed those soldiers who wanted to return to Iraq depart without ransom , while offering the rest the opportunity to settle in Egypt . 
 The victorious Sa 'd al @-@ Aysar went to Damascus , where he rebelled against Khumarawayh , but was defeated and killed . 
 Over the next couple of years , Khumarawayh followed up on the victory and succeeded in considerably extending his realm . In late 886 , he launched an offensive against the Jazira ; Ishaq ibn Kundaj was defeated and forced to flee , and the province came under the Tulunid sphere of influence . Shortly after this , Khumarawayh began negotiations with al @-@ Muwaffaq , and a treaty was signed in December 886 whereby the Abbasid government recognized Khumarawayh as hereditary ruler in his possessions for thirty years . Subsequent attempts by both Ishaq ibn Kundaj and Ibn Abu 'l @-@ Saj to retake the Jazira failed , and Ishaq ibn Kundaj eventually submitted to Khumarawayh . In 890 <unk> al @-@ Khadim , the governor of Tarsus , also declared allegiance to him , thus bringing Cilicia under Tulunid control as well . 
 The Tulunid triumph was to prove ephemeral , however . In 893 Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , now Caliph , succeeded in regaining the Jaziran provinces by treaty , and after Khumarawayh 's death in 896 , took advantage of <unk> weakness to recover northern Syria and Cilicia as well . Finally , in 905 the Abbasids launched a campaign that rapidly brought about the end of Tulunid autonomy and fully re @-@ incorporated their lands into the Caliphate . 
 = Hegemony or Survival = 
 Hegemony or Survival : America 's Quest for Global Dominance is a study of the " American Empire " written by the American linguist and political activist Noam Chomsky , a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . It was first published in the United States in November 2003 by Metropolitan Books , and later republished in the United Kingdom by Penguin Books . 
 Chomsky 's main argument in Hegemony or Survival is that the socio @-@ economic elite who control the United States have pursued an " Imperial Grand Strategy " since the end of World War II in order to maintain global hegemony through military , political and economic means . He argues that in doing so they have repeatedly shown a total disregard for democracy and human rights , in stark contrast to the US government 's professed support for those values . Furthermore , he argues that this continual pursuit of global hegemony now threatens the existence of the human species itself because of the increasing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . 
 Drawing historical examples from 1945 through to 2003 to support his argument , Chomsky looks at the US government 's support for regimes responsible for mass human rights abuses ( including ethnic cleansing and genocide ) , namely El Salvador , Colombia , Turkey , Israel , Egypt , South Africa and Indonesia . He also discusses US support for militant dissident groups widely considered " terrorists " , particularly in Nicaragua and Cuba , as well as direct military interventions , such as the Vietnam War , NATO bombing of Yugoslavia , Afghan War and Iraq War , in order to further its power and grasp of resources . In doing so , he highlights that US foreign policy – whether controlled by Republican or Democratic administrations – still follows the same agenda of gaining access to lucrative resources and maintaining US world dominance . 
 Mainstream press reviews in the US were mixed and were largely negative in the UK , although a review in Asia was more positive . In a speech before the UN General Assembly in September 2006 , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez openly praised the work . Sales of the book surged after the recommendation , its rank on Amazon.com rising to # 1 in paperback and # 6 in hardcover in only a few days . 
 = = Background = = 
 Noam Chomsky ( 1928 – ) was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , to Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe . Becoming academically involved in the field of linguistics , Chomsky gained a PhD and secured a teaching job at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In the field of linguistics , he is credited as the creator or co @-@ creator of the Chomsky hierarchy and the universal grammar theory , achieving international recognition for his work . 
 Politically , Chomsky had held radical leftist views since childhood , identifying himself with anarcho @-@ syndicalism and libertarian socialism . A staunch critic of U.S. foreign policy , he arose to public attention for these views in 1967 , when The New York Times published his article , " The Responsibility of Intellectuals " , a criticism of the Vietnam War . His media criticism has included Manufacturing Consent : The Political Economy of the Mass Media ( 1988 ) , co @-@ written with Edward S. Herman , an analysis articulating the propaganda model theory for examining the media . 
 Chomsky is the author of over 100 books , and has been described as a prominent cultural figure . According to the Arts and Humanities Citation Index in 1992 , Chomsky was cited as a source more often than any other living scholar from 1980 to 1992 , and was the eighth most cited source overall . 
 The book was published as the first in The American Empire Series , edited for Metropolitan Books by Steve Fraser and Tom Engelhardt . The series had been devised as a vehicle for works of anti @-@ imperialism that were critical of U.S. foreign policy . Engelhardt informed an interviewer that the series reflected their " <unk> impulse " and represented an attempt to reclaim " the word " from the political right in the U.S. They agreed to publish with Metropolitan because it was co @-@ run by Engelhardt and Sara <unk> . In conjunction with the publication of the book , Chomsky answered a series of public questions on the website of The Washington Post . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Chomsky 's first chapter , " Priorities and Prospects " , provides an introduction to U.S. global dominance at the start of 2003 . He looks at the role of propaganda – employed by government and mass media – in shaping public opinion in both the U.S. and United Kingdom , arguing that it allows a wealthy elite to thrive at the expense of the majority . As evidence for the manner in which the media shapes public opinion on foreign policy , he discusses the role of the U.S. government in protecting its economic interests in Nicaragua , first by supporting the military junta of General Somoza and then by supporting the Contra militias , in both instances leading to mass human rights abuses which were ignored by the mainstream U.S. media . 
 Chapter two , " Imperial Grand Strategy " , looks at the U.S. government 's belief that it should take part in " preventative war " against states who threaten its global hegemony , despite the illegality of these actions under international law . Chomsky argues that the targets of U.S. preventative war must be weak , yet important and easy to depict as a threat to the U.S. populace . Using the 2003 invasion of Iraq as an example , he discusses how the U.S. government and media portrayed the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein as a threat to the U.S. and other Middle Eastern states , something which Chomsky argues it was not . 
 Chapter three , " The New Era of Enlightenment " , explores further examples of U.S. interventionism in world affairs . Criticising the standard U.S. government claim that such interventionism is for humanitarian purposes , Chomsky maintains that it is an attempt to further the power of U.S. capitalism , with little interest in the welfare of the people involved . Using the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo as an example , he argues that western forces intervened not to protect Albanian <unk> from Serbian aggression ( as they claimed ) , but to humiliate and weaken Serbian President Slobodan <unk> , who had remained resistant to western demands for years . He asserts that western criticism of foreign human rights abuses is politically motivated , highlighting that while the U.S. were intervening in Kosovo , they were simultaneously supporting the governments of Turkey , Colombia and Indonesia , all of whom were involved in widespread human rights abuses and ethnic cleansing . 
 In the fourth chapter , " Dangerous Times " , Chomsky focuses primarily on U.S. interventionism throughout Latin America , which the government has defended through its Monroe Doctrine . He discusses the U.S. campaign to topple the socialist government of Fidel Castro in Cuba , highlighting both its economic embargo of the island and its financial backing for militant groups that attack Cuban targets , including the perpetrators of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the bombing of Cubana Flight 455 . He furthermore discusses the U.S. government 's role in training Latin American right wing paramilitary squads , who have perpetrated widespread human rights abuses across the region . 
 Chapter five , " The Iraq Connection " , looks at the background to the 2003 Iraq War , beginning with an analysis of the activities of the Reagan administration in the 1980s , who focused their military efforts in Central America and the Middle East . Chomsky argues that Reagan 's administration utilized fear and nationalist rhetoric to distract the public from the poor economic situation that the U.S. was facing , finding scapegoats in the form of the leftist governments of Libya , Grenada and Nicaragua , as well as the international drug trade . He examines the long relationship that the U.S. had with the Hussein 's Iraqi government , noting that they actively supported Hussein throughout the Iran – Iraq War , Al @-@ <unk> Campaign and the <unk> poison gas attack , only turning against their former ally after his Invasion of Kuwait in 1990 . Proceeding to critique the idea that the Bush II administration was genuinely concerned about threats to U.S. security , he criticises their attempts to undermine international efforts to prevent the militarization of space , the abolition of biological warfare , and the fight against global pollution , as well as the fact that they ignored all warnings that the Iraq invasion would cause a worldwide anti @-@ American backlash . Exploring the dismissive attitude that the U.S. took towards European governments who opposed the war , namely France and Germany , he critiques the idea that the U.S. wanted to install a democratic government in Iraq , arguing that they wanted to install a puppet regime that would be obedient to U.S. corporate interests . 
 In the sixth chapter , " Dilemmas of Dominance " , Chomsky explores the relationship that the U.S. has had with Eastern Europe since the collapse of the Soviet Union and with East Asia since the Second World War . In the former , Chomsky argues , the U.S. has allied itself with the capitalist reformers who have advocated privatization and neoliberalism at the expense of the welfare state , leading to increased poverty and demographic decline across the region . In the latter , he has explored the role that the U.S. has played – through the likes of the San Francisco Peace Treaty of 1951 – in supporting capitalist development , but trying to ensure its own economic hegemony at the same time . 
 Chapter seven , " Cauldron of <unk> " , opens with a discussion of U.S. support for the increasing militarization of Israel and its illegal development of nuclear weapons , something Chomsky believes threatens peace in the Middle East by encouraging nations like Iran and Iraq to do the same . He explores the longstanding western exploitation of the Middle East for its oil resources , first by the British Empire and subsequently by the U.S. post @-@ World War II , and then looks at the U.S. ' role in the Israeli – Palestinian conflict , continually supporting Israel both militarily and politically , furthering human right abuses against the Palestinian people and repeatedly sabotaging the peace process . 
 The eighth chapter , " Terrorism and Justice : Some Useful <unk> " , looks at what Chomsky calls " a few simple truths " regarding the criteria that is accepted for a conflict to be internationally recognized as a " just war " . He argues that these truisms are continually ignored when it comes to the actions of the U.S. and her allies . Exploring the concepts of " terror " and " terrorism " , he argues that the U.S. only use the term to refer to the actions of their enemies , and never to their own actions , no matter how similar they may be . As an example of such double standards , he highlights the public outcry at the killing of Leon Klinghoffer , a disabled American murdered by Palestinian militants in 1985 , contrasting it with the complete U.S. ignorance of the Israeli military 's killing of a disabled Palestinian , Kemal <unk> , in 2002 . Focusing in on the Afghan War – widely described as a " just war " in the U.S. press – he criticizes such a description , arguing that the conflict was opposed by the majority of the world 's population , including the Afghan people . 
 In the final chapter , " A Passing Nightmare " , Chomsky turns his attention to weapons of mass destruction . He argues that rather than helping to eradicate nuclear , chemical and biological weaponry , the U.S. has continually increased its number of nuclear warheads , thereby encouraging other nations to do the same , putting the world in jeopardy of nuclear holocaust . Discussing the role of the U.S. in creating ballistic missile defense systems and encouraging the militarization of outer space , he notes that the U.S. government have continually undermined international treatise to decrease the number of weapons of mass destruction , because the American socio @-@ economic elite believe that " hegemony is more important than survival . " However , he argues that there is still hope for humanity if the citizens of the world – the " Second Superpower " – continue to criticize and oppose the actions of the U.S. government . 
 = = Main arguments = = 
 = = = U.S. Imperial Grand Strategy = = = 
 Chomsky 's primary argument in Hegemony or Survival is that the United States government has pursued an " Imperial Grand Strategy " in order to maintain its status as the world 's foremost superpower since at least the end of the Second World War . Adopting the term " Imperial Grand Strategy " from international affairs specialist John Ikenberry of Princeton University , he quotes Ikenberry on the nature of this doctrine and the manner in which it considers the " rule of force " to be more important than the " rule of law " , thereby ignoring international law . Quoting liberal statesman Dean Acheson , Chomsky asserts that the purpose of this strategy is to prevent any challenge to the " power , position , and prestige of the United States " . 
 Noting that economic decision making in the United States is highly centralized among a select socio @-@ economic elite who control big business , he argues that this elite play a dominant role in this Imperial Grand Strategy because they consistently maintain a strong influence over successive U.S. governments . As a result , he argues that U.S. foreign policy has focused on gaining and maintaining unrestricted access to markets , energy supplies , and strategic resources across the world . Chomsky goes on to categorize the specific purposes of the doctrine as : 
 containing other centers of global power within the " overall framework of order " managed by the United States ; maintaining control of the world 's energy supplies ; barring unacceptable forms of independent nationalism ; and overcoming " crisis of democracy " within domestic enemy territory . 
 Chomsky argues that as a part of this strategy , the U.S. has regularly engaged in " preventative war " , which he highlights is illegal under international law and could be categorised as a war crime . Preventative war refers to conflict waged to prevent a nation ever reaching the stage where it could become a potential threat , and according to Chomsky , under the regimes of Ronald Reagan , George H.W. Bush and his son George W. Bush it has actively involved attacking " an imagined or invented threat " such as Grenada and Iraq . He differentiates this " preventative war " from " preemptive war " , which he argues can be justifiable under international law in cases of self @-@ defence . Examining examples of preventative war waged by the United States , he notes that all of the nations that have been attacked have shared the same three characteristics : 1 ) they are " virtually defenseless " , 2 ) they are " important enough to be worth the trouble " and 3 ) there has been a way to portray them as " the ultimate evil and an imminent threat to our survival . " 
 = = = The Bush administration and the invasion of Iraq = = = 
 Chomsky argues that the Republican neoconservative administration of President George W. Bush , elected to the presidency in 2001 , differed from earlier administrations in one key respect : it was open about adhering to the Imperial Grand Strategy , outright declaring that it would be willing to use force to ensure U.S. global hegemony despite international condemnation . Chomsky sees this as being in contrast to previous administrations , who had never explicitly informed the public that they adhered to such a doctrine . Instead , earlier administrations had discussed their intentions within elite circles which were known only to specialists or readers of dissident literature . Thus , where once only the socio @-@ economic elite and their left @-@ wing critics knew of the Imperial Grand Strategy , now the entire American populace are potentially aware of it . He considers this a " significant difference . " 
 In Chomsky 's view , the invasion of Iraq by a U.S. and U.K. coalition must be seen in the wider context of the U.S. government 's Imperial Grand Strategy . He claims that the Iraq invasion fits the three criteria that he has highlighted for being classified as a U.S. target for preventative war . Considering the country " virtually defenseless " against the superior might of the western armed forces , he also notes that securing control of the country would be an important move for the U.S. socio @-@ economic elite , gaining unlimited access to the country 's lucrative oil resources and asserting their own military might to intimidate other nations into compliance . He also argued that government and media propaganda also set out to forge an erroneous link between Iraq President Saddam Hussein and Al @-@ Qaeda , playing on the American people 's horror of the 9 / 11 attacks . Furthermore , he stated that they also wrongly claimed that the Iraqi government was developing weapons of mass destruction to be used against the U.S. or its allies . Chomsky remarks that the 2003 invasion of Iraq is particularly significant because it signals the " new norm " in international relations , and that in future the U.S. might be willing to wage a preventative war against " Iran , Syria , the Andean region , and a number of others . " 
 = = Reviews = = 
 = = = Academic reviews = = = 
 Writing in the International Affairs journal , Michael T. Boyle of the Australian National University reviewed Hegemony or Survival alongside Immanuel Wallerstein 's The Decline of American Power : The U.S. in a Chaotic World ( 2003 ) , considering both to be " well @-@ considered if imperfect arguments " that the Bush administration 's foreign policy was in keeping with a long history of U.S. interference in global affairs . Praising its " prescient " appearance and its analysis of the historical evidence , Boyle did present some criticism of the book . In stressing the Bush administration 's continuity with earlier presidencies , Boyle argued that Chomsky had neglected to highlight the differences between the Bush administration and its predecessors , in particular its willingness to break relationships with long @-@ standing allies . Furthermore , Boyle opined that Chomsky had failed to offer a " compelling explanation " for why the U.S. government was willing to declare war on Iraq in 2003 , a conflict that was far costlier and riskier than the 1980s military adventures in Nicaragua and Grenada . 
 Journalism lecturer David Blackall of the University of Wollongong reviewed Chomsky 's book for the Asia Pacific Media Educator . He noted that it would polarize readers between those whose anti @-@ imperialist beliefs would be reinforced and those who would denounce Chomsky 's ideas as conspiracy theories . He thought the book was important in reminding readers that the War on Terror was keeping the US public in fear and was ensuring an ongoing international market for weaponry . However , he thought that there were " recurring attribution problems " in Chomsky 's text , for instance by referring to the international press as if it were a homogeneous entity with a single point of view . Ultimately , he thought that the book had something to teach educators of journalism : that " [ w ] hen there is a desire of the power elite to move on an issue , and the population is generally opposed , then the issue is removed from the political arena and from the news media priorities – distraction being a primary method . " 
 Eliza Mathews of the University of Queensland published a review of the book in the Journal of Australian Studies . She considered it similar to other books criticizing Bush 's administration , such as those of Michael Moore , John Dean , and Bob Woodward , but thought it novel in acknowledging prior policy . She thought some of his research to be " inadequate " in supporting his arguments , relying too heavily on newspaper reports and not verifying secondary sources . In other instances , she thought it unsatisfactory that Chomsky used his own work as a reference . She thought that despite being aimed at a wide audience , the text was not " light reading " , and expressed dislike at Chomsky 's " sarcastic tone " . 
 = = = Press reviews = = = 
 Views in the U.S. press were mixed . In a review for The New York Times , current U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , Harvard scholar , and Pulitzer Prize winner Samantha Power described the book as a " raging and often meandering assault " on U.S. foreign policy . Believing that Chomsky divides the world into two camps , the oppressor and the oppressed , she asserts that in Hegemony or Survival he portrays the U.S. as " the prime oppressor , [ who ] can do no right " , meanwhile overlooking the crimes of the oppressed . Arguing that he completely ignores the concept that the U.S. might undertake any foreign interventions with good intentions , she asserts that his book is not easy to read , and that his " glib and caustic tone " are distracting . Furthermore , she highlights problems with his use of end notes , particularly when some of these notes simply reference his earlier publications . Although disagreeing with his arguments , she believed that reading his book was " sobering and instructive " , having value in illustrating how many non @-@ Americans viewed the U.S. and highlighting many of the " structural defects " in U.S. foreign policy . Furthermore , recognizing that Chomsky 's " critiques have come to influence and reflect mainstream opinion elsewhere in the world , " she concedes that <unk> 's analysis has a coherence that , for many , resolves much of the post @-@ 9 / 11 confusion and disillusionment stemming from the Bush administration 's standard response to the question , " Why do they hate us ? " . 
 Carol Armbrust discussed Chomsky 's book critically in The Antioch Review , claiming that his writing style was " a monumental turnoff " and that only those who already agreed with Chomsky 's political views would read the book . Claiming that his opinions constituted " conspiracy theories " , she compared his arguments to adding " two and two " together and getting " minus six " . Conversely , Publishers Weekly considered it " highly readable " and thought it both " cogent and provocative " , representing a significant addition to the debate on U.S. foreign policy . 
 Views in the British press were largely negative . Writing in The Observer , journalist Nick Cohen wrote disparagingly of Hegemony or Survival , describing Chomsky as a " master of looking @-@ glass politics " , exemplifying a trend in the western Left for being more interested in anti @-@ Americanism than in opposing the " fascist " regime of Saddam Hussein . Focusing his critique primarily on Chomsky and his readership than the book itself , he refers to its " convoluted prose " , and remarks that its argument is " dense and filled with non sequiturs " . In a shorter review published in The Observer , Oliver Robinson described the work as an " unequivocally incensed , if meandering " study of U.S. foreign policy . 
 Piyush Mathur reviewed the work for Asia Times Online , a joint Thai @-@ Hong <unk> publication . Praising the book , Mathur argued that by being a U.S. citizen who was willing to criticise his own government , Chomsky was showing " a way beyond parochialism " that avoided nationalistic or ethnocentric intentions . Highlighting Chomsky 's " wry humor and sarcasm " , he notes that the author " successfully shows that the American emperor , while preaching modesty to the rest , himself struts about rather ostentatiously . " Mathur also turned his attention to the most prominent press reviews of the book that appeared in the U.S. and U.K. , those of Power and Cohen . He argues that the former 's review was " hardly charitable " , and that she had narrowly framed Hegemony or Survival as a critique purely of the Bush administration , something Mathur stated it clearly was not . Turning to Cohen 's " venomous " review , he highlights that it actually dealt very little with Chomsky 's book , instead offering a diatribe against the Left , one which consisted of a " thoroughly convoluted vagueness " . Ultimately , Mathur notes that the " strangely defensive and rather parochial posture " adopted by Power and Cohen was " entirely in line " with the reception that Chomsky had received from the Anglo @-@ American world . 
 = = = Hugo Chávez 's endorsement = = = 
 In September 2006 , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez held up a Spanish @-@ language copy of Hegemony or Survival during his speech at the United Nations . Chávez praised the work as an " excellent book to help us understand what has been happening in the world throughout the 20th century " . He urged everyone present to read it , including those in the U.S. , remarking that " I think that the first people who should read this book are our brothers and sisters in the United States , because their threat is right in their own house . " A vocal anti @-@ imperialist and prominent critic of U.S. foreign policy , particularly in his native Latin America , Chávez went on to describe U.S. President Bush as the " devil " in his speech . 
 In the U.S. , demand for the book dramatically increased . Within a week , sales had risen tenfold ; it reached number 1 on <unk> 's best @-@ seller list , and number 6 in the best @-@ seller lists of the bookstore chains Borders Group and Barnes & Noble . A prominent critic of Chomsky 's political views , Alan Dershowitz of Harvard Law School , told The New York Times that he believed most of those buying Hegemony or Survival would not read it , remarking that " I don 't know anybody who 's ever read a Chomsky book " . Furthermore , he related that the MIT professor " does not write page turners , he writes page stoppers . There are a lot of bent pages in Noam Chomsky 's books , and they are usually at about Page 16 . " 
 In response to Chávez 's endorsement , Chomsky told The New York Times that he would be " happy to meet " the Venezuelan President , asserting that he was " quite interested " in what his administration had achieved and thought many of Chávez 's views to be " quite constructive " . This meeting came about in August 2009 , when Chomsky visited the Latin American country . In a press conference to commence the meeting , Chávez made reference to the intellectual 's work , remarking " Hegemony or survival ; we opt for survival " , before comparing Chomsky 's thesis with the concept of " Socialism or Barbarism " advocated by German Marxist Rosa Luxemburg in the early 20th century . Speaking through an interpreter , Chomsky replied that " I write about peace and criticize the barriers to peace ; that 's easy . What 's harder is to create a better world ... and what 's so exciting about at last visiting Venezuela is that I can see how a better world is being created . " He went on to Venezolana de Televisión , where he commented on the U.S. government 's role in orchestrating the 2009 Honduran coup d 'état to overthrow leftist President Manuel Zelaya . He also expressed cautious support for the leftist reforms being implemented by Chávez 's administration , remarking his opinion that their moves " toward the creation of another socio @-@ economic model could have a global impact if these projects are successfully carried out " . 
 In summer 2011 , Chomsky expressed criticism of Chávez 's government over the controversial imprisonment of judge María Lourdes <unk> , who had been detained since December 2009 . He asserted that he was " convinced that she must be set free , not only due to her physical and psychological health conditions , but in conformance with the human dignity the Bolivarian revolution presents as a goal . " In December 2011 , Chomsky reiterated this position , sending a letter to Chávez asking him to include the judge in his " Christmas @-@ time pardons " . <unk> was released on June 14 , 2013 . 
 = Don Dunstan = 
 Donald Allan " Don " Dunstan AC , QC ( 21 September 1926 – 6 February 1999 ) was a South Australian politician . He entered politics as the Member for Norwood in 1953 , became leader of the South Australian Branch of the Australian Labor Party in 1967 , and was Premier of South Australia between June 1967 and April 1968 , and again between June 1970 and February 1979 . 
 The son of a business executive , Dunstan grew up as part of the Adelaide establishment . He excelled academically before experiencing his progressive political awakening while training in law and arts at the University of Adelaide . His upper @-@ class background and scholarly bearing made him unusual for the Labor Party at the time , but he rose quickly and entered parliament at the age of 26 . Dunstan quickly achieved prominence as Labor 's standout performer , a charismatic and aggressive debater in an era of sedate political conduct . The dominant political figure at the time was Premier Thomas Playford IV , then leading the Liberal and Country League ( LCL ) through a 27 @-@ year hold on power , aided by a system of electoral malapportionment dubbed the Playmander , which gave undue weight to the LCL 's rural base since its introduction by the LCL in 1936 . Dunstan stridently pursued the LCL over the Playmander . 
 In the late 1950s , Dunstan became well known for his campaign against the death penalty being imposed on Max Stuart , who was convicted of rape and murder of a small girl . He harried Playford aggressively over the matter , creating an uproar over what he saw as an unfair process . Playford eventually relented , and appeared shaken thereafter ; the event was seen as a turning point in the LCL 's decline , and Labor gained momentum . During Labor 's time in opposition , Dunstan was prominent in securing some reforms in Aboriginal rights , and was at the forefront of Labor abandoning the White Australia Policy . 
 Labor conducted an extensive campaign in marginal LCL seats at the 1965 election , resulting in 21 of 39 seats , with Frank Walsh and the Labor Party taking power . As Deputy Premier and Attorney @-@ General , the youthful and charismatic Dunstan made his older peers look lethargic as television became increasingly ubiquitous . The LCL opposition changed leaders and installed the young Steele Hall , worrying Labor as the elderly Walsh appeared bumbling in contrast . This resulted in Labor replacing Walsh with Dunstan . Despite maintaining a much larger vote over the LCL , Labor lost two seats at the 1968 election , with the LCL forming government with support of an independent . Dunstan responded by increasing his attacks on the Playmander and was able to convincingly sustain Playmander attacks with the effect of convincing the LCL into watering down the malapportionment . Again with little change in Labor 's vote but with the Playmander removed , Labor won 27 of 47 seats at the 1970 election . With a fairer seat and boundary system in place , Dunstan won three more elections , in 1973 , 1975 and 1977 . 
 A reformist , Dunstan brought profound change to South Australian society . His socially progressive administration saw Aboriginal land rights recognised , homosexuality decriminalised , the first female judge appointed , the first non @-@ British governor , Sir Mark Oliphant , and later , the first indigenous governor Sir Douglas Nicholls . He enacted consumer protection laws , reformed and expanded the public education and health systems , abolished the death penalty , relaxed censorship and drinking laws , created a ministry for the environment , enacted anti @-@ discrimination law , and implemented electoral reforms such as the overhaul of the Legislative Council of parliament , lowered the voting age to 18 , enacted universal suffrage , and completely abolished malapportionment , changes which gave him a less hostile parliament and allowed him to enact his reforms . He established Rundle Mall , enacted measures to protect buildings of historical heritage , and encouraged a flourishing of the arts , with support for the Adelaide Festival Centre , the State Theatre Company , and the establishment of the South Australian Film Corporation . He encouraged cultural exchanges with Asia , multiculturalism and an increase in the state 's culinary awareness and sophistication . He is recognised for his role in reinvigorating the social , artistic and cultural life of South Australia during his nine years in office , remembered as the Dunstan Decade . However , there were also problems ; the economy began to stagnate , and the large increases to burgeoning public service generated claims of waste . One of Dunstan 's pet projects , a plan to build a new city at Monarto to alleviate urban pressures in Adelaide , was abandoned when economic and population growth stalled , with much money and planning already invested . After four consecutive election wins , Dunstan 's administration began to falter in 1978 following his dismissal of Police Commissioner Harold Salisbury , as controversy broke out over whether he had improperly interfered with a judicial investigation . In addition , policy problems and unemployment began to mount , as well as unsubstantiated rumours of corruption and personal impropriety . Dunstan became increasingly short @-@ tempered , and the strain was increased by the death of his second wife . His resignation from the premiership and politics in 1979 was abrupt after collapsing due to ill health , but he would live for another 20 years , remaining a vocal and outspoken campaigner for progressive social policy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dunstan was born on 21 September 1926 in Suva , Fiji to Francis Vivian Dunstan and Ida May Dunstan ( née Hill ) ( Australian parents of Cornish descent ) . His parents had moved to Fiji in 1916 after his father took up a position as manager of the Adelaide Steamship Company . He spent the first seven years of his life in Fiji , starting his schooling there . Dunstan was beset by illness , and his parents sent him to South Australia hoping that the drier climate would assist his recovery . He lived in Murray Bridge for three years with his mother 's parents before returning to Suva for a short period during his secondary education . During his time in Fiji , Dunstan mixed easily with the Indian settlers and indigenous people , something that was frowned upon by the whites on the island . 
 He won a scholarship in classical studies and attended St Peter 's College , a traditional private school for the sons of the Adelaide establishment . He developed public speaking and acting skills , winning the College 's public speaking prize for two consecutive years . In 1943 , he portrayed the title role in a production of John Drinkwater 's play Abraham Lincoln , and according to the school magazine , he " was the chief contributor to the success of the occasion . " His academic strengths were in classical history and languages , and he disliked mathematics . He gained a reputation as a maverick , and said that his headmaster called him a " congenital rebel " multiple times . During this time , Dunstan did not board and lived in the seaside suburb of Glenelg with relatives . Dunstan completed his secondary schooling in 1943 , ranking in the top 30 overall in the statewide matriculation examinations . 
 In his youth , influenced by his uncle , former Liberal Lord Mayor of Adelaide Sir Jonathan Cain , Dunstan was a supporter of the conservative Liberal and Country League ( LCL ) and handed out how @-@ to @-@ vote cards for the party at state elections . Dunstan later said of his involvement with the Liberals : " I do not call it snobbery to deride the Establishment in South Australia , I admit that I was brought up into it , and I admit that it gave me a pain . " When asked of his roots , he said " I 'm a refugee from it and thank God for somewhere honest to flee to ! " 
 His political awakening happened during his university years . Studying law and arts at the University of Adelaide , he became very active in political organisations , joining the University Socialist Club , Fabian Society , the Student Representative Council and the Theatre Group . A two @-@ week stint in the Communist Party was followed by membership in the Australian Labor Party . Dunstan was markedly different from the general membership of the Labor Party of the time ; upon applying for membership at Trades Hall , a Labor veteran supposedly muttered " how could that long @-@ haired prick be a Labor man ? " His peculiarities , such as his upper @-@ class accent , were a target of derision by the working @-@ class Labor old guard throughout his early political involvement . Dunstan funded his education by working in theatre and radio during his university years . He eventually graduated with a double degree , with arts majors in Latin , comparative philology , history and politics , and he came first in political science . 
 Whilst living in Norwood and studying at university , Dunstan met his first wife , Gretel Dunstan ( née <unk> ) , whose Jewish family had fled Nazi Germany to Australia . They married in 1949 , and moved , after Dunstan graduated , to Fiji where he was admitted to the bar and began his career as a lawyer . They returned to Adelaide in 1951 and settled in George Street , Norwood , with the couple 's young daughter , Bronwen . The family was forced to live in squalor for a number of years while Dunstan established his legal practice ; during this time , they took in boarders as a source of extra income . Gretel later gave birth to two sons , Andrew and Paul . 
 = = Political beginnings = = 
 Dunstan was nominated as the Labor candidate for the electoral district of Norwood at the 1953 election . His campaign was noted for his colourful methods to sway voters : posters of his face were placed on every pole in the district , and Labor supporters walked the streets advocating Dunstan . He targeted in particular the large Italian migrant population of the district , distributing translated copies of a statement the sitting LCL member Roy Moir had made about immigrants . Moir had commented that " these immigrants are of no use to us — a few of them are tradesmen but most of them have no skills at all . And when they intermarry we 'll have all the colours of the rainbow " . Dunstan won the seat and was elected to the South Australian House of Assembly . His son Andrew was born nine months after the win . 
 Dunstan was to become the most vocal opponent of the LCL Government of Sir Thomas Playford , strongly criticising its practice of electoral malapportionment , known as the Playmander , a pun on the term gerrymander . This system gave a disproportionate electoral weight to the LCL 's rural base , with votes worth as much as ten times others − at the 1968 election the rural seat of Frome had 4 @,@ 500 formal votes , while the metropolitan seat of Enfield had 42 @,@ 000 formal votes . He added colour and flair to debate in South Australian politics , changing the existing " gentlemanly " method of conducting parliamentary proceedings . He did not fear direct confrontation with the incumbent government and attacked it with vigour — up to this point most of his Labor colleagues had become dispirited by the Playmander , and were resigned to the ongoing dominance of Playford and LCL , so they were sought to influence policy through collaborative legislating . In 1954 , the LCL introduced the Government Electoral Bill , which was designed to further accentuate the undue weight on rural voters . During the debate , Dunstan decried this " immoral Bill ... I cannot separate it from the motives of those who put it forward . Since it is immoral , so are they . " Such language , unusually aggressive by the prevailing standards , resulted in Dunstan 's removal from the parliamentary chambers after he refused a request from the Speaker to retract his remark . The first parliamentarian to be expelled in years , Dunstan found himself on the front pages of newspapers for the first time . Nevertheless , he was not able to build up much of a profile in his first few years as The Advertiser , the dominant newspaper in the city , had a policy of ignoring the young politician 's activities — its editor Lloyd Dumas was the father of one of Dunstan 's first girlfriends . 
 = = Max Stuart trial = = 
 In December 1958 there occurred an event that initially had nothing to do with Playford , but eventually intensified into a debacle that was regarded as a turning point in his premiership and marked the end of his rule . Dunstan was prominent in pressuring Playford during this time . 
 A young girl was found raped and murdered , and Max Stuart , an Aborigine , was convicted and sentenced to be executed . Stuart 's lawyer claimed that the confession was forced , and appeals to the Supreme and High Courts were dismissed . Amid objections against the fairness of the trial among an increasing number of legal academics and judges , The News brought much attention to Stuart 's plight with an aggressive , tabloid @-@ style campaign . 
 When Playford and the Executive Council decided not to reprieve Stuart , an appeal to the Privy Council was made to stall the execution . Spearheaded by Dunstan , Labor then tried to introduce legislation to stall the hanging . Amid hue and cry , Playford started a Royal Commission to review the case . However , two of the commissioners had already been involved in the trial and one of the appeals . This provoked worldwide controversy with claims of bias from Dunstan and Labor , who also attacked Playford for what they regarded as a too @-@ restrictive scope of inquiry . 
 The Royal Commission began its work and the proceedings were followed closely and eagerly debated by the public . As Playford did not commute Stuart 's sentence , Dunstan introduced a bill to abolish capital punishment . The vote was split along party lines and was thus defeated , but Dunstan used the opportunity to attack the Playmander with much effect in the media , portraying the failed legislation as an unjust triumph of a malapportioned minority who had a vengeance mentality over an electorally repressed majority who wanted a humane outcome . 
 Amid the continuing uproar , Playford decided to grant clemency . The Royal Commission concluded that the guilty verdict was sound . Although a majority of those who spoke out against the handling of the matter — including Dunstan — thought that Stuart was probably guilty , the events provoked heated and bitter debate in South Australian society and destabilised Playford 's administration , while bringing much publicity to Dunstan . 
 From 1959 onwards , the LCL government clung to power with the support of two independents , as Labor gained momentum . Always at the forefront , Dunstan lambasted the government for perceived <unk> on social welfare , education , health and the arts . Dunstan heavily promoted himself as a reformer . 
 In 1960 , Dunstan became president of the State Labor Party . The year also saw the death of Opposition Leader Mick O 'Halloran and his replacement by Frank Walsh . Dunstan attempted to win both the position of Opposition Leader and , failing that , Deputy Leader . However , the Labor caucus was sceptical of his age and inexperience , and he failed to gain either position , albeit narrowly . 
 = = Ascent to power = = 
 Federally , Dunstan , together with fellow Fabian Gough Whitlam , set about removing the White Australia policy from the Labor platform . The older trade @-@ unionist @-@ based members of the Labor Party vehemently opposed changing the status quo . However , the " New Guard " of the party , of which Dunstan was a part , were determined to bring about its end . Attempts in 1959 and 1961 failed , with Labor leader Arthur Calwell stating , " It would ruin the Party if we altered the immigration policy ... it was only cranks , long hairs , academics and do @-@ gooders who wanted the change " . However , Dunstan persisted in his efforts , and in 1965 it was removed from the Labor platform at their national conference ; Dunstan personally took credit for the change . Whitlam would later bring about the comprehensive end of the White Australia policy in 1973 as Prime Minister . 
 Dunstan pursued similar reforms with respect to Indigenous Australians . In 1962 , the Aboriginal Affairs Bill was introduced to liberalise constraints that had been placed on Indigenous Australians in the past and had effectively resulted in segregation . The initial proposal still retained some restrictions , placing more controls over full @-@ blooded Aborigines . Dunstan was prominent in Labor 's opposition to the double standards , and called for abolition of race @-@ based restrictions , saying that social objectives could be achieved without explicit colour @-@ based schemes . He was successful in forcing amendments to liberalise controls on property and the confinement of Indigenous Australians to reserves . However , his attempt to remove the different standards required of part and full @-@ blooded Aborigines failed , as did his proposal to ensure that at least half of the members of the Aboriginal Affairs Board be Indigenous Australians . Despite the passage of the bill , restrictions remained in place and Dunstan questioned the policy of assimilation of Aborigines , which he saw as the diluting of their distinctive cultures . 
 Labor won the seats of Glenelg and Barossa at the 1965 election , after winning the seats of Chaffey and Unley at the 1962 election . Labor thus finally overcame the Playmander and formed government for the first time in 32 years , with Frank Walsh as Premier of South Australia . Despite winning 55 percent of the primary vote , the Playmander was still strong enough that Labor won only 21 of 39 seats , a two @-@ seat majority . Dunstan became Attorney @-@ General and Minister of Community Welfare and Aboriginal Affairs . He was far and away the youngest member of the cabinet ; he was the only minister under 50 , and only one of three under 60 . Dunstan had a major impact on Government policy as Attorney @-@ General . Having only narrowly lost out on the leadership in 1960 , Dunstan became the obvious successor to the 67 @-@ year @-@ old Walsh , who was due to retire in 1967 under Labor rules of the time . 
 The Walsh Government implemented significant reform in its term of office . Liquor , gambling and entertainment laws were overhauled and liberalised , social welfare was gradually expanded and Aboriginal reserves were created . Strong restrictions on Aboriginal access to liquor were lifted . Women 's working rights were granted under the mantra of " equal pay for work of equal value " , and racial discrimination legislation was enacted . Town planning was codified in law , and the State Planning Authority was created to oversee development . Workers were given more rights and the bureaucracy of the education department was liberalised . Much of the reform was not necessarily radical and was primarily to " fill the gaps " that the previous LCL government had left . Despite a consistently higher statewide vote , Labor were consistently outnumbered 16 – 4 in the Legislative Council , so some desired legislation did not make it through . In 1965 , the legislature convened for 65 days , the most for 34 years , but many bills were still yet to be debated . 
 Many bills were watered down , but due to public disinterest , outcry was minimal . In particular , the council blocked electoral reform legislation , paving the way for a probable LCL win at the next election . Such was Dunstan 's pre @-@ eminence during his term as Attorney @-@ General that the cabinet was often called the " Dunstan Ministry " . 
 An economic depression had begun in South Australia after the Labor government gained office in 1965 ; unemployment went from the lowest in the country to the second highest , while immigration levels dropped . Labor was not responsible for the depression , although it initially did little to alleviate it . The Liberals seized on this opportunity , blaming it on " twelve months of Socialist administration in South Australia " and branding it the " Dunstan Depression " . 
 In the 1966 federal election , Labor suffered a swing against it of 11 @.@ 8 % in South Australia , double the national average . If this was replicated at a state election , it was projected that Labor would only hold 10 of the 39 seats . The Liberals dropped Playford as the state leader , and the younger and more progressive Steele Hall took his place . In a dire situation with the next state election looming , Labor changed leaders with Walsh , a " <unk> figure in the television age " , standing down in May 1967 . Much of the Labor Right faction , as well as Walsh , was opposed to Dunstan taking the leadership , but no other MPs had the same charisma or eloquence . Eventually , Dunstan won the leadership over Des Corcoran , winning fourteen votes to eleven on the strength of rural and marginal Laborites , having trailed by one vote on the first count before less popular candidates were eliminated . 
 Dunstan 's first Premiership was eventful , with a steady stream of reform and attempts to end the depression . The latter half of 1967 saw the beginnings of a slight recovery , with unemployment dipping and industrial capacity steadying . The 1967 – 68 budget ran into deficit , allocating funds to energise the economic engine whilst Dunstan lambasted the Federal Government for neglecting the South Australian economy , demanding it take a degree of responsibility for its ills . 
 = = Elections 1968 – 1970 = = 
 In preparation for the 1968 election , Labor campaigned heavily around its leader , and this resonated with voters ; in surveys conducted in parts of the metropolitan area , 84 % of respondents declared their approval of Dunstan . In a presidential @-@ style election campaign , Hall and Dunstan journeyed across the state advocating their platforms , and the major issues were the leaders , the Playmander and the economy . Television saw its first major use in the election , and Dunstan , an astute public speaker , successfully mastered it . With his upbeat style , Dunstan also made an impact in the print media , which had long been a bastion of the LCL . Despite winning a 52 % majority of the primary vote , and 54 % of the two @-@ party preferred count , Labor lost two seats , resulting in a hung parliament : the LCL and Labor each had 19 seats . Had 21 votes in the rural seat of Murray gone the other way , Labor would have retained power . The balance of power rested with the chamber 's lone independent , Tom Stott , who was offered the speakership by the LCL in return for his support on the Assembly floor . Stott , a conservative , agreed to support the LCL . 
 There was a degree of speculation in the press that Dunstan would call for a new election because of the adverse outcome . However , Dunstan realised the futility of such a move and instead sought to humiliate the LCL into bringing an end to malapportionment . Although Stott 's decision to support the LCL ended any realistic chance of Dunstan remaining premier , Dunstan did not immediately resign his commission , intending to force Hall and the LCL to demonstrate that they had support on the floor of the Assembly when it reconvened . He used the six weeks before the start of the new legislature to draw attention to malapportionment . Protests were held on 15 March in Light Square . There , Dunstan spoke to a crowd of more than 10 @,@ 000 : " We need to show that the people of SA feel that at last the watershed has been reached in this , and that they will not continue to put up with a system which is as undemocratic as the present one in SA . " On 16 April , the first day of the new House 's sitting , Dunstan lost a confidence vote . With it now clear that the LCL had control of the House , Dunstan tendered his resignation to Governor Edric <unk> . Hall was then sworn in as premier . However , the six weeks of protesting had brought nationwide criticism of the unfairness of the electoral system and put more pressure on the LCL to relent to reforms ; it has been seen as one of the most important political events of its time . 
 With the end of Playford 's tenure , the LCL had brought younger , more progressive members into its ranks . The Hall Government continued many of the social reforms that the Walsh / Dunstan governments had initiated ; most of these at the instigation of Hall or his Attorney @-@ General , Robin Millhouse . Abortion was partially legalised , and planning for the Festival Centre began . The conservative and rural factions of the League , notably in the Legislative Council dominated by the landed gentry , were bitterly opposed to some reforms , and more than once Hall was forced to rely on Labor support to see bills passed . The LCL began to break apart ; what had once been a united party was now <unk> — four distinct groups across the political spectrum appeared within the party . The economy of South Australia began to pick up under Hall , returning to full employment . During the term in opposition , Des Corcoran became Dunstan 's deputy , and the pair worked together well despite any rift that may have been caused by the struggle to succeed Walsh . 
 Hall also enacted a complete reform of the electoral system . He was embarrassed that the LCL was in a position to win government despite having clearly lost the first @-@ preference vote , and was committed to a fairer electoral system . The reforms were significant , but did not go as far as the change to " one vote one value " that Labor and Dunstan had demanded . The lower house formerly had 39 seats — 13 in Adelaide and 26 in the country . Now , 47 seats were to be contested : 28 in Adelaide and 19 in the country . While there was still a slight rural weighting ( since Adelaide accounted for two @-@ thirds of the state 's population ) , with Adelaide now electing a majority of the legislature , historical results made a Labor win at the next election likely . Under the Playmander , Labor usually dominated Adelaide . In most years , the LCL won almost no seats in the capital outside of the wealthy eastern crescent and around Holdfast Bay . Under the circumstances , conventional wisdom was that Hall undertook electoral reform knowing he was effectively handing the premiership to Dunstan at the next election . 
 Stott withdrew support in 1970 over the <unk> Dam , a dispute over the location of a dam on the Murray River , and South Australia went to the polls . The dam controversy was not much of an election issue , and attempts by the Democratic Labor Party to portray Dunstan as a communist over his opposition to ongoing Australian support for South Vietnam had little effect . The LCL campaigned heavily on Hall , while Dunstan promised sweeping social reform , artistic transformation and more community services . He said " We 'll set a new standard of social advancement that the whole of Australia will envy . We believe South Australia can set the pace . It can happen here . We can do it . " Dunstan won the 1970 election easily , taking 27 seats compared with the LCL 's 20 . Although the share of the votes had been similar to 1968 , the dilution of the Playmander had changed the share of the seats . As Labor had attained a majority of the popular vote for a long period , and because malapportionment had been largely ended , the political scientists Neal Blewett and Dean Jaensch said " a Dunstan decade seems assured " . 
 = = Dunstan decade = = 
 Dunstan wasted no time in organising his new ministry , taking several portfolios for himself , and again taking the position of Treasurer of South Australia . Deputy Premier Des Corcoran took on most infrastructure portfolios — Marine and Harbours , and Public Works . Corcoran became the face of the Dunstan ministry in its relationship with the Labor caucus , with his ability to use his strong manner to settle disputes . Bert Shard became Health Minister , overseeing the construction and planning of new , major public hospitals : the Flinders Medical Centre and Modbury Hospital . Hugh Hudson took on the Education portfolio , an important role in a government that was determined to bring about profound change to the South Australian education system . Geoff Virgo , the new Transport Minister , was to deal with the Metropolitan Adelaide Transport Study ( MATS ) plans . Len King was made Attorney @-@ General and Aboriginal Affairs Minister despite being a new member of parliament . Dunstan formed a strong circle of loyal ministers around him , in a style radically different from his predecessors . 
 Soon after the election , Dunstan travelled to Canberra for the annual Premiers ' Conference as the sole Labor premier . His Government , on a mandate to dramatically increase funding in key areas , sought to appropriate further finances from the Federal Government . This brought Dunstan into conflict with Prime Minister John Gorton , and federal funding to SA was not increased . An appeal was made to the Federal Grants Commission , and Dunstan was awarded more than he had hoped for . In addition to the money received from the Grants Commission , funds were diverted from water @-@ storage schemes in the Adelaide Hills over the advice of engineers , and cash reserves were withdrawn from the two government @-@ owned banks . The monies were subsequently used to finance health , education and arts schemes . 
 On the death in office of Governor Sir James Harrison in 1971 , Dunstan finally had the chance to appoint the governor of his choosing : Sir Mark Oliphant , a physicist who had worked on the Manhattan Project . Dunstan had never been happy that governors were usually British ex @-@ servicemen ; it was a personal goal of his to see an active and notable South Australian take on the role . Although the post was ceremonial , Oliphant brought energy to the role , and he used his stature to decry damage to the environment caused by deforestation , excessive open @-@ cut mining and pollution . Oliphant 's tenure was successful and held in high regard , although he did come into conflict with the premier at times as both men were outspoken and strong @-@ willed . 
 In 1972 , the first major developments in regard to the state 's population growth occurred . Adelaide 's population was set to increase to 1 @.@ 3 million and the MATS plan and water @-@ storage schemes were in planning to accommodate this . These were summarily rejected by the Dunstan Government , which planned to build a new city 83 kilometres from Adelaide , near Murray Bridge . The city , to be known as Monarto , was to be built on farmland to the west of the existing town . Dunstan was very much against allowing Adelaide 's suburbs to further sprawl , and thus Monarto was a major focus of his government . He argued that the new South Eastern Freeway would allow a drive of only 45 minutes from Adelaide , that the city was not far from current industry , and that water could be readily supplied from the River Murray . The government hoped that Adelaide would not sprawl into the Mount Lofty Ranges to the east and that the bureaucracy would be dispersed from the capital . In contrast , public servants feared being forced into the rural settlement . Critics — of which there were many — derided the project as " Dunstan 's Versailles in the bush " . Environmental activists aired fears of the effects of Monarto on the River Murray , which was already suffering from pollution and salinity problems . Later on , it was noticed that there was hard bedrock underneath the ground , raising drainage problems . 
 From 1970 to 1973 , much legislation passed through the South Australian Parliament . Workers saw increases in welfare , drinking laws were further liberalised , an Ombudsman was created , censorship was liberalised , seat belts were made mandatory , the education system was overhauled , and the public service was gradually increased ( doubling in size during the Dunstan era ) . Adelaide 's water supply was fluoridated in 1971 and the age of majority was lowered from 21 to 18 . A Commissioner of Consumer Affairs was created , a demerit point system was introduced to penalise poor driving practices in an attempt to cut the road toll , and compensation for workers was improved . Police autonomy and powers were restricted following a rally in opposition to the Vietnam War , which was broken up by police , although Dunstan had wanted the demonstrators to be able to close off the street . A royal commission was called into the police commissioner 's disregard for Dunstan 's orders , and resulted in legislation giving the government more control over the police ; the commissioner then retired . The dress code for the Parliament was relaxed during this period , the suit and tie was no longer seen as obligatory , and Dunstan himself caused media frenzy when he arrived at Parliament House in 1972 wearing pink shorts that ended above his knees . After his departure from public life he admitted that his sartorial statement may have gone beyond the limits . Nevertheless , his fashion sense resulted in his being voted " the sexiest political leader in Australia " by Woman 's Day in 1975 , and the image of Dunstan in the shorts remains iconic . 
 In 1972 Dunstan separated from his wife and moved into a small flat in Kent Town , adjacent to Norwood . The family home was sold as two of the children were already studying in university . In 1974 the couple were finally divorced . Dunstan notes this period as being initially a " very bleak and lonely " time for him . 
 In absence of his family , he made new friends and acquaintances . Friends living nearby would come to his apartment for conversation and good food — cooking was Dunstan 's hobby . Dunstan bought another house in 1974 , partially financed from a then @-@ unpublished cookbook . In 1976 , Don Dunstan 's Cookbook was published — the first cookbook released by a serving Australian leader . More generally , Dunstan promoted a revolution in fine dining in the state . Encouraged by Dunstan 's enthusiasm for multiculturalism , many new restaurants were opened by proprietors and the diversity of cuisine increased . He also promoted the viticulture industry through his patronage of wine festivals . 
 Having played a part in Labor 's abandonment of the White Australia Policy at national level , Dunstan was also prominent in promoting multiculturalism . He was well known for his attendance at and patronage of Cornish , Italian and Greek Australian cultural festivals and his appreciation of Asian art , and sought to build on cultural respect to create trade links with Asia . Dunstan 's involvement in such cultural exchanges was also credited with generating strong support for Labor from ethnic and non @-@ Anglo @-@ Saxon immigrant communities , although it was viewed with suspicion by some in the Anglo @-@ Saxon establishment . Dunstan himself later recalled : " When I proposed the establishment of a Cornish Festival , in Australia 's " Little Cornwall " , people of Cornish descent came flocking . " 
 Having been vocal in criticising Playford for sacrificing heritage to the march of development , Dunstan was prominent in protecting historic buildings from being bulldozed for high @-@ rise office blocks . In 1972 , the government intervened to purchase and thereby save Edmund Wright House on King William Street from being replaced with a skyscraper . In 1975 , the Customs House at Semaphore was purchased to save it from demolition . His support of heritage preservation overlapped with his promotion of gourmet dining when his personal efforts helped to save the historic Ayers House on North Terrace , having it converted into a restaurant to avoid demolition . In contrast , there were also some controversial developments . Part of the rocky Hallett Cove on Gulf St Vincent in Adelaide 's southern suburbs was developed for housing , as were vineyards in Morphettville , Tea Tree Gully , Modbury , and <unk> . This attracted criticism , as Dunstan was prominent in promoting South Australian viticulture and enotourism . 
 In pursuit of economic links with the nations of South @-@ East Asia , Dunstan came into contact with the leaders of the Malaysian state of Penang in 1973 . Striking a note with Chong Eu Lim , the Chief Minister , Dunstan set about organising cultural and economic engagement between the two states . " Penang Week " was held in Adelaide in July , and in return , " South Australia Week " was held in Penang 's capital , George Town . In the same year , the Adelaide Festival Centre was opened — Australia 's first multifunction performing arts complex . 
 Over a six @-@ year period , government funding for the arts was increased by a factor of seven and in 1978 , the South Australian Film Corporation commenced work . During Dunstan 's time in charge , acclaimed films such as Breaker Morant , Picnic at Hanging Rock and Storm Boy were made in the state . Dunstan 's support of the arts and fine dining was credited by commentators with attracting artists , craftspeople and writers into the state , helping to change its atmosphere . 
 The South Australian Legislative Council , the Upper House in the Parliament , was , due to its limited electoral roll , overwhelmingly non @-@ Labor . Unlike the Lower House , its members were elected only by voters who met certain property and wealth requirements . Combined with the remains of the " Playmander " malapportionment , it was difficult for the Labor Party to achieve the representation it wished . The Legislative Council either watered down or outright rejected a considerable amount of Labor legislation ; bills to legalise homosexuality , abolish corporal and capital punishment and allow gambling and casinos were rejected . A referendum had indicated support for Friday night shopping , but Labor legislation was blocked in the upper house by the LCL . 
 Dunstan called an election for March 1973 , hoping to gain a mandate to seek changes to the Council . The LCL were badly disunited ; the more liberal wing of the party under Hall joined Dunstan in wanting to introduce universal suffrage for the upper house , while the more conservative members of the LCL did not . The conservatives then decided to limit Hall 's powers , resulting in his resignation and creation of the breakaway Liberal Movement ( LM ) , which overtly branded itself as a semi @-@ autonomous component within the LCL . Labor capitalised on the opposition divisions to secure an easy victory . They campaigned under the slogan " South Australia 's Doing Well with Labor " , while the LCL was hampered by infighting ; many LCL candidates were claiming different leaders in their electoral material depending on their factional allegiance . The Labor Party won with 51 @.@ 5 % of the primary vote and secured a second consecutive majority government with 26 seats . It was only the second time that a Labor government in South Australia had been re @-@ elected for a second term , the first being the early Thomas Price Labor government . It would be the first five @-@ year @-@ incumbent Labor government however . They also gained two more seats in the Legislative Council to have six of the twenty members . Labor entered the new term with momentum when a fortnight after the election , the LCL purged LM members from its ranks , forcing them to either quit the LM or leave the LCL and join the LM as a distinct party . 
 Dunstan saw reform of the Legislative Council as an important goal , and later a prime achievement , of his Government . Labor , as a matter of party policy , wanted to see the Legislative Council abolished . Dunstan , seeing this as unfeasible in his term , set about to reform it instead . Two bills were prepared for Legislative Council reform ; one to lower the voting age to 18 and introduce universal suffrage , and another to make councillors elected from a single statewide electorate under a system of proportional representation . The LCL initially blocked both bills , stating that it would only accept them if modifications were made to the second one . Changes were conceded ; unlike the House of Assembly , voting would not be compulsory and the preference system was to be slightly altered . Once the amendments were made , the legislation was passed . 
 During his second term , Dunstan started efforts to build a petrochemical complex at <unk> , near Port Augusta . Negotiations were held with several multinational companies , but nothing eventuated . Legislation was passed to create a Land Commission and introduce urban land price controls . However , a bill to create " a right to privacy " was defeated in the upper house after protests from journalists , as was legislation to mandate refunds to consumers for returning beverage containers and therefore promote recycling . In 1975 , Dunstan declared Australia 's first legal nude bathing reserve . 
 Prior to the 1975 federal and state elections , Australia , and South Australia in particular , had been hit by a series of economic problems . The 1973 oil crisis had massively increased the cost of living , domestic industry began to erode due to a lack of cost @-@ competitiveness , and government funds were waning . In response , the Dunstan Government sold loss @-@ making railways to the Commonwealth and brought in new taxes to allow wage rises . The changes had unexpected consequences : inflation , already high , increased markedly , and workers were still displeased with wages . The LCL , now known as the Liberal Party , had rebuilt after internal schism and had modernised to make themselves more appealing to the public . Having called an early election , Dunstan appealed to the electorate and pushed blame onto the Whitlam Government for South Australia 's problems . In a television address just days before the election , he said : " My Government is being smeared and it hurts . They want you to think we are to blame for Canberra 's mistakes . The vote on Saturday is not for Canberra , not for Australia , but for South Australia . " 
 Labor remained the largest party in Parliament , but lost the two @-@ party preferred vote at 49 @.@ 2 % and saw its numbers decrease from 26 to 23 . The LCL held 20 seats , the Liberal Movement two , the Country Party one , and the last remaining with an independent , the nominally Labor Mayor of Port Pirie , Ted Connelly . Dunstan appealed to Connelly and offered him the role of Speaker . However , the reforms to the Legislative Council 's election bore fruit . Of the 11 seats up for election , Labor won six with 47 @.@ 3 % of the vote , and the LM two , allowing Labor a total of 10 seats . This meant they could now , with the help of the LM , push through reforms opposed by the Liberals . 
 It was the first time that a Labor government in South Australia had been re @-@ elected for a third term , and would be the first seven @-@ year @-@ incumbent Labor government . 
 Dunstan continued to try to push through further legislation ; he sought to expand on the Hall Government 's electoral @-@ boundaries reform , to bring it closer to one vote one value . The legislation sought to establish 47 electoral districts containing roughly equal numbers of voters ( with a 10 % tolerance ) . <unk> were to be presided over by an independent boundaries commission . The bill passed with the support of the breakaway LM in the upper house — former Premier Steele Hall and his former Attorney @-@ General Robin Millhouse . 
 One famous demonstration of Dunstan 's charismatic style and media savvy came in January 1976 . A psychic predicted that , due to Dunstan and the state 's social liberalisation — which he saw as sinful — God would destroy Adelaide with a tsunami caused by an earthquake . This was publicised by the media , prompting a not insignificant number of residents to sell their property and leave ; some businesses had clearance sales while many who decided to stay indulged in doomsday parties . Dunstan promised to stand on the seashore at Glenelg and wait for the imminent destruction . He did so on 20 January , the day of the predicted storm , and nothing happened , although he made newspaper headlines in the United Kingdom for his defiance . 
 In 1976 , the Dunstan Government stepped up its legislative efforts . Some bills , such as the one to remove the sodomy law and decriminalise male homosexuality , had been initially blocked by the Legislative Council . However , the bill to abolish capital punishment passed with ease , and the homosexuality law reforms eventually passed in September . Rape law was properly codified and defined as a crime within marriage for the first time in Australia . Shopping hours , previously the most restrictive in the nation , became the most open . Following a royal commission , Friday night shopping was introduced for the city and Thursday night shopping for the suburbs . The deposits on beverage containers was finally passed . The first signs of Monarto 's eventual failure began to appear : birth rates started dropping significantly , immigration slowed and the economy was stagnant . South Australia 's robust population growth , previously the highest per capita among the states , came to an abrupt halt . However , state money continued to be poured into the Monarto project , despite the fact that the Whitlam government cut funding to $ 600 @,@ 000 in 1975 , while his Liberal successor Malcolm Fraser gave nothing at all the following year . However , by the time Monarto was eventually scrapped after Dunstan 's departure , no less than $ 20 million had been used to buy land , plant trees and formulate development plans , and the failed project is often seen as Dunstan 's greatest failure . In addition , the federal government removed subsidies for shipbuilding at Whyalla , forcing the operations to be scaled down . 
 In 1973 Adele Koh , a Malaysian journalist formerly living in Singapore , was appointed to work for Dunstan . She had been expelled by the Singaporean Government of Lee Kuan Yew for criticising its policies . The newspaper she had been working for , the Singapore Herald , was shut down by the government and she then moved to Australia . A relationship developed in 1974 between her and Dunstan , and they were married in 1976 in a small ceremony at his residence . Dunstan was much older than his wife , who was in her 30s . 
 After Oliphant 's term had expired , Dunstan appointed the first Indigenous Australian Governor , Sir Douglas Nicholls , a former football player and clergyman . Following Nicholls ' resignation due to ill health in 1977 , a second consecutive clergyman took the post , Methodist Keith Seaman . However , this appointment was not successful ; Seaman became involved in an unspecified scandal and made a statement admitting to a " grave impropriety " , without elaborating further . He did not resign and kept a low profile from then on . Dunstan also appointed Dame Roma Mitchell to become the nation 's first female Supreme Court judge . She later said " I doubt anybody else in those days would have pushed for a woman " , and that Dunstan enjoyed creating a legacy of equality among social groups . 
 Dunstan broke new ground in Australian politics with his policies on native title for Aborigines . The North West Aboriginal Reserve ( NWAR ) covered more than 7 % of the state 's land , and was inhabited by the Pitjantjatjara people . In 1977 , when the NWAR was about to be transferred to the Aboriginal Lands Trust , a tribal delegation asked for the lands to be given to the traditional owners . Dunstan agreed to an investigation , and subsequently introduced the Pitjantjatjara Land Rights Bill . This bill proposed for a tribal body , the <unk> <unk> , to take control of the NWAR and further lands after the claims were cleared by an independent tribunal . It also proposed to allow the body to decide mining proposals on the land and receive royalties . This aroused discontent among mining interests , but a bipartisan parliamentary committee endorsed the bill and it was tabled . However , Labor lost power before the bill was passed and although the new Liberal government said they would remove the mining restrictions , mass public rallies forced them to relent , and a bill similar to Dunstan 's was passed . The legislation , the bedrock of which was laid by Dunstan , was the most reformist in Australia , and in the 1980s , more than 20 % of the land was returned to its traditional owners . 
 Dunstan called another snap election in September at the 1977 election ; he hoped to recover from the previous election , the outcome of which had been affected by the dismissal of the Federal Labor Government . As the remnants of the Playmander had been abolished , conditions were more favourable for Labor and they wanted to end their reliance on the casting vote of the speaker . The campaign proceeded smoothly and exploited the unpopularity of the federal Liberal government , using the jingle " Thank the Lord for South Australia " . Labor won an absolute majority with 51 @.@ 6 % of the primary vote and 27 seats . 
 It was the first time that a Labor government in South Australia had been re @-@ elected for a fourth term , and would be the first nine @-@ year @-@ incumbent Labor government . 
 = = = Salisbury affair and departure from office = = = 
 The South Australian Police had since 1949 a " Special Branch " in its forces for the purposes of surveillance and espionage . Conceived earlier as an " intelligence branch " in 1939 for the purposes of spying on the large German Australian community in World War II , it had amassed information on tens of thousands of individuals and organisations . While such an operation was of concern to Dunstan and his government for civil liberty reasons , its apparent party @-@ political bias was even more concerning to them . In particular , the branch held information files on Labor parliamentarians , communists , church leaders , trade unionists and so @-@ called " pink files " on gay community activists dating from the time before homosexuality was decriminalised . Only two Labor MPs , from both federal and state parliaments , did not have files , whereas the branch held significantly fewer files relating to Liberal figures . Dunstan had known of the existence of the branch since 1970 , but said that he had been assured by the police commissioner that its files were not systematically focused on left @-@ wing political figures . 
 However , Peter Ward , a journalist and former Dunstan staffer published a story about the files . An inquiry was conducted into the branch by Justice White of the Supreme Court of South Australia , and the report was placed in Dunstan 's hands on 21 December 1977 . It said that the dossiers did exist and that they were " scandalously inaccurate , irrelevant to security purposes and outrageously unfair to hundreds , perhaps thousands , of loyal and worthy citizens " . It also noted that the reports overwhelmingly focused on left @-@ wing politicians and activists , and that Dunstan had been misled by the police commissioner . After reviewing the report , Dunstan sacked Police Commissioner Harold Salisbury in January and threatened to release the report to the public . However , Salisbury had a reputation as a man of integrity , and controversy erupted regarding the inquiry and Dunstan 's actions , and whether he had already known about the true contents of the files for several years , as claimed by Ward . A Royal Commission under Justice Mitchell , set up at the instigation of the Liberals , investigated the matter . The inquiry cleared the Dunstan Government of any error , as it had not known about the Special Branch 's activities earlier . Dunstan sacked Salisbury for misleading Parliament about the existence of the " pink files " and many of the Special Branch files were burnt . Salisbury retired to the United Kingdom with a $ 160 @,@ 000 payout ; a book , The Salisbury Affair by Stewart Cockburn , was written about the debacle . 
 There were initially no other major controversies for Dunstan , although the economy remained poor and the <unk> complex was still in limbo as an agreement with Dow was still to be finalised . The financial difficulties forced a freeze on public sector expansion and hospital developments , and there were claims of theft and mismanagement in the health system , but the Liberals were in a disorganised state and unpopular , so they were not able to pressure Dunstan effectively . 
 Towards the end of the year , political and media scrutiny began to grow on Dunstan , who began to grow uneasy in his dealings with the press . Soon after the Salisbury dismissal , he walked out of a stormy media conference after refusing to be drawn on the rumoured sacking of Seaman from the gubernatorial role . Increasing innuendo about Dunstan 's private life and allegations of corruption and economic mismanagement were worsened by Dunstan 's self @-@ righteous tendencies . The premier angrily denied claims that he was using government funds to build an opulent residence in Malaysia as well as claims about his sexual lifestyle . He pre @-@ emptively called a press conference on one occasion to denounce what he called " idiot rumours " and he further claimed that " reactionary forces " and " right wing journalists " were engaged in a witchhunt against his " decent and responsible government " . 
 Dunstan also faced difficulties on policy issues . Factional cracks began to appear in Labor and the discovery of uranium deposits near the northern outback town of Roxby Downs put the premier in a bind . The uranium was seen as a valuable economic boost in difficult times , but a government ban on its mining on safety grounds was still in force . Dunstan was opposed to uranium mining but he was seen as lacking in conviction by environmentalists , as well as being criticised by industrialists . By May , his approval rating had fallen to 57 % , down from 80 % just two years earlier , while unemployment increased . It was also widely anticipated that a book named It 's Grossly Improper would soon be released , containing embarrassing allegations about Dunstan 's private life . 
 Dunstan 's wife Adele was diagnosed with advanced lung cancer in May 1978 . She died in October after Dunstan had cared for her at her bedside for months ; her death seriously affected him and his own health began to suffer . Together with Mike Rann , his Press Secretary , speechwriter and eventually Premier , who had worked with him in 1978 on a series of speeches on Aboriginal Land Rights , industrial democracy and women 's rights , he made a uranium fact @-@ finding trip to Europe to study safe methods of nuclear power and waste disposal . By the summer that followed , Dunstan fell extremely ill . When Parliament resumed , he collapsed on the floor of the House and was forced to use a walking stick ; his doctor advised him that he required six months of rest to recover . The Liberal Opposition seized on the state of affairs and charged that the Labor Party was " as ailing as the man who led it " . In a stage @-@ managed press conference on 15 February 1979 , Dunstan announced his retirement as premier from his room in Calvary Hospital while shaking and wearing a dressing gown . 
 The political scientist Andrew Parkin said that one of Dunstan 's main achievements was to debunk the notion that state governments and parliaments lacked the ability to make significant reforms with profound impacts . He cited Dunstan 's sweeping social reforms and the fact that many other state governments followed South Australia 's lead as evidence of this . 
 = = Life after politics = = 
 After Dunstan 's resignation from parliament , deputy Des Corcoran took his place as party leader and Premier . At the subsequent Norwood by @-@ election , Dunstan 's seat was retained by Labor . Corcoran soon called the 1979 election . Corcoran 's lack of media savvy , the Advertiser 's bias towards the Liberals at this election , and the public 's widespread dissatisfaction with the economy and bus strikes , brought about an 8 @.@ 4 percent two @-@ party swing against Labor , leaving the party with only 19 seats against the Liberals on 25 seats . The Tonkin Liberal Government came to power and began reducing the size of the public service and abandoned the Monarto project . Dunstan took a trip to Europe after being released from hospital , staying in Perugia for five months and pursuing Italian studies . He subsequently returned home and lived quietly in Adelaide for three years without finding work that appealed to him , such as that related to the shaping of public policy . 
 During this time he became increasingly disillusioned with South Australian political affairs . A book by two Adelaide journalists , It 's Grossly Improper , was released in November and sold out within a week . It alleged inappropriate use of government funds and a homosexual affair with a restaurateur , John <unk> , in return for political favours . There was initial fanfare and speculation as to the authenticity of its claims ; Dunstan dismissed the book as a " farrago of lies " in his 1981 memoirs , entitled Felicia . 
 From May 1980 to early 1981 he acted as editor for the magazine POL . In 1982 , he moved to the neighbouring state of Victoria , and was appointed the Director of Tourism . This sparked an outcry in South Australia due to the two states ' traditional rivalry . For his part , Dunstan said that he had yearned to be given a role in shaping and building the future of his native state , but that he had been snubbed for three years . He said that public figures in South Australia had told him that his high profile and ability to overshadow others could have caused a loss of face to them , and thus his departure would be seen favourably by them , while Victoria 's offer gave him an opportunity to be constructive . Dunstan was appointed to the Victorian Economic Development Corporation on 12 July 1983 , resigning on 23 June 1986 . Dunstan stayed in the Director of Tourism role until 1986 , when he returned to Adelaide after falling out with the government of John Cain . His retirement from these positions followed the provocative publication of a photograph of him with Monsignor <unk> , member of the gay community Order of Perpetual Indulgence , taken after he had launched a collection of coming out stories by gay historian Gary Wotherspoon . 
 He was the national president of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign ( 1982 – 87 ) , president of the Movement for Democracy in Fiji ( from 1987 ) , and national chairman of Community Aid Abroad ( 1992 – 93 ) . Dunstan was an adjunct professor at the University of Adelaide from 1997 to 1999 and portrayed himself in the 1989 Australian independent film Against the Innocent . 
 In his retirement , Dunstan continued to be a passionate critic of economic rationalism ( neoliberalism ) and privatisation , particularly of South Australia 's water , gas and electricity supplies . During the 1990s he wrote essays for the Adelaide Review magazine strongly criticising both the Federal Labor Governments of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating , the Federal Liberal Government of John Howard and the State Liberal Governments of Dean Brown and John Olsen . He remained an advocate for multiculturalism and cultural diversity , often writing about the dangers of racism . A year before his death , the ailing Dunstan decried Labor 's economic rationalism in front of 5 @,@ 000 at the Gough Whitlam Lecture . In his last interview , he decried economic rationalism as the " nonsense of the Chicago school with which we 've been beset " . Regardless of the acclaim in which he was held during his decade in power , Dunstan was largely overlooked for honours after leaving office and largely ignored by the state 's elite . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia in June 1979 , but no national parks , gardens , buildings or performance venues were named after him . 
 In 1986 he met his future partner , Stephen Cheng , with whom he opened a restaurant called " Don 's Table " in 1994 . He lived with Cheng in their Norwood home for the rest of his life . Dunstan was afflicted by illness in his final years . He was diagnosed with throat cancer in 1993 before contracting an inoperable lung cancer , which led to his death on 6 February 1999 . A public memorial service was held on 9 February at the Adelaide Festival Centre as a tribute to Dunstan 's love of the arts . In attendance were former Labor Prime Ministers Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke , Federal Opposition Leader Kim Beazley , Premier John Olsen , and State Opposition Leader Mike Rann . Thousands more gathered outside the centre in Elder Park along the banks of the River Torrens . State flags were flown at half @-@ mast and the memorial service was televised live . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Don Dunstan Foundation was established at the University of Adelaide shortly before his death to push for progressive change and to honour Dunstan 's memory . Dunstan had spent his last months helping to lay the platform for its establishment . At the inauguration of the body , Dunstan had said " What we need is a concentration on the kind of agenda which I followed and I hope that my death will be useful in this " . The foundation 's primary work is the giving of scholarships ; an additional aim is to promote causes championed by Dunstan such as human rights , social equality , multiculturalism and aboriginal rights . 
 Since its commencement in 2003 , the Adelaide Film Festival has presented The Don Dunstan Award in recognition of outstanding contribution by an individual to the Australian film industry . Deemed by the Adelaide Film Festival 's Board to have " enriched Australian screen culture through their work " , its recipients include David <unk> , Rolf de Heer , Scott Hicks and others . After receiving the award in 2013 , Hicks acknowledged Dunstan 's vision for the creation of a film industry in South Australia as being instrumental to his professional development . 
 A theatre in the Festival Centre was renamed the Dunstan Playhouse . 
 The Electoral Commission of South Australia 's 2012 redistribution included renaming the seat of Norwood to Dunstan which came into existence as of the 2014 election . In 2014 a biography Don Dunstan Intimacy & Liberty by Dino Hodge , written with the co @-@ operation of Dunstan 's family and former lovers , was published . 
 In 1988 Dunstan donated a collection of files pertaining to his political , professional and personal life , photographs , press clippings , speeches and press releases , audiovisual material , books from his library , some items of clothing and other memorabilia to Flinders University Library , where it can be viewed and accessed for research purposes ( see External links ) . 
 = Oligonucleotide synthesis = 
 Oligonucleotide synthesis is the chemical synthesis of relatively short fragments of nucleic acids with defined chemical structure ( sequence ) . The technique is extremely useful in current laboratory practice because it provides a rapid and inexpensive access to custom @-@ made oligonucleotides of the desired sequence . Whereas enzymes synthesize DNA and RNA only in a 5 ' to 3 ' direction , chemical oligonucleotide synthesis does not have this limitation , although it is , most often , carried out in the opposite , 3 ' to 5 ' direction . Currently , the process is implemented as solid @-@ phase synthesis using phosphoramidite method and phosphoramidite building blocks derived from protected 2 ' <unk> ( dA , dC , dG , and T ) , <unk> ( A , C , G , and U ) , or chemically modified nucleosides , e.g. LNA , BNA . 
 To obtain the desired oligonucleotide , the building blocks are sequentially coupled to the growing oligonucleotide chain in the order required by the sequence of the product ( see Synthetic cycle below ) . The process has been fully automated since the late 1970s . Upon the completion of the chain assembly , the product is released from the solid phase to solution , deprotected , and collected . The occurrence of side reactions sets practical limits for the length of synthetic oligonucleotides ( up to about 200 nucleotide residues ) because the number of errors accumulates with the length of the oligonucleotide being synthesized . Products are often isolated by high @-@ performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) to obtain the desired oligonucleotides in high purity . Typically , synthetic oligonucleotides are single @-@ stranded DNA or RNA molecules around 15 – 25 bases in length . 
 <unk> find a variety of applications in molecular biology and medicine . They are most commonly used as antisense oligonucleotides , small interfering RNA , primers for DNA sequencing and amplification , probes for detecting complementary DNA or RNA via molecular hybridization , tools for the targeted introduction of mutations and restriction sites , and for the synthesis of artificial genes . 
 = = History = = 
 The evolution of oligonucleotide synthesis saw four major methods of the formation of internucleosidic linkages and has been reviewed in the literature in great detail . 
 = = = Early work and contemporary H @-@ phosphonate synthesis = = = 
 In the early 1950s , Alexander Todd ’ s group pioneered H @-@ phosphonate and phosphate triester methods of oligonucleotide synthesis . The reaction of compounds 1 and 2 to form H @-@ phosphonate diester 3 is an H @-@ phosphonate coupling in solution while that of compounds 4 and 5 to give 6 is a phosphotriester coupling ( see phosphotriester synthesis below ) . 
 Thirty years later , this work inspired , independently , two research groups to adopt the H @-@ phosphonate chemistry to the solid @-@ phase synthesis using nucleoside H @-@ phosphonate <unk> 7 as building blocks and <unk> chloride , 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> chloride ( TPS @-@ Cl ) , and other compounds as activators . The practical implementation of H @-@ phosphonate method resulted in a very short and simple synthetic cycle consisting of only two steps , detritylation and coupling ( Scheme 2 ) . Oxidation of internucleosidic H @-@ phosphonate diester linkages in 8 to phosphodiester linkages in 9 with a solution of iodine in aqueous pyridine is carried out at the end of the chain assembly rather than as a step in the synthetic cycle . If desired , the oxidation may be carried out under anhydrous conditions . Alternatively , 8 can be converted to phosphorothioate 10 or <unk> 11 ( X = Se ) , or oxidized by CCl4 in the presence of primary or secondary amines to <unk> analogs 12 . The method is very convenient in that various types of phosphate modifications ( phosphate / phosphorothioate / <unk> ) may be introduced to the same oligonucleotide for modulation of its properties . 
 Most often , H @-@ phosphonate building blocks are protected at the 5 ' -hydroxy group and at the amino group of nucleic bases A , C , and G in the same manner as phosphoramidite building blocks ( see below ) . However , protection at the amino group is not mandatory . 
 = = = <unk> synthesis = = = 
 In the 1950s , Har Gobind Khorana and co @-@ workers developed a phosphodiester method where 3 ’ -O @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 ’ -O @-@ phosphate 2 ( Scheme 3 ) was activated with N , N ' <unk> ( DCC ) or 4 @-@ <unk> chloride ( Ts @-@ Cl ) . The activated species were reacted with a 5 ’ -O @-@ protected nucleoside 1 to give a protected <unk> monophosphate 3 . Upon the removal of 3 ’ -O @-@ acetyl group using base @-@ catalyzed hydrolysis , further chain elongation was carried out . Following this methodology , sets of tri- and <unk> were synthesized and were enzymatically converted to longer oligonucleotides , which allowed elucidation of the genetic code . The major limitation of the phosphodiester method consisted in the formation of pyrophosphate oligomers and oligonucleotides branched at the internucleosidic phosphate . The method seems to be a step back from the more selective chemistry described earlier ; however , at that time , most phosphate @-@ protecting groups available now had not yet been introduced . The lack of the convenient protection strategy necessitated taking a retreat to a slower and less selective chemistry to achieve the ultimate goal of the study . 
 = = = <unk> synthesis = = = 
 In the 1960s , groups led by R. <unk> and C. Reese developed a phosphotriester approach . The defining difference from the phosphodiester approach was the protection of the phosphate moiety in the building block 1 ( Scheme 4 ) and in the product 3 with 2 @-@ cyanoethyl group . This precluded the formation of oligonucleotides branched at the internucleosidic phosphate . The higher selectivity of the method allowed the use of more efficient coupling agents and catalysts , which dramatically reduced the length of the synthesis . The method , initially developed for the solution @-@ phase synthesis , was also implemented on low @-@ cross @-@ linked " popcorn " polystyrene , and later on controlled pore glass ( CPG , see " Solid support material " below ) , which initiated a massive research effort in solid @-@ phase synthesis of oligonucleotides and eventually led to the automation of the oligonucleotide chain assembly . 
 = = = Phosphite triester synthesis = = = 
 In the 1970s , substantially more reactive P ( III ) derivatives of nucleosides , 3 ' -O @-@ <unk> , were successfully used for the formation of internucleosidic linkages . This led to the discovery of the phosphite triester methodology . The group led by M. Caruthers took the advantage of less aggressive and more selective 1H @-@ <unk> and implemented the method on solid phase . Very shortly after , the workers from the same group further improved the method by using more stable nucleoside phosphoramidites as building blocks . The use of 2 @-@ cyanoethyl phosphite @-@ protecting group in place of a less user @-@ friendly methyl group led to the nucleoside phosphoramidites currently used in oligonucleotide synthesis ( see <unk> building blocks below ) . Many later improvements to the manufacturing of building blocks , oligonucleotide synthesizers , and synthetic protocols made the phosphoramidite chemistry a very reliable and expedient method of choice for the preparation of synthetic oligonucleotides . 
 = = Synthesis by the phosphoramidite method = = 
 = = = Building blocks = = = 
 = = = = <unk> phosphoramidites = = = = 
 As mentioned above , the naturally occurring nucleotides ( nucleoside @-@ 3 ' - or 5 ' <unk> ) and their phosphodiester analogs are insufficiently reactive to afford an expedite synthetic preparation of oligonucleotides in high yields . The selectivity and the rate of the formation of internucleosidic linkages is dramatically improved by using 3 ' -O- ( N , N @-@ diisopropyl phosphoramidite ) derivatives of nucleosides ( nucleoside phosphoramidites ) that serve as building blocks in phosphite triester methodology . To prevent undesired side reactions , all other functional groups present in nucleosides have to be rendered unreactive ( protected ) by attaching protecting groups . Upon the completion of the oligonucleotide chain assembly , all the protecting groups are removed to yield the desired oligonucleotides . Below , the protecting groups currently used in commercially available and most common nucleoside phosphoramidite building blocks are briefly reviewed : 
 The 5 ' -hydroxyl group is protected by an acid @-@ labile DMT ( 4 @,@ 4 ' <unk> ) group . 
 <unk> and uracil , nucleic bases of thymidine and uridine , respectively , do not have exocyclic amino groups and hence do not require any protection . 
 Although the nucleic base of guanosine and 2 ' <unk> does have an exocyclic amino group , its basicity is low to an extent that it does not react with phosphoramidites under the conditions of the coupling reaction . However , a phosphoramidite derived from the N2 @-@ unprotected 5 ' -O @-@ DMT @-@ 2 ' <unk> is poorly soluble in acetonitrile , the solvent commonly used in oligonucleotide synthesis . In contrast , the N2 @-@ protected versions of the same compound dissolve in acetonitrile well and hence are widely used . Nucleic bases adenine and cytosine bear the exocyclic amino groups reactive with the activated phosphoramidites under the conditions of the coupling reaction . By the use of additional steps in the synthetic cycle or alternative coupling agents and solvent systems , the oligonucleotide chain assembly may be carried out using dA and dC phosphoramidites with unprotected amino groups . However , these approaches currently remain in the research stage . In routine oligonucleotide synthesis , exocyclic amino groups in nucleosides are kept permanently protected over the entire length of the oligonucleotide chain assembly . 
 The protection of the exocyclic amino groups has to be orthogonal to that of the 5 ' -hydroxy group because the latter is removed at the end of each synthetic cycle . The simplest to implement , and hence the most widely used , strategy is including a base @-@ labile protection group on the exocyclic amino groups . Most often , two protection schemes are used . 
 In the first , the standard and more robust scheme ( Figure ) , <unk> ( benzoyl ) protection is used for A , dA , C , and dC , while G and dG are protected with <unk> group . More recently , Ac ( acetyl ) group is used to protect C and dC as shown in Figure . 
 In the second , mild protection scheme , A and dA are protected with <unk> or <unk> groups ( PAC ) . C and dC bear acetyl protection , and G and dG are protected with 4 @-@ <unk> ( <unk> @-@ PAC ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) groups . Mild protecting groups are removed more readily than the standard protecting groups . However , the phosphoramidites bearing these groups are less stable when stored in solution . 
 The phosphite group is protected by a base @-@ labile 2 @-@ cyanoethyl group . Once a phosphoramidite has been coupled to the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotide and the phosphite moieties have been converted to the P ( V ) species , the presence of the phosphate protection is not mandatory for the successful conducting of further coupling reactions . 
 In RNA synthesis , the 2 ' -hydroxy group is protected with <unk> ( t @-@ <unk> ) <unk> or with <unk> ( tri @-@ iso @-@ <unk> ) group , both being removable by treatment with fluoride ion . 
 The phosphite moiety also bears a diisopropylamino ( <unk> ) group reactive under acidic conditions . Upon activation , the diisopropylamino group leaves to be substituted by the 5 ' -hydroxy group of the support @-@ bound oligonucleotide ( see " Step 2 : Coupling " below ) . 
 = = = = Non @-@ nucleoside phosphoramidites = = = = 
 Non @-@ nucleoside phosphoramidites are the phosphoramidite reagents designed to introduce various functionalities at the termini of synthetic oligonucleotides or between nucleotide residues in the middle of the sequence . In order to be introduced inside the sequence , a non @-@ nucleosidic modifier has to possess at least two hydroxy groups , one of which is often protected with the DMT group while the other bears the reactive phosphoramidite moiety . 
 Non @-@ nucleosidic phosphoramidites are used to introduce desired groups that are not available in natural nucleosides or that can be introduced more readily using simpler chemical designs . A very short selection of commercial phosphoramidite reagents is shown in Scheme for the demonstration of the available structural and functional diversity . These reagents serve for the attachment of 5 ' -terminal phosphate ( 1 ) , NH2 ( 2 ) , SH ( 3 ) , <unk> ( 4 ) , and carboxylic groups ( 5 ) , CC triple bonds ( 6 ) , non @-@ radioactive labels and <unk> ( exemplified by 6 @-@ <unk> amidite 7 for the attachment of fluorescein and <unk> amidite 8 , respectively ) , hydrophilic and hydrophobic modifiers ( exemplified by <unk> amidite 9 and cholesterol amidite 10 , respectively ) , and biotin amidite 11 . 
 = = = Synthetic cycle = = = 
 Oligonucleotide synthesis is carried out by a stepwise addition of nucleotide residues to the 5 ' -terminus of the growing chain until the desired sequence is assembled . Each addition is referred to as a synthetic cycle ( Scheme 5 ) and consists of four chemical reactions : 
 = = = = Step 1 : De @-@ blocking ( detritylation ) = = = = 
 The DMT group is removed with a solution of an acid , such as 2 % trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) or 3 % dichloroacetic acid ( DCA ) , in an inert solvent ( dichloromethane or toluene ) . The orange @-@ colored DMT cation formed is washed out ; the step results in the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotide precursor bearing a free 5 ' -terminal hydroxyl group . It is worth remembering that conducting detritylation for an extended time or with stronger than recommended solutions of acids leads to depurination of solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotide and thus reduces the yield of the desired full @-@ length product . 
 = = = = Step 2 : Coupling = = = = 
 A 0 @.@ 02 – 0 @.@ 2 M solution of nucleoside phosphoramidite ( or a mixture of several phosphoramidites ) in acetonitrile is activated by a 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 7 M solution of an acidic <unk> catalyst , 1H @-@ tetrazole , 5 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1H @-@ tetrazole , 2 @-@ <unk> , 4 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> , or a number of similar compounds . A more extensive information on the use of various coupling agents in oligonucleotide synthesis can be found in a recent review . The mixing is usually very brief and occurs in fluid lines of oligonucleotide synthesizers ( see below ) while the components are being delivered to the reactors containing solid support . The activated phosphoramidite in 1 @.@ 5 – 20 @-@ fold excess over the support @-@ bound material is then brought in contact with the starting solid support ( first coupling ) or a support @-@ bound oligonucleotide precursor ( following couplings ) whose 5 ' -hydroxy group reacts with the activated phosphoramidite moiety of the incoming nucleoside phosphoramidite to form a phosphite triester linkage . The coupling of 2 ' <unk> phosphoramidites is very rapid and requires , on small scale , about 20 s for its completion . In contrast , sterically hindered 2 ' -O @-@ protected ribonucleoside phosphoramidites require 5 @-@ 15 min to be coupled in high yields . The reaction is also highly sensitive to the presence of water , particularly when dilute solutions of phosphoramidites are used , and is commonly carried out in anhydrous acetonitrile . Generally , the larger the scale of the synthesis , the lower the excess and the higher the concentration of the phosphoramidites is used . In contrast , the concentration of the activator is primarily determined by its solubility in acetonitrile and is irrespective of the scale of the synthesis . Upon the completion of the coupling , any unbound reagents and by @-@ products are removed by washing . 
 = = = = Step 3 : Capping = = = = 
 The capping step is performed by treating the solid support @-@ bound material with a mixture of acetic anhydride and 1 @-@ <unk> or , less often , <unk> as catalysts and , in the phosphoramidite method , serves two purposes . 
 After the completion of the coupling reaction , a small percentage of the solid support @-@ bound 5 ' <unk> groups ( 0 @.@ 1 to 1 % ) remains unreacted and needs to be permanently blocked from further chain elongation to prevent the formation of oligonucleotides with an internal base deletion commonly referred to as ( n @-@ 1 ) <unk> . The unreacted 5 ' -hydroxy groups are , to a large extent , acetylated by the capping mixture . 
 It has also been reported that phosphoramidites activated with 1H @-@ tetrazole react , to a small extent , with the O6 position of guanosine . Upon oxidation with I2 / water , this side product , possibly via O6 @-@ N7 migration , undergoes depurination . The <unk> sites thus formed are readily cleaved in the course of the final deprotection of the oligonucleotide under the basic conditions ( see below ) to give two shorter oligonucleotides thus reducing the yield of the full @-@ length product . The O6 modifications are rapidly removed by treatment with the capping reagent as long as the capping step is performed prior to oxidation with I2 / water . 
 The synthesis of oligonucleotide phosphorothioates ( OPS , see below ) does not involve the oxidation with I2 / water , and , respectively , does not suffer from the side reaction described above . On the other hand , if the capping step is performed prior to sulfurization , the solid support may contain the residual acetic anhydride and N @-@ <unk> left after the capping step . The capping mixture interferes with the sulfur transfer reaction , which results in the extensive formation of the phosphate triester internucleosidic linkages in place of the desired PS triesters . Therefore , for the synthesis of OPS , it is advisable to conduct the sulfurization step prior to the capping step . 
 = = = = Step 4 : Oxidation = = = = 
 The newly formed <unk> phosphite triester linkage is not natural and is of limited stability under the conditions of oligonucleotide synthesis . The treatment of the support @-@ bound material with iodine and water in the presence of a weak base ( pyridine , <unk> , or <unk> ) oxidizes the phosphite triester into a <unk> phosphate triester , a protected precursor of the naturally occurring phosphate diester internucleosidic linkage . Oxidation may be carried out under anhydrous conditions using tert @-@ <unk> <unk> or , more efficiently , ( 1S ) - ( + ) - ( 10 @-@ <unk> ) <unk> ( CSO ) . The step of oxidation is substituted with a sulfurization step to obtain oligonucleotide phosphorothioates ( see Oligonucleotide phosphorothioates and their synthesis below ) . In the latter case , the sulfurization step is best carried out prior to capping . 
 = = = Solid supports = = = 
 In solid @-@ phase synthesis , an oligonucleotide being assembled is covalently bound , via its 3 ' -terminal hydroxy group , to a solid support material and remains attached to it over the entire course of the chain assembly . The solid support is contained in columns whose dimensions depend on the scale of synthesis and may vary between 0 @.@ 05 mL and several liters . The overwhelming majority of oligonucleotides are synthesized on small scale ranging from 40 nmol to 1 μmol . More recently , high @-@ throughput oligonucleotide synthesis where the solid support is contained in the wells of multi @-@ well plates ( most often , 96 or 384 wells per plate ) became a method of choice for parallel synthesis of oligonucleotides on small scale . At the end of the chain assembly , the oligonucleotide is released from the solid support and is eluted from the column or the well . 
 = = = = Solid support material = = = = 
 In contrast to organic solid @-@ phase synthesis and peptide synthesis , the synthesis of oligonucleotides proceeds best on non @-@ swellable or low @-@ swellable solid supports . The two most often used solid @-@ phase materials are controlled pore glass ( CPG ) and <unk> polystyrene ( MPPS ) . 
 CPG is commonly defined by its pore size . In oligonucleotide chemistry , pore sizes of 500 , 1000 , 1500 , 2000 , and 3000 Å are used to allow the preparation of about 50 , 80 , 100 , 150 , and 200 @-@ mer oligonucleotides , respectively . To make native CPG suitable for further processing , the surface of the material is treated with ( 3 @-@ aminopropyl ) <unk> to give aminopropyl CPG . The aminopropyl arm may be further extended to result in long chain <unk> ( <unk> ) CPG . The amino group is then used as an anchoring point for linkers suitable for oligonucleotide synthesis ( see below ) . 
 MPPS suitable for oligonucleotide synthesis is a low @-@ swellable , highly cross @-@ linked polystyrene obtained by polymerization of <unk> ( min 60 % ) , styrene , and 4 @-@ <unk> in the presence of a <unk> agent . The <unk> <unk> MPPS obtained is converted to aminomethyl MPPS . 
 = = = = <unk> chemistry = = = = 
 To make the solid support material suitable for oligonucleotide synthesis , non @-@ nucleosidic linkers or nucleoside <unk> are covalently attached to the reactive amino groups in aminopropyl CPG , <unk> CPG , or aminomethyl MPPS . The remaining unreacted amino groups are capped with acetic anhydride . Typically , three conceptually different groups of solid supports are used . 
 Universal supports . In a more recent , more convenient , and more widely used method , the synthesis starts with the universal support where a non @-@ nucleosidic linker is attached to the solid support material ( compounds 1 and 2 ) . A phosphoramidite respective to the 3 ' -terminal nucleoside residue is coupled to the universal solid support in the first synthetic cycle of oligonucleotide chain assembly using the standard protocols . The chain assembly is then continued until the completion , after which the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotide is deprotected . The characteristic feature of the universal solid supports is that the release of the oligonucleotides occurs by the hydrolytic cleavage of a P @-@ O bond that attaches the 3 ’ -O of the 3 ’ -terminal nucleotide residue to the universal linker as shown in Scheme 6 . The critical advantage of this approach is that the same solid support is used <unk> of the sequence of the oligonucleotide to be synthesized . For the complete removal of the linker and the 3 ' -terminal phosphate from the assembled oligonucleotide , the solid support 1 and several similar solid supports require gaseous ammonia , aqueous ammonium hydroxide , aqueous methylamine , or their mixture and are commercially available . The solid support 2 requires a solution of ammonia in anhydrous methanol and is also commercially available . 
 <unk> solid supports . In a historically first and still popular approach , the 3 ' -hydroxy group of the 3 ' -terminal nucleoside residue is attached to the solid support via , most often , 3 ’ -O @-@ succinyl arm as in compound 3 . The oligonucleotide chain assembly starts with the coupling of a phosphoramidite building block respective to the nucleotide residue second from the 3 ’ -terminus . The 3 ’ -terminal hydroxy group in oligonucleotides synthesized on nucleosidic solid supports is deprotected under the conditions somewhat milder than those applicable for universal solid supports . However , the fact that a nucleosidic solid support has to be selected in a sequence @-@ specific manner reduces the throughput of the entire synthetic process and increases the likelihood of human error . 
 Special solid supports are used for the attachment of desired functional or reporter groups at the 3 ’ -terminus of synthetic oligonucleotides . For example , the commercial solid support 4 allows the preparation of oligonucleotides bearing 3 ’ -terminal 3 @-@ aminopropyl linker . Similarly to non @-@ nucleosidic phosphoramidites , many other special solid supports designed for the attachment of reactive functional groups , non @-@ radioactive reporter groups , and terminal modifiers ( <unk> cholesterol or other hydrophobic tethers ) and suited for various applications are commercially available . A more detailed information on various solid supports for oligonucleotide synthesis can be found in a recent review . 
 = = = Oligonucleotide phosphorothioates and their synthesis = = = 
 Oligonucleotide phosphorothioates ( OPS ) are modified oligonucleotides where one of the oxygen atoms in the phosphate moiety is replaced by sulfur . Only the phosphorothioates having sulfur at a non @-@ bridging position as shown in figure are widely used and are available commercially . The replacement of the non @-@ bridging oxygen with sulfur creates a new center of chirality at phosphorus . In a simple case of a dinucleotide , this results in the formation of a <unk> pair of <unk> and Rp @-@ <unk> <unk> whose structures are shown in Figure . In an n @-@ mer oligonucleotide where all ( n – 1 ) internucleosidic linkages are phosphorothioate linkages , the number of diastereomers m is calculated as m = 2 ( n – 1 ) . Being non @-@ natural analogs of nucleic acids , OPS are substantially more stable towards hydrolysis by nucleases , the class of enzymes that destroy nucleic acids by breaking the bridging P @-@ O bond of the phosphodiester moiety . This property determines the use of OPS as antisense oligonucleotides in in vitro and in vivo applications where the extensive exposure to nucleases is inevitable . Similarly , to improve the stability of siRNA , at least one phosphorothioate linkage is often introduced at the 3 ' -terminus of both sense and antisense strands . In <unk> pure OPS , all @-@ Sp diastereomers are more stable to enzymatic degradation than their all @-@ Rp analogs . However , the preparation of <unk> pure OPS remains a synthetic challenge . In laboratory practice , mixtures of diastereomers of OPS are commonly used . 
 Synthesis of OPS is very similar to that of natural oligonucleotides . The difference is that the oxidation step is replaced by sulfur transfer reaction ( sulfurization ) and that the capping step is performed after the sulfurization . Of many reported reagents capable of the efficient sulfur transfer , only three are commercially available : 
 3- ( <unk> ) amino @-@ 3H @-@ 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> , <unk> ( 3 ) provides rapid kinetics of sulfurization and high stability in solution . The reagent is available from several sources . 
 3H @-@ 1 @,@ 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ one 1 @,@ 1 @-@ dioxide ( 4 ) also known as <unk> reagent displays a better solubility in acetonitrile and short reaction times . However , the reagent is of limited stability in solution and is less efficient in <unk> RNA linkages . 
 N , N , N 'N ' <unk> disulfide ( <unk> ) is soluble in acetonitrile and is commercially available . However , the sulfurization reaction of an internucleosidic DNA linkage with <unk> requires 15 min , which is more than 10 times as slow as that with compounds 3 and 4 . 
 = = = Automation = = = 
 In the past , oligonucleotide synthesis was carried out manually in solution or on solid phase . The solid phase synthesis was implemented using , as containers for the solid phase , miniature glass columns similar in their shape to low @-@ pressure chromatography columns or syringes equipped with porous filters . Currently , solid @-@ phase oligonucleotide synthesis is carried out automatically using computer @-@ controlled instruments ( oligonucleotide synthesizers ) and is technically implemented in column , multi @-@ well plate , and array formats . The column format is best suited for research and large scale applications where a high @-@ throughput is not required . Multi @-@ well plate format is designed specifically for high @-@ throughput synthesis on small scale to satisfy the growing demand of industry and academia for synthetic oligonucleotides . A number of oligonucleotide synthesizers for small scale synthesis and medium to large scale synthesis are available commercially . 
 = = = First Commercially available Oligonucleotide Synthesizers = = = 
 In March of 1982 a practical course was hosted by the Department of Biochemistry , Technische Hochschule Darmstadt , Germany . M.H. Caruthers , M.J. Gait , H.G. Gassen , <unk> , K. <unk> , and C. Birr among others attended . The program comprised practical work , lectures , and seminars on solid @-@ phase chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides . A select group of 15 students attended and had an unprecedented opportunity to be instructed by the esteemed teaching staff . 
 Along with manual exercises , several prominent automation companies attended the course . Biosearch of Novato , CA , Genetic Design of Watertown , MA , were two of several companies to demonstrate automated synthesizers at the course . Biosearch presented their new SAM I synthesizer . The Genetic Design had developed their synthesizer from the design of its sister companies ( <unk> ) solid phase peptide sequencer . The Genetic Design arranged with Dr Christian Birr ( Max @-@ Planck @-@ Institute for Medical Research ) [ 1 ] a week before the event to convert his solid phase sequencer into the semi @-@ automated synthesizer . The team led by Dr Alex Bonner and Rick Neves converted the unit and transported it to Darmstadt for the event and installed into the Biochemistry lab at the Technische Hochschule . As the system was semi @-@ automatic , the user injected the next base to be added to the growing sequence during each cycle . The system worked well and produced a series of test tubes filled with bright red <unk> color indicating complete coupling at each step . This system was later fully automated by inclusion of an auto injector and was designated the Model 25A . 
 = = = Mid to Large Scale Oligonucleotide Synthesis - A History = = = 
 Large scale oligonucleotide synthesizers were often developed by augmenting the capabilities of a preexisting instrument platform . One of the first mid scale synthesizers appeared in the late 1980s , manufactured by the Biosearch company in Novato , CA ( The 8800 ) . This platform was originally designed as a peptide synthesizer and made use of a fluidized bed reactor essential for accommodating the swelling characteristics of polystyrene supports used in the Merrifield methodology . Oligonucleotide synthesis involved the use of CPG ( controlled pore glass ) which is a rigid support and is more suited for column reactors as described above . The scale of the 8800 was limited to the flow rate required to <unk> the support . Some novel reactor designs as well as higher than normal pressures enabled the 8800 to achieve scales that would prepare 1 <unk> of oligonucleotide . In the mid 1990s several companies developed platforms that were based on semi @-@ preparative and preparative liquid chromatographs . These systems were well suited for a column reactor approach . In most cases all that was required was to augment the number of fluids that could be delivered to the column . <unk> synthesis requires a minimum of 10 and liquid chromatographs usually accommodate 4 . This was an easy design task and some semi @-@ automatic strategies worked without any modifications to the preexisting LC equipment . <unk> <unk> as well as Pharmacia ( GE ) were two of several companies that developed synthesizers out of liquid chromatographs . Genomic Technologies , Inc. was one of the few companies to develop a large scale oligonucleotide synthesizer that was , from the ground up , an oligonucleotide synthesizer . The initial platform called the <unk> for very large scale synthesizer utilized large Pharmacia liquid chromatograph columns as reactors and could synthesize up to 75 <unk> of material . Many oligonucleotide synthesis factories designed and manufactured their own custom platforms and little is known due to the designs being proprietary . The <unk> design continued to be refined and is continued in the <unk> synthesizer which is a scaled down platform providing milligram to gram amounts of synthetic oligonucleotide . 
 The current practices of synthesis of chemically modified oligonucleotides on large scale have been recently reviewed . 
 = = = Synthesis of oligonucleotide microarrays = = = 
 One may visualize an oligonucleotide microarray as a miniature multi @-@ well plate where physical dividers between the wells ( plastic walls ) are intentionally removed . With respect to the chemistry , synthesis of oligonucleotide microarrays is different from the conventional oligonucleotide synthesis in two respects : 
 <unk> remain permanently attached to the solid phase , which requires the use of linkers that are stable under the conditions of the final deprotection procedure . 
 The absence of physical dividers between the sites occupied by individual oligonucleotides , a very limited space on the surface of the microarray ( one oligonucleotide sequence occupies a square 25 × 25 μm ) and the requirement of high fidelity of oligonucleotide synthesis dictate the use of site @-@ selective 5 ' <unk> techniques . In one approach , the removal of the 5 ' -O @-@ DMT group is effected by electrochemical generation of the acid at the required site ( s ) . Another approach uses 5 ' -O- ( α @-@ methyl @-@ 6 @-@ <unk> ) ( <unk> ) protecting group , which can be removed by irradiation with UV light of 365 nm wavelength . 
 = = Post @-@ synthetic processing = = 
 After the completion of the chain assembly , the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotide is fully protected : 
 The 5 ' -terminal 5 ' -hydroxy group is protected with DMT group ; 
 The internucleosidic phosphate or phosphorothioate moieties are protected with 2 @-@ cyanoethyl groups ; 
 The exocyclic amino groups in all nucleic bases except for T and U are protected with acyl protecting groups . 
 To furnish a functional oligonucleotide , all the protecting groups have to be removed . The N @-@ acyl base protection and the 2 @-@ cyanoethyl phosphate protection may be , and is often removed simultaneously by treatment with inorganic bases or amines . However , the applicability of this method is limited by the fact that the cleavage of 2 @-@ cyanoethyl phosphate protection gives rise to acrylonitrile as a side product . Under the strong basic conditions required for the removal of N @-@ acyl protection , acrylonitrile is capable of alkylation of nucleic bases , primarily , at the N3 @-@ position of thymine and uracil residues to give the respective <unk> ( 2 @-@ cyanoethyl ) adducts via Michael reaction . The formation of these side products may be avoided by treating the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotides with solutions of bases in an organic solvent , for instance , with 50 % <unk> in acetonitrile or 10 % <unk> in acetonitrile . This treatment is strongly recommended for medium- and large scale preparations and is optional for syntheses on small scale where the concentration of acrylonitrile generated in the deprotection mixture is low . 
 Regardless of whether the phosphate protecting groups were removed first , the solid support @-@ bound oligonucleotides are deprotected using one of the two general approaches . 
 ( 1 ) Most often , 5 ' <unk> group is removed at the end of the oligonucleotide chain assembly . The oligonucleotides are then released from the solid phase and deprotected ( base and phosphate ) by treatment with aqueous ammonium hydroxide , aqueous methylamine , their mixtures , gaseous ammonia or methylamine or , less commonly , solutions of other primary amines or <unk> at ambient or elevated temperature . This removes all remaining protection groups from 2 ' <unk> , resulting in a reaction mixture containing the desired product . If the oligonucleotide contains any 2 ' -O @-@ protected ribonucleotide residues , the deprotection protocol includes the second step where the 2 ' -O @-@ protecting silyl groups are removed by treatment with fluoride ion by various methods . The fully deprotected product is used as is , or the desired oligonucleotide can be purified by a number of methods . Most commonly , the crude product is <unk> using ethanol precipitation , size exclusion chromatography , or reverse @-@ phase HPLC . To eliminate unwanted truncation products , the oligonucleotides can be purified via <unk> gel electrophoresis or anion @-@ exchange HPLC followed by <unk> . 
 ( 2 ) The second approach is only used when the intended method of purification is reverse @-@ phase HPLC . In this case , the 5 ' -terminal DMT group that serves as a hydrophobic handle for purification is kept on at the end of the synthesis . The oligonucleotide is deprotected under basic conditions as described above and , upon evaporation , is purified by reverse @-@ phase HPLC . The collected material is then <unk> under aqueous acidic conditions . On small scale ( less than 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 02 mmol ) , the treatment with 80 % aqueous acetic acid for 15 – 30 min at room temperature is often used followed by evaporation of the reaction mixture to dryness in vacuo . Finally , the product is <unk> as described above . 
 For some applications , additional reporter groups may be attached to an oligonucleotide using a variety of post @-@ synthetic procedures . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 As with any other organic compound , it is prudent to characterize synthetic oligonucleotides upon their preparation . In more complex cases ( research and large scale syntheses ) oligonucleotides are characterized after their deprotection and after purification . Although the ultimate approach to the characterization is sequencing , a relatively inexpensive and routine procedure , the considerations of the cost reduction preclude its use in routine manufacturing of oligonucleotides . In day @-@ by @-@ day practice , it is sufficient to obtain the molecular mass of an oligonucleotide by recording its mass spectrum . Two methods are currently widely used for characterization of oligonucleotides : electrospray mass spectrometry ( ES MS ) and matrix @-@ assisted laser desorption / ionization time @-@ of @-@ flight mass spectrometry ( <unk> @-@ TOF ) . To obtain informative spectra , it is very important to exchange all metal ions that might be present in the sample for ammonium or <unk> [ <unk> <unk> , ( <unk> ) <unk> + ] ions prior to submitting a sample to the analysis by either of the methods . 
 In ES MS spectrum , a given oligonucleotide generates a set of ions that correspond to different ionization states of the compound . Thus , the oligonucleotide with molecular mass M generates ions with masses ( M – nH ) / n where M is the molecular mass of the oligonucleotide in the form of a free acid ( all negative charges of internucleosidic phosphodiester groups are neutralized with H + ) , n is the ionization state , and H is the atomic mass of hydrogen ( 1 Da ) . Most useful for characterization are the ions with n ranging from 2 to 5 . Software supplied with the more recently manufactured instruments is capable of performing a deconvolution procedure that is , it finds peaks of ions that belong to the same set and derives the molecular mass of the oligonucleotide . 
 To obtain more detailed information on the impurity profile of oligonucleotides , liquid chromatography @-@ mass spectrometry ( LC @-@ MS or HPLC @-@ MS ) or capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry ( <unk> ) are used . 
 = Joe Tinker = 
 Joseph Bert Tinker ( July 27 , 1880 – July 27 , 1948 ) was an American professional baseball player and manager . He played from 1902 through 1916 for the Chicago Cubs and Cincinnati Reds of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) and the Chicago Whales of the Federal League . 
 Born in <unk> , Kansas , Tinker began playing semi @-@ professional baseball in Kansas in the late 19th century . He began his professional career in 1900 in minor league baseball and made his MLB debut with the Cubs in 1902 . Tinker was a member of the Chicago Cubs dynasty that won four pennants and two World Series championships between 1906 and 1910 . After playing one season with Cincinnati in 1913 , he became one of the first stars to jump to the upstart Federal League in 1914 . After leading the Whales to the pennant in 1915 , he returned to the Cubs as their player @-@ manager in 1916 , his final season in MLB . 
 Tinker returned to minor league baseball as a part @-@ owner and manager for the Columbus Senators before moving to Orlando , Florida , to manage the Orlando Tigers . While in Orlando , Tinker developed a real estate firm , which thrived during the Florida land boom of the 1920s . However , the 1926 Miami hurricane and Great Depression cost Tinker most of his fortune , and he returned to professional baseball in the late 1930s . 
 With the Cubs , Tinker was a part of a great double @-@ play combination with teammates Johnny Evers and Frank Chance that was immortalized as " Tinker @-@ to @-@ Evers @-@ to @-@ Chance " in the poem " Baseball 's Sad Lexicon " . However , Evers and Tinker feuded off the field . Tinker was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946 , the same year as Evers and Chance . He has also been honored by the Florida State League and the city of Orlando . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tinker was born in <unk> , Kansas . His twin sister died at a young age . When Tinker was two , his family moved to Kansas City , Kansas . There , he began to play baseball for his school 's team when he was 14 years old . He played in semi @-@ professional baseball for Hagen 's Tailors in 1898 , winning the city championship . In 1899 , he played for a team based in Parsons , Kansas , until it disbanded . He then joined a team representing Coffeyville , Kansas , as a third baseman , for the remainder of the year . 
 Tinker started his professional baseball career in 1900 , at the age of 19 , when Billy Hulen , a teammate of Tinker 's with the Coffeyville squad , recommended him to George Tebeau , the manager of the Denver Grizzlies of the Western League . Playing as a second baseman for Denver , Tinker batted .219 in his first 32 games . Tebeau sold Tinker to the Great Falls Indians of the Montana State League in June . Great Falls sold Tinker to the Helena Senators , also in the Montana State League , for $ 200 later in the season due to the team 's financial insolvency . 
 In 1901 , Tinker batted .290 for the Portland Webfoots of the Pacific Northwest League as their third baseman . He led the league with 37 stolen bases . Receiving interest from the Chicago Cubs and the Cincinnati Reds of the National League ( NL ) , Tinker decided on the Cubs when teammate Jack McCarthy told him that he felt mistreated from his time with the Reds . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 When he purchased Tinker 's contract , Cubs manager Frank Selee was seeking a replacement at shortstop for Barry McCormick , who had joined the St. Louis Browns of the rival American League . Tinker won the job during spring training . As a rookie in 1902 , Tinker batted .261 , but also led NL shortstops with 72 errors . Johnny Evers , also a rookie , played second base for the Cubs . With Frank Chance , the team 's first baseman , the trio first played together on September 13 , 1902 , and collaborated on their first double play on September 15 . 
 In the 1903 season , Tinker 's batting average improved to .291 , and he also contributed 70 RBIs . Tinker led all NL shortstops in the 1906 season with a .944 fielding percentage . On September 14 , 1905 , Tinker and Evers engaged in a fistfight on the field because Evers had taken a cab to the stadium and left his teammates behind in the hotel lobby . They did not speak for years following this event . 
 Tinker led all shortstops in the NL in double plays turned in the 1905 season . Led by Tinker , Evers and Chance , the Cubs had a 116 – 36 win @-@ loss record in the 1906 season , a record for victories that only was matched by the Seattle Mariners in the 2001 season , in which the Mariners played ten more games than the 1906 Cubs . Tinker batted .167 in the 1906 World Series as the Chicago White Sox defeated the Cubs in six games . Prior to the 1907 season , Tinker underwent surgery for appendicitis . Tinker batted only .154 in the 1907 World Series , but the Cubs defeated the Detroit Tigers in five games . 
 In the 1908 season , Tinker played all 157 games on the Cubs ' schedule . In addition to batting .266 , he led the team with 146 hits , six home runs , 14 triples , and a .391 slugging percentage . He also led the league with 570 assists . In the game characterized by Merkle 's Boner , Tinker hit an inside @-@ the @-@ park home run against Christy Mathewson of the New York Giants , prior to Fred Merkle 's baserunning gaffe . In the 1908 NL playoff game , which was a replay of the Merkle game , Tinker hit a leadoff triple off of Mathewson in the third inning , which ignited a four @-@ run rally that helped Chicago to clinch the pennant . Tinker then batted .263 as the Cubs defeated the Tigers in the 1908 World Series in five games . Tinker also hit a home run off of Bill Donovan , the first home run hit in a World Series following the 1905 rules agreement . 
 In 1909 , Tinker , who earned $ 1 @,@ 500 , demanded a $ 2 @,@ 500 salary . He accepted a $ 200 raise . The Cubs reached the 1910 World Series , and though Tinker batted .333 in the series , the Cubs lost to the Philadelphia Athletics in five games . Following the 1910 season , Tinker threatened to quit the Cubs and play baseball in Australia over a salary dispute . 
 Tinker led the NL with 486 assists in the 1911 season and led all shortstops in putouts with 333 . In August 1911 , Chance suspended Tinker for the remainder of the season for using profanity , though he was reinstated two days later . 
 Garry Herrmann , the owner of the Reds , identified Tinker as an ideal candidate to become his player @-@ manager for the 1912 season . According to Tinker , shareholders of the Reds approached Tinker about his interest in the job , and he then met with Charles W. Murphy , the Cubs ' owner , and Chance , then serving as the Cubs ' manager . They forbade him from taking the role with Cincinnati , which left Tinker unhappy . Herrmann began to listen to entreaties from his players , who wanted to retain Clark Griffith as manager , but decided to hire Hank O 'Day . In the 1912 season , Tinker had a .282 batting average , and scored 80 runs and recorded 75 RBIs , both career records . He again led the league in putouts by a shortstop , with 354 . Tinker finished in fourth place in the Chalmers Award voting following the season , behind Larry Doyle , Honus Wagner , and Chief Meyers . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 Murphy named Evers the new manager of the Cubs for the 1913 season . Tinker did not want to play for Evers and met with Murphy and Evers to discuss his transfer to the Reds . Murphy was unhappy with Tinker 's high salary demands , which led him to agree to trade Tinker to the Cincinnati Reds in December 1912 . The Reds received Tinker , Harry Chapman and Grover <unk> in exchange for Red Corriden , Bert Humphries , Pete <unk> , Mike Mitchell , and Art Phelan . He signed a contract for an undisclosed salary . 
 Tinker missed several weeks during the 1913 season when he gave blood for his wife 's blood transfusion . Tinker finished the season with a .317 batting average , .445 slugging percentage , and a <unk> fielding percentage , all career highs , in 110 games . However , the Reds as a team struggled , finishing the season with a 64 – 89 win @-@ loss record . Due to the Reds ' struggles , Herrmann challenged Tinker 's managerial style and sought his resignation . Tinker refused to resign . 
 = = = Chicago Whales and Cubs = = = 
 In October 1913 , Tinker and Herrmann conferred , leading to Tinker signing a contract to remain the Reds manager for the 1914 season . However , Herrmann fired Tinker in November , leaving him to seek a contract from another team . Tinker complained that Herrmann did not seek his input on player transactions , while Herrmann charged that Tinker did not accept his authority . 
 Charles Ebbets , owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers , viewed Tinker as a good replacement for the released Bob Fisher , their shortstop in 1913 . The Cubs , Giants , Pittsburgh Pirates , and Philadelphia Phillies were also interested in acquiring Tinker . Ebbets secured Tinker 's release from the Reds for $ 15 @,@ 000 , with another $ 10 @,@ 000 to be paid to Tinker . The teams also agreed to swap players , with Earl <unk> and Herbie Moran going to Cincinnati and Dick Egan joining Brooklyn . Ebbets entered contract negotiations with Tinker . 
 However , Tinker never received the $ 10 @,@ 000 promised to him by Ebbets . He insisted on a $ 10 @,@ 000 salary for the 1914 season , higher than the $ 5 @,@ 000 Brooklyn was willing to pay . Tinker was willing to accept a three @-@ year contract if it paid $ 7 @,@ 500 per season . Tinker decided to jump to the Federal League rather than sign with Brooklyn , signing a three @-@ year contract worth $ 36 @,@ 000 . He was considered the first " star " player to jump to the Federal League , though he signed with the Federal League the same day as Mordecai Brown . 
 Joining the Chicago Whales in the Federal League , Tinker served as player @-@ manager . In his role , he signed other major league players to the Federal League , though he could not lure American League pitchers Walter Johnson from the Washington Senators or Smoky Joe Wood from the Boston Red Sox . The Whales drew more fans than the Cubs in those two seasons . The Whales finished in second place in 1914 , with Tinker batting .259 despite suffering a broken rib during the season . Tinker tore a muscle in May 1915 , ending his season prematurely . With Tinker managing , the Whales won the pennant in 1915 . However , the league folded after the 1915 season . 
 Charles <unk> , the owner of the Whales , purchased the Cubs and consolidated his two Chicago rosters , retaining Tinker as his manager . Due to the high combined salaries of the Cubs and Whales , which included Brown and Roger Bresnahan , Tinker was tasked with releasing extraneous players from their contracts . He served as the player @-@ manager of the Cubs for the 1916 season . 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 Tinker was the starting shortstop for the Chicago Cubs from 1902 to 1912 . He was a speedy runner , stealing an average of 28 bases a season and even stealing home twice in one game on July 28 , 1910 . He also excelled at fielding , often leading the National League in a number of statistical categories ( including four times in fielding percentage ) . During his decade with the Cubs , they went to the World Series four times , winning in 1907 and 1908 . 
 Despite being just an average hitter , batting .268 for his career in an era of high batting averages , Tinker had a good amount of success against fellow Hall of Famer Christy Mathewson , batting .350 against the Hall of Fame pitcher over his career . In Mathewson 's 1912 book , Pitching in a Pinch , he referred to Tinker as " the worst man I have to face in the National League . " 
 Tinker is perhaps best known for the " Tinker to Evers to Chance " double play combination in the poem " Baseball 's Sad Lexicon " , written by the New York Evening Mail newspaper columnist Franklin Pierce Adams in July 1910 . The poem was written as a lamentation from the perspective of a New York Giants fan on how the team is consistently defeated by the Chicago Cubs . 
 Tinker was also noted as a fighter . In addition to fighting Evers , Tinker defeated Egan in a fight after a game and fought Rabbit Maranville during a game . In 1908 , he was arrested for assault when he got into a fight with a fan at a saloon he owned . He was acquitted of the charge . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In December 1916 , Tinker became part @-@ owner of the Columbus Senators of the American Association , with Thomas E. Wilson serving as the principal owner . The duo paid $ 65 @,@ 000 for 75 % ownership of the team . Tinker also served as the team 's manager . He allowed Grover Hartley to succeed him as manager in 1919 and chose Bill Clymer to manage the team for the 1920 season , leading Hartley to request a trade . 
 Tinker 's wife continued to suffer through poor health , so Tinker sold his interest in the Columbus team after the 1920 season and moved to Orlando , Florida . Tinker became owner and manager of the Orlando Tigers of the Florida State League . The team became known as the " Tinker Tigers " and won the league 's championship . Tinker also scouted for the Reds . 
 Tinker 's wife committed suicide on Christmas Day , 1923 , with a revolver during an apparent nervous breakdown . He remarried in 1926 , to Mary Ross Eddington of Orlando . Jack Hendricks of the Reds served as Tinker 's best man . He married his third wife , Susanna Margaret Chabot , in 1942 . 
 Tinker ended his involvement in professional baseball , focusing instead on his real estate ventures during the Florida land boom of the 1920s . He developed a successful real estate firm , buying and selling land in Orange County and Seminole County . He purchased the Longwood Hotel , now listed on the National Register of Historic Places , in 1926 . Tinker convinced Reds owner Garry Herrmann to use his stadium in Orlando for their spring training site in 1923 . 
 Tinker made up to $ 250 @,@ 000 in his real estate business . However , his fortunes began to change in 1926 , when the stock market receded and the 1926 Miami hurricane damaged significant areas of South Florida . During the Great Depression , he was forced to liquidate most of his real estate holdings . Tinker owned a billiard parlor during the Depression . He opened one of Orlando 's first bars after the end of Prohibition . He also returned to baseball . Tinker scouted the Philadelphia Athletics ' hitters for the Cubs prior to the 1929 World Series . 
 During the 1930 season , Tinker returned to baseball as a coach for the Buffalo Bisons of the International League , who were managed by Clymer . Tinker became the manager of the Jersey City Skeeters of the International League after the dismissal of Nick Allen in August . The owner of the Springfield Ponies of the Eastern League attempted to convince Tinker to manage his team in 1931 . Tinker assumed managerial duties of the Orlando Gulls in mid @-@ May 1937 , succeeding Nelson Leach . However , he resigned the position in July of that year , as the team was unable to pay his salary . During World War II , Tinker worked at Orlando Air Force Base as a boiler inspector . 
 According to some tellings , Tinker and Evers did not speak to one another again following their fight for 33 years , until they were asked to participate in the radio broadcast of the 1938 World Series , played between the Cubs and the New York Yankees . Neither Tinker nor Evers knew the other had been invited . However , in 1929 , Tinker joined with Evers in signing a 10 @-@ week contract to perform a theatrical skit on baseball in different cities across the United States . 
 Tinker had serious health problems in his later life . Complications of diabetes mellitus and Bright 's disease left Tinker near death in 1936 , when his physician believed he had 24 hours to live , and 1944 , when he was placed in an oxygen tent . However , he returned to health and scouted minor league players for the Boston Braves in 1946 . Tinker developed an infection relating to diabetes that in 1947 required the amputation of a toe and persisted until his left leg above the knee was amputated as well . Tinker died at Orange Memorial Hospital in Orlando on July 27 , 1948 , his 68th birthday , of complications from diabetes . He was buried in Greenwood Cemetery and survived by his four children . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Tinker was elected into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946 . Evers and Chance were inducted that same year . Local leaders in Orlando held a testimonial dinner in his honor in 1947 . 
 Tinker Field , a stadium in the shadow of the Citrus Bowl , and the Tinker Building , Tinker 's office in Orlando , are on the National Register of Historic Places . Tinker was posthumously inducted into the Florida State League Hall of Fame in 2009 , in its inaugural class . 
 = Palestinian fedayeen = 
 Palestinian fedayeen ( from the Arabic <unk> 'ī , plural <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) are militants or guerrillas of a nationalist orientation from among the Palestinian people . Most Palestinians consider the fedayeen to be " freedom fighters " , while most Israelis consider them to be terrorists . 
 Considered symbols of the Palestinian national movement , the Palestinian fedayeen drew inspiration from guerrilla movements in Vietnam , China , Algeria and Latin America . The ideology of the Palestinian fedayeen was mainly left @-@ wing nationalist , socialist or communist , and their proclaimed purpose was to defeat Zionism , claim Palestine and establish it as " a secular , democratic , nonsectarian state " . The meaning of a secular , democratic and non @-@ sectarian , however greatly diverged among fedayeen factions . 
 Emerging from among the Palestinian refugees who fled or were expelled from their villages as a result of the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , in the mid @-@ 1950s the fedayeen began mounting cross @-@ border operations into Israel from Syria , Egypt and Jordan . The earliest infiltrations were often to access the lands agricultural products they had lost as a result of the war , or to attack Israeli military , and sometimes civilian targets . The Gaza Strip , the sole territory of the All @-@ Palestine Government — an independent Palestinian state declared in October 1948 , became the focal point of the Palestinian fedayeen activity . Fedayeen attacks were directed on Gaza and Sinai borders with Israel , and as a result Israel undertook retaliatory actions , targeting the fedayeen that also often targeted the citizens of their host countries , which in turn provoked more attacks . 
 Fedayeen actions were cited by Israel as one of the reasons for its launching of the Sinai Campaign of 1956 , the 1967 War , and the 1978 and 1982 invasions of Lebanon . Palestinian fedayeen groups were united under the umbrella the Palestine Liberation Organization after the defeat of the Arab armies in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War , though each group retained its own leader and independent armed forces . 
 = = Definitions of the term = = 
 The words " Palestinian " and " fedayeen " have had different meanings to different people at various points in history . According to the Sakhr Arabic @-@ English dictionary , <unk> 'i — the singular form of the plural fedayeen — means " one who risks his life voluntarily " or " one who sacrifices himself " . In their book , The Arab @-@ Israeli Conflict , Tony Rea and John Wright have adopted this more literal translation , translating the term fedayeen as " self @-@ sacrificers " . 
 In his essay , " The Palestinian Leadership and the American Media : Changing Images , Conflicting Results " ( 1995 ) , R.S. <unk> comments on the perceptions and use of the terms " Palestinian " and " fedayeen " in the 1970s , writing : 
 " Palestinian became synonymous with terrorists , <unk> , commandos , and guerrillas . The term fedayeen was often used but rarely translated . This added to the mysteriousness of Palestinian groups . Fedayeen means " freedom fighter . " 
 Edmund Jan <unk> 's Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements ( 2002 ) defines fedayeen as " Palestinian resistance fighters " , whereas Martin Gilbert 's The Routledge Atlas of the Arab @-@ Israeli Conflict ( 2005 ) defines fedayeen as " Palestinian terrorist groups " . Robert McNamara refers to the fedayeen simply as " guerrillas " , as do Zeev Schiff and Raphael Rothstein in their work Fedayeen : Guerrillas Against Israel ( 1972 ) . Fedayeen can also be used to refer to militant or guerrilla groups that are not Palestinian . ( See Fedayeen for more . ) 
 Beverly Milton @-@ Edwards describes the Palestinian fedayeen as " modern revolutionaries fighting for national liberation , not religious salvation , " distinguishing them from mujahaddin ( i.e. " fighters of the jihad " ) . While the fallen soldiers of both mujahaddin and fedayeen are called <unk> ( i.e. " martyrs " ) by Palestinians , Milton nevertheless contends that it would be political and religious blasphemy to call the " leftist fighters " of the fedayeen . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1948 to 1956 = = = 
 Palestinian immigration into Palestine first emerged among the Palestinian refugees of the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , living in camps in Jordan ( including the Jordania @-@ occupied West Bank ) , Lebanon , Egypt ( including the Egyptian protectorate in Gaza ) , and Syria . Initially , most infiltrations were economic in nature , with Palestinians crossing the border seeking food or the recovery of property lost in the 1948 war . 
 Between 1948 and 1955 , immigration by Palestinians into Israel was opposed by Arab governments , in order to prevent escalation into another war . The problem of establishing and guarding the demarcation line separating the Gaza Strip from the Israeli @-@ held Negev area proved vexing , largely due to the presence of over 200 @,@ 000 Palestinian Arab refugees in this Gaza area . The terms of the Armistice Agreement restricted Egypt ’ s use and deployment of regular armed forces in the Gaza strip . In keeping with this restriction , the Egyptian Government ’ s solution was to form a Palestinian para @-@ military police force . The Palestinian Border police was created in December 1952 . The Border police were placed under the command of ‘ Abd @-@ al @-@ Man ’ <unk> ‘ Abd @-@ al @-@ Ra ’ uf , a former Egyptian air brigade commander , member of the Muslim Brotherhood and member of the Revolutionary Council . 250 Palestinian volunteers started training in March 1953 , with further volunteers coming forward for training in May and December 1953 . Some Border police personnel were attached to the Military Governor ’ s office , under ‘ Abd @-@ al- ‘ Azim al @-@ <unk> , to guard public installations in the Gaza strip . After an Israeli raid on an Egyptian military outpost in Gaza in February 1955 , during which 37 Egyptian soldiers were killed , the Egyptian government began to actively sponsor fedayeen raids into Israel . 
 The first struggle by Palestinian fedayeen may have been launched from Syrian territory in 1951 , though most counterattacks between 1951 and 1953 were launched from Jordanian territory . According to <unk> <unk> ( former head of Israeli military intelligence ) , these early infiltrations were limited " incursions " , initially motivated by economic reasons , such as Palestinians crossing the border into Israel to harvest crops in their former villages . Gradually , they developed into violent robbery and deliberate ' terrorist ' attacks as fedayeen replaced the ' innocent ' refugees as the perpetrators . 
 In 1953 , Israeli Prime Minister David Ben @-@ Gurion tasked Ariel Sharon , then security chief of the Northern Region , with setting up of a new commando unit , Unit 101 , designed to respond to fedayeen infiltrations ( see retribution operations ) . After one month of training , " a patrol of the unit that infiltrated into the Gaza Strip as an exercise , encountered Palestinians in al @-@ Bureij refugee camp , opened fire to rescue itself and left behind about 30 killed Arabs and dozens of wounded . " In its five @-@ month existence , Unit 101 was also responsible for carrying out the <unk> massacre on the night of 14 – 15 October 1953 , in the Jordanian village of the same name . Cross @-@ border operations by Israel were conducted in both Egypt and Jordan " to ' teach ' the Arab leaders that the Israeli government saw them as responsible for these activities , even if they had not directly conducted them . " Moshe Dayan felt that retaliatory action by Israel was the only way to convince Arab countries that , for the safety of their own citizens , they should work to stop fedayeen infiltrations . Dayan stated , " We are not able to protect every man , but we can prove that the price for Jewish blood is high . " 
 According to Martin Gilbert , between 1951 and 1955 , 967 Israelis were killed in what he claims as " Arab terrorist attacks " , a figure Benny Morris characterizes as " pure nonsense " . Morris explains that Gilbert 's fatality figures are " 3 @-@ 5 times higher than the figures given in contemporary Israeli reports " and that they seem to be based on a 1956 speech by David Ben @-@ Gurion in which he uses the word <unk> 'im to refer to " casualties " in the broad sense of the term ( i.e. both dead and wounded ) . According to the Jewish Agency for Israel between 1951 and 1956 , 400 Israelis were killed and 900 wounded in fedayeen attacks . Dozens of these attacks are today cited by the Israeli government as " Major Arab Terrorist Attacks against Israelis prior to the 1967 Six @-@ Day War " . According to the Jewish Virtual Library , while the attacks violated the 1949 Armistice Agreements prohibiting hostilities by paramilitary forces , it was Israel that was condemned by the United Nations Security Council for its counterattacks . 
 United Nations reports indicate that between 1949 and 1956 , Israel launched more than seventeen raids on Egyptian territory and 31 attacks on Arab towns or military forces . 
 From late 1954 onwards , larger scale Fedayeen operations were mounted from Egyptian territory . The Egyptian government supervised the establishment of formal fedayeen groups in Gaza and the northeastern Sinai . General Mustafa Hafez , commander of Egyptian army intelligence , is said to have founded Palestinian fedayeen units " to launch terrorist raids across Israel 's southern border , " nearly always against civilians . In a speech on 31 August 1955 , Egyptian President Nasser said : 
 Egypt has decided to dispatch her heroes , the disciples of Pharaoh and the sons of Islam and they will cleanse the land of Palestine .... There will be no peace on Israel 's border because we demand vengeance , and vengeance is Israel 's death . 
 In 1955 , it is reported that 260 Israeli citizens were killed or wounded by the fedayeen . Some believe fedayeen attacks contributed to the outbreak of the Suez Crisis ; they were cited by Israel as the reason for undertaking the 1956 Sinai Campaign . Others argue that Israel " engineered eve @-@ of @-@ war lies and deceptions .... to give Israel the excuse needed to launch its strike " , such as presenting a group of " captured fedayeen " to journalists , who were in fact Israeli soldiers . 
 In 1956 , Israeli troops entered Khan Yunis in the Egyptian controlled Gaza Strip , conducting house @-@ to @-@ house searches for Palestinian fedayeen and weaponry . During this operation , 275 Palestinians were killed , with an additional 111 killed in Israeli raids on the Rafah refugee camp . Israel claimed these killings resulted from " refugee resistance " , a claim denied by refugees ; there were no Israeli casualties . 
 = = = Suez Crisis = = = 
 On 29 October 1956 , the first day of Israel 's invasion of the Sinai Peninsula , Israeli forces attacked " fedayeen units " in the towns of Ras al @-@ <unk> and <unk> . Two days later , fedayeen destroyed water pipelines in Kibbutz Ma 'ayan along the Lebanese border , and began a campaign of mining in the area which lasted throughout November . In the first week of November , similar attacks occurred along the Syrian and Jordanian borders , the Jerusalem corridor and in the Wadi Ara region — although the state armies of both those countries are suspected as the saboteurs . On 9 November , four Israeli soldiers were injured after their vehicle was ambushed by fedayeen near the city of Ramla ; and several water pipelines and bridges were sabotaged in the Negev . 
 During the invasion of Sinai , Israeli forces killed fifty defenseless fedayeen on a lorry in Ras Sudar . ( Reserve Lieutenant Colonel Saul Ziv told Maariv in 1995 he was haunted by this killing . ) After Israel took control of the Gaza Strip , dozens of fedayeen were summarily executed , mostly in two separate incidents . Sixty @-@ six were killed in screening operations in the area ; while a US diplomat estimated that of the 500 fedayeen captured by the Israeli Defense Forces ( IDF ) , " about 30 " were killed . 
 = = = 1956 to 1967 = = = 
 Between the 1956 war and the 1967 war , Israeli civilian and military casualties on all Arab fronts , inflicted by regular and irregular forces ( including those of Palestinian fedayeen ) , averaged one per month — an estimated total of 132 fatalities . 
 During the mid and late 1960s , there emerged a number of independent Palestinian fedayeen groups who sought " the liberation of all Palestine through a Palestinian armed struggle . " The first incursion by these fedayeen may have been the 1 January 1965 commando infiltration into Israel , to plant explosives that destroyed a section of pipeline designed to divert water from the Jordan River into Israel . In 1966 , the Israeli military attacked the Jordanian @-@ controlled West Bank village of Samu , in response to Fatah raids against Israel 's eastern border , increasing tensions leading to the Six @-@ Day War . 
 = = = 1967 to 1987 = = = 
 Fedayeen groups began joining the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) in 1968 . While the PLO was the " unifying framework " under which these groups operated , each fedayeen organization had its own leader and armed forces and retained autonomy in operations . Of the dozen or so fedayeen groups under the PLO framework , the most important were the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( PFLP ) headed by George Habash , the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( DFLP ) headed by Nayef Hawatmeh , the PFLP @-@ General Command headed by Ahmed Jibril , as @-@ Sa 'iqa ( affiliated with Syria ) , and the Arab Liberation Front ( backed by Iraq ) . 
 The most severe act of sabotage of the fedayeen occurred on 4 July 1969 , when a single militant placed three pounds of explosives under the manifold of eight pipelines carrying oil from the Haifa refinery to the dockside . As a result of the explosion , three pipelines were temporarily out of commission and a fire destroyed over 1 @,@ 500 tons of refined oil . 
 = = = = West Bank = = = = 
 In the late 1960s , attempts were made to organize fedayeen resistance cells among the refugee population in the West Bank . The stony and empty terrain of the West Bank mountains made the fedayeen easy to spot ; and Israeli collective punishment against the families of fighters resulted in the fedayeen being pushed out of the West Bank altogether , within a few months . Yasser Arafat reportedly escaped arrest in Ramallah by jumping out a window , as Israeli police came in the front door . Without a base in the West Bank , and prevented from operating in Syria and Egypt , the fedayeen concentrated in Jordan . 
 = = = = Jordan = = = = 
 After the influx of a second wave of Palestinian refugees from the 1967 war , fedayeen bases in Jordan began to proliferate , and there were increased fedayeen attacks on Israel . Fedayeen fighters launched ineffective bazooka @-@ shelling attacks on Israeli targets across the Jordan River , while " brisk and indiscriminate " Israeli retaliations destroyed Jordanian villages , farms and installations , causing 100 @,@ 000 people to flee the Jordan Valley eastward . The increasing ferocity of those Israeli reprisals directed at Jordanians ( not Palestinians ) for fedayeen raids into Israel became a growing cause of concern for the Jordanian authorities . 
 One such Israeli reprisal was in the Jordanian town of Karameh , home to the headquarters of an emerging fedayeen group called Fatah , led by Yasser Arafat . Warned of large @-@ scale Israeli military preparations , many fedayeen groups , including the PFLP and the DFLP , withdraw their forces from the town . Advised by a pro @-@ Fatah Jordanian divisional commander to withdraw his men and headquarters to nearby hills , Arafat refused , stating " We want to convince the world that there are those in the Arab world who will not withdraw or flee . " Fatah remained , and the Jordanian Army agreed to back them if heavy fighting ensued . 
 On the night of 21 March 1968 , Israel attacked Karameh with heavy weaponry , armored vehicles and fighter jets . Fatah held its ground , surprising the Israeli military . As Israel 's forces intensified their campaign , the Jordanian Army became involved , causing the Israelis to retreat in order to avoid a full @-@ scale war . By the battle 's end , 100 Fatah militants had been killed , 100 wounded and 120 @-@ 150 captured ; Jordanian fatalities were 61 soldiers and civilians , 108 wounded ; and Israeli casualties were 28 soldiers killed and 69 wounded . 13 Jordanian tanks were destroyed in the battle ; while the Israelis lost 4 tanks , 3 half tracks , 2 armoured cars , and an airplane shot down by Jordanian forces . 
 The Battle of Karameh raised the profile of the fedayeen , as they were regarded the " daring heroes of the Arab world " . Despite the higher Arab death toll , Fatah considered the battle a victory because of the Israeli army 's rapid withdrawal . Such developments prompted Rashid Khalidi to dub the Battle of Karameh the " foundation myth " of the Palestinian commando movement , whereby " failure against overwhelming odds [ was ] brilliantly narrated as [ an ] heroic triumph . " 
 Financial donations and recruitment increased as many young Arabs , including thousands of non @-@ Palestinians , joined the ranks of the organization . The ruling Hashemite authorities in Jordan grew increasingly alarmed by the PLO 's activities , as they established a " state within a state " , providing military training and social welfare services to the Palestinian population , bypassing the Jordanian authorities . Palestinian criticism of the poor performance of the Arab Legion ( the King 's army ) was an insult to both the King and the regime . Further , many Palestinian fedayeen groups of the radical left , such as the PFLP , " called for the overthrow of the Arab monarchies , including the Hashemite regime in Jordan , arguing that this was an essential first step toward the liberation of Palestine . " 
 In the first week of September 1970 , PFLP forces hijacked three airplanes ( British , Swiss and German ) at Dawson 's field in Jordan . To secure the release of the passengers , the demand to free PFLP militants held in European jails was met . After everyone had disembarked , the fedayeen destroyed the airplanes on the tarmac . 
 = = = = Black September in Jordan = = = = 
 On 16 September 1970 , King Hussein ordered his troops to strike and eliminate the fedayeen network in Jordan . Syrian troops intervened to support the fedayeen , but were turned back by Jordanian armour and Israeli army overflights . Thousands of Palestinians were killed in the initial battle — which came to be known as Black September — and thousands more in the security crackdown that followed . By the summer of 1971 , the Palestinian fedayeen network in Jordan had been effectively dismantled , with most of the fighters setting up base in southern Lebanon instead . 
 = = = = Gaza Strip = = = = 
 The emergence of a fedayeen movement in the Gaza Strip was catalyzed by Israel 's occupation of the territory during the 1967 war . Palestinian fedayeen from Gaza " waged a mini @-@ war " against Israel for three years before the movement was crushed by the Israeli military in 1971 under the orders of then Defense Minister , Ariel Sharon . 
 Palestinians in Gaza were proud of their role in establishing a fedayeen movement there when no such movement existed in the West Bank at the time . The fighters were housed in refugee camps or hid in the citrus groves of wealthy Gazan landowners , carrying out raids against Israeli soldiers from these sites . 
 The most active of the fedayeen groups in Gaza was the PFLP , an offshoot of the Arab Nationalist Movement ( ANM ) — who enjoyed instant popularity among the already secularized , socialist population who had come of age during Egyptian President Nasser 's rule of Gaza . The emergence of armed struggle as the liberation strategy for the Gaza Strip reflected larger ideological changes within the Palestinian national movement toward political violence . 
 " The ideology of armed struggle was , by this time , broadly secular in content ; Palestinians were asked to take up arms not as part of a jihad against the infidel but to free the oppressed from the Zionist colonial regime . The vocabulary of liberation was distinctly secular . " 
 The " radical left " dominated the political scene , and the overarching slogan of the time was , " We will liberate Palestine first , then the rest of the Arab world . " 
 During Israel 's 1971 military campaign to contain or control the fedayeen , an estimated 15 @,@ 000 suspected fighters were rounded up and deported to detention camps in Abu <unk> and Abu <unk> in the Sinai . Dozens of homes were demolished by Israeli forces , rendering hundreds of people homeless . According to Milton @-@ Edwards , " This security policy successfully instilled terror in the camps and wiped out the fedayeen bases . " The destruction of the secular infrastructure , paved the way for the rise of the Islamic movement , which began organizing as early as 1969 – 1970 , led by Sheikh Ahmed Yassin . 
 = = = = Lebanon = = = = 
 On 3 November 1969 , the Lebanese government signed the Cairo Agreement which granted Palestinians the right to launch attacks on Israel from southern Lebanon in coordination with the Lebanese Army . After the expulsion of the Palestinian fedayeen from Jordan and a series of Israeli raids on Lebanon , the Lebanese government granted the PLO the right to defend Palestinian refugee camps there and to possess heavy weaponry . After the outbreak of 1975 Lebanese Civil War , the PLO increasingly began to act once again as a " state within a state " . On 11 March 1978 , twelve fedayeen led by Dalal <unk> infiltrated Israel from the sea and hijacked a bus along the coastal highway , killing 38 civilians in the ensuing gunfight between them and police . Israel invaded southern Lebanon in the 1978 Israel @-@ Lebanon conflict , occupying a 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) wide area there to put an end to Palestinian attacks on Israel , but fedayeen rocket strikes on northern Israel continued . 
 Israeli armoured artillery and infantry forces , supported by air force and naval units again entered Lebanon on 6 June 1982 in an operation code @-@ named " Peace for Galilee " , encountering " fierce resistance " from the Palestinian fedayeen there . Israel 's occupation of southern Lebanon and its siege and constant shelling of the capital Beirut in the 1982 Lebanon War , eventually forced the Palestinian fedayeen to accept an internationally brokered agreement that moved them out of Lebanon to different places in the Arab world . The headquarters of the PLO was moved out of Lebanon to Tunis at this time . The new PLO headquarters was destroyed during an Israeli airstrike in 1985 . 
 During a September 2 , 1982 press conference at the United Nations , Yasser Arafat stated that , " Jesus Christ was the first Palestinian fedayeen who carried his sword along the path on which the Palestinians today carry their cross . " 
 = = = First Intifada = = = 
 On 25 November 1987 , PFLP @-@ GC launched an attack , in which two fedayeen infiltrated northern Israel from an undisclosed Syrian @-@ controlled area in southern Lebanon with hang gliders . One of them was killed at the border , while the other proceeded to land at an army camp , initially killing a soldier in a passing vehicle , then five more in the camp , before being shot dead . Thomas Friedman said that judging by commentary in the Arab world , the raid was seen as a boost to the Palestinian national movement , just as it had seemed to be almost totally eclipsed by the Iran – Iraq War . Palestinians in Gaza began taunting Israeli soldiers , chanting " six to one " and the raid has been noted as a catalyst to the First Intifada . 
 During the First Intifada , armed violence on the part of Palestinians was kept to a minimum , in favor of mass demonstrations and acts of civil disobedience . However , the issue of the role of armed struggle did not die out altogether . Those Palestinian groups affiliated with the PLO and based outside of historic Palestine , such as rebels within Fatah and the PFLP @-@ GC , used the lack of fedayeen operations as their main weapon of criticism against the PLO leadership at the time . The PFLP and DFLP even made a few abortive attempts at fedayeen operations inside Israel . According to Jamal Raji Nassar and Roger Heacock , " 
 [ … ] at least parts of the Palestinian left sacrificed all to the golden calf of armed struggle when measuring the degree of revolutionary commitment by the number of fedayeen operations , instead of focusing on the positions of power they doubtless held inside the Occupied Territories and which were major assets in struggles over a particular political line . " 
 During the First Intifada , but particularly after the signing of the Oslo Accords , the fedayeen steadily lost ground to the emerging forces of the mujahaddin , represented initially and most prominently by Hamas . The fedayeen lost their position as a political force and the secular nationalist movement that had represented the first generation of the Palestinian resistance became instead a symbolic , cultural force that was seen by some as having failed in its duties . 
 = = = Second Intifada and current situation = = = 
 After being dormant for many years , Palestinian fedayeen reactivated their operations during the Second Intifada . In August 2001 , ten Palestinian commandos from the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( DFLP ) penetrated the electric fences of the fortified army base of <unk> , killing an Israeli major and two soldiers and wounding seven others . One of the commandos was killed in the firefight . Another was tracked for hours and later shot in head , while the rest escaped . In Gaza , the attack produced " a sense of euphoria — and nostalgia for the Palestinian fedayeen raids in the early days of the Jewish state . " Israel responded by launching airstrikes at the police headquarters in Gaza City , an intelligence building in the central Gaza town of Deir al @-@ Balah and a police building in the West Bank town of Salfit . Salah Zeidan , head of the DFLP in Gaza , stated of the operation that , " It 's a classic model — soldier to soldier , gun to gun , face to face [ ... ] Our technical expertise has increased in recent days . So has our courage , and people are going to see that this is a better way to resist the occupation than suicide bombs inside the Jewish state . " 
 Today , the fedayeen have been eclipsed politically by the Palestinian National Authority ( PNA ) , which consists of the major factions of the PLO , and militarily by Islamist groups , particularly Hamas . Already strained relations between Hamas and the PNA collapsed entirely when the former took over the Gaza Strip in 2007 . Although the fedayeen are leftist and secular , during the most recent hostilities between Israel and the Gaza Strip , fedayeen groups fought alongside and in coordination with Hamas even though a number of the factions were previously sworn enemies of them . The al @-@ Aqsa Martyrs Brigades , an armed faction loyal to the Fatah @-@ controlled PNA , undermined Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas by lobbing rockets into southern Israel in concert with rivals Hamas and the Islamic Jihad . According to researcher Maha Azzam , this symbolized the disintegration of Fatah and the division between the grassroots organization and the current leadership . The PFLP and the Popular Resistance Committees also joined in the fighting . 
 To rival the PNA and increase Palestinian fedayeen cooperation , a Damascus @-@ based coalition composed of representatives of Hamas , Islamic Jihad , the PFLP , as @-@ Sa 'iqa , the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front , the Revolutionary Communist Party , and other anti @-@ PNA factions within the PLO , such as Fatah al @-@ Intifada , was established during the Gaza War in 2009 . 
 = = Philosophical grounding and objectives = = 
 The objectives of the fedayeen were articulated in the statements and literature they produced , which were consistent with reference to the aim of destroying Zionism . In 1970 , the stated aim of the fedayeen was establishing Palestine as " a secular , democratic , nonsectarian state . " Robert Freedman writes that for some fedayeen groups , the secular aspect of the struggle was " merely a slogan for assuaging world opinion , " while others strove " to give the concept meaningful content . " Prior to 1974 , the fedayeen position was that any Jew who renounced Zionism could remain in the Palestinian state to be created . After 1974 , the issue became less clear and there were suggestions that only those Jews who were in Palestine prior to " the Zionist invasion " , alternatively placed at 1947 or 1917 , would be able to remain . 
 In The Intifada : Its Impact on Israel , the Arab World , and the Superpowers , Bard O 'Neill writes that the fedayeen attempted to study and borrow from all of the revolutionary models available , but that their publications and statements show a particular affinity for the Cuban , Algerian , Vietnamese , and Chinese experiences . 
 = = = Infighting and breakaway movements = = = 
 During the post @-@ Six @-@ Day War era , individual fedayeen movements quarreled over issues about the recognition of Israel , alliances with various Arab states , and ideologies . A faction led by Nayef Hawatmeh and Yasser Abed <unk> split from PFLP in 1974 , because they preferred a Maoist and non @-@ Nasserist approach . This new movement became known as the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( DFLP ) . In 1974 , the PNC approved the Ten Point Program ( drawn up by Arafat and his advisers ) , and proposed a compromise with the Israelis . The Program called for a Palestinian national authority over every part of " liberated Palestinian territory " , which referred to areas captured by Arab forces in the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War ( present @-@ day West Bank and Gaza Strip ) . Perceived by some Palestinians as overtures to the United States and concessions to Israel , the program fostered internal discontent , and prompted several of the PLO factions , such as the PFLP , DFLP , as @-@ Sa 'iqa , the Arab Liberation Front and the Palestine Liberation Front , among others , to form a breakaway movement which came to be known as the Rejectionist Front . 
 During the Lebanese Civil War ( 1975 – 1990 ) , the PLO aligned itself with the Communist and Nasserist Lebanese National Movement . Although they were initially backed by Syrian president Hafez al @-@ Assad , when he switched sides in the conflict , the smaller pro @-@ Syrian factions within the Palestinian fedayeen camp , namely as @-@ Sa 'iqa and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command fought against Arafat 's Fatah @-@ led PLO . In 1988 , after Arafat and al @-@ Assad partially reconciled , Arafat loyalists in the refugee camps of Bourj al @-@ <unk> and Shatila attempted to force out Fatah al @-@ Intifada — a pro @-@ Syrian Fatah breakaway movement formed by Said al @-@ <unk> in 1983 . Instead , al @-@ <unk> 's forces overran Arafat loyalists from both camps after bitter fighting in which Fatah al @-@ Intifada received backing from the Lebanese Amal militia . 
 The PLO and other Palestinian armed movements became increasingly divided after the Oslo Accords in 1993 . They were rejected by the PFLP , DFLP , Hamas , and twenty other factions , as well as Palestinian intellectuals , refugees outside of the Palestinian territories , and the local leadership of the territories . The Rejectionist fedayeen factions formed a common front with the Islamists , culminating in the creation of the Alliance of Palestinian Forces . This new alliance failed to act as a cohesive unit , but revealed the sharp divisions among the PLO , with the fedayeen finding themselves aligning with Palestinian Islamists for the first time . Disintegration within the PLO 's main body Fatah increased as Farouk <unk> — in charge of foreign affairs — voiced his opposition to negotiations with Israel . Members of the PLO @-@ Executive Committee , poet Mahmoud Darwish and refugee leader Shafiq al @-@ Hout resigned from their posts in response to the PLO 's acceptance of Oslo 's terms . 
 = = = Tactics = = = 
 Until 1968 , fedayeen tactics consisted largely of hit @-@ and @-@ run raids on Israeli military targets . A commitment to " armed struggle " was incorporated into PLO Charter in clauses that stated : " Armed struggle is the only way to liberate Palestine " and " Commando action constitutes the nucleus of the Palestinian popular liberation war . " 
 Preceding the Six @-@ Day War in 1967 , the fedayeen carried out several campaigns of sabotage against Israeli infrastructure . Common acts of this included the consistent mining of water and irrigation pipelines along the Jordan River and its tributaries , as well as the Lebanese @-@ Israeli border and in various locations in the Galilee . Other acts of sabotage involved bombing bridges , mining roads , ambushing cars and vandalizing ( sometimes destroying ) houses . After the Six @-@ Day War , these incidents steadily decreased with the exception of the bombing of a complex of oil pipelines sourcing from the Haifa refinery in 1969 . 
 The <unk> counterinsurgency tactics , which from 1967 onwards regularly included the use of home demolitions , curfews , deportations , and other forms of collective punishment , effectively precluded the ability of the Palestinian fedayeen to create internal bases from which to wage " a people 's war " . The tendency among many captured guerrillas to collaborate with the Israeli authorities , providing information that led to the destruction of numerous " terrorist cells " , also contributed to the failure to establish bases in the territories occupied by Israel . The fedayeen were compelled to establish external bases , resulting in frictions with their host countries which led to conflicts ( such as Black September ) , diverting them from their primary objective of " bleeding Israel " . 
 = = = = Airplane hijackings = = = = 
 The tactic of exporting their struggle against Israel beyond the Middle East was first adopted by the Palestinian fedayeen in 1968 . According to John <unk> , it was Wadie Haddad of the PFLP who , unconvinced with the effectiveness of raids on military targets , masterminded the first hijacking of a civilian passenger plane by Palestinian fedayeen in July 1968 . Two commandos forced an El Al Boeing 747 en route from Rome to Tel Aviv to land in Algiers , renaming the flight " Palestinian Liberation 007 " . While publicly proclaiming that it would not negotiate with terrorists , the Israelis did negotiate . The passengers were released unharmed in exchange for the release of sixteen Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails . The first hijacking of an American airliner was conducted by the PFLP on 29 August 1969 . Robert D. Kumamoto describes the hijacking as a response to an American veto of a United Nations Security Council resolution censuring Israel for its March 1969 aerial attacks on Jordanian villages suspected of harbouring fedayeen , and for the impending delivery of American Phantom jets to Israel . The flight , en route to Tel Aviv from Rome , was forced to land in Damascus where , Leila Khaled , one of the two fedayeen to hijack the plane proclaimed that , " this hijacking is one of the operational aspects of our war against Zionism and all who support it , including the United States ... [ ; ] it was a perfectly normal thing to do , the sort of thing all freedom fighters must tackle . " Most of the passengers and crew were released immediately after the plane landed . Six Israeli passengers were taken hostage and held for questioning by Syria . Four women among them were released after two days , and the two men were released after a week of intensive negotiations between all the parties involved . Of this PFLP hijacking and those that followed at Dawson 's field , Kumamoto writes : " The PFLP hijackers had seized no armies , mountaintops , or cities . Theirs was not necessarily a war of arms ; it was a war of words - a war of propaganda , the exploitation of violence to attract world attention . In that regard , the Dawson 's Field episode was a publicity <unk> . " 
 George Habash , leader of the PFLP , explained his view of the efficacy of hijacking as a tactic in a 1970 interview , stating , " When we hijack a plane it has more effect than if we killed a hundred Israelis in battle . " Habash also stated that after decades of being ignored , " At least the world is talking about us now . " The hijacking attempts did indeed continue . On 8 May 1972 , a Sabena Airlines 707 was forced to land in Tel Aviv after it was commandeered by four Black September commandos who demanded the release of 317 fedayeen fighters being held in Israeli jails . While the Red Cross was negotiating , Israeli paratroopers disguised as mechanics stormed the plane , shot and killed two of hijackers and captured the remaining two after a gunfight that injured five passengers and two paratroopers . 
 The tactics employed by the Black September group in subsequent operations differed sharply from the other " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill PLO attacks of the day " . The unprecedented level of violence evident in multiple international attacks between 1971 and 1972 included the Sabena airliner hijacking ( mentioned above ) , the assassination of the Jordanian Prime Minister in Cairo , the Massacre at Lod airport , and the Munich Olympics massacre . In The Dynamics of Armed Struggle , J. Bowyer Bell contends that " armed struggle " is a message to the enemy that they are " doomed by history " and that operations are " violent message units " designed to " accelerate history " to this end . Bell argues that despite the apparent failure of the Munich operation which collapsed into chaos , murder , and gun battles , the basic fedayeen intention was achieved since , " The West was appalled and wanted to know the rationale of the terrorists , the Israelis were outraged and punished , many of the Palestinians were encouraged by the visibility and ignored the killings , and the rebels felt that they had acted , helped history along . " He notes the opposite was true for the 1976 hijacking of an Air France flight redirected to Uganda where the Israelis scored an " enormous tactical victory " in Operation Entebbe . While their death as martyrs had been foreseen , the fedayeen had not expected to die as villains , " bested by a display of Zionist skill . " 
 = = = = Affiliations with other guerrilla groups = = = = 
 Several fedayeen groups maintained contacts with a number of other guerrilla groups worldwide . The IRA for example had long held ties with Palestinians , and volunteers trained at fedayeen bases in Lebanon . In 1977 , Palestinian fedayeen from Fatah helped arrange for the delivery of a sizable arms shipment to the <unk> by way of Cyprus , but it was intercepted by the Belgian authorities . 
 The PFLP and the DFLP established connections with revolutionary groups such as the Red Army Faction of West Germany , the Action <unk> of France , the Red Brigades of Italy , the Japanese Red Army and the <unk> of Uruguay . These groups , especially the Japanese Red Army participated in many of the PFLP 's operations including hijackings and the Lod Airport massacre . The Red Army Faction joined the PFLP in the hijackings of two airplanes that landed in Entebbe Airport . 
 = Devotions upon Emergent Occasions = 
 Devotions upon Emergent Occasions , or in full Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions , and severall steps in my <unk> , is a prose work by the English metaphysical poet and cleric in the Church of England John Donne , published in 1624 . It covers death , rebirth and the Elizabethan concept of sickness as a visit from God , reflecting internal sinfulness . The Devotions were written in December 1623 as Donne recovered from a serious but unknown illness – believed to be relapsing fever or typhus . Having come close to death , he described the illness he had suffered from and his thoughts throughout his recovery with " near super @-@ human speed and concentration " . Registered by 9 January , and published soon after , the Devotions is one of only seven printed works attributed to Donne which were printed during his lifetime . 
 The Devotions is divided into 23 parts , each consisting of 3 sub @-@ sections , called the ' meditation ' , the " expostulation ' and a prayer . The 23 sections are chronologically ordered , each covering his thoughts and reflections on a single day of the illness . Famously , the 17th devotion , Meditation XVII , includes the phrases " No man is an Iland " ( often modernised as " No man is an island " ) and " ... for whom the bell tolls " . The work as a whole is considered similar to 17th @-@ century devotional writing generally , and particularly to Donne 's Holy Sonnets . Some academics have also identified political strands running through the work , from a polemic Arminian denunciation of Puritanism to advice to the young Prince Charles . 
 = = Background = = 
 Donne was born on 21 January 1572 to the elder John Donne , a wealthy ironmonger and one of the wardens of the Worshipful Company of <unk> , and his wife Elizabeth . After his father 's death when he was four , Donne was , instead of being prepared to enter a trade , trained as a gentleman scholar ; his family used the money his father had made from <unk> to hire private tutors who taught him grammar , rhetoric , mathematics , history and foreign languages . Elizabeth soon remarried to a wealthy doctor , ensuring that the family remained comfortable ; as a result , despite being the son of an ironmonger and portraying himself in his early poetry as an outsider , Donne refused to accept that he was anything other than a gentleman . After study at Hart Hall , Oxford , Donne 's private education eventually saw him study at Lincoln 's Inn , one of the Inns of Court , where he occupied his time with history , poetry , theology and " Humane learning and languages " . It was at Lincoln 's Inn that Donne first began writing poetry , looking upon it as " a life @-@ sign or minor irritation " rather than something that defined him . 
 In November 1623 , Donne fell seriously ill . London was the scene of a ' spotted ' or relapsing fever , which hit its victims unexpectedly and left them conscious but physically helpless . What disease Donne suffered from is not known . Writers have suggested typhus as a likely culprit , but Donne 's writings on the subject reference multiple diseases . Clara Lander , writing in Studies in English Literature 1500 – 1900 , suggests that the typhus may have exacerbated the enteritis Donne had suffered from since childhood . 
 Donne was of the opinion – as were many others of the age – that illness reflected a state of internal sinfulness , and constituted a visit from God . Despite being ordered to rest , he insisted that a pen and paper be given to him , and he wrote down his impressions of the disease . After his recovery , in December , these became Devotions upon Emergent Occasions , one of his few published prose works , and also one of only seven printed works of which he acknowledged authorship . Written with " near super @-@ human speed and concentration " , the work was registered with the Stationers ' Company by 9 January 1624 . It was published that year , and again in 1634 and 1638 . The full , albeit rarely used , title is Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions , and severall steps in my <unk> . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Structurally , Devotions consists of 23 chronologically ordered sections – representing the length , in days , of Donne 's illness . Each one contains a ' meditation ' , in which he describes a stage of his illness , an ' expostulation ' containing his reaction to that stage , and finally a prayer in which he makes peace with the disease . In the five editions published during the 17th century , the book opens with a Latin preface , titled " <unk> , sive <unk> in <unk> , ad <unk> <unk> Meditationes <unk> " . Also 23 sections long , each line of the preface is followed by what purports to be an English translation of the Latin . Joan Webber argues that these lines constitute a poem , in dactylic hexameter ; David <unk> disputes this , arguing that <unk> " has none of Donne 's customary wit , drama , and imagination " . Instead , it represents the Stations of the Cross , or <unk> <unk> . Mary <unk> , writing in Modern Philology , argues that the stationes indeed constitute a poem – or , at least , something more than a mere table of contents . The Latin lines play @-@ off the English translations , and contain nuanced meaning not found in the English that better represents the sections to which they refer . 
 Following the stationes , the 23 meditations begin . Each section , taken in an isolated way , follows the same pattern : Donne states some element of his illness or treatment , and then expands upon his statement to develop a theme that culminates with him becoming closer to God . Perhaps the most famous of the meditations is Meditation XVII , which begins with the statement : 
 Nunc lento <unk> <unk> , <unk> ( Now this Bell , tolling softly for another , <unk> to me , Thou must die ) . 
 This statement , or title , is then expanded on . Donne first concludes that he may not be aware that the bell is tolling , saying " hee for whom this Bell tolls may be so ill , as that he <unk> not it tolls for him ; And perchance I may thinke my selfe so much better than I am , as that they who are about mee , and see my state , may have caused it to toll for mee , and I know not that " . This is then expanded with the realisation that , even if the bell is tolling for others , it is a matter of concern for Donne , as : 
 No man is an Iland , intire of it selfe ; every man is a <unk> of the Continent , a part of the <unk> ; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea , Europe is the <unk> , as well as if a <unk> were , as well as if a <unk> of thy friends or of thine owne were ; any mans death diminishes me , because I am involved in <unk> ; And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls ; It tolls for thee . [ Donne 's original spelling and punctuation ] 
 Donne then argues that if someone dies , anyone has the right to use their death as long as they do so <unk> , considering it a treasure . He writes that : 
 If a man carry treasure in bullion , or in a wedge of gold , and have none coined into currant <unk> , his treasure will not defray him as he <unk> . Tribulation is Treasure in the nature of it , but it is not currant money in the use of it , except wee get nearer and nearer our home , Heaven , by it . Another man may be <unk> too , and sick to death , and this affliction may lie in his bowels , as gold in a Mine , and be of no use to him ; but this bell , that tells me of his affliction , digs out , and applies that gold to mee if by this consideration of <unk> danger , I take mine owne into contemplation , and so secure my selfe , by making my recourse to my God , who is our onely <unk> . 
 The death of an individual – signified by the tolling of the bell – is thus a treasure buried at the bottom of a mine : only of value if it is given to someone who makes good use of it . In this he refers to the work of Augustine of Hippo , specifically On Christian Doctrine , in which Augustine describes the knowledge of pagans as gold and silver : something that can be involved in Christian purposes if appropriated properly . Donne , twisting this idea , is arguing that the death of any individual is something others can learn from , should they understand it properly . 
 = = Style and meaning = = 
 Stylistically , the Devotions is an example of 17th @-@ century devotional writing , and has been compared by Roger Rollin , professor of literature at Clemson University , to the Holy Sonnets and considered , in effect , a sequel . In the context of 17th century devotional writing , Rollin uses the Devotions to demonstrate that , in his view , such writings were " more public than private , [ serving as ] vehicles for the diagnosis of spiritual malaise and as sources of remedies " . Lander argued that the full title signifies " growth of the spirit through physical ordeal " , and in doing so draws on the devotional works of Joseph Hall . Thomas F. Van Laan , writing in Studies in Philology , draws parallels between Donne 's style and the Ignatian exercises : a set of structured mental exercises designed to bring an individual closer to understanding God . 
 A number of literary theorists have approached the Devotions as politically themed . Richard <unk> , in particular , identifies the Devotions as an " Arminian polemic " , arguing that it was highly atypical of Donne to actually publish works , rather than merely let them circulate amongst friends . Both before and after ordination , Donne actively resisted publication , normally only publishing works that had been the result of a commission , such as The Anniversaries or Pseudo @-@ Martyr . The Devotions , however , were " literally rushed " into print , with the volume being handed to the printers a month after he had recovered from his disease . <unk> argues that Donne 's rationale for publishing the Devotions matches his rationale for publishing a sermon , the Encaenia , the same year , to assert the importance of " places , and of <unk> , and of all outward <unk> " , because he felt some sense of urgency about what he had to say . This is coupled with Devotion XVI , in which Donne explicitly comes out against Puritanism and is simultaneously " purposely militant " , deliberately frustrating the other extreme from Puritanism , where " the Arminianism and the polemical anti @-@ puritanism of the volume becomes explicit " . 
 Dave Gray and Jeanne Shami , writing in the Modern Language Quarterly , argue that it was not just a work of political rhetoric but a work of political advice , aimed at Prince Charles , to whom it was dedicated . The political situation at the time was complex , as King James was ill and Charles attempting to gain control of the government . Gray and Shami highlight the noted line " No man is an island " ; while most interpret it spiritually , they argue that it was a reminder to the prince and his advisors that " even private actions have public consequences " . The veiled nature of the political references was deliberate ; it allowed the work to be acceptable to the censors , but accessible to Charles and those close to him . In the event that they rejected the underlying message , it would also be accessible to other prominent and influential political figures . 
 Lander argues that the structure of the work is itself symbolic . As well as the division of the poem into 23 parts , each signifying and describing one day of Donne 's illness , each part is itself split in three – representing the Trinity . The use of three elements – Meditation , <unk> , and Prayer – also matches the three services found in the Book of Common Prayer , a common influence on devotional writers of Donne 's era . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The Devotions have received a mixed reaction from critics . Evelyn Simpson described it as " a curious little book " , and wrote that " [ a ] s a manual of devotion [ the Devotions ] compares unfavourably with the Devotions of Bishop Andrewes or the Holy Living of Jeremy Taylor . It is too introspective , too metaphysical , too much overloaded with learning of different kinds " . Helen C. White described it as the output of an " anxious and restless mind " . 
 <unk> , on the other hand , describes the Devotions as 
 Donne 's most mature , perhaps most complex work : a remarkable , sustained prose @-@ poem that not only expresses conflicting and powerful internal emotions but also consciously provides its readers with a touching model of the experiences of God 's elect in confronting the inexorable course of human sinfulness that characterizes life on earth . 
 Helen Wilcox writes that " the mixture of elaborate rhetoric , painstaking argument , and the frank details of his melancholic ' <unk> distemper ' creates a particularly powerful impact " and draws particular attention to Meditation XVII , noting that despite the apparent self @-@ interest of the Devotions , that piece highlights Donne 's recognition of the ultimate interconnectedness of humanity . Meditation XVII was also the focus of Robert Jungman , who , writing in American Notes and Queries , noted it as the most forceful statement of Donne 's theme in what was ultimately a " powerful psychological analysis " . 
 In wider popular culture , several phrases from the Devotions , particularly Meditation XVII , have become commonly quoted , including " No man is an Iland " ( often modernised as " No man is an island " ) and " ... for whom the bell tolls " . Thomas Festa , writing in Notes and Queries , identifies similarities between Thomas Browne 's Christian Morals and Donne 's Meditation XIV . 
 = Gravesend Blockhouse = 
 Gravesend Blockhouse was an artillery fortification constructed as part of Henry VIII 's Device plan of 1539 , in response to fears of an imminent invasion of England by France and the Holy Roman Empire . It was built at Gravesend in Kent along a strategic point along the River Thames and was operational by 1540 . A two @-@ storey , D @-@ shaped building built from brick and stone , it had a circular bastion overlooking the river and gun platforms extending out to the east and west . It functioned in conjunction with Tilbury Fort on the other side of the river , and was repaired in 1588 to deal with the threat of Spanish invasion , and again in 1667 when the Dutch navy raided the Thames . A 1778 report recommended alterations to the blockhouse and its defences , leading to the remodelling of the gun platforms and the construction of the new , larger New Tavern Fort alongside it . In the 1830s the government decided to rely entirely on the newer fort and the old blockhouse was demolished in 1844 . Its remains were uncovered in archaeological excavations between 1975 and 1976 . 
 = = 16th century = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Gravesend Blockhouse was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry then broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England now appeared certain . 
 = = = Device of 1539 = = = 
 Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . Under this programme of work the River Thames was protected with a mutually reinforcing network of blockhouses at Gravesend , Milton , and Higham on the south side of the river , and Tilbury and East Tilbury on the opposite bank . 
 The fortifications were strategically placed . London and the newly constructed royal dockyards of Deptford and Woolwich were vulnerable to seaborne attacks arriving up the Thames estuary , which was then a major maritime route , with 80 percent of England 's exports passing through it . The village of Milton and the adjacent town of Gravesend , only 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) apart , formed a particularly important communications point along the river . They were the centre for the " Long Ferry " traffic of passengers into the capital , and for the " Cross Ferry " over the river to Tilbury , resulting in the local riverbank becoming lined with wharfs . This was also the first point that an invasion force would be able to easily disembark along the Thames , as before this point the mudflats along the sides of the estuary would have made landings difficult . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Gravesend Blockhouse was designed by the Clerk of the King 's Works , James Nedeham , and the Master of Ordnance , Christopher Morice , with Robert Lorde serving as the paymaster for the project and Lionel Martin , John <unk> and Mr Travers acting as the local overseers . The Crown bought the land for the fort , along with the space for Gravesend Blockhouse , from William Burston for £ 66 ; it is uncertain how much the building work cost , but earlier estimates in 1539 had suggested that it would cost £ 211 to build such a blockhouse , including the 150 @,@ 000 bricks and quantities of stone , chalk , lime , timber and labour that would be needed . The work was quickly completed , and by 1540 the blockhouse was fully operational . 
 It was approximately 28 by 21 metres ( 92 by 69 ft ) in size , two storeys tall , forming a D @-@ shape , with a circular bastion at the front , extending into the Thames ; another circular bastion jutted out from the side of the fort . The bulk of the building was made of brick , faced with ashlar stone , with external walls 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) thick . Two walls ran alongside either side of the blockhouse , parallel with the river , forming part of the adjacent platforms for mounting additional guns ; in 1600 , the east platform was described as being 100 feet ( 30 m ) long and 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide . The rear of the blockhouse was overlooked by higher ground and would have been hard to defend . 
 The fort was initially commanded by Captain James Crane , with a garrison of ten men , including his second in command , a porter , six gunners and two soldiers . As time went on , not all of the gunners worked full @-@ time at the fort , some living and working in the town itself . It is uncertain how many artillery pieces the blockhouse was initially equipped with , although it is known that the five blockhouses along the Thames had 108 brass and iron guns in total between them in 1540 . 
 = = = Use = = = 
 In 1553 , orders were issued for the artillery pieces to be removed from Gravesend Blockhouse and taken to the Tower of London , although the historian Victor Smith casts doubt on whether this was actually carried out . In 1588 , however , there was a renewed threat of invasion , this time from Spain ; the Spanish Armada sailed from A Coruña , while a separate invasion force was prepared in Flanders , threatening London ; Rober Dudley , the Earl of Leicester was put in charge of the defences along the Thames . 
 When Dudley inspected the blockhouse , Gravesend was found to be in poor condition . The gun platforms were unable to bear the weight of cannons , and the defences needed additional artillery and gunpowder ; the permanent garrison by now only comprised five gunners . One estimate that summer suggested that 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of structural timber , 300 iron spikes and 10 cartloads of smaller pieces of timber were needed for the repairs . 
 Plans were made to seal off the river with a chain or a boom stretching between the blockhouse and Tilbury Fort on the other bank , which was eventually accomplished at a cost of £ 305 . Further work was carried out on the defences , possibly including raising earthworks and establishing watch @-@ houses . Fears of an invasion persisted for many years afterwards and in 1598 Charles Howard , the Lord High Admiral , expressed his concerns about the effectiveness of the Gravesend Blockhouse in protecting the Thames . 
 = = 17th century = = 
 A 1600 survey showed 10 pieces of artillery to be ineffective , while the gun platforms on either side of the fort were in bad condition and 2 @,@ 828 feet ( 862 m ) of planking , 650 joists and over 19 cartloads of other timber was needed for the repairs . Little investment was forthcoming under James I or Charles I and by 1630 the garrison 's pay was in arrears , with the fort was in need of repairs estimated at £ 1 @,@ 248 . In 1631 the blockhouse was equipped with two brass demi @-@ culverins and sakers , and an iron culverin , six demi @-@ culverins , four sakers and one minion ; the brass guns , which were needed for naval units , were exchanged for iron weapons in 1635 . 
 In 1642 civil war broke out between the supporters of King Charles I and those of Parliament . Gravesend was controlled by Parliament , who placed it under the command of a military governor who oversaw both this fort and Tilbury , and was used to control traffic entering London and to search for spies . Charles II regained the throne in 1660 and was petitioned by several royalists who claimed that they should be restored to the command of the blockhouse ; William Leonard was ultimately successful . The defences were repaired and may have been occasionally used by the King as a banqueting hall . 
 The Dutch fleet raided up the Thames in June 1667 , but did not approach Gravesend Blockhouse due to the threat posed by its guns . The fort , under the command of Sir John Griffith , was in reality not well prepared for war . £ 400 was spent on upgrading the blockhouse , artillery was sent from the Tower of London to reinforce the local guns and four infantry companies were detached to guard the site . The risk of attack ended with the signing of the Peace of Breda that July , and the blockhouse did not see action . Shortly after the Dutch raids , Sir John was removed from his post for apparently demanding payments from ships passing by the blockhouse , a complaint which was repeated in later years under subsequent captains . 
 = = 18th – 19th centuries = = 
 By the start of the 18th century a complex of building had grown up around the original blockhouse , which now had a pier , a dock and two wharfs alongside it , and a large house built by the King 's brother , James the Duke of York , after his return to England , as well as the two lines of approximately 20 guns stretching on either side along the river ; it had a garrison of a sergeant , 20 soldiers and a gunner on loan from Tilbury Fort . The blockhouse itself was no longer used to mount guns but instead acted as the magazine for the wider fortification , being able to store 2 @,@ 500 barrels of gunpowder . Under the terms of the Peace of Utrecht in 1713 , the number of artillery pieces was reduced to ten , and a survey in 1766 reported that Gravesend was in good condition and equipped with ten 9 lb guns . 
 Amid rising concerns over the threat of a French invasion , Sir Thomas Page surveyed the blockhouse in 1778 and concluded that its guns were too closely packed together and that they could not easily fire down @-@ river , proposing that a larger fort be built along the Thames to the east to rectify this problem . New Tavern Fort was constructed shortly afterwards and the eastern Gravesend Blockhouse gun platform was redesigned and extended as part of the work . Two volunteer militia companies were established in 1794 and 1797 to support the blockhouse and in 1805 it was equipped with 19 32 lb guns . 
 Concerns continued to be raised that the blockhouse 's guns could not fire downriver and by the 1830s it had been decided to focus investment on the New Tavern and Tilbury forts . The blockhouse itself fell out of use as a magazine in 1834 , being briefly used as a government store , and the adjacent gun platforms were sold off in 1835 . The blockhouse building was subsequently demolished in 1844 . 
 = = 20th – 21st centuries = = 
 The site of the former Gravesend Blockhouse was excavated in 1975 and 1976 by the Kent Archaeological Society , uncovering parts of the original building . The site , which lies in the grounds of the Clarendon Royal Hotel , was protected under UK law as a scheduled monument in 1979 . 
 = Big Wapwallopen Creek = 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek ( also known as Wapwallopen Creek or Big Wap ) is a tributary of the Susquehanna River in Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 23 miles ( 37 km ) long and flows through Bear Creek Township , Fairview Township , Rice Township , Wright Township , Dorrance Township , Hollenback Township , Nescopeck Township , and Conyngham Township . The watershed of the creek has an area of 53 @.@ 2 square miles ( 138 km2 ) . The creek has three named tributaries : Balliet Run , Watering Run , and Bow Creek . The creek is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery and is also Class A Wild Trout Waters for part of its length . However , it is considered to be impaired by organic enrichment and / or low levels of dissolved oxygen and its pH ranges from moderately acidic to slightly alkaline . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek has three large waterfalls , all of which are more than 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high . The creek flows through the Wapwallopen Gorge in its lower reaches , where it descends 210 feet ( 64 m ) . It mainly flows through rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale . The creek has existed for several million years , but the portion of its course that flows through the Wapwallopen Gorge is less than 20 @,@ 000 years old . The creek 's watershed is mainly rural and most of it is forested . It is the main source of flooding in six townships . 
 Wapwallopen Creek is named after a Native American village that historically existed on the creek . The Delaware tribe inhabited the area by 1675 and the Shawnee tribe also historically inhabited the area . Numerous mills were built on the creek in the 1700s and 1800s , including two powder mills in the Wapwallopen Gorge . The second powder mill was built in 1859 by E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and Company and was one of the largest powder mills in the United States at the time . That powder mill operated until 1912 . Numerous bridges were built across the creek in the 1900s . The Wapwallopen Gorge is listed on the Luzerne County Natural Areas Inventory . It is possible to canoe on 10 @.@ 3 miles ( 16 @.@ 6 km ) of the creek , but there are some <unk> points . 
 = = Course = = 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek begins in Crystal Lake in Bear Creek Township . It flows west for several tenths of a mile and enters Fairview Township . The creek turns west @-@ southwest for approximately a mile , passing Arbutus Peak to the south and crossing Pennsylvania Route 437 . It then turns west @-@ northwest for several tenths of a mile before turning southwest and then west , crossing Pennsylvania Route 309 . It passes through Pole Bridge Swamp and begins flowing along the border between Rice Township and Wright Township . Over the next couple of miles , the creek gradually turns south @-@ southwest , still following the township line . It then passes through Hickory Swale and receives Bow Creek , its first named tributary , from the left . It turns southwest for several tenths of a mile before turning south and then southwest . It then turns west for more than a mile before turning southwest for a few miles , receiving the tributary Watering Run from the left before entering Dorrance Township and crossing Interstate 81 . The creek then turns south for a few tenths of a mile before turning west and then southwest for a few miles , passing <unk> Grove . It eventually turns west @-@ southwest and enters Hollenback Township . After a few miles , the creek turns south for a short distance and receives Balliet Run , its last named tributary , from the left . It then turns west @-@ northwest for more than a mile before turning south . At this point , the creek turns west again and enters a gorge . After several tenths of a mile , it turns north again , still flowing through the gorge and crossing the border between Hollenback Township and Nescopeck Township several times . The creek then turns west @-@ northwest and begins flowing along the border between Nescopeck Township and Conyngham Township . After approximately a mile , it leaves the gorge and crosses Pennsylvania Route 239 . It then reaches its confluence with the Susquehanna River just southwest of Wapwallopen . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek joins the Susquehanna River 166 @.@ 64 miles ( 268 @.@ 18 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek has three named tributaries : Balliet Run , Watering Run , and Bow Creek . The creek also has numerous unnamed tributaries . Balliet Run joins Big Wapwallopen Creek 5 @.@ 18 miles ( 8 @.@ 34 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 7 @.@ 23 square miles ( 18 @.@ 7 km2 ) . Watering Run joins Big Wapwallopen Creek 8 @.@ 46 miles ( 13 @.@ 62 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 3 @.@ 87 square miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km2 ) . Bow Creek joins Big Wapwallopen Creek 11 @.@ 90 miles ( 19 @.@ 15 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 4 @.@ 69 square miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km2 ) . Two unnamed tributaries of Big Wapwallopen Creek include " Big Wapwallopen Creek Tributary E " and " Big Wapwallopen Creek Tributary H " . Their watersheds have areas of 3 @.@ 61 square miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km2 ) and 3 @.@ 40 square miles ( 8 @.@ 8 km2 ) , respectively . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek is considered to be impaired . The cause of the impairment is organic enrichment and / or low levels of dissolved oxygen . The likely source of the impairment is municipal point @-@ source pollution , such as sewage . The creek has a United States Geological Survey stream gage near Wapwallopen . 
 The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Big Wapwallopen Creek near its mouth in 1975 and 1976 ranged from 9 @.@ 4 to 13 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0094 to 0 @.@ 0130 oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of hydrogen ions ranged from 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> milligrams per liter ( 3 @.@ 0 × 10 − 8 to 1 @.@ 269 × 10 − 6 oz / cu ft ) milligrams per liter in December 1975 and February to August 1976 and the concentration of carbon dioxide ranged from 0 @.@ 7 to 30 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) during the same time period . Between December 1975 and August 1976 , the ammonia concentration ranged from 0 @.@ 026 to 0 @.@ 090 milligrams per liter ( 2 @.@ 6 × 10 − 5 to 9 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 oz / cu ft ) . 
 In the mid 1970s , the concentration of nitrogen in the form of nitrates in Big Wapwallopen Creek near its mouth ranged from 0 @.@ 60 to 1 @.@ 96 milligrams per liter ( 3 @.@ 5 × 10 − 7 to 1 @.@ 13 × 10 − 6 oz / cu in ) . The concentration of nitrogen in the form of nitrites ranged from 0 @.@ 026 to 0 @.@ 076 milligrams per liter ( 2 @.@ 6 × 10 − 5 to 7 @.@ 6 × 10 − 5 oz / cu ft ) . The phosphorus concentration ranged from 0 @.@ 050 to 0 @.@ 500 milligrams per liter ( 5 @.@ 0 × 10 − 5 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) , the sulfate concentration ranged from 10 @.@ 0 to 36 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 0100 to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) , and the chloride concentration ranged from 6 @.@ 0 to 13 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ 0130 oz / cu ft ) . 
 In 1975 and 1976 , the calcium concentration in Big Wapwallopen Creek near its mouth ranged from 5 @.@ 60 to 9 @.@ 60 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> to 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) . The magnesium concentration ranged between 0 @.@ 50 and 5 @.@ 50 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ <unk> and 0 @.@ <unk> oz / cu ft ) . The concentration of iron ranged from less than 10 to 3 @,@ 150 micrograms per liter ( 5 @.@ 8 × 10 − 9 to 1 @.@ <unk> × 10 − 6 oz / cu in ) . 
 The turbidity of Big Wapwallopen Creek near its mouth was measured several times in 1975 and 1976 . It ranged from less than one Jackson Turbidity Unit to 50 Jackson Turbidity Units . The specific conductance of the creek ranged from 70 to 100 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter at 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) . The creek 's pH ranged from 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 5 in December 1975 and February to August 1976 . The concentration of water hardness in the creek between December 1975 and August 1976 ranged from 12 to 42 milligrams per liter ( 0 @.@ 012 to 0 @.@ 042 oz / cu ft ) . 
 Between 1920 and 2013 , the average annual discharge of Big Wapwallopen Creek at Wapwallopen was more than 100 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 8 m3 / s ) five times : in 1928 , in 1978 , in 1994 , in 2004 , and in 2001 . The average annual discharges in these years were 105 @.@ 9 cubic feet per second ( 3 @.@ 00 m3 / s ) , 108 @.@ 3 cubic feet per second ( 3 @.@ 07 m3 / s ) , 105 @.@ 4 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 98 m3 / s ) , 100 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 84 m3 / s ) , and 141 @.@ 1 cubic feet per second ( 4 @.@ 00 m3 / s ) , respectively . The average annual discharge of the creek has been less than 40 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 1 m3 / s ) four times : in 1931 and 1932 , in 1965 , and in 2001 . The values in these years were 33 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 94 m3 / s ) , 36 @.@ 9 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 04 m3 / s ) , 30 @.@ 9 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 87 m3 / s ) and 39 @.@ 6 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 12 m3 / s ) . The average annual discharge of the creek in 2013 was 52 @.@ 3 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 48 m3 / s ) 
 The peak annual discharge of Big Wapwallopen Creek at its mouth has a 10 percent chance of reaching 3350 cubic feet per second . It has a 2 percent chance of reaching <unk> cubic feet per second and a 1 percent chance of reaching 8400 cubic feet per second . The peak annual discharge has a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 15 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second . The peak annual discharge of the creek at the confluence of Balliet Run has a 10 percent chance of reaching 1900 cubic feet per second . It has a 2 percent chance of reaching 3050 cubic feet per second and a 1 percent chance of reaching 3600 cubic feet per second . The peak annual discharge has a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 5200 cubic feet per second . 
 The peak annual discharge of Big Wapwallopen Creek upstream of the tributary Watering Run has a 10 percent chance of reaching 1 @,@ 220 cubic feet per second ( 35 m3 / s ) , a 2 percent chance of reaching 2 @,@ 080 cubic feet per second ( 59 m3 / s ) , a 1 percent chance of reaching 2 @,@ 530 cubic feet per second ( 72 m3 / s ) , and a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 3 @,@ 770 cubic feet per second ( 107 m3 / s ) . The peak annual discharge of the creek upstream of the tributary Bow Creek has a 10 percent chance of reaching 588 cubic feet per second ( 16 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) , a 2 percent chance of reaching 1 @,@ 025 cubic feet per second ( 29 @.@ 0 m3 / s ) , a 1 percent chance of reaching 1 @,@ 253 cubic feet per second ( 35 @.@ 5 m3 / s ) and a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 1 @,@ 904 cubic feet per second ( 53 @.@ 9 m3 / s ) . 
 = = Geography , geology , and climate = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Big Wapwallopen Creek is 495 feet ( 151 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is between 1 @,@ 920 and 1 @,@ 940 feet ( 590 and 590 m ) above sea level . The gradient of the creek for its first 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) is 257 @.@ 5 feet per mile ( 48 @.@ 77 m / km ) . For the next 14 miles ( 23 km ) it is only 42 @.@ 9 feet per mile ( 8 @.@ 13 m / km ) . From there to the creek 's mouth , the gradient is 69 @.@ 8 feet per mile ( 13 @.@ 22 m / km ) . The mean elevation of the creek 's watershed upstream of State Route 3012 / Hobbie Road is 1 @,@ 330 feet ( 410 m ) above sea level . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek is in the ridge and valley physiographic province . It flows off the southwestern edge of the Pocono Plateau . Closer to its mouth , there are three large waterfalls on the creek . All of the waterfalls are more than 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high with the highest being 45 feet ( 14 m ) high . The uppermost waterfall cuts through red sandstone . The falls are known as the Upper Falls , the Middle Falls , and the Lower Falls , respectively . Big Wapwallopen Creek has a long stretch of rapids formed from numerous small ledges and boulders . The creek flows through a gorge known as the Wapwallopen Gorge or ( locally ) as the Powder Hole . The gorge is in Conyngham Township , Hollenback Township , and Nescopeck Township . The creek drops a total of 210 feet ( 64 m ) in the gorge . Within the gorge , there are large floodplains that are relatively forested and flat . The gorge was likely created several million years ago by the precursor to Big Wapwallopen Creek . However , the creek 's original channel in this location was slightly to the west of its current one . It moved to its present channel 20 @,@ 000 years ago , during the last Ice Age , when glaciers covered the area for a thousand years . Along most of the creek 's length , it cut through glacial material to flow through its preglacial valley . However , at the site of the Wapwallopen Gorge it failed to do this and instead carved a new path through bedrock . The old glacial valley of Big Wapwallopen Creek was broad and gently sloping . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek has been described as a small creek . The topography of the creek 's watershed mainly consists of broken hills , with a few swamps and lakes . Nescopeck Mountain is on the watershed 's southeastern border . 
 The channel of Big Wapwallopen Creek is sinuous and flows through rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale . The creek is surrounded by steep , high hills with a height of 200 to 300 feet ( 61 to 91 m ) for its last 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . In the Wapwallopen Gorge , it cuts through a rib of gray siltstone belonging to the Trimmers Rock Formation . This rock formation dates to 380 million years ago ( the late Devonian ) and covers the northern three quarters of the gorge . It mainly consists of gray siltstone , shale , and sandstone . The southern quarter of the gorge has bedrock consisting of the Irish Valley Member of the Catskill Formation . This formation contains siltstone , sandstone , shale , and claystone . The Soil Infiltration Index near the creek at State Route 3012 / Hobbie Road is 3 @.@ 51 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 cm ) . 
 The Carbondale coal formation occurs near Big Wapwallopen Creek and also appears as far away as the Wyoming Valley . The coal formation is estimated to be 60 to 70 miles ( 97 to 113 km ) long , several miles wide , and 20 to 25 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 6 m ) thick . It is lighter in color and burns more easily than the Mauch Chunk coal or the Lehigh Coal . 
 The annual rate of precipitation in the watershed of Big Wapwallopen Creek ranges from 35 to 45 inches ( 89 to 114 cm ) . The average rate of precipitation where the creek crosses State Route 3012 / Hobbie Road is 41 @.@ 60 inches ( 105 @.@ 7 cm ) per year and the average rate for the whole drainage basin is 44 inches ( 110 cm ) per year . A precipitation intensity of 2 @.@ 80 inches ( 7 @.@ 1 cm ) in 24 hours is expected to occur at this site once every two years . The water temperature of the creek was measured several times from late 1975 to 1976 . The values ranged from 0 @.@ 0 ° C ( 32 @.@ 0 ° F ) in January 1976 to 26 @.@ 0 ° C ( 78 @.@ 8 ° F ) in August 1976 . The rate of groundwater recharge in the creek 's watershed is 14 @.@ 2 inches ( 36 cm ) per year , or 32 percent of the annual precipitation rate . It ranges from 218 to 721 gallons per minute per square mile , with an average of 469 gallons per minute per square mile . The rate of evapotranspiration ranges from 16 @.@ 57 to 41 @.@ 85 inches ( 42 @.@ 1 to 106 @.@ 3 cm ) per year , with an average of 23 @.@ 73 inches ( 60 @.@ 3 cm ) per year . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Big Wapwallopen Creek has an area of 53 @.@ 2 square miles ( 138 km2 ) . At the confluence of the tributary Balliet Run , its watershed has an area of 32 @.@ 74 square miles ( 84 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Upstream of the tributary Watering Run , its watershed has an area of 14 @.@ 52 square miles ( 37 @.@ 6 km2 ) and upstream of the tributary Bow Creek , its watershed has an area of only 7 @.@ 30 square miles ( 18 @.@ 9 km2 ) . The mouth of the creek is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Berwick . However , the source is in the quadrangle of Wilkes @-@ Barre East . The creek also passes through the quadrangles of Wilkes @-@ Barre West , Freeland , and Sybertsville . The creek is in the Lower North Branch Susquehanna drainage basin and its watershed is in the south @-@ central part of Luzerne County . It flows in a general southwesterly direction . A total of 84 percent of the upper 43 @.@ 8 square miles ( 113 km2 ) of the watershed is forested land . A total of 1 percent is storage land . The creek 's mouth is located approximately 17 miles ( 27 km ) to the southwest of the city of Wilkes @-@ Barre . The community of Mountain Top is located at the headwaters of the creek . The historical community of Glen Summit Springs was also at the headwaters of the creek . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek flows through a rural valley with steep slopes . The uppermost 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) of Big Wapwallopen Creek are all on private land . A dammed reservoir with an area of 494 acres ( 200 ha ) is located on the creek at its headwaters . This reservoir is known as Crystal Lake and it is primarily used as a public water supply . However , it is capable of reducing peak discharges on the creek in Fairview Township . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek is one of the main sources of flooding in Rice Township and Wright Township . It is also a primary flooding source in Conyngham Township , Dorrance Township , Fairview Township , Hollenback Township , and Nescopeck Township . However , in Conyngham Township , a 100 year flood of the creek would only inundate a small and undeveloped area . 
 A tract of land known as American Legion Post 781 is in the vicinity of Big Wapwallopen Creek in Wright Township . The tract is owned by the North Branch Land Trust and has an area of 254 @.@ 5 acres ( 103 @.@ 0 ha ) . The watershed of the creek is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away from the planned Bell Bend Nuclear Power Plant . The two sites are separated by the Susquehanna River . 
 The designated use of Big Wapwallopen Creek is use for aquatic life . 
 = = History = = 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . The creek is also known as Wapwallopen Creek or Big <unk> 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek is named after a Native American village on the Susquehanna River near the creek . The Delaware and Shawnee tribes historically had camps and <unk> on the creek . The Delaware tribe was hunting and fishing in the vicinity of the creek 's watershed as early as 1675 . 
 The first land grant in Nescopeck Township was located to the west of Big Wapwallopen Creek . It was known as the Campania Tract and it was surveyed to Daniel Grant in 1769 . The tract was patented to George Campbell in 1773 . Prince Maximilian of Wied visited the area near the creek during his travels in North America . 
 Nathan Beach constructed a mill on Big Wapwallopen Creek in the Wapwallopen Gorge in 1795 . The mill eventually burned down by accident . Cornelius Garrison built a mill on the creek in southwestern Wright Township in 1833 . A mill owned by Samuel Heller was operational on the creek as late as the late 1800s . In 1856 , William Silver also built a powder mill in the Wapwallopen Gorge . He then sold partial ownership of the mill to G.P. Parrish . However , early in 1859 , a freshet and an explosion destroyed the mill and caused Silver 's and Parrish 's company went bankrupt . E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and Company bought the site in April 1859 and constructed the powder mills known as the Wapwallopen Mills there . At that time , the mills were one of the largest powder mills in the United States . While the mills were in operation , there were fatal explosions every eight years and the infrastructure was destroyed by flooding numerous times . However , by 1868 , the mills were producing 70 @,@ 000 tons of black powder per year . The mills operated until 1912 , when the Du Pont company moved the machinery to Moosic due to increasing costs of shipping black powder and also a desire to consolidate operations . Only ruins remain today . There were still some gristmills on the creek as late as 1955 . 
 The artist Thomas Addison Richards created a graphite @-@ on @-@ wove @-@ paper drawing of Big Wapwallopen Creek in 1852 . The Crystal Spring Water Company was chartered on April 11 , 1861 . It got its water supply from the upper reaches of the watershed of Big Wapwallopen Creek . In the 1800s , F.K. Miller constructed a tannery on a tributary of the creek in southeastern Dorrance Township . By 1865 , the community of Dorrance had a gristmill , four sawmills , and a tavern on the creek . 
 Historically , there was a timbering industry in the watershed of Big Wapwallopen Creek . It was carried out by J.C. Patterson . However , the timbering was completed by the 1870s on several properties . In the early 1900s , the main industry in the watershed of Big Wapwallopen Creek was agriculture . However , the creek 's main stem and Crystal Lake were used as a water supply by the Spring Brook Water Supply Company . A small hydroelectric plant and several mills operated in the lower reaches of the creek . In the early 1900s , the main population centers in the watershed included Wapwallopen , Hobbie , and <unk> . Their populations were 450 , 113 , and 60 , respectively . The Lehigh Valley Railroad and the Central Railroad of New Jersey historically passed through the upper part of the creek 's watershed and the Wilkes @-@ Barre and Hazleton Railway also passed through the creek 's drainage basin . The Albert Methodist Church was moved from the Powder Glen near Wapwallopen in the early 1900s and dedicated in 1927 . 
 In March 1936 , Big Wapwallopen Creek flooded in Rice Township to a depth of 18 inches ( 46 cm ) over Nuangola Road . The two largest floods in Hollenback Township occurred in August 1955 and June 1972 . During these flooding events , discharge of Big Wapwallopen Creek at the Hobbie Road Bridge was <unk> and 5410 cubic feet per second , respectively . The gage heights were 9 @.@ 23 feet ( 2 @.@ 81 m ) and 11 @.@ 04 feet ( 3 @.@ 36 m ) , respectively . The floodwaters reached a depth of 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) on Hobbie Road and many nearby homes were flooded . 
 A metal truss bridge carries T @-@ 392 / Faux Road over Big Wapwallopen Creek . It is 44 @.@ 0 feet ( 13 @.@ 4 m ) long . A masonry arch bridge with a length of 26 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) was built across the creek in 1897 and repaired in 1963 . Another metal truss bridge was built over the creek in 1908 and is 85 @.@ 0 feet ( 25 @.@ 9 m ) long . Three concrete tee beam bridges with lengths of 40 @.@ 0 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) , 42 @.@ 0 feet ( 12 @.@ 8 m ) , and 46 @.@ 9 feet ( 14 @.@ 3 m ) were constructed over the creek in 1925 and the third was repaired in 1963 . A concrete slab bridge with a length of 29 @.@ 9 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) was built across the creek in 1930 and a concrete tee beam with a length of 34 @.@ 1 feet ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) was built over the creek in 1957 . A prestressed box beam or girders bridge with a length of 68 @.@ 9 feet ( 21 @.@ 0 m ) was built over it in 1958 . Another bridge of the same type , but with two spans and a length of 99 @.@ 1 feet ( 30 @.@ 2 m ) was built over the creek in 1961 . 
 Two prestressed box beam or girders bridges with three spans were built across Big Wapwallopen Creek in 1965 and repaired in 1982 . Both carried Interstate 81 and were 144 @.@ 0 feet ( 43 @.@ 9 m ) long . A concrete culvert bridge carrying Pennsylvania Route 239 was built over the creek in 1970 . This bridge is 65 @.@ 0 feet ( 19 @.@ 8 m ) long . A prestressed box beam or girders bridge with a length of 37 @.@ 1 feet ( 11 @.@ 3 m ) was built over the creek in 1993 . A prestressed box beam or girders bridge with a length of 44 @.@ 0 feet ( 13 @.@ 4 m ) was constructed across the creek in 1996 . 
 The Big Wapwallopen Creek Watershed Association is based on Dorrance . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The drainage basin of Big Wapwallopen Creek is designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . Wild trout naturally reproduce in the creek from its headwaters downstream to its mouth . They also do so in all three of the creek 's named tributaries . A 4 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) long stretch of the creek from Crystal Lake to a powerline crossing upstream of Nuangola Road is designated as Class A Wild Trout Waters for both brook trout and brown trout . The tributaries Bow Creek and Balliet Run are also Class A Wild Trout Waters . 
 Big Wapwallopen Creek is stocked with trout . It was stocked with rainbow trout a month before the fishing season in 2014 , on March 5 . It has also been stocked with brook trout at times . <unk> and suckers have been observed within the creek . 
 A major fish kill occurred in Big Wapwallopen Creek in 1967 . A tank of a caustic substance was accidentally overturned and its contents spilled into the creek , polluting it for a stretch running from approximately 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) from the tributary Bow Creek to Legion Road / Legislative Route <unk> . Approximately 4000 fish were killed , most of them minnows , suckers , and trout . 
 Hemlock trees form a canopy over Big Wapwallopen Creek in some places . The Wapwallopen Gorge is listed as a Locally Significant site on the Luzerne County Natural Areas Inventory . Hemlock and yellow birch are common at the gorge 's upper end . However , river birch and sycamore are more common at the lower end of the gorge . The area has been affected by trash dumping and graffiti . There are riparian forests along Big Wapwallopen Creek in the American Legion Post 781 land tract . The tract of land also contains some wet areas such as vernal pools and marshes . These areas provide breeding grounds for reptiles , amphibians , fish , and aquatic invertebrates . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 It is possible to canoe on 10 @.@ 3 miles ( 16 @.@ 6 km ) of Big Wapwallopen Creek during snowmelt or within two days of heavy rain . The difficulty rating ranges from 1 to 2 + , though at least one of the waterfalls in the Wapwallopen Gorge is <unk> . Edward Gertler 's book Keystone Canoeing describes the scenery as " good to excellent " and describes the creek as " short and scenic " and a " clear brook " . There are also hiking opportunities along the lower reaches of the creek . 
 There are also three swimming holes , known collectively as the Powder Hole , on Big Wapwallopen Creek . As of 2001 , these have the highest injury and death rate of any swimming hole in the area . Between 1986 and 2001 , at least three people died at the swimming holes and three others were severely injured . 
 A Jewish camp known as Camp <unk> was historically situated along Big Wapwallopen Creek . It was 16 miles ( 26 km ) from Hazleton and had an area of 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) . 
 As of 1998 or 2006 , the Lance Corporation owns the Wapwallopen Gorge . They permit public access for recreational purposes . The creek is designated as Approved Trout Waters from a powerline crossing upstream of Nuangola Road downstream to county road . In 2016 , it opened for trout fishing on April 16 . 
 = Scyllarides latus = 
 Scyllarides latus , the Mediterranean slipper lobster , is a species of slipper lobster found in the Mediterranean Sea and in the eastern Atlantic Ocean . It is edible and highly regarded as food , but is now rare over much of its range due to overfishing . Adults may grow to 1 foot ( 30 cm ) long , are camouflaged , and have no claws . They are nocturnal , emerging from caves and other shelters during the night to feed on molluscs . As well as being eaten by humans , S. latus is also preyed upon by a variety of bony fish . Its closest relative is S. herklotsii , which occurs off the Atlantic coast of West Africa ; other species of Scyllarides occur in the western Atlantic Ocean and the Indo @-@ Pacific . The larvae and young animals are largely unknown . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Scyllarus latus is found along most of the coast of the Mediterranean Sea ( one exception being the northern Adriatic Sea ) , and in parts of the eastern Atlantic Ocean from near Lisbon in Portugal south to Senegal , including the islands of Madeira , the Azores , the <unk> Islands and the Cape Verde Islands . In Senegal , it occurs together with a related species Scyllarides herklotsii , which it closely resembles . 
 = = Description = = 
 S. latus can grow to a total body length about 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) , although rarely more than 30 cm ( 12 in ) . This is equivalent to a carapace length of up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) . An individual may weigh as much as 1 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) . As in all slipper lobsters , the second pair of antennae are enlarged and flattened into " shovels " or " flippers " . Despite the name " lobster " , slipper lobsters such as Scyllarides latus have no claws , and nor do they have the protective spines of spiny lobsters . Instead , the exoskeleton , and particularly the carapace , are thicker than in clawed lobsters and spiny lobsters , acting as resilient armour . Adults are cryptically coloured , and the carapace is covered in conspicuous , high tubercles . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Substrate = = = 
 S. latus lives on rocky or sandy substrates at depths of 4 – 100 metres ( 13 – 328 ft ) . They shelter during the day in natural dens , on the ceilings of caves , or in reefs , preferring situations with more than one entrance or exit . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The diet of S. latus consists generally of molluscs . The preferred prey is , according to different sources , either limpets or bivalves . The prey , which S. latus can detect even under 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) of sediment , is opened by careful use of the strong pointed pereiopods . They will also eat oysters and squid , but not sea urchins or <unk> snails . They eat more in warmer seasons , getting through 3 @.@ 2 oysters per day in July , but only 0 @.@ 2 oysters per day in January . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 The most significant predator of S. latus is the grey triggerfish , <unk> <unk> , although a number of other fish species have also been reported to prey on S. latus , including dusky groupers ( Epinephelus <unk> ) , <unk> ( Serranus spp . ) , Mediterranean rainbow wrasse ( Coris <unk> ) , red groupers ( Epinephelus morio ) and gag groupers ( <unk> microlepis ) . An Octopus vulgaris has been observed to eat S. latus in an artificial setting , but it is unclear whether S. latus is preyed on by octopuses in nature . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Male Scyllarus latus carry spermatophores at the base of the last two pairs of pereiopods in April . Fertilisation has not been observed in this species , but most <unk> decapods mate with the ventral surfaces together . Between July and August , females carry around 100 @,@ 000 eggs on their enlarged , feathery pleopods . The eggs develop from being a bright orange colour to a dark brown before being shed into the water after around 16 days of development . There is normally only one generation per year . 
 The larvae are much less well known than the adults . An initial 1 @.@ 3 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 05 in ) long <unk> stage , which swims using its antennae , moults into the first of eleven phyllosoma stages , which swim using their thoracic legs . The last phyllosoma stage may reach a size of 48 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) and can be up to 11 months old ; most of the intermediate phyllosoma stages have not been observed . A single <unk> ( juvenile has been recorded , having been caught off Reggio Calabria in 1900 , but only recognised as being a juvenile S. latus in 2009 . Young adults are also rare ; a museum specimen with a carapace length of 34 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) is the smallest adult yet observed . Adults moult annually , and probably migrate to cooler waters with a temperature of 13 – 18 ° C ( 55 – 64 ° F ) to do so . The old exoskeleton softens over a period of 10 – 22 days before being shed , and the new , pale exoskeleton takes around three weeks to harden completely . Smaller individuals typically gain weight over the course of a moult , but this difference is less pronounced in larger animals . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Scyllarides latus is mostly nocturnal in the wild , since most of its predators are diurnal . While sheltering , S. latus tends to be gregarious , with several individuals sharing the same shelter . When confronted with a predator , S. latus has no claws or spines to repel the predator , and instead either clings to the substrate , or swims away with powerful flexion of the abdomen , or " tail @-@ flips " . Larger lobsters can exert a stronger grip than smaller ones , with a force of up to 150 newtons ( equivalent to a weight of 15 kilograms or 33 pounds ) required to dislodge the largest individuals . 
 Predator avoidance may also explain the frequent behaviour where S. latus will carry food items back to a shelter before consuming them . When two S. latus individuals compete for a food item , they may use the enlarged second antennae to flip their opponent over , by wedging the antennae underneath the opponent 's body and quickly raising them . An alternative strategy is to grip an opponent and begin the tail @-@ flipping movement , or to engage in a tug of war . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Scyllarides latus was originally classified in the genus Scyllarus , along with the four other slipper lobsters known at the time ( Scyllarus <unk> , Scyllarides <unk> , <unk> orientalis and <unk> guineensis ) . Separate genera were first introduced by William Elford Leach in 1815 , namely <unk> and <unk> . In 1849 , Wilhem de Haan divided the genus Scyllarus into two genera , Scyllarus and Arctus , but made the error of including the type species of Scyllarus in the genus Arctus . This was first recognised by the ichthyologist Theodore Gill in 1898 , who synonymised Arctus with Scyllarus , and erected a new genus Scyllarides to hold the species that De Haan had placed in Scyllarus . Scyllarides is placed in the subfamily <unk> , which is differentiated from other subfamilies by the presence of <unk> exopods on all three maxillipeds , and a three @-@ segmented palp on the mandible . The only other genus in the subfamily , <unk> , is distinguished by having a more highly sculptured carapace , with an extra spine behind each eye , and a transverse groove on the first segment of the abdomen . 
 The only other species of Scyllarides to occur in the Eastern Atlantic is Scyllarides herklotsii , which differs from S. latus mostly in the ornamentation on the carapace ; while in S. latus the tubercles ( lumps projecting from the surface ) are high and pronounced , they are lower and more rounded in S. herklotsii . 
 = = = Type specimen = = = 
 The type locality given by Pierre André Latreille in his original description of the species was simply " <unk> " ( Mediterranean Sea ) , without designating a type specimen . <unk> Holthuis later chose a lectotype for the species , which was the animal illustrated by Cornelius <unk> , and published in Conrad Gesner 's Historiae animalium in 1558 ( book 4 , p . 1097 ) . This illustration , originally a watercolour but reproduced by Gesner in a woodcut , had been mentioned by Latreille in his description as being particularly fine , and is all that remains of the type specimen . Given that <unk> was working in Rome at the time , it is likely that the type specimen was a fresh specimen from the Tyrrhenian Sea near Rome . 
 = = Human consumption = = 
 S. latus is edible , but it is a relatively rare species , and is therefore of little interest to fisheries . However , it is caught in small numbers throughout its distribution , mostly in trammel nets , by trawling and in lobster pots . An annual catch of 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 – 6 @,@ 600 lb ) has been reported for Israel . Catching by hand has become increasingly frequent , since the advent of SCUBA diving made the animal 's habitat more accessible to humans . This may have affected population sizes of S. latus in some areas . 
 = SMS Leipzig = 
 For other ships of this name , see SMS Leipzig ( 1875 ) and SMS Leipzig ( 1918 ) . 
 SMS Leipzig ( " His Majesty 's Ship Leipzig " ) was the sixth of seven Bremen @-@ class cruisers of the Imperial German Navy , named after the city of Leipzig . She was begun by AG Weser in Bremen in 1904 , launched in March 1905 and commissioned in April 1906 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Leipzig was capable of a top speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 Leipzig spent her career on overseas stations ; at the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was cruising off the coast of Mexico . After rejoining with the East Asia Squadron , she proceeded to South American waters , where she participated in the Battle of Coronel , where the German squadron overpowered and sank a pair of British armored cruisers . A month later , she again saw action at the Battle of the Falkland Islands , which saw the destruction of the East Asia Squadron . Leipzig was chased down and sunk by the cruisers HMS Glasgow and HMS Kent ; the majority of her crew was killed in the battle , with only 18 survivors . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Leipzig was ordered under the contract name " N " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1904 and launched on 21 March 1905 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 20 April 1906 . The ship was 111 @.@ 1 meters ( 365 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 3 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 61 m ( 18 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 816 t ( 3 @,@ 756 long tons ; 4 @,@ 206 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines , designed to give 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) for a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Leipzig carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 690 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 690 km ; 5 @,@ 400 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 274 – 287 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . She was also fitted to carry fifty naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Franz von Hipper served as the ship 's first commanding officer , from her commissioning in April until September , when Leipzig was deployed overseas , and was assigned to the East Asia Squadron , along with the armored cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the light cruisers Emden and Nürnberg . The ship was cruising off the west coast of Mexico at the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 to show the flag in the Americas . In addition , Leipzig had been tasked with safeguarding German nationals in Mexico during a period of unrest . She spent the first weeks of the conflict patrolling for British @-@ flagged merchantmen off San Francisco before stopping in the Galapagos Islands on 18 August , on her way to South America . A week later , Leipzig sank a British freighter carrying sugar and then proceeded to the Peruvian coast by the 28th . She stopped in Guaymas in neutral Mexico to take on a fresh load of coal on 8 September . 
 On 14 October , she joined the rest of Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron at Easter Island ; she brought with her three colliers . On 18 October , the Squadron departed , bound for South America ; they stopped in the Juan Fernández Islands while en route , and by 26 October , they were approaching Mas a Fuera . They then steamed to Valparaiso , Chile , where they received intelligence that indicated that the British cruiser HMS Glasgow was anchored in Coronel . Von Spee decided to proceed to Coronel to ambush the British ship when it left port . Glasgow was in fact joined by the armored cruisers HMS Good Hope and HMS Monmouth . 
 = = = Battle of Coronel = = = 
 While patrolling off Coronel , Leipzig stopped a Chilean barque and searched her , but since she was a neutral vessel , and not carrying contraband , the Germans let her go . At 16 : 00 on 1 November , Leipzig spotted a column of smoke in the distance , followed by a second ship at 16 : 17 , and a third at 16 : 25 . The British spotted Leipzig at approximately the same time , and the two squadrons formed into lines of battle . Leipzig was the third ship in the German line , behind the two armored cruisers . At 18 : 07 , von Spee issued the order " Fire distribution from left " , meaning that each ship would engage its opposite number ; the Germans fired first , at 18 : 34 . 
 Scharnhorst and Gneisenau quickly wrecked their British counterparts , while Leipzig fired at Glasgow without success . At 18 : 49 , Glasgow hit Leipzig , but the shell was a dud and did not explode . Leipzig and Dresden hit Glasgow five times before von Spee ordered Leipzig to close with the stricken Good Hope and torpedo it . A rain squall obscured the ship , and by the time Leipzig reached Good Hope 's position , the latter had sunk . Unaware of the sinking of Good Hope , no rescue operations were mounted by Leipzig 's crew . By 20 : 00 , Leipzig encountered Dresden in the gathering darkness , and the two initially mistook each other for hostile warships , though they quickly established their identity . Leipzig emerged from the battle essentially unscathed , and with no wounded crewmen . 
 In the aftermath of the Battle of Coronel , von Spee decided to return to Valparaiso to receive further orders ; while Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Nürnberg went into the harbor , Leipzig and Dresden escorted the colliers to Mas a Fuera . The rest of the East Asia Squadron joined them there on 6 November ; the cruisers restocked their coal and other supplies . On 10 November , Leipzig and Dresden were sent to Valparaiso , arriving on the 13th . Five days later , they rejoined the Squadron approximately 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) west of Robinson Crusoe Island ; the unified Squadron then proceeded to the Gulf of Penas , arriving on 21 November . There , they coaled and prepared to make the long voyage around Cape Horn . The British , shocked by their defeat at Coronel , had meanwhile dispatched the powerful battlecruisers HMS Invincible and HMS Inflexible , under the command of Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee , to hunt down and destroy von Spee 's ships . They departed Britain on 11 November and reached the Falkland Islands on 7 December , having been joined on the way by the armored cruisers Carnarvon , Kent , and Cornwall and the light cruisers Bristol and the battered Glasgow . 
 = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = 
 On 26 November , the East Asia Squadron departed the Gulf of Penas , bound for Cape Horn and the Atlantic and reached the Cape on 2 December . While off the Cape , Leipzig took the Canadian sailing ship Drummuir as a prize ; the ship was carrying 2 @,@ 750 t ( 2 @,@ 710 long tons ; 3 @,@ 030 short tons ) of coal , which was transferred to the colliers Baden and Santa Isabel at Picton Island . On the night of 6 December , von Spee held a conference with the ship commanders to discuss his proposed attack on the Falklands ; Fregattenkapitän Haun , the commander of Leipzig , along with the commanders from Gneisenau and Dresden , opposed the plan and favored bypassing the Falklands to wage commerce war off La Plata . Nevertheless , von Spee made the decision to attack the Falklands on the morning of 8 December . 
 The Germans approached Port Stanley , the capital of the Falklands , early on the morning of 8 December ; the British quickly spotted them , and raised steam to go out and meet them . Von Spee initially thought the smoke clouds to be the British burning their coal stocks to prevent the Germans from seizing them . Upon realizing the presence of the powerful British squadron , he broke off the attack and turned to flee . The British quickly steamed out of the harbor in pursuit . By 12 : 55 , the battlecruisers had caught up to the retreating Germans , and opened fire on Leipzig , the last ship in the German line , though she was not hit . Von Spee ordered the light cruisers to detach and flee while Scharnhorst and Gneisenau turned on their pursuers , in the hope that he could cover their escape . In response , Sturdee sent his cruisers to chase down Nürnberg , Dresden , and Leipzig . 
 Glasgow pursued Leipzig , and quickly caught up , opening fire by 14 : 40 . After about twenty minutes of firing , Leipzig was hit ; she turned to port to open the range , before turning to starboard in order to bring her full broadside into action . In the ensuing action , both ships were hit several times , forcing Glasgow to break off and fall behind the more powerful armored cruisers . Leipzig was battered severely by Cornwall and Kent and set on fire ; she nevertheless remained in action and continued to fight . In the course of the engagement , Leipzig hit Cornwall eighteen times , causing a significant list to port . She fired three torpedoes at the British ships , but failed to score any hits with them . At 19 : 20 , Haun issued the order to scuttle his wrecked ship ; the British approached and opened fire on the stricken cruiser at close range , killing large numbers of the crew . The British also destroyed a cutter filled with survivors , killing all of them . Leipzig finally capsized and sank at 21 : 05 , with Haun going down with his ship . Only eighteen men were pulled from the freezing water . 
 = Red panda = 
 The red panda ( Ailurus fulgens ) , also called the lesser panda , the red bear @-@ cat , and the red cat @-@ bear , is a mammal native to the eastern Himalayas and southwestern China . It has reddish @-@ brown fur , a long , shaggy tail , and a waddling gait due to its shorter front legs , and is slightly larger than a domestic cat . It is arboreal , feeds mainly on bamboo , but also eats eggs , birds , and insects . It is a solitary animal , mainly active from dusk to dawn , and is largely sedentary during the day . 
 The red panda has been classified as Endangered by the IUCN because its wild population is estimated at less than 10 @,@ 000 mature individuals and continues to decline due to habitat loss and fragmentation , poaching , and inbreeding depression , although red pandas are protected by national laws in their range countries . 
 The red panda is the only living species of the genus Ailurus and the family Ailuridae . It has been previously placed in the raccoon and bear families , but the results of phylogenetic research provide strong support for its taxonomic classification in its own family Ailuridae , which along with the weasel , raccoon and skunk families is part of the superfamily Musteloidea . Two subspecies are recognized . It is not closely related to the giant panda . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The head and body length of a red panda measures 50 to 64 cm ( 20 to 25 in ) , and its tail is 28 to 59 cm ( 11 to 23 in ) . Males weigh 3 @.@ 7 to 6 @.@ 2 kg ( 8 @.@ 2 to 13 @.@ 7 lb ) and females 3 to 6 @.@ 0 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 to 13 @.@ 2 lb ) . They have long , soft , reddish @-@ brown fur on the upper parts , blackish fur on the lower parts , and a light face with tear markings and robust cranio dental features . The light face has white badges similar to those of a raccoon , but each individual can have distinctive markings . Their roundish heads have medium @-@ sized upright ears , black noses , and very dark eyes - almost pitch black . Their long bushy tails with six alternating yellowish red transverse ochre rings provide balance and excellent camouflage against their habitat of <unk> and lichen @-@ covered trees . The legs are black and short with thick fur on the soles of the paws . This fur serves as thermal insulation on snow @-@ covered or icy surfaces and conceals scent glands which are also present on the anus . 
 The red panda is specialized as a bamboo feeder with strong , curved and sharp semi @-@ retractile claws standing inward for grasping narrow tree branches , leaves , and fruit . Like the giant panda , it has a “ false thumb ” which is an extension of the wrist bone . When descending a tree head @-@ first , the red panda rotates its ankle to control its descent , one of the few climbing species to do so . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The red panda is endemic to the temperate forests of the Himalayas , and ranges from the foothills of western Nepal to China in the east . Its easternmost limit is the Qinling Mountains of the Shaanxi Province in China . Its range includes southern Tibet , Sikkim and Assam in India , Bhutan , the northern mountains of Burma , and in south @-@ western China , in the Hengduan Mountains of Sichuan and the <unk> Mountains in Yunnan . It may also live in south @-@ west Tibet and northern Arunachal Pradesh , but this has not been documented . Locations with the highest density of red pandas include an area in the Himalayas that has been proposed as having been a refuge for a variety of endemic species in the Pleistocene . The distribution range of the red panda should be considered disjunct , rather than continuous . A disjunct population inhabits the Meghalaya Plateau of north @-@ eastern India . 
 During a survey in the 1970s , signs of red pandas were found in Nepal 's Dhorpatan Hunting Reserve . Their presence was confirmed in spring 2007 when four red pandas were sighted at elevations ranging from 3 @,@ 220 to 3 @,@ 610 m ( 10 @,@ 560 to 11 @,@ 840 ft ) . The species ' westernmost limit is in Rara National Park located farther west of the Dhorpatan Hunting Reserve . Their presence was confirmed in 2008 . 
 The red panda lives between 2 @,@ 200 and 4 @,@ 800 m ( 7 @,@ 200 and 15 @,@ 700 ft ) altitude , inhabiting areas of moderate temperature between 10 and 25 ° C ( 50 and 77 ° F ) with little annual change . It prefers mountainous mixed deciduous and conifer forests , especially with old trees and dense understories of bamboo . 
 The red panda population in Sichuan Province is larger and more stable than the Yunnan population , suggesting a southward expansion from Sichuan into Yunnan in the Holocene . 
 The red panda has become extirpated from the Chinese provinces of Guizhou , Gansu , Shaanxi , and Qinghai . 
 = = = Distribution of subspecies = = = 
 Distribution of the red panda is disjointed , with two extant subspecies : 
 Western red panda A. f. fulgens ( Cuvier , 1825 ) lives in the western part of its range , in Nepal , Assam , Sikkim , and Bhutan . 
 <unk> 's red panda A. f. styani lives in the east @-@ north @-@ eastern part of its range , in southern China and northern Burma . 
 A. f. styani has been described by Thomas in 1902 based on one skull from a specimen collected in Sichuan . Pocock distinguished A. f. styani from A. f. fulgens by its longer winter coat and more abundant blackness in the pelage , bigger skull , more strongly curved forehead , and more robust teeth . His description is based on skulls and skins collected in Sichuan , Myitkyina close to the border of Yunnan , and Upper Burma . 
 The <unk> 's red panda is supposedly larger and darker in color than the Western member of the species , but with considerable variation in both subspecies , and some individuals may be brown or yellowish brown rather than red . 
 The Brahmaputra River is often considered the natural division between the two subspecies , where it makes a curve around the eastern end of the Himalayas , although some authors suggest A. f. fulgens extends farther eastward , into China . 
 = = Biology and behavior = = 
 = = = Behavior = = = 
 The red panda is territorial ; it is solitary except during mating season . The species is generally quiet except for some twittering , tweeting , and whistling communication sounds . It has been reported to be both nocturnal and crepuscular , sleeping on tree branches or in tree hollows during the day and increasing its activity in the late afternoon and early evening hours . It sleeps stretched out on a branch with legs dangling when it is hot , and curled up with its tail over the face when it is cold . This panda is very heat sensitive , with an optimal “ well @-@ being ” temperature between 17 and 25 ° C ( 63 and 77 ° F ) , and cannot tolerate temperatures over 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) . 
 Shortly after waking , red pandas clean their fur like a cat , licking their front paws and then rubbing their backs , torsos , and sides . They also rub their backs and bellies along the sides of trees or rocks . Then they patrol their territories , marking with urine and a weak musk @-@ smelling secretion from their anal glands . They search for food running along the ground or through the trees . Red pandas may alternately use their fore paws to bring food to their mouths or place food directly into their mouths . 
 Predators of the red panda include the snow leopard , martens ( Mustelidae ) , and humans . If they feel threatened or sense danger , they may try to escape by climbing a rock column or tree . If they can no longer flee , they stand on their hind legs to make themselves appear larger and use the sharp claws on their front paws to defend themselves . The red panda Futa became a visitor attraction in Japan for his ability to stand upright for ten seconds at a time . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Red pandas are excellent climbers , and forage largely in trees . They eat mostly bamboo , and may eat small mammals , birds , eggs , flowers , and berries . In captivity , they were observed to eat birds , flowers , maple and mulberry leaves , and bark and fruits of maple , beech , and mulberry . 
 Like the giant panda , they cannot digest cellulose , so they must consume a large volume of bamboo to survive . Their diets consist of about two @-@ thirds bamboo , but they also eat mushrooms , roots , acorns , lichens , and grasses . Occasionally , they supplement their diets with fish and insects . They do little more than eat and sleep due to their low @-@ calorie diets . 
 Bamboo shoots are more easily digested than leaves , exhibiting the highest digestibility in summer and autumn , intermediate digestibility in the spring , and lowest digestibility in the winter . These variations correlate with the nutrient contents in the bamboo . Red pandas process bamboo poorly , especially the cellulose and cell wall components . This implies microbial digestion plays only a minor role in their digestive strategy . To survive on this poor @-@ quality diet , they have to eat the high @-@ quality sections of the bamboo plant , such as the tender leaves and shoots , in large quantities , over 1 @.@ 5 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) of fresh leaves and 4 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) of fresh shoots daily . This food passes through the digestive tract fairly rapidly ( about 2 – 4 hr ) so as to maximize nutrient intake . Red pandas can taste artificial sweeteners , such as aspartame , the only <unk> known to do so . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Red pandas are able to reproduce around 18 months of age , and are fully mature at two to three years . Adults rarely interact in the wild except to mate . Both sexes may mate with more than one partner during the mating season from mid @-@ January to early March . A few days before birth , females begin to collect material , such as brushwood , grass , and leaves , to build a nest , which is normally located in a hollow tree or a rock crevice . After a gestation period of 112 to 158 days , the female gives birth in mid @-@ June to late July to one to four blind and deaf cubs weighing 110 to 130 g ( 3 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 6 oz ) each . 
 After birth , the mother cleans the cubs and can then recognize each by its smell . At first , she spends 60 % to 90 % of her time with the cubs . After the first week , the mother starts spending more time outside the nest , returning every few hours to nurse and groom the cubs . She moves the young frequently among several nests , all of which she keeps clean . The cubs start to open their eyes at about 18 days of age . By about 90 days , they have achieved full adult fur and coloring , and begin to venture out of the nest . They also start eating solid foods at this point , weaning at around six to eight months of age . The cubs stay with their mother until the next litter is born in the following summer . Males rarely help raise the young , and only if they live in pairs or in small groups . 
 Their average lifespan is between eight and 10 years , but individuals have been known to reach 15 years . 
 = = Threats = = 
 The primary threats to red pandas are direct harvest from the wild , live or dead , competition with domestic livestock resulting in habitat degradation , and deforestation resulting in habitat loss or fragmentation . The relative importance of these factors is different in each region , and is not well understood . For instance , in India , the biggest threat seems to be habitat loss followed by poaching , while in China , the biggest threat seems to be hunting and poaching . A 40 % decrease in red panda populations has been reported in China over the last 50 years , and populations in western Himalayan areas are considered to be lower . 
 Deforestation can inhibit the spread of red pandas and exacerbate the natural population subdivision by topography and ecology , leading to severe fragmentation of the remaining wild population . Fewer than 40 animals in four separate groups share resources with humans in Nepal 's <unk> National Park , where only 6 % of 1 @,@ 710 km2 ( 660 sq mi ) is preferred red panda habitat . Although direct competition for food with domestic livestock is not significant , livestock can depress bamboo growth by trampling . 
 Small groups of animals with little opportunity for exchange between them face the risk of inbreeding , decreased genetic diversity , and even extinction . In addition , clear @-@ cutting for firewood or agriculture , including hillside terracing , removes old trees that provide maternal dens and decreases the ability of some species of bamboo to regenerate . 
 In south @-@ west China , red pandas are hunted for their fur , especially for the highly valued bushy tails from which hats are produced . In these areas , the fur is often used for local cultural ceremonies . In weddings , the bridegroom traditionally carries the hide . The " good @-@ luck charm " red panda @-@ tail hats are also used by local newly @-@ weds . This practice may be quite old , as the red panda seems to be depicted in a 13th @-@ century Chinese pen @-@ and @-@ ink scroll showing a hunting scene . Little or no mention of the red panda is made in the culture and folklore of Nepal . 
 In the past , red pandas were captured and sold to zoos . Angela <unk> reported she had personally handled 350 red pandas in 17 years . 
 Due to CITES , this number has decreased substantially in recent years , but poaching continues , and red pandas are often sold to private collectors at exorbitant prices . In some parts of Nepal and India , red pandas are kept as pets . 
 The red panda has a naturally low birth rate ( usually single or twin births per year ) , and a high death rate in the wild . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The red panda is listed in CITES Appendix I. The species has been classified as endangered in the IUCN Red List since 2008 because the global population is estimated at about 10 @,@ 000 individuals , with a decreasing population trend ; only about half of the total area of potential habitat of 142 @,@ 000 km2 ( 55 @,@ 000 sq mi ) is actually being used by the species . Due to their shy and secretive nature , and their largely nocturnal habits , observation of red pandas is difficult . Therefore , population figures in the wild are determined by population density estimates and not direct counts . 
 Worldwide population estimates range from fewer than 2 @,@ 500 to between 16 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 individuals . In 1999 , the total population in China was estimated at between 3 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 individuals . In 2001 , the wild population in India was estimated at between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 individuals . Estimates for Nepal indicate only a few hundred individuals . No records from Bhutan or Burma exist . 
 Reliable population numbers are hard to find , partly because other animals have been mistaken for the red panda . For instance , one report from Burma stated that red pandas were still fairly common in some areas , and was accompanied by a photograph of a " red panda " as proof . The photograph in question depicted a species of civet . 
 The red panda is protected in all range countries , and hunting is illegal . Beyond this , conservation efforts are highly variable between countries : 
 China has 35 protected areas covering about 42 @.@ 4 % of red panda habitat . 
 India has 20 protected areas with known or possible red panda populations in Sikkim , Arunachal Pradesh , and West Bengal such as <unk> National Park , <unk> National Park , and Singalila National Park , and a coordinated conservation policy for the red panda . 
 In Nepal , known populations occur in <unk> National Park , Sagarmatha National Park , <unk> Barun National Park , Rara National Park , Annapurna Conservation Area , Kanchenjunga Conservation Area , and in Dhorpatan Hunting Reserve . 
 Bhutan has five protected areas that support red panda populations . 
 Burma has 26 protected areas , of which at least one hosts red panda populations . 
 = = = In situ initiatives = = = 
 A community @-@ managed forest in <unk> District of eastern Nepal is home to 15 red pandas which generate household income through tourism activities , including home stays . Villagers in the high @-@ altitude areas of Arunachal Pradesh have formed the <unk> Red Panda Conservation Alliance comprising five villages with a community @-@ conserved forest area of 200 km2 ( 77 sq mi ) at an altitude of 2 @,@ 500 m ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) to over 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 The red panda is quite adaptable to living in captivity , and is common in zoos worldwide . By 1992 , more than 300 births had occurred in captivity , and more than 300 individuals lived in 85 institutions worldwide . By 2001 , 182 individuals were in North American zoos alone . As of 2006 , the international studbook listed more than 800 individuals in zoos and parks around the world . Of these , 511 individuals of subspecies A. f. fulgens were kept in 173 institutions and 306 individuals of subspecies A. f. styani were kept in 81 institutions . 
 The international studbook is currently managed at the Rotterdam Zoo in the Netherlands . In cooperation with the International Red Panda Management Group , they coordinate the Species Survival Plan in North America , the European Endangered Species Programme in Europe , and other captive @-@ breeding programs in Australia , India , Japan , and China . In 2009 , Sarah Glass , curator of red pandas and special exhibits at the Knoxville Zoo in Knoxville , Tennessee , was appointed as coordinator for the North American Red Panda Species Survival Plan . The Knoxville Zoo has the largest number of captive red panda births in the Western Hemisphere ( 101 as of August 2011 ) . Only the Rotterdam Zoo has had more captive births worldwide . 
 The Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park in Darjeeling , India , successfully released four captive @-@ bred red pandas to the wild in August and November 2003 . 
 Three red panda cubs were born in captivity at Hamilton Zoo in New Zealand in December 2012 , doubling the number held there . 
 = = As pets = = 
 The most often cited example of keeping red pandas as pets is by Indira Gandhi . Pandas were presented to Gandhi 's family as a gift and they were then housed in " a special tree house " . 
 = = Phylogenetics = = 
 The taxonomic classification of the red panda has been controversial since it was discovered . French zoologist Frédéric Cuvier initially described the red panda in 1825 , and classified it as a close relative of the raccoon ( Procyonidae ) , though he gave it the genus name Ailurus , ( from Ancient Greek <unk> , " cat " ) , based on superficial similarities with domestic cats . The specific epithet is the Latin adjective fulgens , " shining " . At various times , it has been placed in the Procyonidae , Ursidae , with <unk> in the <unk> ( until this family was moved into the Ursidae ) , and in its own family , the Ailuridae . This uncertainty comes from difficulty in determining whether certain characteristics of Ailurus are phylogenetically conservative or are derived and convergent with species of similar ecological habits . 
 Evidence based on the fossil record , serology , karyology , behavior , anatomy , and reproduction reflect closer affinities with Procyonidae than Ursidae . However , ecological and foraging specializations and distinct geographical distribution in relation to modern procyonids support classification in the separate family Ailuridae . 
 Recent molecular systematic DNA research also places the red panda into its own family , Ailuridae , a part of the broad superfamily Musteloidea that also includes the skunk , raccoon , and weasel families . 
 It is not a bear , nor closely related to the giant panda , nor a raccoon , nor a lineage of uncertain affinities . Rather it is a basal lineage of <unk> , with a long history of independence from its closest relatives ( skunks , raccoons , and otters / weasels / badgers ) . 
 The two subspecies are A. f. fulgens and A. f. styani . However , the name Ailurus fulgens refulgens is sometimes incorrectly used for A. f. styani . This stems from a lapsus made by Henri Milne @-@ Edwards in his 1874 paper " Recherches pour servir à l 'histoire naturelle des <unk> <unk> des <unk> sur la classification de ces animaux " , making A. f. refulgens a nomen nudum . The most recent edition of Mammal Species of the World still shows the subspecies as A. f. refulgens . This has been corrected in more recent works , including A guide to the Mammals of China and Handbook of the Mammals of the World , Volume 1 : Carnivores . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 The red panda is considered a living fossil and only distantly related to the giant panda ( <unk> melanoleuca ) , as it is naturally more closely related to the other members of the superfamily Musteloidea to which it belongs . The common ancestor of both pandas ( which also was an ancestor for all living bears , pinnipeds -the walrus and <unk> and musteloids <unk> , skunks , weasels , otters ... ) can be traced back to the Early Tertiary period tens of millions of years ago , with a wide distribution across Eurasia . 
 Fossils of the extinct red panda Parailurus anglicus have been unearthed from China in the east to Britain in the west . In 1977 , a single tooth of Parailurus was discovered in the Pliocene Ringold Formation of Washington . This first North American record is almost identical to European specimens and indicates the immigration of this species from Asia . In 2004 , a tooth from a red panda species never before recorded in North America was discovered at the Gray Fossil Site in Tennessee . The tooth dates from 4 @.@ 5 – 7 million years ago . This species , described as <unk> <unk> , indicates that a second , more primitive <unk> lineage inhabited North America during the Miocene . Cladistic analysis suggests that Parailurus and Ailurus are sister taxa . Additional fossils of <unk> <unk> were discovered at the Gray Fossil Site in 2010 and in 2012 . The frequency with which panda fossils are being found at Gray Fossil Site suggests the species played a large role in the overall ecosystem of the area . 
 The discovery in Spain of the postcranial remains of <unk> <unk> , a Miocene relative to the red panda , supports a sister @-@ group relationship between red pandas and bears . The discovery suggests the red panda 's " false thumb " was an adaptation to arboreal locomotion — independent of the giant panda 's adaptation to manipulate bamboo — one of the most dramatic cases of convergent evolution among vertebrates . 
 = = = Taxonomic history = = = 
 The first known written record of the red panda occurs in a 13th @-@ century Chinese scroll depicting a hunting scene between hunters and the red panda . 
 Major General Thomas Hardwicke ’ s 1821 presentation of an article titled " Description of a new Genus of the Class Mammalia , from the Himalaya Chain of Hills Between <unk> and the Snowy Mountains " at the Linnean Society in London is usually regarded as the moment the red panda became a bona fide species in Western science . Hardwicke proposed the name " wha " and explained : " It is frequently discovered by its loud cry or call , resembling the word ‘ Wha ’ , often repeating the same : hence is derived one of the local names by which it is known . It is also called <unk> . " Hardwicke 's paper was not published until 1827 , by which time Frédéric Cuvier had published his description and a figure . Hardwicke 's originally proposed taxonomic name was removed from the 1827 publication of his paper with his permission , and naming credit is now given to Cuvier . 
 Frédéric Cuvier had received the specimen he described from his brother 's stepson , Alfred <unk> , who had sent it " from the mountains north of India " . He was the first to use both the binomial name Ailurus fulgens and the vernacular name panda in his description of the species published in 1825 in Histoire naturelle des <unk> . Ailurus is adopted from the ancient Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " cat " . The specific epithet fulgens is Latin for " shining , bright " . Panda is the French name for the Roman goddess of peace and travellers , who was called upon before starting a difficult journey . Whether this is the origin of the French vernacular name panda remains uncertain . Later publications claim the name was adopted from a Himalayan language . 
 In 1847 , Hodgson described a red panda under the name Ailurus ochraceus , of which Pocock concluded it represents the same type as Ailurus fulgens , since the description of the two agree very closely . He subordinated both types to the Himalayan red panda subspecies Ailurus fulgens fulgens . 
 = = Local names = = 
 The red panda 's local names differ from place to place . The Lepcha people call it <unk> nam . In Nepal , the species is called <unk> <unk> ( bear @-@ cat ) and <unk> . The Sherpa people of Nepal and Sikkim call it ye <unk> <unk> and wah <unk> . The word <unk> is <unk> meaning bear ; in Tamang language , a small , red bear is called <unk> . In the Kanchenjunga region of eastern Nepal , the Limbus know red pandas as <unk> , which literally means dark because of their underside pelage ; villagers of Tibetan origin call them <unk> . 
 Additionally , Pocock lists the vernacular names ye and <unk> <unk> ( Nepal ) ; <unk> and <unk> ( Limbu ) ; <unk> or <unk> and <unk> ( <unk> ) ; <unk> <unk> ( Lepcha ) . Nigálya may originate from the Nepali word <unk> <unk> or <unk> meaning a particular kind of small bamboo , namely <unk> intermedia , but also refers to a kind of small leopard , or cat @-@ bear . The word pónya may originate from the Nepali word <unk> ् <unk> <unk> meaning claw , or <unk> <unk> meaning paw of an animal . Nigálya pónya may translate to bamboo claw or paw . 
 Nigálya pónya , nyala <unk> , and <unk> are said to mean eater of bamboo . The name panda could originate from <unk> . 
 In modern Chinese , the red panda is called <unk> ( <unk> / <unk> , lesser or small panda ) , or <unk> / <unk> ( <unk> , red panda ) . In contrast , the giant panda is called <unk> ( <unk> / <unk> , giant or big panda ) , or simply <unk> ( <unk> / <unk> , panda , literally bear @-@ cat ) . 
 In English , the red panda is also called lesser panda , though " red " is generally preferred . Many other languages also use red or variations of shining / gold or lesser / small in their names for this species . For instance , <unk> <unk> in Bulgarian , panda roux in French , and panda <unk> in Spanish all mean red panda . Since at least as far back as 1855 , one of its French names has been panda <unk> ( shining panda ) . In Finnish , it is called <unk> ( gold panda ) . Variations of lesser panda occur in French petit panda ( small panda ) , Spanish panda <unk> ( lesser panda ) , Dutch kleine panda ( small panda ) , Russian <unk> <unk> ( <unk> panda , " small panda " ) , Korean <unk> ( <unk> panda , " baby panda " ) , and Japanese <unk> ( <unk> panda , a transliteration of English " lesser panda " ) . 
 Other names attributed to this species include fire cat , bright panda , and common panda . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The red panda was recognized as the state animal of Sikkim in the early 1990s , and was the mascot of the Darjeeling Tea Festival . 
 In 2005 , Babu , a male red panda at Birmingham Nature Centre in Birmingham , England , escaped and briefly became a media celebrity , before being recaptured . He was subsequently voted " Brummie of the Year " , the first animal to receive this honor . Rusty , a male red panda at the National Zoo in Washington , DC , similarly attracted media attention when he briefly escaped in 2013 . 
 The name of the Firefox web browser is said to have been derived from a nickname of the red panda . 
 An anthropomorphic red panda was featured as Master <unk> , the Kung Fu teacher , in the 2008 film Kung Fu Panda , and its sequels Kung Fu Panda 2 in 2011 and Kung Fu Panda 3 in 2016 . Some comments on the original film showed a lack of awareness about the red panda in the U.S. at the time it was released . Although most of the reviewers got the species correct , some nevertheless mistook it for a tiny wolf , a rodent , and a lemur . In an interview , Dustin Hoffman also indicated he did not know much about the animal when he first agreed to voice the character . The red panda Futa inspired the character of Pabu , the so @-@ called " fire ferret " animal companion ( primarily of Bolin ) , in the U.S. animated TV series The Legend of Korra . 
 = The Judy Garland Show = 
 The Judy Garland Show was an American musical variety television series that aired on CBS on Sunday nights during the 1963 @-@ 1964 television season . Despite a sometimes stormy relationship with Judy Garland , CBS had found success with several television specials featuring the star . Garland , who for years had been reluctant to commit to a weekly series , saw the show as her best chance to pull herself out of severe financial difficulties . 
 Production difficulties beset the series almost from the beginning . The series had three different producers in the course of its 26 episodes and went through a number of other key personnel changes . With the change in producers also came changes to the show 's format , which started as comedy / variety but switched to an almost purely concert format . 
 While Garland herself was popular with critics , the initial variety format and her co @-@ star , Jerry Van Dyke , were not . The show competed with Bonanza , then the fourth most popular program on television , and consistently performed poorly in the ratings . Although fans rallied in an attempt to save the show , CBS cancelled it after a single season . 
 TV Guide included the series in their 2013 list of 60 shows that were " Cancelled Too Soon " . 
 = = Garland and CBS = = 
 Garland 's history with CBS prior to the series was a checkered one . She had previously headlined several specials for the network . The first was the inaugural episode of the Ford Star Jubilee which aired in 1955 . The special , the first full @-@ scale color telecast on CBS , was a ratings triumph , garnering a 34 @.@ 8 Nielsen rating . This success led to Garland 's signing a three @-@ year , $ 300 @,@ 000 contract with the network . Only a single special aired , a live General Electric Theater episode in 1956 , before the pact was terminated . The relationship between CBS and Garland and her then @-@ husband and manager , Sid Luft , dissolved in acrimony in 1957 after they and agent Freddie Fields were unable to come to terms with the network over the format of her next special . Garland filed a US $ 1 @.@ 4 million lawsuit against CBS for libel and breach of contract ( CBS filed a counterclaim ) that was not settled until 1961 , when Garland and CBS each agreed to drop their claims and negotiations began for a new round of Garland specials for the network . 
 The first of two specials under this new relationship aired in February 1962 and was entitled The Judy Garland Show . This special , guest starring Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin , was nominated for four Emmy awards . Garland signed the deal for the weekly series in December 1962 . Garland 's final special was the awkwardly @-@ titled Judy Garland and Her Guests Phil Silvers and Robert Goulet , presented in March 1963 . Alternately promoted as a preview and a pilot for Garland 's upcoming regular series , this special too was nominated for an Emmy . 
 = = Production = = 
 Judy Garland 's four @-@ year contract for the series called for 26 weekly shows , for which Garland 's corporation , <unk> Enterprises , would be paid $ 140 @,@ 000 per episode . Of that Garland was guaranteed between $ 25 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 per show . <unk> Enterprises would also retain ownership of the tapes , allowing Garland to sell the series into syndication . Although Garland had said as early as 1955 that she would never do a weekly television series , in the early 1960s she was in a financially precarious situation . Garland was several hundred thousand dollars in debt to the Internal Revenue Service , having failed to pay taxes in 1951 and 1952 , and the commercial disappointment of the film A Star is Born meant that her share of any profits from that film would be eaten up immediately . A successful run on television would secure Garland 's financial future . 
