 = = = The George Schlatter episodes ( Episodes 1 @-@ 5 ) = = = 
 The Judy Garland Show was initially slated to be taped in New York City . The network initially offered the producer 's job to Bob Banner , who was at the time producing a series for Garry Moore . Although he was interested , he declined to relocate from the West Coast . Bob Finkel , whose credits included shows for Dinah Shore and Andy Williams , was next approached but similarly refused to relocate . Veteran producer and director Bill Hobin , then heading up Sing Along with Mitch , was approached to produce and direct the program . Already based in the East , Hobin eagerly accepted . Unbeknownst to Hobin , George Schlatter had been lobbying on the West Coast for the producer job and was signed to produce . Ultimately Hobin bowed out of the producer slot and Schlatter became the producer while Hobin was retained to direct . 
 With the producer question settled , Schlatter set about assembling the crew for the series . Mort Lindsey was hired to conduct the show 's orchestra . Gary Smith , who had designed the earlier Sinatra / Martin special , was signed as art director . Multiple Academy Award @-@ winner Edith Head was engaged to design Garland 's costumes while Ray <unk> , who Schlatter knew from their work together with Dinah Shore , was hired to costume Garland 's guests . Mel Tormé was brought on as musical arranger and to write special musical material and would also appear as a guest on the program . Choreography duties were taken by Danny Daniels . Comedian Jerry Van Dyke was engaged as a series regular . 
 In addition to musical performances from Garland and the week 's guest stars , the series ' initial format included the recurring segments " Born in a Trunk " ( the name taken from a number in A Star is Born ) in which Garland would tell stories of her show business career and sing a related song , and " Tea for Two " which would feature her chatting with a surprise guest . Van Dyke would perform comedy sketches , sometimes with Garland or the guests . Garland would close each episode by singing the song " Maybe I 'll Come Back . " The obscure novelty song , selected by Garland and Schlatter over CBS 's objections ( the network wanted a few bars of Over the Rainbow ) , included the line " And President Coolidge is a cousin of mine . " Garland as a running gag would substitute a different name for Coolidge 's each week . 
 Although initially planned for an East Coast shoot , The Judy Garland Show was taped in Studio 43 at CBS Television City in Los Angeles . The network had gone to great expense to prepare the studio , including an estimated $ 100 @,@ 000 to raise the stage and install a separate revolving stage . Garland 's dressing room was a 110 ft × 40 ft trailer which had been decorated as a replica of her newly purchased Brentwood home . The corridor that led from her dressing room to the stage was painted to resemble the Yellow Brick Road from The Wizard of Oz . 
 The first taping commenced on June 24 , 1963 . Garland 's old friend and frequent MGM co @-@ star Mickey Rooney was , at Garland 's insistence , her first guest — although , because the network elected to air the series out of production order , this was actually the tenth episode to be broadcast . 
 = = = The Norman Jewison episodes ( Episodes 6 @-@ 13 ) = = = 
 On August 2 , after six weeks of taping and five completed shows , Schlatter was fired as producer by James Aubrey , Jr . , president of CBS . Production was suspended for five weeks . But according to Mel Tormé in his book The Other Side of the Rainbow , Garland was the one who fired Schlatter . Also fired were several of the writing staff and choreographer Danny Daniels . Replacing Schlatter as executive producer was Norman Jewison , who shared a vision for the series that was closer to that of Aubrey 's . That vision was that Garland was too glamorous for television and that she needed her series to present her in a more conventional light . Veteran musical variety show writers John Aylesworth and Frank Peppiatt were brought in as well . Jewison , who had agreed to serve as producer through the thirteenth episode , implemented changes designed to " make the sacred cow less sacred , " including Garland 's subjection to Van Dyke 's jokes that denigrated her issues with her weight , her reputation for unreliability and her career highs and lows . Jewison also introduced a new recurring feature , " Be My Guest , " with Tormé 's writing tailored material for the week 's guest to perform with Garland near the top of each show . 
 The Judy Garland Show premiered on September 29 , during Jewison 's run as producer . The episode chosen to be the premiere was Jewison 's second completed episode , the seventh produced episode overall . Reviews were generally favorable ( see below ) , though Jerry Van Dyke 's supporting role was heavily criticized ; Van Dyke was let go from the cast after the tenth produced episode . Jewison himself left after episode thirteen , as he had intended . 
 = = = The Bill Colleran episodes ( Episodes 14 @-@ 26 ) = = = 
 After Jewison , Bill Colleran joined the show as Garland 's selection for its third executive producer . Colleran revamped the format yet again , doing away with the insulting humor and focusing the show more on Garland and her singing , although there were still comedy elements in Colleran 's initial episodes with guests such as Bob Newhart and Shelley Berman . As well , Ken Murray was briefly featured as a regular , showing his home movies of Hollywood stars , but was dropped after four episodes . 
 Ratings continued to be poor , and CBS announced the cancellation of The Judy Garland Show on January 22 , 1964 . Officially , it was reported that it was Garland who exited the series , as explained in a letter released by CBS , supposedly from Garland to Aubrey advising him that she wanted to spend more time caring for her children . 
 Despite The Judy Garland Show 's announced cancellation , it was allowed to finish out the 1963 / 64 season , and continued to tape episodes for broadcast . The final seven episodes taped after the cancellation notice jettisoned any pretense of sustaining a comedy / variety element , and simply presented Judy Garland " In Concert " — sometimes solo for the entire episode , sometimes with musical guests such as Lena Horne , Diahann Carroll or Mel Tormé . 
 During these final episodes , following Show 22 specifically , Tormé was fired and was replaced by Bobby Cole , a musician Garland had met recently in New York . Tormé would later file suit for breach of contract and write a tell @-@ all book about the series , The Other Side of the Rainbow : With Judy Garland on the Dawn Patrol . 
 = = On the air = = 
 The first episode of The Judy Garland Show aired on September 29 , 1963 . The show , featuring guest star Donald O 'Connor , was the seventh one taped . Episodes would continue to be shown out of sequence throughout the series ' run . The show scored an 18 @.@ 7 rating and reviews were largely positive . Variety wrote " If Judy Garland ... is of a mind to work every week with the same dedication and zeal that characterized her premiere this week , Bill Paley and his associates should be in clover . ... Miss Garland was in fine <unk> . " The San Francisco Chronicle characterized the show as " tasteful , elegant and exciting . " Not every review was as glowing , with the New York Herald Tribune noting " Miss Garland is fine , just fine . The rest of the show , however , needs help . " Other negative reviews were in a similar vein , focusing on Van Dyke in particular and the show 's format and writing in general . 
 CBS publicly responded to the critiques by issuing a statement through talent chief Michael Dann . " We have decided that [ Judy ] should never appear in sketches and never play any character but herself . And she 'll be singing more songs , more medleys , more standards . Songs are her babies . We told her what we think and she 's listening . She 's far too insecure about television to exercise her own judgment . She knows what 's good for her . " 
 Behind the scenes , however , the network continued to tinker with the show . In addition to the replacement of key production staff and constantly revising the format , Garland was also summoned to New York to receive such bits of information as she was touching her guests too much and was instructed to stop . As well , Van Dyke was let go almost immediately after the reviews came out , taping his last show on October 11 . 
 Nevertheless , numerous episodes featuring Van Dyke had already completed taping and would continue to air , meaning that the changes in the show 's format would not be apparent to viewers for several weeks . Accordingly , reviews about the show 's format ( as opposed to Garland 's singing ) continued to be negative , as the Garland @-@ deprecating humor continued to attract criticism rather than viewers . Saturday Evening Post reviewer Richard Warren Lewis wrote , " The absurd notion of debasing Judy 's reputation as a legendary figure and molding her show into an imitation of other prosaic variety shows has been a disaster where it hurts most , in the audience @-@ rating polls . " Indeed , Garland 's show was averaging an 18 rating , about half of the audience represented by Bonanza and its 35 rating . 
 After the departure of Jewison as producer and of Jerry Van Dyke ( whose exit from the show was lauded by one contemporary reviewer as " a marvelous idea but it came too late " ) the focus of the show changed yet again to emphasize Garland 's performances , singly and with guests . This format , including several " Judy Garland in Concert " solo episodes , would remain more or less intact for the remainder of the series . Despite continuing positive critical comment about Garland 's performances , the ratings remained flat . Fans of the show formed a " Save The Judy Garland Show committee " and organized an early letter @-@ writing campaign on behalf of the series but their efforts were not enough to spare the show from cancellation . The final Judy Garland Show , another concert episode , was broadcast on March 29 , 1964 . 
 = = Episode list = = 
 = Evergreen ( Echo & the Bunnymen album ) = 
 Evergreen is the seventh studio album by the English rock band Echo & the Bunnymen . It is their first album since reforming after they disbanded in 1993 . Vocalist Ian McCulloch and guitarist Will Sergeant had previously worked together as Electrafixion before they were rejoined by bassist Les Pattinson under the name Echo & the Bunnymen in early 1997 . The album was recorded at Doghouse Studios in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames and was produced by McCulloch and the band 's manager Paul Toogood but was credited to the whole band . 
 Following a successful return to live performances and the release of the single " Nothing Lasts Forever " , the album was released in July 1997 . Two further singles – " I Want to Be There " and " Don 't Let It Get You Down " – followed the album 's release . The album received good reviews from the music press and was received well by the public , reaching number eight on the UK Albums Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 After leaving Echo & the Bunnymen in 1988 to pursue a solo career , vocalist Ian McCulloch released two albums that were not commercial successes . Despite McCulloch 's departure and drummer Pete de Freitas 's death , guitarist Will Sergeant and bassist Les Pattinson decided to recruit three new members – Noel Burke ( vocals ) , Jake Brockman ( keyboards ) and Damon Reece ( drums ) – and continue with the same band name , which angered McCulloch . The Bunnymen released one further album , Reverberation ( 1990 ) , which critics and fans alike received poorly . WEA Records subsequently dropped the group , who went on to break @-@ up in early 1993 . 
 McCulloch met former Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr in 1993 and they wrote and recorded an album , tentatively titled Touch Down . The album was to be released in early 1994 ; however , despite McCulloch and Marr being happy with the album , Rob Dickins at WEA felt it was missing some element . Dickins suggested to McCulloch that Sergeant be brought in to do some work . McCulloch was initially sceptical because he had not spoken with Sergeant since de Freitas 's funeral ; however , he did give the idea some thought . Before McCulloch had chance to contact Sergeant , a mutual friend persuaded the pair to meet socially . While McCulloch and Sergeant were being reacquainted , the tapes from the McCulloch and Marr sessions disappeared . McCulloch was not upset about this as he and Sergeant had started working together as Electrafixion . 
 With McCulloch influenced by American alternative rock bands such as Nirvana and The Smashing Pumpkins , the group employed a heavier sound than Echo & the Bunnymen 's previous work . After successfully touring the United Kingdom and refusing to play any Echo & the Bunnymen material , Electrafixion released their only album , Burned , in September 1995 . Despite critics giving the album good reviews , sales of it and the follow @-@ up singles were disappointing . After embarking on a tour of the United States in 1996 , Electrafixion eventually gave in to fan pressure and began to introduce Echo & the Bunnymen material to their live set . Sergeant felt that as the band were playing Echo & the Bunnymen songs , they might as well reform Echo & the Bunnymen ; however , McCulloch was initially opposed to the idea . McCulloch changed his mind and , having persuaded Pattinson to come out of retirement , Echo & the Bunnymen was reformed in mid @-@ 1996 . McCulloch felt Echo & the Bunnymen could not reform without Pattinson and described the bassist 's involvement as " integral " . McCulloch went on to say it was important to " feel like the original group " . He has also said , " Right from the first demo [ of Evergreen ] we realised that we 'd still got that chemistry . " 
 = = Recording and packaging = = 
 The recording of Evergreen started at the beginning of 1997 when Echo & the Bunnymen entered Doghouse Studios in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . The production of the album was undertaken by McCulloch and Paul Toogood , the band 's new manager , although it was credited to the band in the liner notes to the album . With Oasis in the next studio , Liam Gallagher contributed backing vocals to the track " Nothing Lasts Forever " . McCulloch said , " We just hit it off right away , and after a few beers he ended up singing on the record . " McCulloch also said that Gallagher " insisted we put tambourine on [ ' Nothing Lasts Forever ' ] " which " took [ it ] to another level " . Adam Peters , who had previously worked on the band 's 1984 album Ocean Rain , was brought in to provide string arrangements for the album . Using musicians from the London Metropolitan Orchestra , Peters recorded string passages for seven tracks from the album at Abbey Road Studios in London . With Clif Norrell , who had previously worked with R.E.M. , finishing the mixing of the album , the recording was completed by the end of March 1997 . 
 The photograph used on the front cover of the album was shot by Norman Watson , who also directed the videos for two of the singles from the album – " Nothing Lasts Forever " , which was to become the lead single from the album , and " I Want to Be There " . The cover was shot in Marrakech in early May 1997 and echoes the cover of the band 's 1980 debut album Crocodiles . The cover picture shows the band against a backdrop of trees at night . However , in place of the band 's former drummer de Freitas , who died in a motorcycle accident , the photograph shows the remaining band members with a car . 
 = = Releases and reception = = 
 The live debut of " Nothing Lasts Forever " was at the Cream nightclub in Liverpool in early May 1997 at Echo & the Bunnymen 's first concert since reforming . This was followed by two sold @-@ out concerts at the Mercury Lounge in New York and a number of festival appearances in the US , UK and Europe before Evergreen was released on 14 July 1997 by London Records . A limited edition version containing a bonus disc titled History of the Peel Sessions 1979 – 1997 was released at the same time . The bonus disc contains tracks that were recorded live for John Peel 's show on BBC Radio 1 between 1979 and 1997 . Following the album , two more singles were released – " I Want to Be There ( When You Come ) " in September 1997 and " Don 't Let It Get You Down " in November 1979 . The album was reissued in 1999 with the addition of four live tracks . 
 Reviewing Evergreen for Allmusic , Ned Raggett described it as " an attractive piece of work " when it " shines at its best " . Although he noted , " Replacement drummer Michael Lee fills in [ for de Freitas ] adequately but not completely , rendering what was a special group something less so . " The reviewer for British music magazine Melody Maker , called the album a " triumph " for fans as well as acknowledging that the album was unlikely to impress people who were not familiar with their work . The album was described in Rolling Stone magazine as " a stunning comeback " . Jeremy Helligar for Entertainment Weekly was not as keen and described the reunion as having " the feel of a non @-@ event " . 
 Evergreen became Echo & the Bunnymen 's fifth album to make the Top 10 of the UK Albums Chart when it reached number eight during its first week of release and stayed on the chart for seven weeks . " Nothing Lasts Forever " reached number eight on the UK Singles Chart , although the follow @-@ up singles " I Want to Be There ( When You Come ) " and " Don 't Let It Get You Down " fared less well reaching numbers thirty and fifty respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Echo & the Bunnymen . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Ian McCulloch – vocals , guitar , piano 
 Will Sergeant – guitar 
 Les Pattinson – bass 
 Adam Peters – keyboards , arrangement ( strings ) , conductor ( strings ) 
 Michael Lee – drums 
 Ed Shearmur – piano on " Nothing Lasts Forever " 
 London Metropolitan Orchestra – strings 
 Echo & the Bunnymen – producer 
 <unk> <unk> – engineer 
 Cenzo Townsend – engineer 
 Markus Butler – assistant engineer 
 Clif Norrell – mixing 
 Richard Woodcraft – mixing assistant 
 Don C. Tyler – digital editing 
 Stephen Marcussen – mastering 
 Guy Massey – recording ( strings ) 
 Alex Scannell – recording assistant ( strings ) 
 Norman Watson – photography 
 = Hull City A.F.C. = 
 Hull City Association Football Club ( / <unk> ˈsɪti / ) is a professional association football club based in Hull , East Riding of Yorkshire , England . It was founded in 1904 . The club participates in the Premier League , the top tier of English football – and their greatest achievement in cup competitions came in 2014 , when the team reached the final of the FA Cup . In 2007 – 08 they achieved promotion to the top flight of English football for the first time in their history by winning the Championship play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium . Their highest league finish was for the 2013 – 14 season , in which they finished 16th in the Premier League table . 
 Hull City play their home games at the KCOM Stadium . They previously played at Boothferry Park and moved to their current home in 2002 . Boothferry Park has been demolished and has been replaced by a housing development . They traditionally play in black and amber , often with a striped shirt design , hence their nickname The Tigers . The club 's mascots are Roary the Tiger and his sister Amber . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Hull City Association Football Club was founded in June 1904 ; previous attempts to found a football club had proved difficult because of the dominance in the city of rugby league teams such as Hull F.C. and Hull Kingston Rovers . The club was unable to apply for membership of the Football League for the 1904 – 05 season and instead played only in friendlies , the first of which was a 2 – 2 draw with Notts County on 1 September 1904 with 6 @,@ 000 in attendance . These early matches were played at the Boulevard , the home of Hull F.C. The club 's first competitive football match was in the FA Cup preliminary round , drawing 3 – 3 with Stockton on 17 September , but they were eliminated after losing the replay 4 – 1 on 22 September . After disputes with landlords at the Boulevard , Hull City moved to Anlaby Road Cricket Ground . After having played 44 friendly fixtures the previous season , Hull City were finally admitted into the Football League Second Division for the 1905 – 06 season . Other teams competing in the league that season included the likes of Manchester United and Chelsea , as well as Yorkshire rivals Barnsley , Bradford City and Leeds City . Hull defeated Barnsley 4 – 1 at home in their first game and finished the season in fifth place . 
 Hull City and Grimsby Town were the only two professional teams which had official permission to play league football on Christmas Day because of the demands of the fish trade , but that tradition has now disappeared following the dramatic reduction of their trawler fleets in recent years . The following season a new ground was built for Hull City across the road from the cricket ground . Still under the managership of Ambrose Langley , Hull continued to finish consistently in the top half of the table . They came close to promotion in the 1909 – 10 season , recording what would be their highest finish until they matched it in 2008 . Hull finished third , level on points with second placed Oldham Athletic , missing promotion on goal average by 0 @.@ 29 of a goal . Hull regularly finished in the top half of the table before the First World War , but after the war the team finished in the bottom half in seven seasons out of eleven , culminating in relegation to the Third Division North in 1930 . 
 = = = Mid @-@ 20th century = = = 
 Hull 's greatest achievement in cup competitions until 2014 was in 1930 , when they reached the FA Cup semi @-@ finals . The cup run saw Hull knock out the eventual champions of the Second and Third Divisions ; Blackpool and Plymouth Argyle respectively . They then knocked out Manchester City , to meet Newcastle United in the quarter @-@ finals . The first game at St James ' Park finished as a 1 – 1 draw , but in the replay Hull beat Newcastle 1 – 0 . The semi @-@ final match against Arsenal took place at Elland Road in Leeds , the game ended 2 – 2 , and was taken to a replay in Birmingham . Arsenal knocked Hull out at Villa Park , the game ending 1 – 0 . 
 After the Second World War , the club moved to another new ground , Boothferry Park . In the 1948 – 49 season , managed by former England international Raich Carter , Hull won the Third Division North championship . " Yo @-@ yoing " between the second and third tiers of English football , Hull City had promotion seasons from the Third to the Second Division again in 1959 and 1966 , winning the Third Division in the latter season . Hull also became the first team in the world to go out of a cup competition on penalties , beaten by Manchester United in the semi @-@ final of the Watney Cup on 1 August 1970 . By the early 1980s , Hull City were in the Fourth Division , and financial collapse led to receivership . 
 Don Robinson took over as chairman and appointed Colin Appleton as the new manager . Both had previously held the equivalent roles with non @-@ league Scarborough . Promotion to Division Three followed in 1983 , with a young team featuring the likes of future England international Brian Marwood , future England manager Steve McClaren , centre @-@ forward Billy Whitehurst , and the prolific goal @-@ scorer Les <unk> . When Hull City missed out on promotion by one goal the following season , Appleton left to manage Swansea City . 
 = = = Decline in the late 20th century = = = 
 Hull reached the Second Division in 1985 under player @-@ manager Brian Horton . They remained there for the next six years before finally going down in 1991 , by which time the club 's manager was Terry Dolan . Hull finished 14th in the Third Division in the 1991 – 92 season , meaning that they would be competing in the new Second Division the following season . In their first season in the rebranded division , Hull narrowly avoided another relegation , but the board kept faith in Dolan and over the next two seasons they achieved mid @-@ table finishes . Financial difficulties hampered City 's progress , as key players such as Alan Fettis and Dean Windass had to be sold to fend off winding @-@ up orders . In the 1995 – 96 season Hull were relegated to the Third Division . 
 In 1997 the club was purchased by former tennis player David Lloyd , who sacked Dolan as manager and replaced him with Mark Hateley after Hull could only finish in 17th place in the table . Hull 's league form was steadily deteriorating to the point that relegation to the Football Conference was looking a real possibility . Lloyd sold the club in November 1998 to a South Yorkshire @-@ based consortium , but retained ownership of Boothferry Park . Hateley departed in November 1998 , with the club at the foot of the table . He was replaced by 34 @-@ year @-@ old veteran player Warren Joyce , who steered the club to safety with games to spare . Hull City fans refer to this season as " The Great Escape " . Despite this feat , Joyce was replaced in April 2000 by the more experienced Brian Little . 
 Despite briefly being locked out of Boothferry Park by bailiffs and facing the possibility of liquidation , Hull qualified for the Third Division play @-@ offs in the 2000 – 01 season , losing in the semi @-@ finals to Leyton Orient . A boardroom takeover by former Leeds United commercial director Adam Pearson had eased the club 's precarious financial situation and all fears of closure were banished . 
 = = = 21st century resurgence = = = 
 The new chairman ploughed funds into the club , allowing Little to rebuild the team . Hull occupied the Third Division promotion and play @-@ off places for much of the 2001 – 02 season , but Little departed two months before the end of the season and Hull slipped to 11th place under his successor Jan Mølby . 
 Hull began the 2002 – 03 season with a number of defeats , which saw relegation look more likely than promotion , and Mølby was sacked in October as Hull languished fifth from bottom in the league . Peter Taylor was named as Hull 's new manager and in December 2002 , just two months after his appointment , Hull relocated to the new 25 @,@ 400 @-@ seater KC Stadium after 56 years at Boothferry Park . At the end of the season Hull finished 13th . 
 Hull were Third Division runners @-@ up in 2003 – 04 and League One runners @-@ up in 2004 – 05 ; these back @-@ to @-@ back promotions took them into the Championship , the second tier of English football . The 2005 – 06 season , the club 's first back in the second tier , saw Hull finish in 18th place , 10 points clear of relegation and their highest league finish for 16 years . 
 However , Taylor left the club to take up the manager 's job at Crystal Palace and Colchester United 's Phil Parkinson was confirmed as his replacement , but was sacked on 4 December 2006 with Hull in the relegation zone , despite having spent over £ 2 million on players during the summer . Phil Brown took over as caretaker manager , and took over permanently in January 2007 , having taken Hull out of the relegation zone . Brown brought veteran striker Dean Windass back to his hometown club on loan from Bradford City , and his eight goals helped secure Hull 's Championship status as they finished in 21st place . 
 Adam Pearson sold the club to a consortium led by Paul Duffen in June 2007 , stating that he " had taken the club as far as I could " , and would have to relinquish control in order to attract " really significant finance into the club " . Under Paul Duffen and manager Phil Brown , Hull City improved greatly on their relegation battle of 2006 – 07 and qualified for the play @-@ offs after finishing the season in third place . They beat Watford 6 – 1 on aggregate in the semi @-@ finals and played Bristol City in the Final on 24 May 2008 , which Hull won 1 – 0 at Wembley Stadium , with Hull native Dean Windass scoring the winning goal . Their ascent from the bottom division of the Football League to the top division of English football in just five seasons is the third @-@ fastest ever . 
 Despite being one of the favourites for relegation in the 2008 – 09 season , Hull began life in the Premier League by beating Fulham 2 – 1 on the opening day in their first ever top flight fixture . With only one defeat in their opening nine games , including away wins at Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur , Hull City found themselves ( temporarily ) joint @-@ top of the Premier League table on points ( third on goal difference ) , following a 3 – 0 victory over West Bromwich Albion — ten years previously , they had been bottom of the fourth tier of English football . Hull 's form never replicated the highs of the early autumn , with the team winning only two more games over the remainder of the season , but secured their top @-@ flight status on the last day of the season due to other results . 
 On 29 October 2009 , chairman Paul Duffen resigned his position with the club , and was replaced by former chairman Adam Pearson on 2 November 2009 . On 15 March 2010 , manager Phil Brown was put on gardening leave after a run of four defeats left Hull in the relegation zone . Brown 's replacement was former Crystal Palace and Charlton boss Iain Dowie , and the appointment was met with some disbelief by supporters who were hoping for a " bigger name " replacement . Hull City 's relegation from the Premier League was confirmed on 3 May 2010 , after a 2 – 2 draw at Wigan Athletic . Both Brown and Dowie had their contracts terminated , and Leicester City 's Nigel Pearson was confirmed as the new manager . 
 A reported block on player transfers into the club , set in place by the Hull City board on 28 July 2010 until transfers out would substantially reduce the £ 39 million @-@ per @-@ year wage bill , at first cast doubt on the new manager 's efforts to build a squad capable of a quick return to the Premier League ; nevertheless , Pearson brought several transfers and loan signings into the club in his bid to strengthen the squad for the season 's campaign . The team set a new club record on 12 March 2011 with 14 away matches unbeaten , breaking a previous record held for over 50 years . This 17 @-@ match streak was finally broken by Bristol City on the last day of the 2010 – 11 season , Hull losing the match 3 – 0 . 
 On 15 November 2011 , Nigel Pearson left the club to return to Leicester . Nick Barmby was appointed as his successor , but was sacked in May 2012 after publicly criticising the club 's owners in an interview given to a local newspaper . In the same month , the club 's consultancy agreement with Adam Pearson was terminated . On 8 June 2012 , Steve Bruce was appointed manager of the club on a three @-@ year deal , and he guided Hull back to the Premier League by drawing with League champions Cardiff City on the final day of the season . 
 On 13 April 2014 , the club reached its first FA Cup Final after defeating Sheffield United 5 – 3 in the semi @-@ final at Wembley Stadium . Their place in the 2014 – 15 UEFA Europa League , regardless of whether they won the 2013 – 14 FA Cup , was confirmed on 3 May as Everton 's failure to win meant that Hull 's FA Cup Final opponents Arsenal would compete in the 2014 – 15 UEFA Champions League . Hull City will enter in the third qualifying round , in their first ever European campaign . The FA Cup final on 17 May saw Hull go 2 – 0 up within the first ten minutes , before losing 3 – 2 after extra time . 
 On 31 July 2014 , Hull made their debut in European competition , in the UEFA Europa League third qualifying round , with a 0 – 0 draw against Slovakian side FK AS Trenčín before winning the second leg 2 – 1 a week later . An error from keeper Allan McGregor gave them a 1 – 0 loss away to Belgian outfit Lokeren in the first leg of their play @-@ off tie on 21 August 2014 with the second leg in East Riding of Yorkshire ending in a 2 – 1 victory , but away goals marked the end of Hull 's first foray into European football . 
 In March 2015 Steve Bruce signed a further three @-@ year deal with the club . Hull were relegated from the Premier League after the 2014 – 15 season , finishing eighteenth with 35 points after a 0 – 0 draw against Manchester United , along with Newcastle United securing their Premier League Status after beating West Ham United 2 – 0 . In October 2015 Hull beat Leicester City in a penalty @-@ shootout to take them through to their first ever quarter @-@ final appearance in the Football League Cup . 
 = = Name change = = 
 = = = 2013 : Initial application = = = 
 In August 2013 , owner Assem Allam announced that the club has re @-@ registered as " Hull City Tigers Ltd , " and that the team would be marketed as " Hull City Tigers , " removing the " Association Football Club " that had been part of the name since the club 's formation in 1904 . Vice @-@ chairman <unk> Allam said " AFC " would remain on the club badge for the 2013 – 14 season , but removed thereafter . 
 In response , a Premier League spokesman said , " We have not been informed of a change in the name of the actual club . They will still be known as Hull City as far as the Premier League is concerned when results or fixtures are published . " 
 According to its Chairman , by 2014 , the club would be further renamed " Hull Tigers , " because , as he claimed , " in marketing , the shorter the name the more powerful [ it is ] , " while " Association Football Club " made the name too long . Allam stated he dislikes the word " City " , as it is too " common " and a " lousy identity " , since it is associated also with other clubs , such as Leicester City , Bristol City and Manchester City . He told David Conn of The Guardian that " in a few years many clubs will follow and change their names to something more interesting and I will have proved I am a leader , " adding that if he were the owner of Manchester City , he would change their name to " Manchester Hunter . " 
 Allam justified the intended name change as part of his plans to create " additional sources of revenue " for the club , after Hull City Council refused to sell him the stadium freehold so he could develop , as he had stated , " a sports park " on the site . The council has refused to sell in order , as they stated , " to preserve the annual Hull Fair held on the adjacent car park . " After the collapse of the negotiations , Allam stated : " I had in mind £ 30 million to spend on the infrastructure of the club , to increase the stadium by 10 @,@ 000 and to have commercial activities around the stadium — cafeterias , shops , supermarkets — to have all this to create income for the club so that in the future it can be self @-@ financing and not relying on me . " He asked rhetorically , " What if I dropped dead tomorrow ? " 
 Supporters ' groups expressed opposition to the name change . Bernard Noble , chairman of Hull City 's official supporters club said he was disappointed , although he agreed that Allam had saved the club from liquidation and that it was " his club " . Blogger Rick Skelton called the name change " a pointless exercise " and said , " Mr Allam 's assertion that the name ' Hull City ' is irrelevant and too common , is as disgusting a use of the English language as his new name for the club . " Before the first home match of the season on 24 August 2013 , a group of supporters marched in protest against the name change , and unfurled a banner that read , " Hull City AFC : a club not a brand " . Allam dismissed complaints by the fans , stating " nobody questions my decisions in my business . " 
 In a comment published on 1 December 2013 in The Independent in response to supporters ' chants and banners of " City Till ( sic ) We Die " , Allam said , " They can die as soon as they want , as long as they leave the club for the majority who just want to watch good football . " The supporters responded with chants of " We 're Hull City , we 'll die when we want " during that day 's home match against Liverpool . Manager Steve Bruce credited the controversy for creating " a fantastic atmosphere " but added , " I have got to have a conversation with him because I don 't think he quite understands what it means in terms of history and tradition . " However , Bruce also said that , because of the money Allam had invested in the club , " If he thinks Hull Tigers is his way forward then we have to respect it . " 
 On 11 December 2013 , a spokesman for Hull City announced that the club had formally applied to the Football Association to have its name changed to " Hull Tigers " from the 2014 – 15 season onwards . The FA Council , which has " absolute discretion " in deciding whether to approve the plan or not , stated the next day that it would follow a " consultation process " with stakeholders , " including the club 's supporter groups . " 
 = = = 2014 : Resistance and rejection = = = 
 Some brand and marketing experts have come out in support of the name change . Nigel Currie , director of sports marketing agency Brand Rapport , stated that " the whole process has been conducted badly with the supporters , but [ the name change ] is a pretty sound idea . " Simon Chadwick , professor of Sport Business Strategy and Marketing at the Coventry University Business School , opined that the objective of opening up lucrative new markets for shirt sales , merchandise and broadcast deals shows commercial vision and could bring benefits , but " this needs to be backed up by a proper marketing strategy and investment . " He said , " it 's no use thinking changing the name or the colour of the shirt will pay instant dividends . " David Stern , commissioner of the National Basketball Association in the United States , warned : " I would say a wise owner [ of a sports club ] would view his ownership as something of a public trust , in addition to the profit motive , and you really do want to allow the fans a little bit more input than I think is being allowed , with respect to Hull . " 
 On 17 March 2014 , the FA membership committee advised that the name change application be rejected at the FA Council meeting on 9 April . In response , the club published a statement saying the FA was " prejudiced " and criticised the committee 's consultation with the City Till We Die opposition group . The following week , the club opened a ballot of season ticket holders over the name change . Opponents of the name change criticised as " loaded " the questions , which asked respondents to choose between " Yes to Hull Tigers with the Allam family continuing to lead the club " , " No to Hull Tigers " and " I am not too concerned and will continue to support the club either way " , on the grounds that voters were not given the option to reject the name while keeping the Allam family as owners . Of 15 @,@ 033 season ticket holders , 5 @,@ 874 voted in all , with 2 @,@ 565 voting in favour of the change and 2 @,@ 517 against , while 792 chose the " not too concerned " option . 
 On 9 April 2014 , the FA Council announced its decision , carried by a 63 @.@ 5 % vote of its members , to reject the club 's application for a name change . The club responded by stating it will appeal the decision . However , since there is no appeal process with the FA and its Council , the decision is final . On 11 September 2014 , Allam confirmed an appeal has been submitted to the Court of Arbitration for Sport . He also held a news conference confirming the club had been put up for sale due to the English FA 's decision on 9 April 2014 . 
 In October 2014 , interviewed by the BBC , Allam confirmed that he would " not invest a penny more in the club " unless he is allowed to change the club 's name to Hull Tigers . In the same interview , Allam said , " I have never been a football fan . I am still not a football fan . I am a community fan . " 
 = = = 2015 : Re @-@ application = = = 
 In March 2015 , an independent panel appointed by the Court of Arbitration for Sport ruled that the decision of the Football Association Council to block the name change " cannot stand " on account of the process having been " flawed . " 
 In July 2015 , the Football Supporters Federation confirmed that a 70 / 30 decision was made in favour of Hull City A.F.C. not changing their name after an FA vote . Greg Dyke , chairman of the FA , reportedly voted yes to a change . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 For most of the club 's history , Hull have worn black and amber shirts with black shorts . These black and amber colours are where Hull 's nickname , The Tigers , originated from . However , in the club 's first match against Notts County in 1904 , white shirts were worn , with black shorts and black socks . During their first season in the League , Hull wore black and amber striped shirts and black shorts , which they continued to wear until the Second World War with the exception of the 1935 – 36 season , in which they wore sky blue shirts . Following the end of the Second World War , Hull spent another season wearing sky blue , but changed to plain amber shirts , which they wore until the early 1960s , when they swapped back to stripes . 
 During the mid @-@ 1970s and early 1980s , the strip was constantly changing between the two versions of plain shirts and stripes . During the late 1980s , red was added to the kits but its duration went no further than this . The early 1990s featured two " tiger skin " designs , which have since featured in several articles listing the " worst ever " football kits . The 1998 – 99 season introduced a kit with cross @-@ fading amber and white stripes , another experiment that proved unpopular . After the start of the 21st century , the club wore plain amber shirts until 2004 , when the club celebrated its centenary by wearing a kit similar to the design of the one worn 100 years ago . 
 In 1935 , Hull City 's first shirt badge mirrored the familiar three crowns civic emblem of Kingston @-@ upon @-@ Hull , which was displayed on the sky blue shirts worn in the 1935 – 36 season . Following that season , the team went without wearing a badge until 1947 , when the club crest depicted a tiger 's head in an orange @-@ shaded badge . This was worn up until 1957 , when it was changed to just the tiger 's head . This was worn for three years , when the shirt again featured no emblem . Then , in 1971 , the club returned to showing the tiger 's head on the shirt . This was used for four years , until the club 's initials of <unk> were shown for four years . After this , a logo with the tiger 's head with the club 's name underneath was used from 1979 until 1998 . The next logo , which remains the club 's current logo , features the tiger 's head in an amber shield with the club 's name , along with the club 's nickname , The Tigers . 
 Hull changed their crest in June 2014 , becoming one of few English league teams without the club name on their crest . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and sponsors = = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Between 1904 and 1905 , Hull City played their home games at The Boulevard . This ground was used by Hull on a contract which allowed them to use it when not used for Rugby League , at a cost of £ 100 per annum . Hull built their own ground , Anlaby Road , which was opened in 1906 . With the threat of the rerouting of the railway line through the Anlaby Road ground , the club was convinced it needed to secure its future by owning its own ground . They negotiated the deal for land between Boothferry Road and North Road in 1929 , which was financed by a £ 3 @,@ 000 loan from the FA . Due to the club 's financial difficulties , no work took place for three years , and development then stopped until 1939 . In that year a proposal to build a new multi @-@ purpose sports stadium on the site temporarily halted the club 's plans to relocate , but when this plan failed the club resolved to continue with the stalled development of the site , in anticipation of moving to the new stadium in 1940 . The outbreak of war , however , meant that the redevelopment again came to a halt , as the site was taken over by the Home Guard . 
 During the Second World War , Anlaby Road was damaged by enemy bombing , the repair cost of which was in the region of £ 1 @,@ 000 . The Cricket Club served notice to quit at the same time , and so in 1943 the tenancy was officially ended . Hull were forced to return to the Boulevard Ground from 1944 until 1945 because of the poor condition of the planned stadium at Boothferry Road . The new stadium was finally opened under the revised name of Boothferry Park on 31 August 1946 . 
 Hull City , along with one of the city 's rugby league sides , Hull F.C. , moved into the newly built KC Stadium in 2002 . The KC Stadium was named " Best Ground " at the 2006 Football League Awards . 
 = = Finances = = 
 In the club ’ s annual report for the 12 @-@ month period up to 31 July 2009 , auditors Deloitte stated that £ 4 @.@ 4 million had gone out of the club and stadium company to owner Russell Bartlett ’ s holding companies in loans , while at least £ 2 @.@ 9 million of it was used in the take @-@ over itself of the club . A further £ 560 @,@ 000 was paid , according to the audit , by the stadium company to Bartlett ’ s holding companies in " management fees , " while at least £ 1 million was owed to him personally as a " salary . " After the warning from Deloitte , Bartlett gave the club a £ 4 million loan , " which brought the money he had taken out and put in since taking over to about even . " 
 The corporate entity that owns the football club , " The Hull City Association Football Club ( Tigers ) Ltd , " is currently owned by Allamhouse Limited , a private , limited @-@ liability company with a share capital of £ 10 million ( as of October , 2012 ) , registered in Jersey . The beneficial owners of Allamhouse Limited , established in 2009 , are the Allam family . 
 On an " Opacity Score " of 100 , where zero indicates complete openness and 100 complete secrecy , the company which owns the club has been rated by Christian Aid at 87 . 
 Hull City 's corporate accounts , as of July 2013 , show a £ 25 @.@ 6 million loss , on revenues of £ 11 million , after player and management costs of " just under £ 23 million . " The club has " future tax losses " available of more than £ 45 million . Another Assam Allam company , Allam Marine , also wholly owned by Allamhouse Limited , revealed in its 2012 accounts that " utilisation of tax losses from group companies " reduced its tax liability by £ 3 @.@ 8 million over 2011 and 2012 . 
 As reported , HM Revenue and Customs are in the process of an inquiry at Hull City AFC , as part of the British tax authorities ' targeting of football clubs over " tax @-@ free payments to players under image rights ' deals and the provision of benefits in kind . For Hull City AFC , the provision for benefits in kind was reported at £ 682 @,@ 000 as of July 2011 , growing to £ 810 @,@ 000 by July 2012 . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Andy Davidson holds the record for Hull City league appearances , having played 579 matches . Garreth Roberts comes second , having played 487 matches . Chris Chilton is the club 's top goalscorer with 222 goals in all competitions ; Chilton also holds the club record for goals scored in the League ( 193 ) , FA Cup ( 16 ) and League Cup ( 10 ) . 
 The club 's widest victory margin in the league was their 11 – 1 win against Carlisle United in the Third Division North on 14 January 1939 . Their biggest win in the top flight was achieved on 28 December 2013 , with a 6 – 0 victory over Fulham . 
 Their heaviest defeat in the league was 8 – 0 against Wolverhampton Wanderers in 1911 . Their heaviest top flight defeat was a 6 – 1 defeat to Liverpool on 26 September 2009 . 
 Hull City 's record home attendance is 55 @,@ 019 , for a match against Manchester United on 26 February 1949 at Boothferry Park , with their highest attendance at their current stadium , the KC Stadium , 25 @,@ 030 set on 9 May 2010 against Liverpool for the last match of the season . 
 The highest transfer fee received for a Hull City player is £ 12 @.@ 5 million from Southampton for Shane Long . The highest transfer fee paid for a player is for Abel Hernández from Italian side Palermo , for a fee reported to be approximately £ 9 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = European record = = = 
 Notes 
 3Q : Third qualifying round 
 PO : Play @-@ off round 
 = = Players = = 
 As of 1 July 2016 . 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Player of the Year = = = 
 = = Managers = = 
 As of 5 June 2016 
 Only professional , competitive matches are counted . 
 * Caretaker manager 
 † Temporary Football Management Consultant 
 = = Current backroom staff = = 
 As of 31 December 2014 . 
 = = Related teams = = 
 = = = Reserves and Juniors = = = 
 Hull City Reserves play in the Reserve League East Division . The team plays home fixtures at the Church Road Ground , home of North Ferriby United . Hull City Juniors play in the Football League Youth Alliance , playing their home fixtures at Winterton Rangers ' home stadium . 
 = = = Hull City Women = = = 
 Hull City Women play in the Northern Combination Women 's Football League . In the 2006 – 07 season , the team finished seventh in the table with 33 points . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 According to a 2003 poll , Hull City fans consider their main rival to be Yorkshire neighbours Leeds United . 
 The club also has a traditional rivalry with Sheffield United . In 1984 , Sheffield United won promotion at Hull City 's expense with the teams level on points and goal difference and separated only by goals scored , with 33 of United 's goals scored by former Hull City striker Keith Edwards . City 's final game of the season against Burnley had been rescheduled due to bad weather and took place after their promotion rivals had finished their campaign ; Hull went into the game knowing that a three @-@ goal victory would mean promotion , but in front of a crowd which included a number of United fans could manage only a 2 – 0 win , ensuring that United went up instead . 
 Distant rivals include teams from across the Humber Estuary in Lincolnshire , Scunthorpe United and former league club Grimsby Town . With Scunthorpe 's promotion from League One , the 2007 – 08 Championship season saw the return of a " Humber Derby " . Additionally , non @-@ league Lincoln City and League Two club York City are said to consider Hull amongst their rivals . 
 The club 's main hooligan firm appears to be the Hull City Psychos , dating back to the 1960s . 
 = = Honours and achievements = = 
 Football League Championship and predecessors ( level 2 of the English football league system ) 
 Runners @-@ up : 2012 – 13 
 Play @-@ off winners : 2007 – 08 , 2015 – 16 
 Football League One and predecessors ( level 3 of the English football league system ) 
 Champions : 1965 – 66 
 Runners @-@ up : 1958 – 59 , 2004 – 05 
 Promoted : 1984 – 85 
 Football League Two and predecessors ( level 4 of the English football league system ) 
 Runners @-@ up : 1982 – 83 , 2003 – 04 
 Football League Third Division North 
 Champions : 1932 – 33 , 1948 – 49 
 FA Cup 
 Runners @-@ up : 2014 
 Semi @-@ finalists : 1930 
 Football League Cup 
 Quarter @-@ finalists : 2015 – 16 
 Football League Trophy 
 Runners @-@ up : 1984 
 Watney Cup 
 Runners @-@ up : 1974 
 = Andrew Simpson ( sailor ) = 
 Andrew James Simpson , MBE ( 17 December 1976 – 9 May 2013 ) , nicknamed " Bart " , was an English sailor . He won a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , as crew for skipper Iain Percy in the Star class representing Great Britain . Simpson was killed in the capsize of the catamaran he was crewing on 9 May 2013 , while training for the America 's Cup in San Francisco Bay . 
 = = Career = = 
 Simpson started his competitive sailing career in the Laser class , before switching to the heavier Finn class . He claimed the bronze medal at the 2003 ISAF Sailing World Championships in Cadiz in the Finn class ; his training partner Ben Ainslie took the gold , with Great Britain topping the medal table . 
 Simpson then moved to the two @-@ man Star class , partnering lifelong friend Percy ; they won a bronze medal at the 2007 ISAF Sailing World Championships in Cascais to qualify for the 2008 Summer Olympics . The pair won the gold medal in Beijing in the Star class . After winning the Olympic gold , Percy and Simpson took a break from Star sailing and were in the <unk> <unk> for the 2010 America 's Cup . In 2010 , he and Percy won the Star World Championships in Rio de Janeiro . 
 Simpson and Percy made the podium in every meeting of the ISAF Sailing World Cup in 2012 , including gold at the <unk> French World Cup regatta . They competed at the 2012 Olympic Games , again in the Star class , failing to defend their title despite being in the lead throughout the competition , but winning the silver medal . After the Star class was removed from the Olympic sailing disciplines , Simpson turned his attention to the America 's Cup , moving to San Francisco to train in March 2013 . He was known for his athleticism , and for his attention to detail in preparing the boat to obtain the best possible performance . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Simpson was killed on 9 May 2013 , during training for the 34th America 's Cup , when the Swedish Artemis Racing team yacht he was aboard capsized near Treasure Island in San Francisco Bay . The yacht , a 72 @-@ foot catamaran with a rigid , wing @-@ like sail , was turning downwind and bearing away when it flipped over and broke into pieces . Simpson was trapped underneath its hulls for approximately ten minutes , and attempts to revive him by doctors afloat and subsequently ashore were unsuccessful . The cause of the accident is unknown . An investigation was initiated by the United States Coast Guard which involved San Francisco police and the America 's Cup management . 
 In the aftermath of the accident , safety concerns were raised over the new <unk> class of yachts which had been chosen to compete in the 2013 America 's Cup . This was the second accident involving the class ; in October 2012 an Oracle Team USA <unk> also capsized in San Francisco Bay during training , causing substantial damage but no serious injuries . Christopher Clarey , writing in The New York Times , described the class as " high @-@ speed and high @-@ risk . " Stephen Park , who heads the British Olympic sailing team , commented : " they 're very high powered and the loads on them are huge ... these boats are untrodden waters for sailing . A lot of the loads and a lot of the equipment is new and there are a lot of unknowns and things being tested . " Sailing journalist Stuart Alexander , writing in The Independent , stated that the <unk> are seen by some as " death traps . " Simpson is the third sailor to be killed during training for the America 's Cup . A steward was knocked overboard and drowned in 1935 , while Spanish sailor Martin <unk> died in 1999 , after being struck on the head by a piece of equipment that became detached . In early @-@ June 2013 , it was announced that the programme of events for the 2013 America 's Cup would be significantly reduced in response to Simpson 's death . Later that month , a review committee presented 37 proposed modifications to the event to an international jury which the committee deemed necessary to be fulfilled in order for the event to go ahead altogether . 
 John Derbyshire , performance director of the Royal Yachting Association , described Simpson as " a huge inspiration to others , both within the British Sailing Team and across the nation " . Other tributes were paid by fellow sailors Ainslie and Percy , Olympian sport shooter , Peter Wilson , British Olympic Association 's director of elite performance , Clive Woodward , and British Foreign Secretary , William Hague , amongst others . His funeral was held at Sherborne Abbey in his home town of Sherborne in Dorset . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Simpson was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the 2009 New Year Honours . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in Windlesham , Surrey in 1976 , where he lived and moved to <unk> . He first learned to sail aged four or five , while visiting his grandparents at Christchurch , Dorset , and later sailed in a <unk> dinghy with his father , Keith . His talent brought him to the notice of Jim Saltonstall , who coached him in the Royal Yachting Association youth squad . Simpson attended Pangbourne College , a mixed boarding school in Berkshire , which originated as a nautical college , coaching students in sailing , seamanship and navigation . He studied at University College London , gaining a degree in economics . In addition to sailing , he was a keen footballer . 
 Affectionately known as " Bart " , after the character Bart Simpson , from the American animated series of the same surname . Simpson was described as having " steely determination and focus " but being " diplomatic , softly spoken " . He is survived by his wife Leah and their two sons , Freddie and Hamish . 
 = The Revenge ( Seinfeld ) = 
 " The Revenge " is the seventh episode of the second season of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld , and the show 's 12th episode overall . The story revolves around George Costanza 's ( Jason Alexander ) plot to exact revenge on his boss , with his friend Elaine Benes ' ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) help , after he quits his job at Rick Barr Properties and is refused re @-@ employment . Meanwhile , Jerry ( Jerry Seinfeld ) and his neighbor Kramer ( Michael Richards ) get even with a laundromat owner — who they believe has stolen money from Jerry — by pouring cement into one of his washing machines . 
 Written by series co @-@ creator Larry David and directed by Tom Cherones , the episode premiered in the United States on NBC on April 18 , 1991 . Largely based on David 's own experiences , " The Revenge " was the first episode he wrote without Seinfeld 's collaboration . The episode also contained the first mention of Newman , as a suicidal man who lives in Jerry and Kramer 's apartment building , who would later become a popular recurring character . As the episode is the first in which Kramer does physical comedy , some cast and crew members consider it a turning point for the show . When first broadcast in the United States , the episode gained a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 4 / 24 and was met with positive response from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode relates three parallel plots , in intertwining scenes . The first plot concerns George being banned from the executive toilet . Because of this he quits his job , but immediately regrets the decision . He discusses job opportunities with Jerry , but is unable to think of an occupation that would suit him . Jerry suggests that George could try to go back to work and pretend he never quit . George takes this advice , but his former boss , Rick Levitan ( Fred Applegate ) , refuses to let him stay and insults him . As revenge , George decides to slip a Mickey Finn into his drink during an office party , and enlists Elaine Benes to help him . At the party , Elaine distracts Levitan while George puts the mickey in his drink . When Levitan notices George , however , he decides he was unreasonable and tells George he can have his job back . George attempts to intercept the drink , but after Levitan welcomes him back with a toast sprinkled with insults at George 's expense , he changes his mind . In the following scene we see George once again brainstorming job opportunity ideas , the subtext being that his boss discovered the spiking of his drink , connected it to George , and has fired him once again . 
 The second plot of the episode revolves around Jerry ; when he prepares to go to the laundromat , Kramer asks him to take his laundry with him . Jerry agrees after some reluctance , insisting that their clothes remain segregated . After retrieving the laundry the following day and returning Kramer 's portion , Jerry remembers that he had hidden a large sum of money in his laundry bag , but is unable to find it . The owner of the laundromat ( John <unk> ) , tells him that he did not see the money , but also points out that he is not responsible for valuables . Kramer and Jerry both assume Vic stole the money and Kramer comes up with a plan to put cement mix in one of Vic 's washing machines as revenge . Once they have acted out the plan , Kramer discovers that he had the money all along ; and it turns out to be just enough to cover the damage to the washing machine . 
 In a subplot , Kramer tells Jerry about his suicidal friend Newman who repeatedly threatens to kill himself by jumping off the apartment building . When he does jump , he jumps from the second floor and survives , much to Kramer 's amusement . At the end of the episode , Newman threatens to jump again , Kramer asks Newman if he wants to go shoot some pool with him , but Newman declines , stating that he has plans to go to the movies . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Revenge " was written by series co @-@ creator Larry David and directed by Tom Cherones . All prior Seinfeld episodes were co @-@ written by Seinfeld and David . The Revenge is the first episode written by David alone , though Seinfeld did proofread the script and would continue to do so for all scripts up to the eighth season . George 's storyline in the episode is based on David 's own experiences while a writer at Saturday Night Live . David had quit SNL halfway through the 1984 @-@ 1985 television season , but felt he had made a mistake once he reached his home . His neighbor Kenny Kramer , who later served as the main inspiration for Kramer , suggested David return to work the following day and act as if nothing had happened . Unlike George Costanza , the ploy succeeded for David , who remained with SNL 's writing staff until the end of that season . George 's reason for quitting was inspired by Seinfeld writer Larry Charles ' use of the private restroom in Seinfeld and David 's office instead of the public one . The Newman sub plot was inspired by one of David 's neighbors , who once jumped from the second floor of the apartment building in which they both lived . The unseen character Mr. <unk> , who is mentioned by Kramer , was named after Pete <unk> , a member of the production crew . 
 " The Revenge " was first read by the cast of the show on February 13 , 1991 and was filmed in front of a live audience on February 20 , 1991 . Filming of the episode had been delayed two days due to President 's Day . Both Alexander and Louis @-@ Dreyfus praised the scene in which Jerry and George discuss the types of employment George could apply for after he quit his job . Louis @-@ Dreyfus stated she was jealous that she was not in the scene . A number of scenes in the episode were removed prior to broadcast , such as one in which George and Kramer meet in the hallway and Kramer informs George that Jerry has gone to the laundromat . The writers decided that George could just say Kramer told him Jerry was at the laundromat and , upon that addition , the scene was cut . Initially , during Jerry and George 's conversation about jobs , George mentions Regis Philbin , when they discuss George being a talk show host . Additional dialogue between George and Jerry at the laundromat was also removed . Because the episode " The Stranded " did not air until mid season three , the few references " The Revenge " contained to the episode , were cut . The Newman subplot was significantly reduced ; the character initially appeared in one scene , but it was never filmed . In that scene , he would have explained to Jerry and Kramer that he jumped from the roof , but an awning broke his fall , though Jerry and Kramer would remain skeptical . The episode also involved the second appearance of Harold the building superintendent , who had previously appeared in " The Apartment " . Harold would inform the main characters that Newman made up the story about the awning breaking his fall , though , with the reduction of the Newman subplot , the scene was removed . 
 The cast considered the episode a turning point for the show . As a method actor , Richards insisted on dumping a real bag of cement into the washing machine used on set , so that the proper physical reactions to such a heavy object would be present . Richards stated that at that point , " rather than talking funny , I wanted to do funny " . During the first take of the scene , Richards fell through a door , and it had to be filmed again . " The Revenge " is also the first episode in which the George and Elaine characters collaborate . Louis @-@ Dreyfus later stated that she and Alexander immediately had " some sort of shorthand with one another comedically , and [ she ] really relished that . " 
 Although Newman 's appearance was ultimately cut from the episode , auditions were held for the role ; Tim Russ , who would go on to star in Star Trek : Voyager , auditioned , as did William Thomas , Jr . , known for his appearance on The Cosby Show , who was cast in the part . Newman does share a brief dialogue with Kramer at the end of the episode , David recorded the lines , though he was not credited . The show 's writing staff did not intend to have the character return in any later seasons , but because the idea of having actor Wayne Knight as a neighbor appealed to them , they re @-@ cast Knight in the role of Newman for the season 3 episode " The Suicide " . Afterwards , Knight re @-@ recorded Newman 's lines for the syndicated version of this episode to establish better continuity . Both Knight 's and David 's dialogue were included on the Seinfeld : Volume 1 DVD boxset . Additionally , Fred Applegate guest @-@ starred as George 's boss and John <unk> portrayed Vic , the laundromat owner . Deck McKenzie , who worked as Seinfeld 's stand @-@ in , portrayed George 's colleague Bill . Teri Austin portrayed Ava , a co @-@ worker of George 's ; she would appear again later in " The Stranded " , which was filmed as part of season two , but aired as part of season three . Patrika <unk> , who played George 's co @-@ worker Glenda , would reappear later in the season five episode " The <unk> Accountant " as a woman Newman flirts with . 
 = = Reception = = 
 First broadcast in the United States on NBC on April 18 , 1991 , Nielsen Media Research estimated that the episode gained a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 4 and an audience share of 24 . This means that 14 @.@ 4 % of American households watched the episode , and that 24 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Seinfeld was the 15th most @-@ watched program of the week it was broadcast in , and the sixth most @-@ watched program broadcast on NBC . Entertainment Weekly reviewers Mike Flaherty and Mary Kaye Schilling gave the episode a mixed review and graded it with a C , stating " Although neat for its parallel plotting and George 's hilariously clueless career chats with Jerry , ' The Revenge ' is not so sweet " . IGN critic Andy Patrizio considered " The Revenge " one of his personal favorites of season two . The scene in which Kramer struggles to put cement in one of the washing machines has gained positive responses from critics . Margery Eagan of The Boston Globe cited the scene as a perfect example of Kramer 's personality . Neal Justin of the Minneapolis Star @-@ Tribune also considers the scene to be one of the show 's " classic moments " . Daily News of Los Angeles critic Jody Leader also praised Seinfeld for how he distracted Vic in the scene . 
 = Iowa @-@ class battleship = 
 The Iowa @-@ class battleships were a class of fast battleships ordered by the United States Navy in 1939 and 1940 to escort the Fast Carrier Task Forces that would operate in the Pacific Theater of World War II . Four were completed ; two more were laid down but canceled at war 's end and scrapped . Like other third @-@ generation American battleships , the Iowa class followed the design pattern set forth in the preceding North Carolina @-@ class and South Dakota @-@ class battleships , which emphasized speed in addition to secondary and anti @-@ aircraft batteries . 
 Between the mid @-@ 1940s and the early 1990s , the Iowa @-@ class battleships fought in four major U.S. wars . In World War II , they defended aircraft carriers and shelled Japanese positions . During the Korean War , the battleships provided seaborne artillery support for United Nations forces fighting North Korea , and in 1968 , New Jersey shelled Viet Cong and Vietnam People 's Army forces in the Vietnam War . All four were reactivated and armed with missiles during the 1980s as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy initiative ; during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 , Missouri and Wisconsin fired missiles and 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns at Iraqi targets . 
 Costly to maintain , the battleships were decommissioned during the post @-@ Cold War draw down in the early 1990s . All four were initially removed from the Naval Vessel Register ; however , the United States Congress compelled the Navy to reinstate two of them on the grounds that existing naval gunfire support would be inadequate for amphibious operations . This resulted in a lengthy debate over whether battleships should have a role in the modern navy . Ultimately , all four ships were stricken from the Naval Vessel Register and released for donation to non @-@ profit organizations . With the transfer of Iowa in 2012 , all four are part of various non @-@ profit maritime museums across the U.S. 
 = = Background = = 
 Work on what would eventually become the Iowa @-@ class battleships began on the first study in early 1938 at the direction of Admiral Thomas C. Hart , head of the General Board . It was an expanded South Dakota , carrying either twelve 16 @-@ inch / 45 caliber Mark 6 guns or nine 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) guns — the latter armament being dropped after the 31 March agreement — with more armor and a power plant large enough to drive the larger ship through the water at the same speed as the South Dakotas , 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . These studies had no further impact on the design of the Iowa class , but development of this design continued and eventually evolved into the design for the Montana class . 
 Another design , pursued by the Design Division section of the Bureau of Construction and Repair , was a " cruiser @-@ killer " . Beginning on 17 January 1938 under Captain A. J. Chantry , the group drew up plans for ships with twelve 16 @-@ inch and twenty 5 @-@ inch guns , Panamax capability but otherwise unlimited displacement , a top speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) and a range of 20 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 37 @,@ 000 km ; 23 @,@ 000 mi ) when traveling at the more economical speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Their plan fulfilled these requirements with a ship of 50 @,@ 940 long tons ( 51 @,@ 760 t ) , but Chantry believed that more could be done if the ship were to be this large ; with a displacement greater than that of most battleships , its armor would only have protected it against the 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) weapons carried by heavy cruisers . 
 Three improved plans — " A " , " B " , and " C " — were designed at the end of January . An increase in draft , vast additions to the armor , and the substitution of twelve 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns in the secondary battery was common between the three designs . " A " was the largest , at 59 @,@ 060 long tons ( 60 @,@ 010 t ) , and was the only one to still carry the twelve 16 @-@ inch guns in four triple turrets ( 3 @-@ gun turrets according to U.S. Navy ) . It required 277 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( shp ) to make 32 @.@ 5 knots ( 60 @.@ 2 km / h ; 37 @.@ 4 mph ) . " B " was the smallest at 52 @,@ 707 long tons ( 53 @,@ 553 t ) ; like " A " it had a top speed of 32 @.@ 5 knots , but " B " only required 225 @,@ 000 shp to make this speed . It also carried only nine 16 @-@ inch guns , in three triple turrets . " C " was similar but it added 75 @,@ 000 shp ( for a total of 300 @,@ 000 shp ) , to make the original requirement of 35 knots . The weight required for this and a longer belt — 512 feet ( 156 m ) , compared with 496 feet ( 151 m ) for " B " — meant that the ship was 55 @,@ 771 long tons ( 56 @,@ 666 t ) . 
 In March 1938 , the General Board followed the recommendations of the Battleship Design Advisory Board , which was composed of the naval architect William Francis Gibbs , William <unk> ( then president of New York Shipbuilding ) , John <unk> , Joseph W. Powell , and the long @-@ retired Admiral and former Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance Joseph Strauss . The board requested an entirely new design study , focusing on increasing the size of the 35 @,@ 000 ton South Dakota class . The first plans made for this indicated that 30 knots ( 35 mph ; 56 km / h ) was possible on a displacement of about 37 @,@ 600 long tons ( 38 @,@ 200 t ) . 33 knots ( 38 mph ; 61 km / h ) could be bought with 220 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower and a displacement of around 39 @,@ 230 long tons ( 39 @,@ 860 t ) , which was well below the Second London Naval Treaty 's maximum limit of 45 @,@ 000 long tons ( 46 @,@ 000 t ) . 
 These designs were able to convince the General Board that a reasonably well @-@ designed and balanced 33 @-@ knot ( 61 km / h ) battleship was possible within the terms of the " escalator clause " . However , further studies revealed major problems with the estimates . The speed of the ships meant that more freeboard would be needed both fore and amidships , the latter requiring an additional foot of armored freeboard . Along with this came the associated weight in supporting these new strains : the structure of the ship had to be reinforced and the power plant enlarged to avoid a drop in speed . In all , about 2 @,@ 400 long tons ( 2 @,@ 400 t ) had to be added , and the large margin the navy designers had previously thought they had — roughly 5 @,@ 000 long tons ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) — was suddenly vanishing . 
 With the additional displacement , the General Board was incredulous that a tonnage increase of 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) would only allow the addition of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) s over the South Dakotas . Rather than retaining the 16 " / 45 caliber Mark 6 gun used in the South Dakotas , they ordered that future studies would have to include the more powerful ( but heavier ) 16 " / 50 caliber Mark 2 guns left over from the canceled Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers and South Dakota @-@ class battleships of the early 1920s . It also allowed the draft of the ships to be increased , meaning that the ships could be shortened ( lowering weight ) and the power reduced ( since a narrower beam reduces drag ) . 
 The 50 @-@ caliber gun weighed some 400 long tons ( 410 t ) more than the 45 caliber did ; the barbette size also had to be increased so the total weight gain was about 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) , putting the ship at a total of 46 @,@ 551 long tons ( 47 @,@ 298 t ) — well over the 45 @,@ 000 long ton limit . An apparent savior appeared in a Bureau of Ordnance preliminary design for a turret that could carry the 50 caliber guns in a smaller barbette . This breakthrough was shown to the General Board as part of a series of designs on 2 June 1938 . 
 However , the Bureau of Ordnance continued working on a larger barbette design , while the Bureau of Construction and Repair utilized the smaller barbettes in the final planning of the new battleships . As the bureaus were independent of one another , they did not realize that the two plans could not go together until November 1938 , when the design was in the final stages of refinement . By this time , the ships could not use the larger barbette , as it would require massive alterations to the design and would result in substantial weight penalties . The General Board was astounded ; one member asked the head of the Bureau of Ordnance if it had occurred to him that Construction and Repair would have wanted to know what turret his subordinates were working on " as a matter of common sense " . A complete scrapping of plans was only avoided when designers within the Bureau of Ordnance were able to design a new 50 @-@ caliber gun , the Mark 7 , that was both lighter and smaller in outside diameter ; this allowed it to be placed in a turret that would fit in the smaller barbette . The redesigned 3 @-@ gun turret , equipped as it was with the Mark 7 naval gun , provided an overall weight saving of nearly 850 long tons ( 860 t ) to the overall design of the Iowa class . 
 In May 1938 the United States Congress passed the Second Vinson Act which " mandated a 20 % increase in strength of the United States Navy " . The act was sponsored by Carl Vinson , a Democratic Congressman from Georgia who was Chairman of the House Naval Affairs and Armed Services Committee . The Second Vinson Act updated the provisions of the Vinson @-@ Trammell Act of 1934 and the Naval Act ( 1936 ) , which had " authorized the construction of the first American battleships in 17 years " , based on the provisions of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 ; this act provided the funding to build the Iowa class . Each ship cost approximately US $ 100 million . 
 As 1938 drew to a close the design of the Iowas was nearly complete , but it would continuously evolve as the battleships were under construction . These revisions included changing the design of the foremast , replacing the original 1 @.@ 1 " / 75 @-@ caliber guns that were to be used for anti @-@ aircraft work with 20 mm and 40 mm guns , and moving the combat information center into the armored hull . Additionally , in November 1939 the New York Navy Yard greatly modified the internal subdivision of the machinery rooms , as tests had shown the underwater protection in these rooms to be inadequate . The result of this was clearly beneficial : " The prospective effect of flooding was roughly halved and the number of uptakes and hence of openings in the third deck greatly reduced . " Although the changes meant extra weight and added 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) to the beam , this was no longer a major issue ; the United Kingdom and France had renounced the Second London Naval Treaty soon after the beginning of the Second World War . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Like all battleships , the Iowas carried heavy armor protection against shellfire and bombs with significant underwater protection against torpedoes . The Iowas ' armor scheme was modeled on that of the preceding South Dakota class , and designed to give a zone of immunity against fire from 16 @-@ inch / 45 @-@ caliber guns between 18 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 and 27 @,@ 000 m ) away . The magazines and engine rooms were protected by an armored belt 12 @.@ 2 inches ( 310 mm ) thick , which sloped to give an effective vertical thickness of 13 @.@ 5 inches ( 340 mm ) . Their armor was not sufficient to protect against guns equivalent to their own 16 @-@ inch / 50 @-@ caliber guns ; increasing the armor would have increased weight and reduced speed . Missouri and Wisconsin incorporated the most significant change in armor from the South Dakota class : the increase from 11 @.@ 3 inches ( 290 mm ) to 14 @.@ 5 inches ( 370 mm ) of the vertical armor on the forward armored bulkhead , the conning tower , and the turret barbettes . The extra armor provided protection from fire directly ahead , which was considered more likely given the high speed of the Iowa class . The installation of armor on the Iowa @-@ class battleships also differed from those of earlier battleships in that the armor was installed while the ships were still " on the way " rather than after the ships had been launched . 
 The Iowa @-@ class torpedo defense was virtually the same as the South Dakota 's . Each side of the ship was protected below the waterline by two tanks mounted outside the belt armor , and separated by a bulkhead . These tanks were initially planned to be empty , but in practice were filled with water or fuel oil . The armored belt tapered to a thickness of 4 inches ( 100 mm ) below the waterline . Behind the armored belt there was a void , and then another bulkhead . The outer hull was intended to detonate a torpedo , with the outer two compartments absorbing the shock and with any splinters or debris being stopped by the armored belt and the empty compartment behind it . In 1939 the Navy discovered that this system was considerably less effective than earlier torpedo defense systems , but by then it was too late to change the design . Based on hard @-@ learned lessons in the Pacific theater concerns were also raised over the ability of the armor on these battleships to withstand the effects of aerial bombing , but at the time these concerns surfaced nothing could be done to adequately address the problem . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The primary guns used on these battleships are the nine 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) / 50 @-@ caliber Mark 7 naval guns , a compromise design developed to fit inside the barbettes . These guns fire explosive – and armor @-@ piercing shells , and can fire a 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) shell approximately 23 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 40 km ) . The guns are housed in three 3 @-@ gun turrets : two forward and one aft , in a configuration known as " 2 @-@ A @-@ 1 " . The guns are 66 feet ( 20 m ) long ( 50 times their 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) bore , or 50 calibers from breechface to muzzle ) . About 43 feet ( 13 m ) protrudes from the gun house . Each gun weighs about 239 @,@ 000 pounds ( 108 @,@ 000 kg ) without the breech , or 267 @,@ 900 pounds ( 121 @,@ 500 kg ) with the breech . They fire projectiles weighing from 1 @,@ 900 to 2 @,@ 700 pounds ( 850 to 1 @,@ 200 kg ) at a maximum speed of 2 @,@ 960 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) up to 20 miles ( 32 km ) . At maximum range , the projectile spends almost 1 ½ minutes in flight . The maximum firing rate for each gun is two rounds per minute . 
 Each gun rests within an armored turret , but only the top of the turret protrudes above the main deck . The turret extends either four decks ( Turrets 1 and 3 ) or five decks ( Turret 2 ) down . The lower spaces contain rooms for handling the projectiles and storing the powder bags used to fire them . Each turret required a crew of between 85 and 110 men to operate . The original cost for each turret was US $ 1 @.@ 4 million , but this figure does not take into account the cost of the guns themselves . The turrets are " three @-@ gun " , not " triple " , because each barrel can be elevated independently ; they can also be fired independently . The ship could fire any combination of its guns , including a broadside of all nine . 
 The large @-@ caliber guns were designed to fire two different conventional 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) shells : the armor @-@ piercing Mk . 8 round for anti @-@ ship and anti @-@ structure work , and the Mk . 13 high @-@ explosive round designed for use against unarmored targets and shore bombardment . Interestingly , when firing the same conventional shell , the 16 " / 45 caliber Mark 6 gun used by the fast battleships of the North Carolina and South Dakota classes had a slight advantage over the 16 " / 50 caliber Mark 7 gun when hitting deck armor — a shell from a 45 cal gun would be slower , meaning that it would have a steeper trajectory as it descended . At 35 @,@ 000 yards ( 20 mi ; 32 km ) , a shell from a 45 cal would strike a ship at an angle of 45 @.@ 2 degrees , as opposed to 36 degrees with the 50 cal . The Mark 7 had a greater maximum range over the Mark 6 : 23 @.@ 64 miles ( 38 @.@ 04 km ) vs 22 @.@ 829 miles ( 36 @.@ 740 km ) . 
 In the 1950s , the <unk> , an adaptation of the W19 nuclear artillery shell was developed specifically for the 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns . The shell had an estimated yield of 15 to 20 kilotons of TNT ( 63 @,@ 000 to 84 @,@ 000 GJ ) , and its introduction made the Iowa @-@ class battleship 's 16 in guns the world 's largest nuclear artillery , and made these four battleships the only U.S. Navy ships ever to have nuclear shells for naval guns . Although developed for exclusive use by the battleship 's guns it is not known if any of the Iowa @-@ class battleships actually carried these shells while in active service due to the United States Navy 's policy of refusing to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weaponry aboard its ships . In 1991 the United States unilaterally withdrew all of its nuclear artillery shells from service , and dismantling of the U.S. nuclear artillery inventory is said to have been completed in 2004 . 
 The Iowas carried ten twin enclosed base ring mounts supporting 5 in / 38 caliber Mark 28 Mod 0 guns . Originally designed to be mounted upon destroyers built in the 1930s , these guns were so successful that they were added to many American ships during the Second World War , including every major ship type and many smaller warships constructed between 1934 and 1945 . They were considered to be " highly reliable , robust and accurate " by the Navy 's Bureau of Ordnance . 
 Each 5 in / 38 gun weighed almost 4 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 800 kg ) without the breech ; the entire mount weighed 156 @,@ 295 pounds ( 70 @,@ 894 kg ) . It was 223 @.@ 8 inches ( 5 @,@ 680 mm ) long overall , had a bore length of 190 inches ( 4 @,@ 800 mm ) and a rifling length of 157 @.@ 2 inches ( 3 @,@ 990 mm ) . The gun could fire shells at about 2 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 762 – 792 m / s ) ; about 4 @,@ 600 could be fired before the barrel needed to be replaced . Minimum and maximum elevations were − 15 and 85 degrees respectively . The guns ' elevation could be raised or lowered at about 15 degrees per second . The mounts closest to the bow and stern could aim from − 150 to 150 degrees ; the others were restricted to − 80 to 80 degrees . They could be turned at about 25 degrees per second . 
 The 5 in / 38 cannon functioned as a dual purpose gun ; that is , it was able to fire at both surface and air targets with a reasonable degree of success . However , this did not mean that it possessed inferior anti @-@ air abilities . As proven during 1941 gunnery tests conducted aboard North Carolina the gun could consistently shoot down aircraft flying at 12 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 5 mi ; 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 0 km ) , twice the effective range of the earlier single purpose 5 " / 25 caliber anti @-@ air gun . As Japanese airplanes became faster , the gun lost some of its effectiveness in the anti @-@ aircraft role ; however , toward the end of the war its usefulness as an anti @-@ aircraft weapon increased again because of an upgrade to the Mark 37 Fire Control System and proximity @-@ fused shells . 
 The 5 in / 38 gun would remain on the battleships for the ships ' entire service life ; however , the total number of guns and gun mounts was reduced from 20 guns in ten mounts to 12 guns in 6 mounts during the 1980s ' modernization of the four Iowas . The removal of four of the gun mounts was required for the battleships to be outfitted with the armored box launchers needed to carry and fire Tomahawk missiles . At the time of the 1991 Persian Gulf War , these guns had been largely relegated to littoral defense for the battleships . Since each battleship carried a small detachment of Marines aboard , the Marines would man one of the 5 in gun mounts . 
 At the time of their commissioning , all four of the Iowa @-@ class battleships were equipped with 20 quad 40 mm mounts and 49 single 20 mm mounts . 
 The Oerlikon 20 mm anti @-@ aircraft gun , one of the most heavily produced anti @-@ aircraft guns of the Second World War , entered service in 1941 and replaced the 0 @.@ 50 " / 90 ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning MG on a one @-@ for @-@ one basis . Between December 1941 and September 1944 , 32 % of all Japanese aircraft downed were credited to this weapon , with the high point being 48 @.@ 3 % for the second half of 1942 ; however , the 20 mm guns were found to be ineffective against the Japanese Kamikaze attacks used during the latter half of World War II and were subsequently phased out in favor of the heavier 40 mm Bofors AA guns . 
 When the Iowa @-@ class battleships were commissioned in 1943 and 1944 they carried twenty quad Bofors 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft gun mounts , which they used for defense against enemy aircraft . These heavy guns were also employed in the protection of allied aircraft carriers operating in the Pacific Theater of World War II , and accounted for roughly half of all Japanese aircraft shot down between 1 October 1944 and 1 February 1945 . Although successful in this role , the guns were stripped from the battleships — initially from New Jersey when reactivated in 1968 and later from Iowa , Missouri , and Wisconsin when they were reactivated for service in the 1980s . 
 = = = Propulsion and size = = = 
 When the Second Vinson Act was passed by the United States Congress in 1938 , the U.S. Navy moved quickly to develop a 45 @,@ 000 @-@ ton battleship that would pass through the 110 ft ( 34 m ) wide Panama Canal . Drawing on a 1935 empirical formula for predicting a ship 's maximum speed based on scale @-@ model studies in flumes of various hull forms and propellers and a newly developed empirical theorem that related waterline length to maximum beam , the Navy drafted plans for a battleship class with a maximum beam of 108 ft ( 33 m ) which , when multiplied by 7 @.@ 96 , produced a waterline length of 860 ft ( 262 m ) — permitting a maximum speed of 34 @.@ 9 knots ( 64 @.@ 6 km / h ) . The Navy also called for the class to have a lengthened forecastle and amidship , which would increase speed , and a bulbous bow . The Iowas were to be outfitted with four screws : the outer pair consisting of two four @-@ bladed propellers roughly 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter and the inboard screws that have five blades and are roughly 17 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 @.@ 3 m ) in diameter . The propeller designs were adopted after earlier testing had determined that propeller cavitation caused a drop in efficiency at speeds over 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) . The engineering plant on Iowa and Missouri consisted of four General Electric cross @-@ compound steam turbine engines , each driving a single shaft . The equivalent machinery on New Jersey and Wisconsin was provided by Westinghouse . 
 Four fire rooms contained eight Babcock & Wilcox M @-@ Type boilers operating at 600 pounds per square inch ( 4 @,@ 137 kPa ; 42 kgf / cm2 ) with a maximum superheater outlet temperature of 875 ° F ( 468 ° C ) . Steam was normally transmitted to four engine rooms numbered 1 to 4 . Each engine room was aft of its associated fire room . In normal steaming four boilers were operated ; this was sufficient to power the ships at speeds up to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . For higher speeds , all eight boilers were lit . 
 Electricity drove many systems aboard ship , including rotating the turrets and elevating the guns . Each of the four engine rooms had a pair of Ship 's Service Turbine Generators ( <unk> ) manufactured by Westinghouse . Each <unk> generated 1 @.@ 25 MW for a total of 10 MW of electricity . The <unk> were powered by steam from the same boilers that fed the engines . To allow battle @-@ damaged electrical circuits to be repaired or bypassed , the lower decks of the ship had a Casualty Power System whose large three @-@ wire cables and wall outlets ( called " biscuits " ) could be used to re @-@ route power . 
 = = Aircraft ( 1943 – 1969 ) = = 
 When they were commissioned during World War II , the Iowa @-@ class battleships came equipped with two aircraft catapults designed to launch floatplanes . Initially , the Iowas carried the Vought OS2U Kingfisher and Curtiss SC Seahawk , both of which were employed to spot for the battleship 's main gun batteries — and , in a secondary capacity , perform search @-@ and @-@ rescue missions . 
 By the time of the Korean War , helicopters had replaced floatplanes and the Sikorsky HO3S @-@ 1 helicopter was employed . In time , the newer UH @-@ 1 Iroquois , SH @-@ 2 <unk> , CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight , CH @-@ 53 Sea Stallion and the SH @-@ <unk> Seahawk <unk> III would serve aboard the battleships . In addition , New Jersey made use of the <unk> <unk> @-@ 50 DASH drone for her Vietnam war deployment in 1968 – 1969 . 
 = = Conversion proposals = = 
 The Iowa class were the only battleships with the speed required for post @-@ war operations based around fast aircraft carrier task forces . There were a number of proposals in the early Cold War to convert the class to take into account changes in technology and doctrine . These included plans to equip the class with nuclear missiles , add aircraft capability and — in the case of Illinois and Kentucky — a proposal to rebuild both as aircraft carriers instead of battleships . 
 Initially , the Iowa class was to consist of only four battleships : Iowa , New Jersey , Missouri , and Wisconsin . However , changing priorities during World War II resulted in the battleships Montana and Ohio being reordered as Illinois and Kentucky respectively . At the time these two battleships were to be built a proposal was put forth to have them constructed as aircraft carriers rather than fast battleships . The plan called for the ships to be rebuilt to include a flight deck and an armament suite similar to that placed aboard the Essex @-@ class aircraft carriers that were at the time under construction in the United States . Ultimately , nothing came of the design proposal to rebuild these two ships as aircraft carriers and they were cleared for construction as fast battleships to conform to the Iowa @-@ class design , though they differed from the earlier four that were built . Eventually , the Cleveland @-@ class light cruisers were selected for the aircraft @-@ carrier conversion . Nine of these light cruisers would be rebuilt as Independence @-@ class light aircraft carriers . 
 After the surrender of the Empire of Japan , construction on Illinois and Kentucky stopped . Illinois was eventually scrapped , but Kentucky 's construction had advanced enough that several plans were proposed to complete Kentucky as a guided missile battleship ( BBG ) by removing the aft turret and installing a missile system . A similar conversion had already been performed on the battleship Mississippi ( BB @-@ 41 / AG @-@ 128 ) to test the RIM @-@ 2 Terrier missile after World War II . One such proposal came from Rear Admiral W. K. Mendenhall , Chairman of the Ship [ s ] Characteristics Board ( SCB ) ; <unk> proposed a plan that called for $ 15 – $ 30 million to be spent to allow Kentucky to be completed as a guided @-@ missile battleship ( BBG ) carrying eight SSM @-@ N @-@ 8 Regulus II guided missiles with a range of 1 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) . He also suggested Terrier or RIM @-@ 8 Talos launchers to supplement the AA guns and proposed nuclear ( instead of conventional ) shells for the 16 @-@ inch guns . This never materialized , and Kentucky was ultimately sold for scrap in 1958 , although her bow was used to repair her sister Wisconsin after a collision . 
 In 1954 the Long Range Objectives Group of the United States Navy suggested converting the Iowa @-@ class ships to <unk> . In 1958 the Bureau of Ships offered a proposal based on this idea . This replaced the 5 @-@ inch and 16 @-@ inch gun batteries with " two Talos twin missile systems , two RIM @-@ 24 Tartar twin missile systems , an RUR @-@ 5 ASROC antisubmarine missile launcher , and a Regulus II installation with four missiles " , as well as flagship facilities , sonar , helicopters , and fire @-@ control systems for the Talos and Tartar missiles . In addition to these upgrades , 8 @,@ 600 additional [ long ] tons of fuel oil was also suggested to serve in part as ballast for the battleships and for use in refueling destroyers and cruisers . Due to the estimated cost of the overhaul ( $ 178 – $ 193 million ) this proposal was rejected as too expensive ; instead , the SCB suggested a design with one Talos , one Tartar , one ASROC and two Regulus launchers and changes to the superstructure , at a cost of up to $ 85 million . This design was later revised to accommodate the Polaris Fleet Ballistic Missile , which in turn resulted in a study of two schemes by the SCB . In the end , none of these proposed conversions for the battleships were ever authorized . Interest in converting the Iowa @-@ class battleships into guided @-@ missile battleships began to deteriorate in 1960 , because the hulls were considered too old and the conversion costs too high . Nonetheless , additional conversion proposals — including one to install the AN / <unk> @-@ 1 Aegis Combat System radar on the battleships — were suggested in 1962 , 1974 and 1977 but as before , these proposals failed to gain the needed authorization . This was due , in part , to the fact that sensitive electronics within 200 ft of any 16 @-@ inch gun muzzle were likely to be damaged . 
 = = 1980s refit = = 
 In 1980 , Ronald Reagan was elected President , with a plan to rebuild the U.S. military as a counter to the increasing military power of the Soviet Union as one of his benchmark commitments . At the time , the Soviet Navy was in the process of commissioning a class of missile cruiser the like of which had not been seen for decades – the Kirov class was the largest type of surface warship ( other than aircraft carriers or amphibious assault vessels ) built since World War II , and the Americans had not envisioned building anything like it . As a consequence , as part of Reagan 's 600 @-@ ship Navy policy and to act as a counter to the Kirov class , the U.S. Navy began the process of reactivating the four Iowa @-@ class units and modernizing them for service in the 1980s . 
 During this reactivation , the Navy considered several concepts entailing removal of the aft 16 @-@ inch turret . Martin Marietta proposed to replace the turret with servicing facilities for 12 AV @-@ 8B Harrier STOVL <unk> . Charles Myers proposed replacement of the turret with vertical launch systems for missiles and a flight deck for Marine helicopters . Naval Institute Proceedings proposed a canted flight deck ( complete with a steam catapult ) and arrestor wires to operate F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighters . Plans for these conversions were dropped in 1984 , but each battleship was overhauled to burn navy distillate fuel and modernized to carry electronic warfare suites , close @-@ in weapon systems ( CIWS ) for self @-@ defense , and missiles . It was determined that the total cost of reactivating and modernising one battleship was roughly the same as the cost of building a new Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigate . 
 After recommissioning , the modernized battleships operated as centerpieces of their own battle group ( termed as a Battleship Battle Group or Surface Action Group ) , consisting of one Ticonderoga @-@ class cruiser , one Kidd @-@ class destroyer or Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyer , one Spruance @-@ class destroyer , three Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigates and one support ship , such as a fleet oiler . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 During their modernization in the 1980s each Iowa @-@ class battleship was equipped with four of the US Navy 's Phalanx CIWS mounts , two of which sat just behind the bridge and two which were next to the after ship 's funnel . Iowa , New Jersey , and Missouri were equipped with the Block 0 version of the Phalanx , while Wisconsin received the first operational Block 1 version in 1988 . The Phalanx system is intended to serve as a last line of defense against enemy missiles and aircraft , and when activated can engage a target with a 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) M61 Vulcan 6 @-@ barreled Gatling cannon at a distance of approximately 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) . 
 As part of their modernization in the 1980s , each of the Iowa @-@ class battleships received a complement of Armored Box Launchers and " shock hardened " Mk . 141 quad cell launchers . The former was used by the battleships to carry and fire the BGM @-@ 109 Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles ( TLAMs ) for use against enemy targets on land , while the latter system enabled the ships to carry a complement of RGM @-@ 84 Harpoon anti @-@ ship missiles for use against enemy ships . With an estimated range of 675 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 250 km ; 777 mi ) to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) for the Tomahawk missile and 64 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 119 @.@ 5 km ; 74 @.@ 2 mi ) to 85 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 158 @.@ 3 km ; 98 @.@ 4 mi ) for the Harpoon missile system , these two missile systems displaced the sixteen @-@ inch guns and their maximum range of 42 @,@ 345 yards ( 38 @,@ 720 m ) ( 24 @.@ 06 mi ) to become the longest @-@ ranged weapons on the battleships during the 1980s . It has been alleged by members of the environmental group Greenpeace that the battleships carried the TLAM @-@ A ( also cited , incorrectly , as the TLAM @-@ N ) — a Tomahawk missile with a variable yield W80 nuclear warhead — during their 1980s service with the United States Navy , but owing to the United States Navy 's policy of refusing to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weaponry aboard its ships , these claims can not be conclusively proved . Between 2010 and 2013 , the U.S. withdrew the BGM @-@ 109A , leaving only conventional munitions packages for its Tomahawk Missile inventory . 
 Owing to the original 1938 design of the battleships , the Tomahawk missiles could not be fitted to the Iowa class unless the battleships were rebuilt in such a way as to accommodate the missile mounts that would be needed to store and launch the Tomahawks . This realization prompted the removal of the anti @-@ aircraft guns previously installed on the Iowas and the removal of four of each of the battleships ' ten 5 " / 38 DP mounts . The mid and aft end of the battleships were then rebuilt to accommodate the missile magazines . At one point , the NATO Sea Sparrow was to be installed on the reactivated battleships ; however , it was determined that the system could not withstand the overpressure effects from firing the main battery . To supplement the anti @-@ aircraft capabilities of the Iowas , five FIM @-@ 92 Stinger surface @-@ to @-@ air missile firing positions were installed . These secured the shoulder @-@ launched weapons and their rounds for ready use by the crew . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 The earliest search radars installed were the SK air @-@ search radar and SG surface @-@ search radar during World War II . They were located on the mainmast and forward fire @-@ control tower of the battleships , respectively . As the war drew to a close , the United States introduced the SK @-@ 2 air @-@ search radar and SG surface @-@ search radar ; the Iowa class was updated to make use of these systems between 1945 and 1952 . At the same time , the ships ' radar systems were augmented with the installation of the SP height finder on the main mast . In 1952 , AN / SPS @-@ 10 surface @-@ search radar and AN / SPS @-@ 6 air @-@ search radar replaced the SK and SG radar systems , respectively . Two years later the SP height finder was replaced by the AN / SPS @-@ 8 height finder , which was installed on the main mast of the battleships . During their brief period of activity under the 600 @-@ ship Navy program , the battleships ' radar systems were again upgraded . The AN / SPS @-@ 6 air @-@ search radar system was replaced with the AN / SPS @-@ 49 radar set ( which also augmented the existing navigation capabilities on the battleships ) , and the AN / SPS @-@ 8 ground @-@ search radar set was replaced by the AN / SPS @-@ 67 search radar . 
 In addition to these search and navigational radars , the Iowa class were also outfitted with a variety of fire control systems for their gun systems , and later for their missile systems . Beginning with their commissioning , the battleships made use of a trio of Mk 38 gun fire control systems to direct the 16 @-@ inch guns and a quartet of Mk 37 gun fire control systems to direct the 5 in gun batteries . These systems were upgraded over time , but remained the cornerstones of the combat radar systems on the Iowa class during their careers . The range estimation of these gunfire control systems provided a significant accuracy advantage over earlier ships with optical rangefinders ; this was demonstrated off Truk Atoll on 16 February 1944 when Iowa engaged the Japanese destroyer <unk> at a range of 35 @,@ 700 yards ( 32 @.@ 6 km ) and straddled her , setting the record for the longest @-@ ranged straddle in history . 
 Initially , the battleships made use of a mass collection of 20 mm and 40 mm guns for anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) operations ; these guns were respectively augmented with the Mk 14 range sight and Mk 51 fire control system to improve accuracy . By the Korean War , jet engines had replaced propellers on aircraft , which severely limited the ability of the AA batteries and their gun systems to track and shoot down enemy planes . Consequently , the AA guns and their associated fire @-@ control systems were removed when reactivated . New Jersey received this treatment in 1967 , and the others followed in their 1980s modernizations . In the 1980s , each ship also received a quartet of Phalanx Close in Weapon System ( CIWS ) mounts which made use of a radar system to locate incoming enemy projectiles and destroy them with a 20 mm Gatling gun before they could strike the ship . 
 With the added missile capacity of the battleships in the 1980s came additional fire @-@ support systems to launch and guide the ordnance . To fire the Harpoon anti @-@ ship missiles , the battleships were equipped with the SWG @-@ 1 fire @-@ control system , and to fire the Tomahawk missiles the battleships used either the SWG @-@ 2 or SWG @-@ 3 fire @-@ control system . In addition to these offensive @-@ weapon systems , the battleships were outfitted with the AN / SLQ @-@ 25 Nixie to be used as a lure against enemy torpedoes , an SLQ @-@ 32 electronic warfare system that can detect , jam , and deceive an opponent 's radar and a Mark 36 SRBOC system to fire chaff rockets intended to confuse enemy missiles . 
 Aside from the electronics added for weaponry control , all four battleships were outfitted with a communications suite used by both cruisers and guided missile cruisers in service at the time . This communication suite included the OE @-@ 82 antenna for satellite communications , but did not include the Naval Tactical Data System . 
 = = = Aircraft ( 1982 – 1992 ) = = = 
 During the 1980s these battleships made use of the RQ @-@ 2 Pioneer , an unmanned aerial vehicle employed in spotting for the guns . Launched from the fantail using a rocket @-@ assist booster that was discarded shortly after takeoff , the Pioneer carried a video camera in a pod under the belly of the aircraft which transmitted live video to the ship so operators could observe enemy actions or fall of shot during naval gunnery . To land the UAV a large net was deployed at the back of the ship ; the aircraft was flown into it . Missouri and Wisconsin both used the Pioneer UAVs successfully during Operation Desert Storm , and in one particularly memorable incident , a Pioneer UAV operated by Wisconsin received the surrender of Iraqi troops during combat operations . This particular Pioneer was later donated to the Smithsonian Institution , and is now on public display . During Operation Desert Storm these Pioneers were operated by detachments of VC @-@ 6 . In addition to the Pioneer UAVs , the recommissioned Iowas could support six types of helicopters : the Sikorsky HO3S @-@ 1 , UH @-@ 1 Iroquois , SH @-@ 2 <unk> , CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight , CH @-@ 53 Sea Stallion and the <unk> III SH @-@ <unk> Seahawk . 
 = = Gunfire support role = = 
 Following the 1991 Gulf War and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union , the United States Navy began to decommission and mothball many of the ships it had brought out of its reserve fleet in the drive to attain a 600 @-@ ship Navy . At the height of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman 's 600 @-@ ship Navy plan , nearly 600 ships of all types were active within the Navy . This included fifteen aircraft carriers , four battleships and over 100 submarines , along with various other types of ships the overall plan specified . When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 the Navy sought to return to its traditional , 313 @-@ ship composition . While reducing the fleet created under the 600 @-@ ship Navy program , the decision was made to deactivate the four recommissioned Iowa @-@ class battleships and return them to the reserve fleet . 
 In 1995 , the decommissioned battleships were removed from the Naval Vessel Register ( NVR ) after it was determined by ranking US Navy officials that there was no place for a battleship in the modern navy . In response to the striking of the battleships from the Naval Vessel Register a movement began to reinstate the battleships , on the grounds that these vessels had superior firepower over the then @-@ existing 5 in guns found on the Spruance @-@ class destroyers , Kidd @-@ class destroyers , Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyers , and Ticonderoga @-@ class cruisers . Citing concern over the lack of available gunfire to support amphibious operations , Congress demanded that the United States Navy reinstate two battleships to the naval vessel register and maintain them with the mothball fleet , until the Navy could certify it had gunfire support within the current fleet that would meet or exceed the battleship 's capability . 
 The debate over battleships in the modern navy continued until 2006 , when the two reinstated battleships were stricken after naval officials submitted a two @-@ part plan that called for the near @-@ term goal of increasing the range of the guns currently in use on the Flight I Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyers with specially designed ammunition intended to allow a five @-@ inch projectile fired from these guns to travel an estimated 40 nautical miles ( 70 km ) inland . The long @-@ term goal calls for the replacement of the two battleships with vessels of the Zumwalt class of guided @-@ missile destroyers . These ships are to be outfitted with an advanced gun system ( AGS ) that will fire specially developed 6 in Long Range Land Attack Projectiles for shore bombardment ; however , the long @-@ term goal for the Zumwalt class is to have the ships mount <unk> or free @-@ electron lasers . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The Iowa class has become culturally symbolic in the United States in many different ways , to the point where certain elements of the American public — such as the United States Naval Fire Support Association — are unwilling to part with the battleships despite their apparent obsolescence in the face of modern naval combat doctrine that places great emphasis on air supremacy and missile firepower . Although all have been officially stricken from the Naval Vessel Register they have been spared scrapping and were donated for use as museum ships . 
 Their service records have added to their fame , ranging from their work as carrier escorts in World War II to their shore bombardment duties in North Korea , North Vietnam , and the Middle East , as well as their service in the Cold War against the expanded Soviet Navy . Their reputation combined with the stories told concerning the firepower of these battleships ' 16 inch guns are such that when they were brought out of retirement in the 1980s in response to increased Soviet Naval activity — and in particular , in response to the commissioning of the Kirov @-@ class battlecruisers — the United States Navy was inundated with requests from former sailors pleading for a recall to active duty so they could serve aboard one of the battleships . 
 In part because of the service length and record of the class , members have made numerous appearances in television shows , video games , movies , and other media , including appearances in the anime series Neon Genesis Evangelion , the History Channel documentary series Battle 360 : USS Enterprise , the Discovery Channel documentary The Top 10 Fighting Ships ( where the Iowa class was rated Number 1 ) , the stealth action game Metal Gear Solid 4 : Guns of the Patriots , the Real Time Tactics game World in Conflict , the book turned movie A Glimpse of Hell , the 1989 song by Cher If I Could Turn Back Time , the 1992 film Under Siege , and the 2012 film Battleship , among other appearances . Japanese rock band Vamps performed the finale of their 2009 US tour on board the USS Missouri on 19 September 2009 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 When brought into service during the final years of World War II , the Iowa @-@ class battleships were assigned to operate in the Pacific Theatre of World War II . By this point in the war , aircraft carriers had displaced battleships as the primary striking arm of both the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy . As a result of this shift in tactics , U.S. fast battleships of all classes were relegated to the secondary role of carrier escorts and assigned to the Fast Carrier Task Force to provide anti @-@ aircraft screening for U.S. aircraft carriers and perform shore bombardment . Three were recalled to service in the 1950s with the outbreak of the Korean War , and provided naval artillery support for U.N. forces for the entire duration of the war before being returned to mothballs in 1955 after hostilities ceased . In 1968 , to help alleviate U.S. air losses over North Vietnam , New Jersey was summoned to Vietnam , but was decommissioned a year after arriving . All four returned in the 1980s during the drive for a 600 @-@ ship Navy to counter the new Soviet Kirov @-@ class battlecruisers , only to be retired after the collapse of the Soviet Union on the grounds that they were too expensive to maintain . 
 1 . ^ Kentucky was not officially launched ; her hull was moved from drydock to allow Missouri to be admitted for repairs following her grounding . 
 = = = Iowa = = = 
 Iowa was ordered 1 July 1939 , laid down 27 June 1940 , launched 27 August 1942 , and commissioned 22 February 1943 . She conducted a shakedown cruise in Chesapeake Bay before sailing to Naval Station Argentia , Newfoundland , to be ready in case the German battleship Tirpitz entered the Atlantic . Transferred to the Pacific Fleet in 1944 , Iowa made her combat debut in February and participated in the campaign for the Marshall Islands . The ship later escorted U.S. aircraft carriers conducting air raids in the Marianas campaign , and then was present at the Battle of Leyte Gulf . During the Korean War , Iowa bombarded enemy targets at Songjin , <unk> , and Kojo , North Korea . Iowa returned to the U.S. for operational and training exercises before being decommissioned on 24 February 1958 . Reactivated in the early 1980s , Iowa operated in the Atlantic Fleet , cruising in North American and European waters for most of the decade and participating in joint military exercises with European ships . On 19 April 1989 , 47 sailors were killed following an explosion in her No. 2 turret . In 1990 , Iowa was decommissioned for the last time and placed in the mothball fleet . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 17 March 2006 . Iowa was anchored as part of the National Defense Reserve Fleet in Suisun Bay , California until October 2011 , when she was towed from her mooring to Richmond , California for renovation as a museum ship . She was towed from Richmond in the San Francisco Bay on 26 May 2012 , to San Pedro at the Los Angeles Waterfront to serve as a museum ship run by Pacific Battleship Center and opened to the public on 7 July 2012 . 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 New Jersey was ordered 4 July 1939 , laid down 16 September 1940 , launched 7 December 1942 , and commissioned 23 May 1943 . New Jersey completed fitting out and trained her initial crew in the Western Atlantic and Caribbean before transferring to the Pacific Theatre in advance of the planned assault on the Marshall Islands , where she screened the U.S. fleet of aircraft carriers from enemy air raids . At the Battle of Leyte Gulf , the ship protected carriers with her anti @-@ aircraft guns . New Jersey then bombarded Iwo Jima and Okinawa . During the Korean War , the ship pounded targets at Wonsan , Yangyang , and Kansong . Following the Armistice , New Jersey conducted training and operation cruises until she was decommissioned . Recalled to duty in 1968 , New Jersey reported to the gunline off the Vietnamese coast , and shelled North Vietnamese targets before departing the line in December 1968 . She was decommissioned the following year . Reactivated in 1982 under the 600 @-@ ship Navy program , New Jersey was sent to Lebanon to protect U.S. interests and U.S. Marines , firing her main guns at Druze and Syrian positions in the Beqaa Valley east of Beirut . Decommissioned for the last time 8 February 1991 , New Jersey was briefly retained on the Naval Vessel Register before being donated to the Home Port Alliance of Camden , New Jersey for use as a museum ship in October 2001 . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 The Missouri was the last of the four Iowa @-@ class battleships to be completed . She was ordered 12 June 1940 , laid down 6 January 1941 , launched 29 January 1944 , and commissioned 11 June 1944 . Missouri conducted her trials off New York with shakedown and battle practice in Chesapeake Bay before transferring to the Pacific Fleet , where she screened U.S. aircraft carriers involved in offensive operations against the Japanese before reporting to Okinawa to shell the island in advance of the planned landings . Following the bombardment of Okinawa , Missouri turned her attention to the Japanese homeland islands of Honshu and Hokkaido , performing shore bombardment and screening U.S. carriers involved in combat operations . She became a symbol of the U.S. Navy 's victory in the Pacific when representatives of the Empire of Japan boarded the battleship to sign the documents of unconditional surrender to the Allied powers in September 1945 . After World War II , Missouri conducted largely uneventful training and operational cruises until suffering a grounding accident . In 1950 she was dispatched to Korea in response to the outbreak of the Korean War . Missouri served two tours of duty in Korea providing shore bombardment . She was decommissioned in 1956 . She spent many years at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton , Washington . Reactivated in 1984 as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy plan , Missouri was sent on operational cruises until being assigned to Operation Earnest Will in 1988 . In 1991 , Missouri participated in Operation Desert Storm , firing 28 Tomahawk Missiles and 759 sixteen @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) shells at Iraqi targets along the coast . Decommissioned for the last time in 1992 , Missouri was donated to the USS Missouri Memorial Association of Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , for use as a museum ship in 1999 . 
 = = = Wisconsin = = = 
 Wisconsin was ordered 12 June 1940 , laid down 25 January 1942 , launched 7 December 1943 , and commissioned 16 April 1944 . After trials and initial training in Chesapeake Bay , she transferred to the Pacific Fleet in 1944 and was assigned to protect the U.S. fleet of aircraft carriers involved in operations in the Philippines until summoned to Iwo Jima to bombard the island in advance of the Marine landings . Afterward , she proceeded to Okinawa , bombarding the island in advance of the allied amphibious assault . In mid @-@ 1945 Wisconsin turned her attention to bombarding the Japanese home islands until the surrender of Japan in August . Reactivated in 1950 for the Korean War , Wisconsin served two tours of duty , assisting South Korean and UN forces by providing call fire support and shelling targets . In 1956 , the bow of the uncompleted USS Kentucky was removed and grafted on Wisconsin , which had collided with the destroyer USS Eaton . Decommissioned in 1958 , Wisconsin was placed in the reserve fleet at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard until reactivated in 1986 as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy plan . In 1991 , Wisconsin participated in Operation Desert Storm , firing 24 Tomahawk Missiles at Iraqi targets , and expending 319 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) shells at Iraqi troop formations along the coast . Decommissioned for the last time 30 September 1991 , Wisconsin was placed in the reserve fleet until stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 17 March 2006 so she could be transferred for use as a museum ship . Wisconsin is currently berthed at the Nauticus maritime museum in Norfolk , Virginia . 
 = = = Illinois and Kentucky = = = 
 Hull numbers BB @-@ 65 and BB @-@ 66 were originally intended as the first and second ships of the Montana @-@ class of battleships ; however the passage of an emergency war building program on 19 July 1940 resulted in both hulls being reordered as Iowa @-@ class units to save time on construction . The war ended before either could be completed , and work was eventually stopped . Initially , proposals were made to convert the hulls into aircraft carriers similar to the Essex @-@ class , but the effort was dropped . Eventually both hulls were scrapped . 
 Illinois was ordered on 9 September 1940 and initially laid down on 6 December 1942 . However , work was suspended pending a decision on whether to convert the hull to an aircraft carrier . Upon determination the result would cost more and be less capable than building from scratch construction resumed , but was canceled for good approximately one @-@ quarter complete on 11 August 1945 . She was sold for scrap and broken up on the slipway in September 1958 . 
 Kentucky was ordered on 9 September 1940 and laid down on 7 March 1942 . Work on the ship was suspended in June 1942 , and the hull floated out to make room for the construction of LSTs . The interruption lasted for two and a half years while a parallel aircraft carrier debate played out as with the Illinois , reaching the same conclusion . Work resumed in December 1944 , with completion projected for mid @-@ 1946 . Further suggestions were made to convert Kentucky into a specialist anti @-@ aircraft ship , and work was again suspended . With the hull approximately three @-@ quarters completed she was floated on 20 January 1950 to clear a dry @-@ dock for repairs to Missouri , which had run aground . During this period , plans were proposed to convert Kentucky into a guided missile battleship , which saw her reclassified from BB @-@ 66 to BBG @-@ 1 . When these failed construction of any sort never resumed and the ship was used as a parts hulk ; in 1956 , her bow was removed and shipped in one piece across Hampton Roads and grafted onto Wisconsin , which had collided with the destroyer Eaton . In 1958 , the engines installed on Kentucky were salvaged and installed on the Sacramento @-@ class fast combat support ships Sacramento and Camden . Ultimately , what remained of the hulk was sold for scrap on 31 October 1958 . 
 = Oliver 's Battery ( Tresco ) = 
 Oliver 's Battery is a ruined artillery battery on the island of Tresco in the Isles of Scilly . It was built by the Parliamentarian admiral , Sir Robert Blake , after he invaded Tresco in April 1651 during the years of the interregnum . It was used to bombard the neighbouring island of St Mary 's , which was still held by an opposing Royalist army , and forced its surrender several weeks later . The battery comprised a triangle of ramparts , constructed using earth and rubble , which , combined with the natural stone features on the site , produced a substantial , if crude , fortification . It is now ruined , and owned by the Duchy of Cornwall . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Oliver 's Battery was built in the interregnum following the English Civil War . The Isles of Scilly had supported Charles I during the conflict between 1642 to 1646 , and , after a short period in Parliamentary control , the islands rebelled in favour of Charles in 1648 . The islands became a base for Royalist privateers , and Parliament became concerned that the Dutch , then hostile to England , might counter the piracy by occupying the islands , gaining a foothold that they could then use against England . In 1651 Parliament sent Sir Robert Blake in charge of a naval task force to retake the islands . 
 Blake arrived in April 1651 and set about invading the island of Tresco . Taking the harbour of Old Grimsby in an amphibious assault on 18 April , he then bypassed the northern fortress of King Charles 's Castle and marched south , intending to use Tresco as a base for taking the neighbouring island of St Mary 's , approximately 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . 
 When Blake reached Carn Near on the south end of Tresco , he constructed an artillery position for a battery of three guns overlooking the channel between the island and St Mary 's , as well as the harbour of St Mary 's Pool , hoping to pressure the Royalists into surrender . The work was carried out rapidly between 19 April and 4 May , possibly reusing the site of a Bronze Age burial cairn . When the battery began firing on 4 May , one of the guns exploded causing two deaths , but the bombardment soon recommenced and St Mary 's agreed to surrender several weeks later on 23 May . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The antiquarian William Borlase visited the site in 1752 , which he thought was a breastwork defence named after the Parliamentary leader Oliver Cromwell . He remarked on how its construction was " irregular and uneven " , and suspected that it was very old , pre @-@ dating the civil war . He also noted how its position would have allowed it to protect the location he believed the Parliamentary forces had used as their camp , and commented as to how the winds and tides would have forced Royalist ships entering or leaving St Mary 's harbour to sail into close range of its guns . 
 The blockhouse is owned by the Duchy of Cornwall and it is protected as a scheduled monument under UK law . The site was surveyed in 1990 by the Cornwall Archaeology Unit , and in 2009 by English Heritage . 
 = = Design = = 
 Oliver 's Battery is on a hill overlooking the island of St Mary 's to the south @-@ east . It is triangular in shape , the sides of which are roughly 25 metres by 30 metres by 30 metres ( 82 ft by 98 ft by 98 ft ) in length . The battery was entered from its north @-@ western side , and in the north @-@ east corner there was a small building , approximately 6 metres by 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 20 ft by 11 ft ) , which may have been a store or a temporary gun magazine . The artillery pieces were located in the south @-@ eastern corner of the battery , where a gun platform , 7 metres ( 23 ft ) in diameter , occupied the highest part of the fortification . 
 The battery is surrounded by an earth and rubble bank , incorporating natural outcrops of stone , between 4 @.@ 5 metres and 8 metres ( 15 ft and 26 ft ) wide , and 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) high externally . On the west and south sides the ramparts are protected by a ditch , typically 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) m wide and 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 ft 0 in ) deep . The historian Mark Bowden considers the fortification to be " substantial but relatively crude " , probably a result of the speed with which the building work was carried out . 
 At the bottom of the hill beside the battery are two rectangular earthworks , 16 metres by 8 metres ( 52 ft and 26 ft ) , and 26 metres and 12 metres ( 85 ft and 39 ft ) . Traditionally these have been thought to be Royalist gun batteries pre @-@ dating the construction of Oliver 's Battery , but recent scholarship casts doubt on this , suggesting that they are instead the remains of hollow ways and sand pits . 
 = Hurricane Hernan ( 1996 ) = 
 Hurricane Hernan was fourth and final tropical cyclone to strike Mexico at hurricane intensity during the 1996 Pacific hurricane season . The thirteenth tropical cyclone , eighth named storm , and fifth hurricane of the season , Hernan developed as a tropical depression from a tropical wave to the south of Mexico on September 30 . The depression quickly strengthened , and became Tropical Storm Hernan later that day . Hernan curved north @-@ northwestward the following day , before eventually turning north @-@ northeastward . Still offshore of the Mexican coast on October 2 , Hernan intensified into a hurricane . Six hours later , Hernan attained its peak as an 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . After weakening somewhat , on 1000 UTC October 3 , Hurricane Hernan made landfall near Barra de Navidad , Jalisco , with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Only two hours after landfall , Hernan weakened to a tropical storm . By October 4 , Tropical Storm Hernan had weakened into a tropical depression , and dissipated over Nayarit on the following day . 
 The storm dropped heavy rainfall along the west coast of Mexico , with some areas experiencing over 20 in ( 510 mm ) of precipitation . As a result of the large amounts of rain , Hurricane Hernan caused moderate flooding . Despite impacting a relatively sparsely populated area of Mexico , no deaths were reported in the country , though one was reported missing . In all , flooding from the storm washed @-@ out highways , disrupted telephone service , caused power outages , and damaged at least 1 @,@ 000 homes . However , at least 100 injuries were recorded . In addition , the remnants caused flooding in southern Texas , and one person was presumed to have drowned . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa during mid @-@ September and moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean . Even though convection associated with the system increased on two separate occasions , the tropical wave did not develop further . After emerging into the Pacific Ocean , the system entered the Gulf of Tehuantepec on September 28 . Meanwhile , deep convection began to consolidate while the cloud pattern continued to improve . By late on September 29 , classifications began on the system via the Dvorak technique , a technique used to measure a tropical cyclones intensity . By 0600 UTC on September 30 , satellite imagery indicated that Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E had developed while centered over 285 mi ( 460 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initiated advisories on the depression , stating that it was over warm sea surface temperatures and outflow was becoming well @-@ established . Subsequently , it was predicted that the depression would intensify into a hurricane before October 3 . 
 Later on September 30 , satellite intensity classifications estimated wind speeds of at least 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Based on this , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Hernan . By October 1 , the atmospheric circulation of Hernan became difficult to locate on infrared satellite imagery . As a result , the NHC reported that it no longer anticipated that Hernan would intensify into a hurricane . Later that day , Hernan strengthened slightly ; subsequently , visible satellite images indicated that the center of the storm redeveloped . Most of the computer models anticipated that Hernan would parallel the coast of Mexico , though the Global Dynamics Fluid Model ( GDFL ) noted that Tropical Storm Hernan would turn sharply northward and eventually make landfall in Mexico . Early on October 2 , deep convection began wrapping around the center , and meteorologists noted that an eye feature may have been forming . Subsequently , Hernan also developed very cold cloud tops while tracking slowly to the northwest . 
 At 0600 UTC on October 2 , it is estimated that Hernan had intensified into a hurricane . Operationally , however , Hernan was not upgraded to a hurricane until nine hours later . The storm strengthened a little more , and at 1200 UTC on October 2 , Hernan attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ) ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg . By late on October 2 , radar imagery remarked that the northern eye wall was affecting portions of the west coast of Mexico . Shortly thereafter , the eye of Hernan became less distinct on satellite images . By 0900 UTC on October 3 , based on data from radars in Cuyutlán , Colima , the NHC reported that Hurricane Hernan had executed a cyclonic loop to the southwest of Manzanillo . About an hour later , Hernan made landfall near Barra de Navidad , with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . 
 Hernan rapidly weakened inland , and it was estimated that it had weakened to a tropical storm only two hours after landfall . By 0000 UTC on October 4 , Hernan weakened further , and was downgraded to a tropical depression . Shortly thereafter , Hernan re @-@ emerged into the Pacific Ocean , and the NHC noted that possibility for the depression to restrengthen into a tropical storm . Hernan weakened further as a large portion of its circulation remained on land , while the low @-@ level center became difficult to locate . By 2100 UTC October 4 , satellite images and surface reports indicated that Hernan had degenerated into a broad area of low pressure . Hernan finally dissipated at 0000 UTC the next day while centered over Nayarit . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Thirty @-@ six hours after formation , on October 1 , a tropical storm warning was issued from Acapulco , to Manzanillo . Early on the following day , a hurricane watch was put into effect from Zihuatanejo , Guerrero , to Manzanillo , . Three hours later , the watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning . At 1500 UTC on that same day , a tropical storm warning was issued from Manzanillo , to San Blas , Nayarit . By 0300 UTC on October 3 , the hurricane warning was extended from Cabo Corrientes , Jalisco to San Blas ; the tropical storm warning was also extended , and included areas between Mazatlán and San Blas . As the storm rapidly weakened inland , all watches and warnings in effect were discontinued midday on October 3 . In addition to these warnings , several ports and harbors were closed in the states of Guerrero , Michoacan , Jalisco , and Colima , a span of some 680 mi ( 1 @,@ 095 km ) . 
 Much of Jalisco was drenched with rain for nearly 12 consecutive hours , resulting in flooding . Country @-@ wide ; however , the highest total was recorded in <unk> and La Union , with 21 @.@ 8 in ( 550 mm ) being measured at both locations . The National Water Commission reported waves of up to 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . Along the coasts of Colima and Jalisco , waves caused by Hernan were not as large , reaching 13 ft ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) in height . High winds were also recorded . 
 Because the storm made landfall in a sparsely populated area , no deaths were reported by the NHC . However , one boy was swept away in the <unk> River and was thus reported missing . Due to flooding caused by the storm , three rivers in Veracruz overflowed their banks . Flooding from the storm also washed @-@ out portions of two Mexico highways . Furthermore , telephone service was interrupted and power outages occurred . Around 1 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed and 100 people were injured . Overall , damage from the system was not widespread . 
 After dissipating , the remnants of Hernan , in combination with low pressure area that eventually became Tropical Storm Josephine , brought heavy downpours to southern Texas . Rainfall reached 5 @.@ 5 in ( 140 mm ) in Brownsville , which caused street flooding and forced several families to evacuate their homes . In addition , coastal flooding was reported in the town of South Padre Island . As a result of heavy rainfall , a flash flood watch and warning were issued for Cameron , Hidalgo , Kenedy , and Willacy Counties . One boy in Brownsville was classified as missing and later presumed to have drowned during the storm . 
 = From The Doctor to my son Thomas = 
 " From The Doctor to my son Thomas " is a viral video recorded by actor Peter Capaldi and sent to autistic nine @-@ year @-@ old Thomas Goodall to console the child over grief from the death of Goodall 's grandmother . Capaldi filmed the video in character as the 12th incarnation of the Doctor in the BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who . Capaldi 's message had a positive effect on Thomas ; his father said the boy smiled for the first time since learning of his grandmother 's death and gained the courage to go to her funeral . 
 Thomas 's father Ross Goodall posted the video to YouTube on 6 November 2014 . He later explained to media that he wanted to make the video available to his family and had no idea it would become popular online . CNN reported that after its appearance on YouTube , the video was viewed over 200 @,@ 000 times in its first 48 @-@ hours online . This more than doubled the next day , and less than a week later it had over 900 @,@ 000 total views . BBC News observed that Capaldi 's message had become a viral video , and ITV News described response to the video as a global phenomenon . 
 The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph called the recording by Capaldi a touching video to a young child suffering from grief . CNN and MTV characterised the video similarly , as did Spanish and Dutch media . The Independent wrote that Capaldi displayed a kinder face of his personality by sending the message . BT commented it was Capaldi 's best contribution as the character of the Doctor to date . 
 The video had a positive impact on those with mental health problems . Autism Daily Newscast reported favourably on Capaldi 's actions . The Hollywood Reporter observed that as his character the Doctor , Capaldi was using his role to support mental health . Hollywood Life said their reporters were moved to tears after watching Capaldi 's video . Peter Harness , writer of the episode " Kill the Moon " , said Capaldi 's video was his favourite highlight from ten years of Doctor Who . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Scottish actor and film director Peter Capaldi was cast in 2013 as the 12th incarnation of the Doctor , in the BBC science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who . His casting was announced on 4 August 2013 in a special BBC programme hosted by Zoë Ball . Capaldi first appeared as the Doctor in a cameo in the 50th anniversary special , " The Day of the Doctor " , before appearing in the 2013 Christmas special , " The Time of the Doctor " . A lifelong fan of the series , Capaldi had played Lobus Caecilius in the 2008 episode " The Fires of Pompeii " and a civil servant , John Frobisher , in the 2009 spin @-@ off Torchwood : Children of Earth . 
 Before taking the role , Capaldi said that he had to seriously consider the increased visibility that would come with the part . He said in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that he had been invited to audition for the role of the Eighth Doctor in 1995 before the production of the 1996 TV film but did not go because he was unsure if he would get the part and did not wish to be part of a large group of actors turned down for the role . 
 = = Prior correspondence = = 
 Thomas Goodall had been a devoted fan of Doctor Who from North Baddesley in Hampshire since the age of two , and wrote a letter to Peter Capaldi saying he hoped the actor found success in his new role portraying the Doctor . The Goodall family were all fans of Doctor Who , describing themselves as <unk> . Thomas decorated his home with objects related to the television series . Capaldi wrote back to Thomas thanking him , and sent a note to the child 's father saying he intended to send a video message . Capaldi enclosed guidance to Ross Goodall on how to organise a tour of the production studios for Doctor Who . 
 Ross Goodall subsequently communicated with Capaldi through the actor 's agent , to inform him that Thomas 's grandmother had died . ( Helen , aged 72 , died in early October 2014 . ) He told Capaldi that his son was not dealing well with the grief from his grandmother 's death . The family received the subsequent video message to Thomas from Capaldi three weeks after the death of the child 's grandmother . 
 = = Video message = = 
 Capaldi appears in character as the Doctor and addresses Thomas directly , greeting him by name . He expresses his gratitude at receiving the child 's letter , saying it had pleased him . 
 He then speaks to Thomas about grief , mentioning the Doctor 's adventures with travelling companion Clara Oswald ( played by Jenna Coleman ) . He tells Thomas that negative events impact Clara and himself in their journeys through the universe and time travel , and that occasionally they feel depressed too . The Doctor tells Thomas he is glad the child is supporting him in his adventures . 
 Capaldi concludes the video message by wishing Thomas to experience joy , and encourages the youth to be well and remain positive . The video is 42 seconds long . 
 = = Goodall family response = = 
 The family received the video from Capaldi on 3 November 2014 . After viewing the video , Thomas felt encouraged to attend his grandmother 's funeral . In an interview with The Guardian , Ross Goodall explained that Capaldi 's mention of sadness resonated with the child due to his experience of grief over his grandmother 's death . He discussed the manner in which Thomas perceived emotions as a strict dichotomy between positive and negative without a middle ground . Thomas interpreted from the video that it was all right to feel happy while simultaneously acknowledging a sad event had occurred . Ross Goodall told The Guardian that before viewing the video from Capaldi his son did not want to attend his grandmother 's funeral . 
 The boy 's mother said that the video had helped him to deal with his depression . After watching Capaldi 's message , Ross Goodall stated that his son 's behaviour patterns changed markedly . This change included the ability to comfort his sister and step out of his day @-@ to @-@ day routine . Ross Goodall said after watching the video his son smiled for the first time since his grandmother died . The family framed the letter from Capaldi that came before the video message , and Ross Goodall said Thomas looked at it when he felt distressed . 
 = = Posted to YouTube = = 
 Ross Goodall uploaded the message from Capaldi to the video @-@ sharing website YouTube on 6 November 2014 . He commented at the video 's YouTube location that he was surprised at the online response , and that at the time of initial posting was unaware it would become viral . He later explained that he had uploaded it only to share it with family members on completion of the memorial services for Thomas 's grandmother . Thomas 's father wrote that the video greatly affected his son and enabled him to cope with grief and feel comforted . He praised Capaldi for his kind act and explained that the video improved his son 's mental well @-@ being throughout the ordeal . 
 By 10 November 2014 , total comments by viewers posted below the video on YouTube numbered in the hundreds . The majority of comments were supportive . Visitors to the site wrote favourably of Capaldi 's actions to record the video for the child . A few observed that Capaldi 's version of the Doctor character is sinister and serious , and contrasted this with the actor 's depiction of the character as warm and effusive in his recording . 
 = = Reception = = 
 CNN reported that after its appearance on YouTube , the video had over 200 @,@ 000 views in its first 48 hours of availability . BBC News noted that by the next day , it had received over 500 @,@ 000 views , and by 10 November 2014 it had over 750 @,@ 000 . The Washington Post noted that by the next day the view count was above 900 @,@ 000 . Multiple publications observed that Capaldi 's message had become a viral video . ITV News called online reaction to the video a global phenomenon . 
 The Guardian called the recording by Capaldi a touching video tribute . CNN characterised the video similarly , as did Digital Spy , ITV News , TV 3 , and publications in Spanish and Dutch . The Barcelona newspaper La Vanguardia wrote that Capaldi 's video was an example of bringing joy into someone 's life through a small act . The Washington Post called it a touching message . The Daily Dot described the video as inspirational . The Independent contrasted Capaldi 's portrayal of the 12th Doctor as one of the darker incarnations of the character with his kinder message as the same character in the video . MTV called Capaldi a most wonderful person for his act , and concluded the video was quite endearing . 
 The Daily Telegraph described the video as a moving inspiration to a child suffering from grief . The Huffington Post wrote that if they were able to engage in time travel themselves , they would be unable to encounter a kinder tale . Io9 appreciated that Capaldi was using his celebrity status to effect positive change through his portrayal of the character , and praised his use of the fictional role as a force for public good . The South Wales Evening Post noted Capaldi had appeared in a brief video as himself congratulating a bride on her wedding , and wrote that this video was more impressive than the previous appearance . Metro commented " Just when you thought Peter Capaldi couldn 't possibly get any cooler , he 's gone and outdone himself with this video . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 International Business Times reported that the video message had a significant impact on the child , in spite of its brevity , and noted in a follow @-@ up piece that Capaldi 's video was featured in headlines of multiple newspapers . Digital Spy followed up on its earlier favourable coverage of Capaldi 's video , and chose it as the number one entry out of " 7 awesome celebrity moments that will melt your heart " . Hollywood Life said their journalists were moved to tears after watching the video . Their review concluded that Capaldi 's message was both kind and strong , and that it was intelligent of the actor to compare the grief of Thomas to that encountered by his character on the television programme . 
 Capaldi 's actions received favourable coverage from the Autism Daily Newscast , an official Google News website reporting on current events and news of interest to those on the autism spectrum . Journalist on the site Jo Worgan noting the actor had devoted himself while on the set of Doctor Who to spending time with an autistic girl who was a fan of the show . The Hollywood Reporter noted that the Time Lord character took time to support the mental well @-@ being of a child in addition to his duties of protecting the universe from harm . 
 In a March 2015 interview with Radio Times , Peter Harness , writer of Doctor Who episode " Kill the Moon " , cited the video by Capaldi as his favourite highlight from the last ten years of the television programme . Harness explained his decision , saying that the video demonstrated Capaldi 's kind demeanour and illustrated that Doctor Who served to assist youngsters in learning about the travails of greater society . He said that , by extension , it reminded all viewers to act with more compassion towards one another . 
 = HMS Hurricane ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Hurricane was an H @-@ class destroyer that had originally been ordered by the Brazilian Navy in the late 1930s with the name <unk> , but was bought by the Royal Navy after the beginning of World War II in September 1939 and later renamed . When completed in June 1940 , the ship was temporarily assigned to the Home Fleet before she began escorting convoys and conducting anti @-@ submarine patrols . She was badly damaged during a German air raid on Liverpool in May 1941 and her repairs were not completed until the beginning of 1942 . Hurricane was then assigned as the flotilla leader of Escort Group B1 assigned to the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force , escorting convoys in the North Atlantic for the next two years . The ship was torpedoed by a German submarine on Christmas Eve 1943 , and had to be scuttled the next day as she was unable to steam back to port . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hurricane displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Hurricane carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 152 officers and men . 
 The vessel was designed for four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear , but ' Y ' gun was removed to compensate for the additional depth charges added . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Hurricane had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were originally fitted , but this was increased to three sets of rails and eight throwers while fitting @-@ out . The ship 's load of depth charges was increased from 20 to 110 as well . She was fitted with an ASDIC set to detect submarines by reflections from sound waves beamed into the water . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Little data on Hurricane 's modifications during the war has survived , although it is known that she had her rear torpedo tubes replaced by a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun by October 1940 . The ship 's short @-@ range AA armament may have been augmented by two Oerlikon 20 mm guns on the wings of the ship 's bridge and the .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts may have also been replaced by a pair of Oerlikons . The ship 's director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge may have been removed in exchange for a Type 271 target indication radar . A Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar was probably also fitted mid @-@ way through the war . The ship probably also received a HF / DF radio direction finder mounted on a pole mainmast . 
 = = Service = = 
 <unk> was ordered by Brazil on 6 December 1937 from Vickers @-@ Armstrongs , Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness . The ship was laid down on 3 June 1938 and she was purchased by the British on 5 September 1939 after the beginning of World War II . Renamed HMS Hurricane , the ship was launched on 29 September and commissioned on 21 June 1940 . She was assigned to the 9th Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet upon commissioning until new construction replaced the losses suffered over the previous few months . Hurricane then began escorting convoys and conducting anti @-@ submarine patrols until May 1941 . On 17 September , the ship rescued survivors of City of Benares , a small passenger ship evacuating 90 children from the United Kingdom to Canada , and the freighter Marina . She rescued 451 survivors from the passenger @-@ cargo liner City of Nagpur and landed them at Greenock , Scotland on 1 May 1941 . 
 Hurricane was bombed and sunk in a German air raid on Liverpool during the night of 7 / 8 May 1941 . She was struck by a bomb that passed through the hull and detonated underneath her . The explosion blew a large hole in her bottom and flooded her engine room and oil tanks . The ship 's structure was badly damaged enough that her stern began to sag downwards and Hurricane was moved to Bidston Dock lest she sink and block traffic in the harbour . No one was killed in the attack , although a few crewmen received minor injuries . 
 The ship was repaired and returned to service in January 1942 as flotilla leader of Escort Group B1 assigned to the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force . Hurricane remained as the leader for the next two years . Whilst escorting Convoy OS 62 / KMS 36 , the ship was hit by an acoustic T5 torpedo fired by the German submarine U @-@ 415 on the evening of 24 December 1943 . The torpedo homed in on the ship 's propeller noises and blew off 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) of her stern . The explosion killed three and wounded nine of her crew , and rendered her unable to move . The following morning , she was scuttled by the destroyer Watchman at 45 ° 10 ′ N 22 ° 05 ′ W. 
 = Sara Sidle = 
 Sara Sidle is a fictional character on the CBS crime drama CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , portrayed by actress Jorja Fox . Sidle is a forensic scientist and one of the core characters of the show , which revolves around a Crime Scene Investigation team in Clark County , Nevada , that investigates cases in and around Las Vegas . Fox appeared in both the first eight seasons , and the final five seasons , of the show as a series regular . She also recurred throughout the ninth and tenth seasons of the series , and headlined Immortality alongside Ted Danson . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Original Tenure = = = 
 Fox appeared in every episode of the series ' first seven seasons , with the exceptions of : 
 Season 01 : " Pilot " 
 Season 03 : " Random Acts of Violence " 
 Season 04 : " Jackpot " 
 Season 05 : " <unk> " , " Hollywood Brass " 
 Season 06 : " Spellbound " 
 Fox then appeared in the first seven episodes of the eighth season , before departing the main cast . 
 = = = Guest star = = = 
 During her brief absence from the main cast , Fox guest starred in the following episodes : 
 Season 09 : " For Warrick " , " The Happy Place " , " Leave Out All The Rest " , " One to Go " 
 Season 10 : " Family Affair " , " Ghost Town " , " Coup de Grace " , " Bloodsport " , " Lover 's Lane " , " Better Off Dead " , " Long Ball " , " Internal Combustion " , " <unk> " , " Neverland " , " <unk> " , " World 's End " , " Take My Life , Please ! " , " Doctor Who " , " Meat Jekyll " 
 = = = Return = = = 
 Upon rejoining the regular cast in the series ' eleventh season , Fox once again appeared in every episode , with the exceptions of : 
 Season 11 : " <unk> " , " Cold Blooded " , " Fracked " , " Man Up " , " A Kiss Before Frying " , " The List " , " Father of the Bride " 
 Season 12 : " Maid Man " , " Genetic Disorder " , " Trends with Benefits " , " Altered Stakes " 
 Season 13 : " Play Dead " , " CSI on Fire " , " Dead of the Class " , " Skin in the Game " 
 Season 14 : " Last Supper " 
 Fox remained a series regular until CSI 's final episode , " Immortality " . 
 = = Fictional character biography = = 
 Sidle was born on September 16 , 1971 , in Tomales Bay , an hour and a half north of San Francisco . Her father was abusive , alcoholic until Sidle 's schizophrenic mother , Laura , killed him , in 1984 . When searching for records of the crime in the Season 5 episode " No Humans Involved , " she searches for records from Modesto . Afterward , she spent time in the foster care system , which didn 't keep her from graduating high school as valedictorian at age 16 . She attended Harvard on a scholarship , moving on to graduate school at the University of California , Berkeley . While at Berkeley , she started a work @-@ study position at the San Francisco Coroner ’ s Office , where she would also audit lectures to keep up with new developments ; it was at one of these that she met Gil Grissom . 
 Some time later , while she was working in San Francisco , Grissom called her because he was in need of someone outside the Las Vegas team . Sidle went to Las Vegas and helped resolve some Internal Affairs problems within the CSIs while also providing a replacement for Holly <unk> , who had been shot . Some episodes later , she became a permanent member of the Night Shift as a CSI Level 3 at the <unk> <unk> Bureau , specialising in Materials and Element Analysis . In Season 8 , Sidle briefly changed from Nights to Swing . In the Season 10 premiere , it is revealed Sara is now married to Grissom . In Season 13 , Episode 15 , Sara revealed that Grissom had split up with her . However in series finale Immortality , Sara and Grissom are ultimately re @-@ united . 
 = = Character development = = 
 Perhaps because of her traumatic childhood , Sidle has demonstrated compassion and empathy for victims of domestic violence , and fury against their abusers . She also has a soft spot for animals , and became a vegetarian after she saw Grissom conduct an experiment on a dead pig . She has also shown a tendency to become very aggressive when under pressure or annoyed , especially in cases involving abused women - such as her arguments with Catherine and Ecklie , and engaging in a heated argument with a man suspected of murdering his wife . In recent years , perhaps because of her mother 's schizophrenia , Sara has been seen to work several cases with a mental health aspect . An example of this is when she was able to calm Agent Moore 's <unk> son in " 418 / 427 " , as well as her open attitude to the A Pharaoh 's Motorists team in " Dune And Gloom " . 
 In the early years of the show , Sidle is depicted as antisocial . Her hobbies are all work @-@ related ( listening to her police scanner and reading forensic journals ) ; and she claims to prefer working with corpses over live people . In a mid @-@ second season episode , she realizes how much she is missing out on and decides to " get a life " outside of work . During season three she dates a paramedic named Hank Pettigrew , but this relationship ends later in the season when she discovered that he had a longtime girlfriend . Later in the third season , she is injured in an explosion in the lab in search of Grissom , at the end of the episode she decides to ask Grissom to dinner though he turns her down , stating he doesn 't know what to do about " this . " . 
 During the fourth and fifth seasons , Sidle seems to be on a downward spiral as her memories of childhood resurface , with cases becoming more difficult for her emotionally . Also , the fact that Grissom decided to promote Nick Stokes instead of Sidle , did not help . Season Four concludes with Sidle being stopped by a traffic cop . Although she is driving under the influence , she is not charged , but Grissom , as her supervisor , is informed of her arrest . He arrives at the station to bring her home , and finally seems to notice her emotional state . Later , in season five , she loses her temper with a domestic abuse suspect and then argues with supervisors Catherine Willows and Conrad Ecklie , which results in her suspension . Following this incident , she admits to Grissom that she has a problem with authority , has chosen emotionally unavailable men ( like Grissom ) , and has a self @-@ destructive streak . Sidle then opens up to him and reveals her family story ; it is during this season that she apparently starts bonding with Grissom . During the subsequent seasons ( sixth and seventh ) , after it is revealed that they are in a relationship , she appears to be happier and on a more even keel . 
 In CSI 's eighth season , when Fox decided to leave the show , both she and the writers decided not to kill the character , so as to leave the door open for a possible comeback . Consequently , Sara Sidle is submerged into depression after she is abducted in the season seven finale ( she is rescued in the first episode of the new season ) , and , even though she accepts Grissom 's marriage proposal on the season 's fourth episode , she shows signs of burnout during the subsequent episodes , breaking down on the season 's seventh episode , leaving Las Vegas with only a goodbye letter for Grissom in which she tells him she loves him - also kissing him out of the blue in front of another colleague - and a good luck note for Ronnie Lake ( played by Jessica Lucas ) . In the letter she states that ever since her father 's death she has been living with " ghosts " and that she now needs to go away and deal with them before self @-@ destructing . 
 In the season eight episode " You Kill Me " , Grissom indicates he has talked with Sidle and that she is in San Francisco visiting her mother . 
 Promos for the season nine premiere announced that actress Jorja Fox would return as Sara , and showed her in three clips . However , Sidle left again after the second episode . She appeared again in the final scene of the tenth episode of season nine when she appears to be working on a research team in Costa Rica , where Grissom joins her after leaving CSI . Then they are married 
 During the tenth season , Fox returned to CSI on a recurring basis . This recurring role continued until the eleventh season of the show . Sara is brought back by Under @-@ Sheriff Ecklie to aid the lab , which has undergone staffing cuts as a result of Warrick 's death and the resignation of his replacement , Riley Adams . Adams was revealed to have resigned as a result of Catherine 's poor management and lack of teamwork ; when Catherine reveals this to Sara , Sara reminds Catherine that Grissom had her ( Catherine ) as a number two , prompting the promotion of Nick Stokes to Assistant Supervisor . 
 = = Relationships = = 
 Sara Sidle 's romantic relationships have been largely unsuccessful . In the first season she named a college boyfriend , Ken Fuller , with whom she had an unsatisfactory relationship , also saying that they had joined the Mile high club ( <unk> Skies ) . In season seven she mentioned a college boyfriend who cheated on her . It is unclear whether Fuller was also the boyfriend who cheated on her . In the third season she had a casual relationship with Hank Pettigrew , who was an emergency medical technician . He was involved in several of her cases , but they later broke up after she found out Hank had a longtime girlfriend . 
 During the first seasons , coroner David Phillips , laboratory technician Greg Sanders , and fellow CSI Nick Stokes occasionally flirted with her , but nothing more than friendship resulted from those flirtations . 
 = = = Gil Grissom = = = 
 Since CSI 's first season there were hints that both Sara Sidle and Gil Grissom were interested in each other romantically ; in fact , the show 's producers initially introduced Sara Sidle as a future love interest for Grissom . However , during the show 's first three seasons Grissom flirted with other female characters , and when she asked him out to dinner he rejected her , saying that he didn 't know what to do about what was going on between them . 
 In season four , Grissom 's true feelings were revealed in " <unk> " , an episode that centers entirely around Grissom exploring his attraction to Sidle when confronted with a dead woman who bore a striking resemblance to her . In this episode , Grissom admitted that he was unable to risk his career to be with her . In this season Sara Sidle apparently developed a drinking problem , which Grissom acknowledged in the season finale . In the next season , Sidle was suspended for insubordination and told Grissom about her tormented childhood . He refused to fire her and had her working with him in almost every episode from season six and season seven . 
 It was not until the sixth season finale that it is revealed that Grissom and Sidle have worked through whatever issues they had and are , in fact , a couple . In season eight it was revealed they have been intimately involved for two years . This revelation caused mixed emotions from fans , some of whom see this relationship as CSI " jumping the shark , " an attempt to include more drama and romance to the show to compete with the medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , which airs in the U.S. at the same time . By resolving the sexual tension between the two characters , critics posited that the show might appeal to some of Grey 's younger audience . This has been denied by the writers . In one interview , producer Carol Mendelsohn said that she has never been able to see Grissom with any other character other than Sidle and that this episode was seen by the writers as the right time to reveal the relationship . Jorja Fox and William Petersen have also said that the relationship between their characters is not new . 
 Throughout season seven the audience saw Grissom and Sidle as a couple , but the relationship was kept secret from the others in the lab until Sidle 's abduction by The Miniature Killer in the season finale , during which Grissom reveals to the team that Sara is the only person he 's ever loved . In season eight , they become engaged to be married , but this storyline is left inconclusive when Sara leaves Grissom with a note three episodes later . 
 A Season 8 scene - cut from its intended episode due to time constraints - showed Catherine Willows visiting Grissom 's apartment to update him on a case . While he is in his bedroom , she snoops around and finds a woman 's dressing robe in his closet . She then notices a photograph of Gil and Sara together on the fridge . When Grissom emerges from his room , she asks him " How long have you and Sara been together ? " He tries to make a quick exit but not before she tells him she 'd always thought he was a lonely bachelor , to which his response is to laugh and leave . 
 In the tenth episode of season nine , " One to Go " , Grissom is seen walking through a rain forest holding a GPS System that places him in Costa Rica . He spots a bug on a leaf , but continues , eventually arriving at a camp where Sidle is seen taking a picture of a monkey in a tree . Sidle then sees Grissom , who removes his backpack and walks into Sidle 's arms and greets her with a passionate kiss . 
 In " Family Affair " , the first episode of Season 10 , Sidle returns to work in the laboratory on a temporary basis , revealing that she and Grissom are now married and have been living in Paris while Grissom conducts a seminar at the Sorbonne . 
 In " The Two Mrs. <unk> " , Sara attends a party for a school for the deaf . She then gets a call from Grissom during a Taiko drum performance . It was revealed that Grissom was in Peru consulting for the government . She then meets Grissom 's mother , Betty , and two deaf professors , at which one of them ends up dead in a car explosion . 
 Grissom 's mother ends up criticising Sara for not spending much time with Grissom . 
 At the end of the episode , she is shown talking with Grissom on a webcam , eventually having his mother walk into the office . Grissom then said that he will return to Vegas to have dinner with Sara and his mother . 
 At the end of " Malice in Wonderland " Grissom sends Sara two plants with a note saying " From Grissom " 
 Hints of a troubled relationship appear in several episodes in Season 13 . In the episode " Forget Me Not " Sara finally reveals that she and Grissom had split up . In the end of the episode , she admitted to Nick and Greg that at the night of the murder she was expecting to see Grissom ; Nick even admits that he and everyone else that worked with Grissom liked having them both together to sort of hang on to but realized that if the relationship is over , it 's over . 
 After remaining separated for a number of years , Grissom and Sara are re @-@ united in the series finale Immortality , when a case involving a suicide bomber brings Grissom temporarily back to the Las Vegas crime lab . The series ends with the pair sailing away together into the sunset , their relationship apparently rekindled . 
 William Petersen has said that what Grissom loves about Sidle is her tenacity . " She 's a bulldog . And he always saw that in her . And he always knew that subconsciously the only person who 'd be able to give him a second look is someone who 's not willing to take the first look for granted . " On her side , Jorja Fox has said that " The story of Sara and Grissom is a little like a fable . And most great fables don 't really have 100 percent resolution . " 
 = = Public reaction = = 
 Sara Sidle has gained an extensive fan base throughout the years . A romantic relationship between Sidle and her supervisor , Gil Grissom , was hinted at during the first years of the show ; but it was only in Season 6 that the relationship was confirmed and then made definitive with Grissom 's marriage proposal in Season 8 . 
 Grissom and Sidle 's relationship has been the subject of intense debate in the press and on @-@ line forums , between fans of the romantic relationship and those who believe the romance detracts from what was once a show devoted mainly to mysteries and a forensics laboratory . 
 In early August 2007 , upon rumors of Jorja Fox leaving the show , a grassroots campaign started . Thousands of fans donated to the cause , and they had a plane flying over the Universal Studios of Los Angeles weekly on Tuesdays and Thursdays with a " Keep Jorja Fox on CBS " banner for a month . The online forum Your Tax Dollars at Work , which has about 15 @,@ 000 members and has organized the campaign , created another campaign that includes mailing the show 's producers a dollar , so as to keep Fox on the show . By October 5 , 2007 , more than $ 3 @,@ 500 had reportedly been mailed to the Universal Studios from forty @-@ nine countries . The campaign had started less than a week before , on September 29 , 2007 . 
 Though the effort garnered media coverage , it was announced in late October , 2007 that Jorja Fox 's final appearance as a full cast member would be in the episode Goodbye and Good Luck , which aired on November 15 , 2007 . Both writers and Fox have said that they believe that Sara Sidle " will be back " sometime in the future . Fox and CSI writer Carol Mendelsohn chose to donate the money sent to the studios to CASA , a national association that supports and promotes court @-@ appointed advocates for abused or neglected children . 
 CBS initially confirmed that Jorja Fox would be returning to CSI in the tenth season for the season premiere and four subsequent episodes . Executive producer Carol Mendelsohn has amended that Fox 's tenure on the show has been extended indefinitely . CBS states that the season premiere would deal with where life has taken Sara and what brings her back to Las Vegas . 
 = = Video games = = 
 Jorja Fox voiced Sara Sidle in the first two CSI video games , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and CSI : Dark Motives . The other two video games , CSI : Hard Evidence and CSI : 3 Dimensions of Murder , were recorded by Kate Savage . Rachel Robinson voiced Sara in the ninth CSI game , CSI : Fatal Conspiracy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = Hellcats = 
 Hellcats is an American cheerleading comedy @-@ drama television series that originally aired on The CW in the United States from September 8 , 2010 , to May 17 , 2011 . Based on the book Cheer : Inside the Secret World of College Cheerleaders by journalist Kate Torgovnick , the series focuses in the lives of college cheerleaders , mainly Marti Perkins ( Aly Michalka ) , a pre @-@ law college student who has to join the cheerleading team , the Hellcats , in order to get the athletic scholarship she needs . The main cast also includes Ashley Tisdale , Robbie Jones , Heather Hemmens , Matt Barr , Gail O 'Grady , and Sharon Leal . 
 In May 2010 , Hellcats had been picked by The CW for the fall 2010 – 11 season . Initially with a 13 @-@ episode order , The CW aired the series after America 's Next Top Model on Wednesday nights . The pilot episode aired on September 8 , 2010 , and became the first premiere to ever match or build on an America 's Next Top Model lead @-@ in since The CW began in 2006 . The CW later gave a full season order for the series , with executives saying they were " thrilled that [ it ] paid off for us " . On May 17 , 2011 , The CW announced that Hellcats would not be renewed for the 2011 fall schedule . 
 Hellcats has been described as " Election meets Bring It On " by critics . It received generally mixed reviews during its first season , obtaining a Metacritic weighted average of 51 percent , based on the impression of 22 critics . The series also earned a nomination in the 2011 People 's Choice Awards . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 Hellcats follows Marti Perkins , a pre @-@ law college student at Lancer University , who lost her scholarship and has no other choice but to join the college 's cheer squad , the Hellcats , in order to obtain a new one . There she meets her new roommate and team captain Savannah Monroe , the injured flyer Alice <unk> , her new partner Lewis Flynn and the Hellcats coach Vanessa Lodge who hopes to win nationals , otherwise the cheer leading program will be cut . All the while , Marti also has to deal with her financially unstable and sometimes irresponsible mother , Wanda Perkins , whom she often has to bail out of difficult situations , and her best friend Dan Patch . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Marti Perkins ( Aly Michalka ) is the protagonist of the series and a townie from Memphis , Tennessee . Described as " wicked smart " , she is a pre @-@ law student at Lancer University . Her mother , Wanda Perkins ( Gail O 'Grady ) , works at the university pub and is a party girl who never grew up . Her mother 's behavior is , for the most part , an embarrassment to Marti . When Lancer 's administrative department cuts scholarships for Lancer employees and families , Marti learns she can get a new one by choosing one of Lancer 's programs . She then auditions for a position on Lancer 's cheerleading team , the Hellcats . 
 Savannah Monroe ( Ashley Tisdale ) , the captain of the Hellcats , is described as " peppy and petite " with a " fierce intensity " . She initially clashes with Marti , but realizes she is the godsend that the Hellcats need to win the championship . She votes for Marti when the team has auditions for a new flyer . Savannah is from a very religious , upper @-@ middle class southern family . After a fight with her family , she left the university she was attending , Memphis Christian , and transferred to secular Lancer . Her sister Charlotte , a recurring role played by Emma <unk> , is the captain of the Cyclones , the cheerleading team at Savannah 's old school and a Hellcats ' rival . 
 Alice ( Heather Hemmens ) is dangerously narcissistic and after she injures her wrist , she dislikes the idea of Marti replacing her on the squad , or the attention Marti receives from Alice 's ex @-@ boyfriend , Lewis Flynn . Lewis ( Robbie Jones ) is one of the Hellcats ' bases and is an easy @-@ going guy who has a love for action . He was once a star on the Lancer football team but quit when he discovered a scandal of players being paid by the college . He tried out for the Hellcats team when his then @-@ girlfriend Alice encouraged him to do so in order to gain scholarship money after the football scandal , and instantly became hooked . He has an instant attraction to Marti . They later start dating . Dan Patch ( Matt Barr ) is a townie who is Marti 's friend . He had an unspoken crush on her but now is dating Savannah , Marti 's new friend on the team . Sharon Leal plays Vanessa Lodge , a former Hellcat cheerleader who is now the team 's coach . Her job is threatened if the Hellcats do not place at the national competition . 
 Supporting cast includes Red Raymond ( Jeff Hephner ) , the Lancer 's football coach who shares a romantic past with Vanessa , and Derrick Altman ( D. B. Woodside ) , a doctor who works at Lancer University and is now Vanessa 's boyfriend . Bill Marsh ( Aaron Douglas ) is the college 's athletic director who is still involved in a " pay for play " scandal with players that could get the school 's programs ( including the Hellcats ) suspended . Morgan Pepper ( Craig Anderson ) is a pre @-@ law student and Marti 's classmate . He later befriends Marti and joins her to solve a legal case introduced by their teacher Julian ( Gale Harold ) . Other Hellcats members include Darwin ( Jeremy Wong ) a gay cheerleader , and Frankie ( Alana Randall ) . Kathy ( Magda <unk> ) is a member of the Cyclones , usually called " Nasty Kathy " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Hellcats is based on the book Cheer : Inside the Secret World of College Cheerleaders by journalist Kate Torgovnick and the series has been described as " Election meets Bring It On " . Actor Tom Welling teamed with Kevin Murphy to executive produce the series , which was initially given the name Cheer . The pilot episode was written by Murphy and directed by Allan Arkush . On May 18 , 2010 , The Hollywood Reporter , Variety and Entertainment Weekly reported that The CW had picked up the series for the 2010 – 2011 television season and confirmed that Paul Becker would be the head choreographer for the series . Tisdale 's character was originally named Sierra Sloan but was renamed Savannah Monroe in the press release . 
 While presenting its 2010 – 11 season schedule on May 21 , 2010 , The CW officially confirmed the pick up of the series and announced its intention to air Hellcats after America 's Next Top Model on Wednesday nights . TV Guide reported that Ashley Tisdale is the best paid of the cast , earning $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode during the first season of the series . 
 During the 2010 Television Critics Association press tour in Los Angeles on July 29 , 2010 , producer Murphy said the series " was inspired by aspirational sports movies of the 1980s like Breaking Away , Vision Quest , and Pittsburgh @-@ set Flashdance " , and also added that " Hellcats is a show either for <unk> or for people who are interested in learning the trade " . Producer Welling said he was attracted to the series mainly because of the script , and he also felt the cheerleaders ' world had not yet been tapped into on television . When asked why it picked up Hellcats , The CW replied saying the series is " one of the underdogs " and it liked the big production numbers . 
 The filming of the pilot episode took place in Vancouver , Canada between April 13 – 21 , 2010 . The filming of the next episodes of the first season began on July 14 in Vancouver . The cast had two weeks of rehearsal for the pilot episode but after the series ' fall season pick up , they will only have a week to rehearse the dance numbers for each episode . Former Fame actress and choreographer Debbie Allen directed the episode " Pledging My Love " . 
 The CW Network attempted to break the Guinness World Records mark for the " Largest Cheerleading Dance " at a single venue by inviting cheerleading squads to participate in a five @-@ minute choreographed Hellcats dance in September 2010 . However , the mark was not broken as there were not enough cheerleaders present . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 On March 8 , 2010 , The Hollywood Reporter announced that Aly Michalka and Gail O 'Grady were the first actresses to be cast in the series . Michalka would play the lead role of Marti Perkins , a college girl who decided to join the Hellcats , and O 'Grady was to portray Wanda Perkins , Marti 's mother . The site later announced that actress Ashley Tisdale was cast as Savannah Monroe ( then known as Sierra Sloane ) , the fiercely intense captain of the Hellcats . 
 Matt Barr was cast as Dan Patch , a womanizer who quietly pines for Marti . On April 5 , 2010 , The Hollywood Reporter and Variety reported that actors Robbie Jones and Heather Hemmens were cast . Jones would portray the male lead , a cheerleading " base " who falls for Marti , and Hemmens was reported to play a cheerleader sidelined with a wrist injury . On April 8 , 2010 , The Hollywood Reporter reported that actress Sharon Leal was cast as Vanessa Lodge , a former Hellcat star who now serves as the squad 's coach . Elena <unk> was cast as Patty " The Wedge " <unk> , a lesbian cheerleader and a base for the squad . 
 On April 14 , 2010 , it was announced that Ben Browder was cast as Red Raymond , Lancer University 's football coach . On May 21 , 2010 , however , it was announced that Browder was no longer portraying Raymond , although he had already shot scenes for the pilot episode . His role was being recast and possibly retooled as well . Raymond 's role was later given to Jeff Hephner . On July 13 , one day before the beginning of filming , D. B. Woodside was cast as Derrick Altman , a " handsome young physician who takes care of the Hellcats cheerleaders " . 
 Producer Kevin Murphy confirmed that Gale Harold would guest star in the series as one of Marti 's law professors . Michalka added that Harold would appear in the third episode of the first season and had a multiple @-@ episode arc . In late November 2010 , AJ Michalka was cast in a recurring role as a girl who works at a record store near Lancer University and befriends Marti . Camille Sullivan was added to the supporting cast in February 2011 to portray Red Reymond 's ex @-@ wife . 
 On January 18 , 2011 , it was announced that <unk> would not be returning to the show . Michalka has said that it was difficult for the writers to incorporate her storylines with the others . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 During the 2010 Television Critics Association press tour held in Los Angeles on July 29 , 2010 , lead actresses Michalka and Tisdale were asked about the idea of singing on the show . They stated that they plan to keep their music careers separate from the series , although Michalka advised that she would sing in the fourth episode . In addition to that , Michalka 's band <unk> recorded " Belong Here " , which served as the theme song for Hellcats . It was later released into digital stores . 
 Executive producer Kevin Murphy confirmed in an interview that a soundtrack would be released for the series , which would include the theme song and other songs recorded for the series . He later added " So we are building a library of material . Once we have enough , we 're gonna put it on iTunes and definitely do a soundtrack album . " Songs covered for the series include " The Letter " originally by The Box Tops , Sting 's " Brand New Day " , Squeeze 's " Tempted " and The Go @-@ Go 's hit " We Got the Beat " . Canadian singer Fefe Dobson recorded " Rockstar " , an exclusive song for the series that was played during the " A World Full of Strangers " episode . However , " Rockstar " was ultimately released on the iTunes Deluxe Edition of Dobson 's album Joy . As previously promised by Murphy , a digital EP featuring five of the songs recorded for the series was released on November 30 , 2010 , via Warner Bros. Records . 
 The first season of Hellcats also included live performances by guest musicians , including Hey Monday , Faber Drive , Fefe Dobson , 3OH ! 3 featuring Ashley Tisdale , Elise Estrada and Ciara . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The first and only season of Hellcats consisted of 22 episodes . The pilot episode was broadcast on September 8 , 2010 . The initial order for the series was thirteen episodes . On September 23 , 2010 , due to successful ratings , The CW ordered six more scripts for the first season , although its production order was still at thirteen . On October 22 , 2010 , Variety announced that The CW had given a full season order for the series . The network said they took risks this year but they were " thrilled that they 've paid off for us " . 
 Hellcats aired on Wednesdays at 9 – 10 pm until December 1 , 2010 , when the eleventh episode aired . Starting January 25 , 2011 , The CW moved Hellcats to Tuesday nights at 9 – 10 pm , following One Tree Hill . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The show has received mixed reviews , with a Metacritic score of 51 percent , based on 22 critic reviews . It was praised and criticized by critics in several round @-@ up reviews of 2010 in television . Los Angeles Times had a good first impression of the pilot episode , saying Hellcats has a predictable story but , on the other hand , Michalka and Tisdale seem perfect for their roles . The newspaper also wrote the cheerleading world portrayed in the series is a " fun and deep world to explore " . The journal later gave a complete review of the series , comparing it to 1983 's film Flashdance aimed squarely at audiences too young for Gossip Girl but too old for Hannah Montana . 
 Verne Gay of Newsday praised Michalka 's performance in the series , while The Hollywood Reporter praised the series itself and said it has " multilayered characters that defy expectations " . 
 Curt Wagner of ChicagoNow said the series is predictable and has unrealistic situations , and criticized the lack of fun in the jokes . The journal also praised Tisdale 's performance , claiming she was the one who made him laugh the most . Hellcats also received positive reviews from Entertainment Weekly and People . 
 Mara Reinstein of Us Weekly gave an early review of the first episode of the series , saying Hellcats has " plenty of winning elements " but added that the series lacks spirit . She also praised the performance and Marti 's relationship with her mother . ABC News listed Hellcats as one of the ten best new shows of 2010 's fall season and described the series as " almost laughably formulaic " and added it " works like a charm " . Brian Lowry of Variety praised the series ' promise , and said that the series has a Glee @-@ like element in the script , while also criticizing Michalka and acclaiming O 'Grady 's performance . Lowry also added Hellcats 's premiere " isn 't quite unabashedly trashy enough to completely qualify as a guilty pleasure " . 
 Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times criticized Michalka 's performance and called the series a " soft @-@ porn music video for teenagers " . Washington Post 's Hank Stuever was critical about the pilot episode , describing it as " mean @-@ spirited , painfully dumb and badly acted " . He also wrote Hellcats is the opposite to Fox 's Glee . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The pilot episode " A World Full of Strangers " averaged a total of 3 @.@ 0 million viewers and scored a 2 @.@ 0 rating in the network 's target audience of women 18 – 34 , which marks the first premiere to ever match or build on an America 's Next Top Model lead @-@ in since The CW began . Hellcats also delivered the largest non @-@ Top Model performance in The CW 's Wednesday 9 – 10 pm time period in 3 years since the Gossip Girl series premiere . On September 10 , the network aired an encore of the pilot episode which averaged a total of 2 @.@ 42 million viewers and won the hour with adults 18 – 49 . 
 Hellcats delivered The CW 's most watched Tuesday of the season with 2 @.@ 2 million viewers watching " Papa , Oh Papa " , its 12th episode and the first in its new Tuesday 9 – 10 pm timeslot . Ratings fell rapidly as the series progressed , with the nineteenth episode , " Before I Was Caught " , hitting a series low , with less than a million viewers watching it on April 27 , 2011 . The finale was watched by 1 @.@ 16 million viewers . 
 The series averaged 2 @.@ 11 million viewers with live + 7 day DVR viewing . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 While presenting its 2010 – 11 season schedule on May 21 , 2010 , The CW announced its intention to air Hellcats in the United States after America 's Next Top Model on Wednesday nights starting September 8 , 2010 , at 9 pm . The series moved to Tuesday nights in the 9 – 10 pm timeslot , starting with the twelfth episode . Hellcats has been syndicated for broadcast in several countries worldwide , including Australia , Canada , Greece , Ireland , Israel , United Kingdom , Brazil , Spain , the Arab World , Latin @-@ America , New Zealand , and Denmark . 
 = Alexander Pechersky = 
 Alexander ' Sasha ' Pechersky ( Russian : Алекса ́ ндр <unk> ́ нович <unk> ́ <unk> ; 22 February 1909 – 19 January 1990 ) was one of the organizers , and the leader , of the most successful uprising and mass @-@ escape of Jews from a Nazi extermination camp during World War II ; which occurred at the Sobibor extermination camp on 14 October 1943 . 
 In 1948 Pechersky was arrested by the Soviet authorities along with his brother during the countrywide Rootless cosmopolitan campaign against the Jews suspected of pro @-@ Western leanings . Only after Stalin 's death in 1953 was he released from jail due in part to mounting international pressure . However , the harassment did not stop there . Pechersky was prevented by the Soviet government from testifying in multiple international trials related to Sobibor , including the Eichmann Trial in Israel . The last time he was refused the permission to exit the country and testify was in 1987 , for a trial in Poland . 
 = = Pre @-@ war life and career = = 
 Pechersky , a son of a Jewish lawyer , was born on February 22 , 1909 in Kremenchuk , Poltava Governorate , Russian Empire ( now Ukraine ) . In 1915 , his family moved to Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don where he eventually worked as an electrician at a locomotive repair factory . After graduating from university with a diploma in music and literature , he became an accountant and manager of a small school for amateur musicians . 
 = = World War II = = 
 On 22 June 1941 , the day when Germany invaded the Soviet Union , Pechersky was conscripted into the Soviet Red Army with a rank of junior lieutenant . By September 1941 , he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant quartermaster ( class II ) . In the early autumn of 1941 , he rescued his wounded commander from being captured by the Germans . He didn 't receive any medals for this deed . One of his fellow soldiers reportedly said : " Sasha , if what you 've done doesn 't make you a hero , I don 't know who is ! " In October 1941 , during the Battle of Moscow , their unit was surrounded and captured by the Germans in the pocket at the city of Vyazma , Smolensk Oblast . 
 Captured , Pechersky soon contracted typhus , but survived the seven @-@ month @-@ long illness . In May 1942 , he escaped along with four other prisoners of war , but they were all recaptured the same day . He was then sent to a penal camp at Borisov , Belarus , and from there to a prisoners of war ( POW ) camp located in the forest next to the city of Minsk . During a mandatory medical examination it was discovered that he was circumcised . Pechersky recalled a German medical officer asking him : " Do you admit to being a Jew ? " He admitted it , since any denial would result in a whipping , and was thrown into a cellar called " the Jewish grave " along with other Jewish POWs ( prisoners of war ) , where for 10 days he sat in complete darkness , being fed 100 grams ( 3 @.@ 5 oz ) of wheat and a cup of water every second day . 
 On August 20 , 1942 , Pechersky was sent to a SS @-@ operated <unk> , a work camp , in Minsk . The camp housed 500 Jews from the Minsk Ghetto , as well as Jewish Soviet POWs ; there were also between 200 – 300 Soviet inmates whom the Germans labeled as incorrigible : people who were suspected of contacting the Soviet partisans and those who were repeatedly truant while working for the Germans . The prisoners were starved and worked from dawn till dusk . Pechersky wrote about the Minsk work camp : 
 The German Nazi camp commandant didn 't let a single day pass without killing someone . If you looked at his face you could tell he was a sadist . He was thin , his upper lip shaking and his left eye bloodshot . He always had a hangover or was drunk and committed unspeakable horrors . He shot people for no reason and his favorite hobby was commanding his dog to attack random people who were ordered not to defend themselves . — Pechersky 
 = = Sobibor extermination camp = = 
 On 18 September 1943 , Pechersky , along with 2 @,@ 000 Jews from Minsk including about 100 Soviet Jewish POWs , was placed in a train cattle car which arrived at the Sobibor extermination camp on September 23 , 1943 . Eighty prisoners from the train , including Pechersky , were selected for work in Lager II . The remaining 1 @,@ 920 Jews were immediately led to the gas chambers . Pechersky later recalled his thoughts as the train pulled up to Sobibor , " How many circles of hell were there in Dante 's Inferno ? It seems there were nine . How many have already passed ? Being surrounded , being captured , camps in Vyazma , Smolensk , Borisov , Minsk ... And finally I am here . What 's next ? " The appearance of Soviet POWs produced an enormous impression on Sobibor prisoners : " hungry hope @-@ filled eyes following their every move " . 
 Pechersky wrote about his first day in Sobibor : 
 I was sitting outside on a pile of logs in the evening with Solomon ( Shlomo ) Leitman , who subsequently became my top commander in the uprising . I asked him about the huge , strange fire burning 500 meters away from us behind some trees and about the unpleasant smell throughout the camp . He warned me that the guards forbade looking there , and told me that they are burning the corpses of my murdered comrades who arrived with me that day . I did not believe him , but he continued : He told me that the camp existed for more than a year and that almost every day a train came with two thousand new victims who are all murdered within a few hours . He said around 500 Jewish prisoners – Polish , French , German , Dutch and Czechoslovak work here and that my transport was the first one to bring Russian Jews . He said that on this tiny plot of land , no more than 10 hectares [ 24 @.@ 7 acres or .1 square kilometer ] , hundreds of thousands of Jewish women , children and men were murdered . I thought about the future . Should I try to escape alone or with a small group ? Should I leave the rest of the prisoners to be tortured and murdered ? I rejected this thought . — Pechersky 
 During his third day at Sobibor , Alexander Pechersky earned the respect of fellow prisoners by standing up to Karl Frenzel , an SS senior officer , as the incident was recalled by Leon Feldhendler . 
 Pechersky , still wearing his Soviet Army uniform , was assigned to dig up tree stumps in the North Camp . Frenzel was in charge because an underling was elsewhere and was in a bad mood . Frenzel was waiting for an excuse to pick on someone since he considered himself an officer and a gentleman and waited for some reason to begin his sadistic games . One Dutch Jew was too weak to chop a stump so Frenzel began beating him with his whip . 
 Pechersky stopped chopping and watched the whipping while resting on his axe . Kapo <unk> translated when Frenzel asked Pechersky if he didn ’ t like what he saw . Pechersky didn 't bow down , shake or cower in fear but answered , Yes <unk> . <unk> told Pechersky that he had 5 minutes to split a large tree stump in two . If Pechersky beat the time he would receive a pack of cigarettes , if he lost , he would be whipped 25 times . <unk> looked at his watch , and said : Begin . 
 Pechersky split the stump in four and a half minutes and Frenzel held out a pack of cigarettes and announced that he always does as he promises . Pechersky replied that he doesn ’ t smoke , turned around and got back to chopping down new tree stumps . Frenzel came back twenty minutes later with fresh bread and butter and offered it to Pechersky . Pechersky replied that the rations at the concentration camp were more than adequate and that he wasn ’ t hungry . Frenzel turned around and left , leaving Kapo <unk> in charge . That evening , this episode of defiance spread throughout Sobibor . This episode influenced the leadership of the Polish Jews to approach Pechersky about ideas for an escape plan . — Leon Feldhendler 
 = = = Escape plan = = = 
 Pechersky 's plan merged the idea of a mass escape with vengeance : to help as many prisoners as possible to escape while executing SS officers and guards . His final goal was to join up with the partisans and continue fighting the Nazis . 
 Five days after arriving at Sobibor , Pechersky was again approached by Solomon Leitman on behalf of Leon Feldhendler , the leader of the camp 's Polish Jews . Leitman was one of the few prisoners who understood Russian and Pechersky didn 't speak either Yiddish or Polish . Pechersky was invited to talk with a group of Jewish prisoner leaders from Poland , to whom he spoke about the Red Army victory in the Battle of Stalingrad and partisan victories . When one of the prisoners asked him why the partisans won 't rescue them from Sobibor , Pechersky reportedly replied : " What for ? To free us all ? The partisans have their hands full already . Nobody will do our job for us . " 
 The Jewish prisoners who had worked at the Bełżec extermination camp were sent to Sobibor to be exterminated when Bełżec closed . From a note found among the clothing of the murdered , the Sobibor prisoners learned that those who had been killed were from work groups in the Belzec camp . The note said : " We worked for a year in Belzec . I don 't know where they 're taking us now . They say to Germany . In the freight cars there are dining tables . We received bread for three days , and tins and liquor . If all this is a lie , then know that death awaits you too . Don 't trust the Germans . Avenge our blood ! " 
 The leadership of the Polish Jews was aware that Belzec and Treblinka had been closed , dismantled and all remaining prisoners had been sent to the gas @-@ chambers and they suspected that Sobibor would be next . There was a great urgency in coming up with a good escape plan , and Pechersky , with his army experience , was their best hope . The escape had to also coincide with the time when the Sobibor 's deputy commandant Gustav Wagner went on vacation , since the prisoners felt that he was sharp enough to uncover the escape plan . 
 = = = Luka = = = 
 Pechersky clandestinely met with Feldhendler under the guise of meeting Luka , a woman he was supposedly involved with . Luka is often described as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old woman from " Holland " , but records indicate she was 28 and from Germany , her real name was Gertrud <unk> – Schönborn . After the war , Pechersky insisted that the relationship was platonic . Her fate after the escape was never established and she was never seen alive again . During an interview with Thomas Blatt , Pechersky said the following regarding Luka : " Although I knew her only about two weeks , I will never forget her . I informed her minutes before the escape of the plan . She has given me a shirt . She said , ' it 's a good luck shirt , put it on right now ' , and I did . It 's now in the museum . I lost her in the turmoil of the revolt and never saw her again . " 
 Luka 's shirt still exists and is described on <unk> @-@ 05 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> 3 , 2010 by Pechersky 's daughter as : 
 It is very well preserved . Light gray . Has dark @-@ gray stripes . A little worn from wear and being often washed . Long sleeves . The shirt collar has some blurred letters of the Latin alphabet which are no longer readable . 
 = = = The uprising = = = 
 According to Pechersky 's plan , the prisoners would assassinate the German SS staff , thereby rendering the auxiliary guards leaderless , obtain weapons , and eliminate the remaining guards . Individual Polish Jewish inmates were assigned specific German SS guards that they were supposed to lure inside the workshops under some pretext and silently kill . Ester Raab , a survivor of the escape , recalled : " The plan was , at 4 o ’ clock ( pm ) , should start ( the escape ) , everybody has to kill his SS man , and his guard at his place of work . " Only a small circle of trusted Polish Jewish inmates were aware of the escape plan as they didn 't trust the Jews from other European countries . 
 On 14 October 1943 , Pechersky 's escape plan began . During the day , several German SS men were lured to workshops on a variety of pretexts , such as being fitted for new boots or expensive clothes . The SS men were then stabbed to death with carpenters ' axes , awls , and chisels discreetly recovered from property left by gassed Jews ; with other tradesmen 's sharp tools ; or with crude knives and axes made in the camp 's machine shop . The blood was covered up with sawdust on the floor . The escapees were armed with a number of hand grenades , a rifle , a submachine gun and several pistols that the prisoners stole from the German living quarters , as well as the sidearms captured from the dead SS men . Earlier in the day , SS @-@ Oberscharführer Erich Bauer , at the top of the death list created by Pechersky , unexpectedly drove out to Chełm for supplies . The uprising was almost postponed since the prisoners believed that Bauer 's death was necessary for the success of the escape . Bauer came back early from Chełm , discovered that SS @-@ Scharführer Rudolf Beckmann had been assassinated , and began shooting at the Jewish prisoners . The sound of the gunfire prompted Alexander Pechersky to begin the revolt earlier than planned . Pechersky screamed the preplanned code @-@ words : " Hurrah , the revolt has begun ! " 
 Disorganized groups of prisoners ran in every direction . Ada Lichtman , a survivor of the escape recalls : " Suddenly we heard shots ... Mines started to explode . Riot and confusion prevailed , everything was thundering around . The doors of the workshop were opened , and everyone rushed through ... We ran out of the workshop . All around were the bodies of the dead and wounded . " Pechersky was able to successfully escape into the woods . At the end of the uprising , 11 German SS personnel and an unknown number of Ukrainian guards were killed . Out of approximately 550 Jewish prisoners at the Sobibor death camp , 130 chose not to participate in the uprising and remained in the camp ; about 80 were killed during the escape either by machine gun fire from watchtowers , or while getting through a mine field in the camp 's outer perimeter ; 170 more were recaptured by the Nazis during large @-@ scale searches . All who remained in the camp or caught after the escape were executed . 53 Sobibor escapees survived the war . Within days after the uprising , the SS chief Heinrich Himmler ordered the camp closed , dismantled and planted with trees . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Immediately after the escape , in the forest , a group of 50 prisoners followed Pechersky . After some time , Pechersky informed the Polish Jews that he along with a few Soviet Jewish soldiers would enter the nearby village and then shortly return with food . They allegedly collected all the money ( Pechersky implies the money collection is a fabricated detail ) and weapons except one rifle , but never came back . In 1980 , Thomas Blatt asked Pechersky why he abandoned the other survivors . Pechersky answered : 
 My job was done . You were Polish Jews in your own terrain . I belonged in the Soviet Union and still considered myself a soldier . In my opinion , the chances for survival were better in smaller units . To tell the people straight forward : " we must part " would not have worked . You have seen , they followed every step of mine , we all would perish . [ ... ] what can I say ? You were there . We were only people . The basic instincts came into play . It was still a fight for survival . This is the first time I hear about money collection . It was a turmoil , it was difficult to control everything . I admit , I have seen the imbalance in the distribution of the weaponry , but you must understand , they would rather die than to give up their arms . — Pechersky 
 Pechersky , along with two other escapees , wandered the forests until they ran into Yakov Biskowitz , and another Sobibor escapee . Biskowitz testified at the Eichmann Trial regarding the meeting : 
 The two of us wandered through the forests , until we met Sasha Pechersky . There were three of them whom I came across . One had weak legs . They wore white clothes made of hand @-@ woven material . They had sunk into mud after escaping . After that , we met together . There were now five of us – we walked to the <unk> forests . There we met the first Jewish partisans called Yehiel 's Group ( under Yehiel Grynszpan ) – it was a group of Jews who had undertaken action . We engaged in sabotaging railway lines , cutting telephone wires , hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on German army units . — Yakov Biskowitz 
 The two Russian Jewish soldiers who <unk> Biskowitz met with Pechersky were Alexander <unk> ( who was responsible for executing SS @-@ Untersturmführer Johann Niemann ; was later killed fighting the Germans ) and Arkady <unk> <unk> ( who was responsible for executing SS @-@ Oberscharführer Siegfried <unk> and Volksdeutscher Ivan Klatt ; survived the war ) . For over a year Pechersky fought with the Yehiel 's Group partisans as a demolition expert and later with the Soviet group of Voroshilov Partisans , until the Red Army drove out the Germans from Belarus . 
 As an escaped POW , Pechersky was conscripted into a special penal battalions , conforming to Stalin 's Order No. 270 and was sent to the front to fight German forces in some of the toughest engagements of the war . Pechersky 's battalion commander , Major Andreev , was so shocked by his description of Sobibor that he permitted Pechersky to go to Moscow and speak to the Commission of Inquiry of the Crimes of Fascist @-@ German <unk> and their Accomplices . The Commission listened to Pechersky and published the report Uprising in Sobibor based on his testimony . This report was included in the Black Book , one of the first comprehensive compilations about the Holocaust , written by Vasily Grossman and Ilya Ehrenburg . 
 For fighting the Germans as part of the penal battalions , Pechersky was promoted to the rank of captain and received a medal for bravery . He was eventually discharged after a serious foot injury . In a hospital in Moscow , he was introduced to his future wife , Olga <unk> . 
 = = After the war = = 
 After the end of World War II , Pechersky returned to Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don , where he lived before the war , and started working as administrator in an Operetta theater . The mass murder of Jews at the Sobibor death camp became part of the charges against leading Nazis at the Nuremberg Trials . The International Tribunal at Nuremberg wanted to call Pechersky as a witness , but the Soviet government wouldn 't allow him to travel to Germany to testify . 
 In 1948 , during Stalin 's persecution of Jews , known as the ' Rootless cosmopolitan ' campaign targeting those who allegedly lacked true loyalty and commitment to Stalinism and the Soviet Union , Pechersky was arrested along with his brother . Only after Stalin 's death in 1953 and mounting international pressure for his release , was Pechersky freed from prison . His brother , however , succumbed to a diabetic coma while incarcerated . Alexander Pechersky was permitted to resume working at a small amateur musical theater but in a far more menial position . 
 The Soviet government prevented Pechersky from testifying at the Eichmann Trial in Israel , only allowing a short deposition in Moscow which was controlled by the KGB . In 1963 , he appeared as a witness during the Soviet trial of 11 former Ukrainian guards at Sobibor ; all of whom were convicted and 10 of whom were executed . According to his daughter in an interview , Pechersky was prevented by the Soviet Union government from testifying in multiple international trials related to Sobibor . The final time Pechersky was refused permission to leave the country and testify was in 1987 for a trial in Poland , and according to his daughter , this refusal " just crippled my father . He almost stopped getting out of bed and instantly aged . " 
 Alexander Pechersky died on January 19 , 1990 , and was buried at the northern cemetery in Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don , Russia . As of 2009 , Pechersky 's daughter , granddaughter and two great @-@ grandsons live in Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don ( his niece , her son and their descendants live in the United States ) . 
 = = Remembrance = = 
 Alexander Pechersky features prominently in a Dutch @-@ Soviet documentary Revolt in Sobibor ( 1989 ) by director Pavel Kogan . 
 An award @-@ winning documentary about the escape was made by Claude Lanzmann , entitled Sobibor , 14 <unk> 1943 , 16 heures . The revolt was also dramatized in the 1987 British TV movie Escape from Sobibor , in which Rutger Hauer received a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( Television ) for his portrayal of " Sasha " . Pechersky however did not attend the premiere of the movie ; his widow later stated that the Soviet government denied him permission to travel to the United States . 
 Only in 2007 , 17 years after his death , was a small memorial plaque placed on the side of the building where he lived in Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don . There is also a memorial wall with his name engraved on it in Boston . A street was named in his honor in Safed , Israel , and a stone memorial erected in Tel Aviv more recently . 
 In January 2016 , he was posthumously awarded the Russian Order of Courage by decree of Vladimir Putin . 
 = West Midlands ( Regional ) League = 
 The West Midlands ( Regional ) League is an English association football competition for semi @-@ professional and amateur teams based in the West Midlands county , Shropshire , Herefordshire , Worcestershire and southern Staffordshire . It has three divisions , the highest of which is the Premier Division , which sits at step 6 of the National League System , or the tenth level of the overall English football league system . 
 The league was formed in 1889 as the Birmingham & District League to cater for teams in Birmingham and the surrounding area , but soon became established as one of the strongest leagues outside the Football League itself , with teams from as far afield as Bristol and Wales taking part . After the Second World War it absorbed the rival Birmingham Combination to become firmly established as the leading league in the area , but a gradual decline in its status began in the late 1950s and it now operates at a much lower level than in its heyday . 
 The league currently acts as a feeder to the Midland Football League Premier Division , to which one team is promoted to each season . Approximately fifty teams compete in the league each season , with new members regularly joining from a number of lower , more local leagues . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In the late 1880s , Birmingham and the surrounding region boasted many of the country 's strongest football teams . Six of the region 's leading clubs joined the first two national leagues set up in England , the Football League and the Football Alliance , but there were still many teams in the area keen to participate in league play . On 31 May 1889 a meeting took place at Birmingham 's Grand Hotel with the view to forming a Birmingham & District League . A total of 17 clubs were invited but only 13 attended , of which 12 were selected to form the new league , to commence play in the 1889 – 90 season . The one club which sent a representative to the meeting but was not invited to take part in the league , for unknown reasons , was Worcester Rovers . 
 The 12 clubs competing in the league 's inaugural season were Aston Victoria , Great Bridge Unity , Hednesford Town , Ironbridge , Kidderminster Harriers , Kidderminster Olympic , Langley Green Victoria , Oldbury Town , Smethwick Carriage Works , Unity Gas Department , Wellington St George 's , and Willenhall Pickwick . Although Kidderminster Olympic topped the final table , no championship was awarded as a number of fixtures had not been completed . This situation was to be repeated in each of the subsequent two seasons , in both of which Brierley Hill Alliance , who had joined the league for its second season , topped the table but did not win the title . The early years of the league also saw new teams joining and existing ones dropping out almost every season , but once the league 's structure settled down , it came to be regarded as one of the strongest leagues outside the Football League itself , rivalled only by the Southern League and the Midland League . 
 Despite the league 's name , in the years prior to the First World War it came to include teams from as far afield as Bristol , Wrexham and Crewe , as well as including the reserve teams of local Football League clubs . A number of clubs which had enjoyed success in the Birmingham Combination also joined the league , which was seen as a step up to a better standard of football . The league 's large coverage area began to create problems in the 1930s , however , as many clubs found the long and costly journeys to away matches difficult , and began to drop out in favour of playing in leagues which covered smaller areas . In 1938 , Bangor City , Worcester City , Wellington Town and the reserve teams of Cardiff City and Wrexham all resigned from the league , reducing the numbers so much that instead of the usual format the organising committee decided to run two separate competitions each lasting for half of the 1938 – 39 season , the first named the Keys Cup and the second the League Cup . By the time competitive football was abandoned in 1939 due to the outbreak of the Second World War , the rival Birmingham Combination , which had not chosen to accept teams from such a wide area , had consolidated and come to be regarded as the region 's top league . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 Although the league lost further clubs to the Combination , which was quicker to restart after the war , within a few years the League had regained its position of pre @-@ eminence in the region , increasing to almost twice its pre @-@ war size . During the 1952 – 53 season the League 's committee proposed a merger of the two competitions , but the Combination rejected the idea , whereupon the Combination 's six best teams all resigned and joined the League . The Combination 's committee then attempted to re @-@ open the merger talks but , having just bolstered its ranks with six new members , the League was not interested . A year later , all of the Combination 's 14 remaining clubs , with the exception of West Bromwich Albion 's ' A ' ( third ) team , left to join the League , which effectively absorbed its former rival . The 40 member clubs were split into Northern and Southern divisions , which a year later were re @-@ arranged into Divisions One and Two , with promotion and relegation taking place between the two . 
 At the end of the 1957 – 58 season , Burton Albion and Nuneaton Borough left to join an expanding Southern League , followed a year later by Hinckley Athletic . In an attempt to consolidate the league decided to expel all remaining reserve teams , reducing to a single division of 22 clubs . Four years later it changed its name to the West Midlands ( Regional ) League to more accurately reflect its catchment area , which now included very few teams from Birmingham or its immediate environs . For the 1965 – 66 season the league was able to revert to a two @-@ division structure when it rebranded its existing single division the Premier Division and added a new Division One . By 1976 , a steady flow of teams joining from smaller regional leagues led to Division One being split into Divisions One ( A ) and One ( B ) , revised a year later to Divisions One and Two . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 The Alliance Premier League was formed in 1979 , pushing the Regional League further down the English football league system . Successful Regional League clubs such as Bilston Town , Hednesford Town and Halesowen Town began applying to , and being accepted into , the Southern League , reducing the Regional League to the status of a feeder league , although their departures continued to be offset by a flow of new members from lower @-@ level leagues . Reflecting the demographics of the West Midlands area , a number of British Asian teams joined the league , including Sikh Hunters , England 's first ever all @-@ Sikh team . At the same time the catchment areas of the Regional League and the Midland Football Combination were increasingly converging , and by the early 1990s the standard of play and geographical coverage of the two competitions were considered to be almost identical . A new competition was formed in 1994 to cater for the best clubs previously split across the two leagues , and thus the Regional League lost ten of its member clubs to the new Midland Football Alliance , further reducing its own status . 
 The reduction in numbers forced the league to revert to a two @-@ division structure , but within two seasons numbers had grown again to the extent that Division One was split into Divisions One ( North ) and One ( South ) for the 1996 – 97 season , a format retained until 2004 when the two Division Ones were re @-@ organised into Division One and Division Two . Although the league now operates at a level much below that which it occupied in its heyday it continues to survive and holds the distinction , jointly with the Northern League , of being the second oldest football league in existence , behind only the Football League itself . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The league currently has no title sponsor . Previously it has been sponsored by Sport Italia , the Wolverhampton @-@ based Express & Star newspaper , and Black Country brewery Banks 's . In the 2014 – 15 season , 55 teams are competing in the league , comprising 22 in the Premier Division , 16 in Division One and 17 in Division Two . Some of the teams in the lower two divisions are reserve teams of clubs playing at a higher level . Each division is contested on a double round @-@ robin basis , with each team playing each of the other teams in the division once at home and once away . Three points are awarded for a win ( increased from two with effect from the 1988 – 89 season ) , one for a draw and zero for a defeat . Goal difference is used to separate teams on the same points , having replaced goal average at the start of the 1978 – 79 season . 
 Since the 1994 – 95 season the Regional League , along with the Midland Football Combination , has served as one of the two official feeders to the Midland Football Alliance . The highest @-@ placed team which meets the Alliance 's entry requirements is promoted to the Alliance , and one or more teams may be relegated into the Regional League from the Alliance depending on the number of clubs remaining in each league . Prior to the 2006 – 07 season , the league was defined as a step 7 league within the National League System , even though it fed into the Alliance , which is graded as step 5 . In 2006 the Regional League was re @-@ graded by the Football Association as a step 6 league . Teams in the top two divisions are eligible to take part in the FA Cup and FA Vase as long as their grounds meet the required standards . 
 Since the formation of the Midland Alliance , the Regional League has accepted applications for membership from successful teams in smaller local leagues within its catchment area . Leagues whose clubs have joined the Regional League include the Shropshire County League , the Herefordshire League , the Wolverhampton Combination , and the Kidderminster & District League . Several ambitious local Sunday league teams have also switched to Saturday play and entered the league . Bewdley Town , <unk> Town and Ellesmere Rangers have all joined from county leagues since 1994 and subsequently gone on to gain promotion to the Premier Division . Regional League teams could also theoretically be relegated to the local leagues but in practice this almost never happens . The only teams in recent history to drop down to a county league have been Leominster Town , Kington Town and Hinton , who dropped down to the Herefordshire League in 2004 , 2006 and 2007 respectively , although all three clubs resigned voluntarily in favour of playing in a more local league as opposed to being relegated due to finishing at the bottom of the table . 
 = = Attendance = = 
 At one time the league attracted large crowds for matches , with 3 @,@ 000 spectators watching a match between Coventry City and Shrewsbury Town in 1899 . By the early 1960s , despite the league 's decline in status , Kidderminster Harriers were still able to attract crowds of around 1 @,@ 000 fans for home matches . In the modern era , however , crowds are much smaller . In the 1993 – 94 season Rocester averaged around 100 fans for home games , and several of the team 's away matches drew crowds of less than 40 . Attendance figures are not currently published for league fixtures , however in the FA Vase in the 2005 – 06 season home attendances for Regional League teams averaged around 50 , with only Wellington 's match against Alvechurch of the Midland Alliance drawing over 100 spectators . 
 = = Current member clubs 2015 – 16 = = 
 The member clubs of the league for the 2015 – 16 season are as follows : 
 = = = Premier Division = = = 
 = = League champions = = 
 = = = Birmingham & District League = = = 
 Initially the league consisted of a single division 
 Between 1915 and 1919 the competition was suspended due to the First World War . 
 Due to the number of teams having dropped dramatically , the 1938 – 39 season consisted of two separate " half @-@ season " leagues . The Keys Cup was contested until Christmas and the League Cup for the remainder of the season . 
 The 1939 – 40 season was abandoned due to the outbreak of the Second World War and the league did not resume operations until 1946 . 
 For the 1954 – 55 season the league was split into two regional sections . 
 For the 1955 – 56 season the league was re @-@ organised into Division One and Division Two . 
 The league reverted to a single @-@ division format for the 1960 – 61 season . 
 = = = West Midlands ( Regional ) League = = = 
 For the 1965 – 66 season the league reverted to a two @-@ division format , now comprising the Premier Division and Division One . 
 For the 1976 – 77 season Division One was split into ' A ' and ' B ' sections . 
 For the 1977 – 78 season Division One ( A ) and Division One ( B ) were re @-@ organised into Division One and Division Two . 
 For the 1993 – 94 season Division Two was discontinued . 
 For the 1996 – 97 season Division One was split into two regional sections . 
 For the 2004 – 05 season Division One ( North ) and Division One ( South ) were re @-@ organised back into Division One and Division Two . 
 = FernGully : The Last Rainforest = 
 FernGully : The Last Rainforest is a 1992 Australian @-@ American animated musical fantasy film , directed by Bill Kroyer . It was produced by Peter Faiman and Wayne Young , with the screenplay written by Jim Cox , adapted from a book of the same name written 15 years prior by Diana Young . Alan Silvestri composed the film 's score . 
 The film features the voices of Jonathan Ward , Samantha Mathis , Tim Curry , Christian Slater and Robin Williams . FernGully is set in a fictitious Australian rainforest inhabited by fairies including Crysta , who accidentally shrinks a young logger named Zak to the size of a fairy . Together they rally the fairies and the animals of the rainforest to protect their home from the loggers and a malevolent pollution entity , Hexxus . 
 The film was released to mainly positive reviews , and was also generally considered a moderate financial success at both the box office and in home video sales . In 1998 it was followed by a direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel FernGully 2 : The Magical Rescue , though none of the original voice cast reprised their roles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Crysta is a fairy with a curious nature living in FernGully , a pristine rainforest free from human intervention . The fairies of FernGully once lived in harmony with humans , but , believe them to have gone extinct after being driven away by a malevolent spirit named Hexxus . Crysta is the apprentice of Magi , a motherly @-@ figure fairy who imprisoned Hexxus in a tree . One day Crysta explores a new part of the forest and meets Batty , a bat who claims to have been experimented on by humans , giving him an unstable personality . She refuses to believe him until she encounters lumberjacks cutting down trees . She sees Zak , a young human whom Crysta accidentally shrinks when she tries to save him from being crushed by a falling tree , though does not know how to restore him to normal size . 
 The tree that Hexxus is imprisoned in is cut down by Tony and Ralph , Zak 's superiors . Hexxus quickly begins to regain his powers by feeding on pollution . He manipulates the humans to drive to FernGully . In FernGully , Zak meets Pips , a fairy male who is envious of Zak 's relationship with Crysta . Zak begins to fall in love with Crysta , but hides the true reason that the humans had returned . When the signs of Hexxus 's resurrection begin to manifest themselves in poisoned trees and rivers , he finally admits that humans are destroying the forest . The fairies mount an attempt to defend their homes , but knowing their fight is hopeless , Zak convinces Batty to aid him in stopping the machine before it destroys them . When Zak makes his presence known to his bosses , Hexxus takes over the machine and begins to wildly destroy the forest . 
 Magi sacrifices herself to give the fairies a chance , and she tells Crysta to remember everything she 's learned . Zak manages to stop the machine , seemingly killing Hexxus by stopping his power at the source , but he manifests himself within the oil in the machine and begins to ignite the forest ablaze . Crysta seemingly sacrifices herself by allowing herself to be devoured by Hexxus and all seems lost , until he begins to sprout limbs and leaves like a tree . Pips and the rest of the fairies rally to the powers they have been given , which causes the seed that Crysta fed him to start growing wildly . Hexxus is made dormant and turned into a twisted tree at the very border of FernGully . Crysta appears after the fight , having survived her ordeal and successfully succeeded Magi as a magical fairy . She gives Zak a seed , begging him to remember everything that has transpired and she sadly restores him to his human size . Remembering the seed in his hand , Zak promises to remember his adventure , and buries the seed in the soil before telling his superiors that things " gotta change " before leaving the forest with them . The seed sprouts new growth for <unk> , as Crysta follows Pips with Batty behind her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the book Disney , Pixar , and the Hidden Messages of Children 's Films , M. Keith Booker states that FernGully " focuses on the theme of the destruction of the earth ’ s rainforests . In this case the rainforest is located near Mount Warning , on the eastern coast of Australia , but the theme is global and the specific location is not particularly emphasized " . Despite the environmental theme Booker stated the film was " somewhat vague in its explanation of the dire consequences of rainforest destruction and it addresses the economic impetus behind this destruction hardly at all " ; the fact that the rainforest was saved at the end of the film " diminishes the urgency of its environmentalist message " and that the character of Hexxus " displaces the real blame for environmental destruction from its real perpetrators onto nonexistent supernatural perpetrators , further diluting the political message . " The character of Batty was said to introduce " the secondary theme of animal experimentation , though with a light touch that presents this potentially horrifying motif as essentially humorous . " 
 In the book Eco @-@ Impacts and the Greening of <unk> , Tom <unk> and David McKie comment that radical views of ecology flourished in the film , perhaps because it was " aimed at a younger generation ... and belong [ s ] to relatively discredited genres " . As Zak is shrunk to fairy size and integrated into the fairy world , more similarities rather than differences are implied with the nonhuman characters . Crysta is said to defeat the evil Hexxus " in the manner of classic western genre heroes " , though with the key difference that her weapon is a seed rather than a revolver , allowing the produce of nature to share the heroic role with her . 
 = = Production = = 
 Producer Wayne Young said his passion for the environment was his motivation for making the film , saying the film was " blatantly environmental , although we have gone to a lot of trouble to avoid preaching . We also want it to be viewed as entertainment . " The inspiration for FernGully came from stories written by his former wife , Diana Young . Diana first wrote the story of FernGully 15 years prior to the film 's release . Wayne said the couple planned a film adaptation for five years , then spent " seven years of dreaming and hustling , followed by another three years of production " . Wayne stated their dream was not possible until the success of the 1989 film The Little Mermaid , which brought popularity back to animation . Hand drawn scenes in the film were complimented by computer animation , which was used to create elements such as flocks of birds that would have taken much longer to animate traditionally . Kroyer states 40 @,@ 000 frames of computer animation were used in the film , and that the use of such animation halved the production time . Most of the film 's $ 24 million budget was spent on the animation and the soundtrack . 
 The film marked Robin Williams ' first animation role , with the character Batty Koda being created specifically for him . Williams provided 14 hours worth of improvised lines for the part which was originally only supposed to be an 8 @-@ minute role . Director Bill Kroyer was so impressed with the voice work he ended up tripling the screen time given to the character . Williams went on to provide the critically applauded voice of the Genie in Disney 's Aladdin later the same year . Williams accepted the role in FernGully because he agreed with the film 's message , as did the rest of the voice cast , who all worked for scale wages . The film marked the first time that both members of Cheech & Chong had worked together in six years , with the two voicing beetle brothers Stump and Root . Cheech Marin said " It was just like old times , but we only worked for two or three hours , had a pizza and split . " 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 The soundtrack album was released by MCA Records . Peter <unk> from Allmusic gave the album three out of five stars , commenting that the songs were " lighter and more pop @-@ driven than Disney soundtracks from the ' 90s , but they are not childish . " The score of FernGully , which was composed by Alan Silvestri , was also released for sale . It consisted of 14 tracks and ran just under 44 minutes in length . 
 = = Release = = 
 FernGully was released in the United States on April 10 , 1992 and in Australia on September 17 . The film was shown at the United Nations General Assembly on Earth Day , April 22 , 1992 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 FernGully grossed US $ 32 @,@ 710 @,@ 894 worldwide , including $ 24 @,@ 650 @,@ 296 from the United States , and A $ 3 @.@ 4 million in Australia . The box office performance was described as a moderate success though it was considered to have done less well than expected , possibly due to its ecological message . Joseph Gelmis from Newsday , however , described FernGully 's box office performance as " dismal " , though noted it was the most successful recent non @-@ Disney animated film . Co @-@ executive producer Jaime Willett and Josh Baran who worked on the film 's marketing both spoke of the difficulties of getting attention to an animated film that was not produced by Disney , with Willett stating box office revenue would have at least doubled by simply having the headline " Walt Disney presents " on the film . An article in USA Today noted that the combined box office gross of FernGully and the five other non @-@ Disney animated films released in 1992 did not even equal a third of the gross for Disney 's 1991 film Beauty and the Beast . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 FernGully received generally positive reviews . The film holds an approval rating of 71 % at Rotten Tomatoes based on 14 reviews ( 10 positive , 4 negative ) . Film critic Roger Ebert gave it three out of four stars , saying the film was visually " very pleasing , " told a " useful lesson " , " and although the movie is not a masterpiece it 's pleasant to watch for its humor and sweetness . " Hollis <unk> from The Austin Chronicle added that the film was " funny , pretty , touching , scary , magical stuff . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times had an unfavourable impression of the film , describing it as " [ a ] n uncertain blend of sanctimonious principles and Saturday @-@ morning cartoon aesthetics " . According to Wayne Young , Jeffrey Katzenberg , then CEO of Walt Disney , called the producers of FernGully just to tell them that he loved the film . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Wayne Young stated that portions of the film 's gross would be donated to Greenpeace , the Rainforest Foundation Fund , and the Sierra Club , as well as a special fund benefiting environmental projects worldwide that was administered by the Smithsonian Institution , though he did not disclose exact figures . 
 In 1998 the film was followed by a direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel , FernGully 2 : The Magical Rescue . None of the original voice cast reprised their roles , and the film was less critically successful than the original . Mike Boon from the Calgary Herald gave a negative review , lamenting the loss of Robin Williams and the originality of the first film . Some reviewers have commented that the 2009 James Cameron film Avatar plagiarised thematic and plot elements from FernGully , though others have been more sceptical of the comparison . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Four months after the theatrical release , 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released FernGully on VHS and Laserdisc on August 26 , 1992 . Sales were strong , with approximately five million units sold by 1998 , including 125 @,@ 000 in Australia . 
 Fox re @-@ released the film on DVD in 2001 . Christopher Simons from DVD Talk gave the 2001 DVD three and a half stars out of five for both audio and video , though only one star for special features , noting that the only extras included were trailers for other films . A " Family Fun Edition " DVD was released in 2005 . Special features included commentary with director Bill Kroyer , art director Ralph Eggleston , and co @-@ ordinating art director Susan Kroyer , several featurettes including the original featurette from 1992 , the music video for If I 'm Gonna Eat Somebody ( It Might As Well Be You ) by Tone Lōc , as well as trailers and TV spots . Scott Weinberg from DVD Talk gave this version four stars out of five for both audio and video , and also four stars for special features . 
 FernGully was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on March 6 , 2012 , containing the same special features as the " Family Fun Edition " . Aaron peck from High Def Digest gave it three out of five stars for video quality , four stars for audio and three and a half stars for extras . Brian Orndorf from Blu @-@ ray.com gave the release three out of five stars for video quality , three and a half stars for audio and four stars for special features . 
 = Craigiehall = 
 Craigiehall is a late @-@ 17th @-@ century country house , which until 2015 served as the Headquarters of the British Army in Scotland . It is located close to Cramond , around 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) west of central Edinburgh , Scotland . 
 Craigiehall was designed by Sir William Bruce , with input from James Smith , and completed in 1699 for the Earl of Annandale , who had recently acquired the Craigie estate through marriage . It is a good surviving example of one of Bruce 's smaller houses , and set a pattern for such villas in the Edinburgh area for the 18th century . 
 It was later the home of Charles Hope @-@ Weir , who made several improvements to the estate policies . Craigiehall was extended several times , before being sold to the Earl of Rosebery , who leased out the property . It was briefly a hotel and country club , before being requisitioned by the Army at the outbreak of the Second World War . Craigiehall continues to be used as the Army 's Scottish Headquarters . The house has been protected as a category A listed building since 1971 , as a substantial 17th @-@ century classical house , worked on by several notable architects . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The estate of Craigie is recorded as belonging to one John de Craigie in the reign of David I ( 1124 – 1153 ) . In 1387 the estate passed by marriage to John Stewart , son of Sir Robert Stewart of <unk> . The Stewarts sold the estate , which by this time had a tower house , in 1643 to John Fairholm , treasurer to the City of Edinburgh . In 1682 John Fairholm 's granddaughter Sophia , aged only 14 , married William Johnstone , 2nd Earl of Annandale , and Craigiehall changed ownership again . Only two built features on the estate date from before this time ; the 17th century east sundial , and the ruined doocot , or pigeon house , dated 1672 . The east sundial is one of only 25 obelisk @-@ type sundials in Scotland , and was re @-@ erected to the east of the house in 1965 , after being found in a field to the south of the house . 
 = = The Bruce house = = 
 The couple set about planning a new house to replace the aging tower house , and in 1694 the Earl contacted Sir William Bruce , who promised to design " a convenient little house , <unk> and courts " . The property was surveyed by John Adair , and the old tower house was taken down . The survey took the place of a site visit by Bruce , who was at this time under virtual house arrest , due to his political leanings , and suspected Jacobite sympathies . Design submissions were also obtained from James Smith and Robert Mylne . Smith 's scheme was judged too small and irregular by Bruce , who urged the Earl to agree to his own " modish and <unk> <unk> " . However , the house as built by Bruce is partially based on Smith 's early design . Before work on the house commenced , a courtyard , 500 by 400 feet ( 150 by 120 m ) across , was laid out , establishing the formal arrangement in which the house would sit . On 16 February 1698 , a contract was signed between Lord Annandale and the mason Thomas Bauchop , for a house 64 by 46 feet ( 20 by 14 m ) , and 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) high , all " according to the <unk> of wood and draught signed by Sir William Bruce of Kinross " . 
 Bruce 's new house was complete by 1699 , and was worked on by many of the same craftsmen who were engaged by Bruce at nearby Hopetoun House , which was under construction at the same time . Craftsmen included the plasterers John McKay and Thomas <unk> , cabinet maker William Scott , plumber Joseph Foster , smith Alexander Gardener , and the wright Andrew Barclay . The staircase , with its wrought @-@ iron balustrade decorated with roses , thistles , tulips and oak leaves , bears many similarities to the one at Caroline Park , Granton , and was the work of the smiths James Storrie and James Horne . 
 The building comprises a compact , three @-@ storey house , in the Dutch @-@ classical style which was introduced into England by Sir Roger Pratt , and is typical of Bruce 's work . The six @-@ bay entrance front has a two @-@ bay projecting central section , surmounted by a pediment topped by three pineapples , of which one remains . The tympanum is carved with the coat of arms of the Earl and his wife , with their initials ( WEA and SCA for William , Earl of Annandale , and Sophia Countess of Annandale ) and the date 1699 . The roof behind was bell @-@ cast , with a cupola and four tall chimneys symmetrically placed , although this was replaced in the 1950s . The centrally placed entrance is reached by steps , and surmounted by carved decorations . The garden front is similar , and is also topped by a decorated pediment . Once the house was complete , two wings connected by curved passages were added . These incorporated additional accommodation and a library , but the passages and south wing were later demolished . 
 Inside , Bruce planned two apartments : a state apartment , comprising dining room , drawing room , bedroom and dressing room , with a second smaller apartment to the south . Bruce 's panelling survives in part of the south apartment , which was later turned into a single room . The chimneypiece and wood carving in the " Blue Room " is also 17th century . The centrally placed stairwell , lighted from above , would be developed more fully by Bruce in his design for Hopetoun House . 
 The walled garden to the north @-@ east was built in 1708 by Alexander McGill , to designs by the Earl of Mar , who also designed the gate piers and garden buildings , and supplied statuary . The garden may have been balanced by a similar walled garden to the south @-@ east of the house . No trace is now visible , but a second garden is shown on 18th century maps of the area , and would have been consistent with Bruce 's symmetrical layout . 
 = = Charles Hope @-@ Weir 's improvements = = 
 In 1741 , the 2nd Marquis of Annandale left Craigiehall to his nephew , Charles Hope @-@ Weir ( 1710 – 1791 ) , second son of Charles Hope , 1st Earl of Hopetoun . Hope @-@ Weir travelled to Europe on the grand tour in 1754 @-@ 55 , taking with him the young architect Robert Adam , and was inspired to improve the Craigiehall policies on his return . A walled forecourt and the formal gardens in front of the house were removed . He also planted numerous trees across the estate , laid out avenues , and had several garden buildings constructed . A lake was excavated , and a new bridge over the River Almond was constructed to link the neighbouring estate of Lennie , which Hope @-@ Weir had bought in 1750 . 
 = = = Bridge , grotto and bath house = = = 
 The rustic arched Grotto Bridge is dated 1757 . It bears Hope @-@ Weir 's initials , with the inscription <unk> <unk> , taken from Horace , and translatable as " the useful with the sweet " . It was built to a design by " J. Adam " , either John or James , Robert 's brothers . The bridge spans a particularly picturesque section of the Almond , with rapids flowing under the single span . 
 Upstream from the bridge is a grotto and bath house , built in a similar rustic style and presumably by the same architect . The bath house is a square vaulted chamber , with a plunge pool fed by river water . The upper chamber comprises a circular saloon with windows , although this is now roofless and in poor condition . The original roof was a conical thatched structure , and a niche on the exterior wall may have housed a statue . 
 = = = Craigiehall Temple = = = 
 An avenue of oak trees runs up Lennie Hill from the Grotto Bridge . At the summit , Hope @-@ Weir had an ornamental temple built in 1759 , commanding wide views of the expanded estate and beyond . Craigiehall Temple was a circular two @-@ storey structure , with a stair tower at the rear and a pedimented portico on the front . The segmental pediment bears the arms of the 1st Marquess of Annandale , and so predates the temple . In The Buildings of Scotland : Edinburgh , it is suggested that this portico may have formed part of a gate to the forecourt of the house . If so , it may have been made by Alexander McGill , to a design by John Erskine , Earl of Mar. It was incorporated into the temple , which was again to the design of one of the Adam brothers . A Latin inscription on the temple , again from Horace , can be translated as " live happy while you can among joyful things " . The structure was burned by vandals in the early 1970s , and in 1977 the upper storey was removed as a hazard to aviation , following the development of a new longer runway at nearby Edinburgh Airport . The remaining storey was renovated , and now forms part of a private house . 
 = = Extensions and additions = = 
 In 1818 Hope @-@ Weir 's grandson James Hope @-@ Vere ( 1785 – 1843 ) asked Thomas Brown to provide designs for an attic extension , although this was never carried out . Ten years later , William Burn was commissioned to design a new north wing , incorporating a dining room , with new kitchens below and bedrooms above . The front of this extension was topped by a pediment matching Bruce 's original , complete with pineapples , although this too was removed in the 1950s . The rear is bowed , with a curved stair led down to the garden at the rear . Plans for a matching wing to the south were never carried out . Burn also remodelled the interior , creating a large drawing room from the rooms of the south apartment . 
 James ' son William ( 1824 – 1916 ) commissioned David Bryce to design a further northern extension in 1853 , forming a servant 's range , and to remodel some of the interiors . William also rebuilt the 18th century stable court and clock tower between 1843 and 1872 . It was William 's son Colonel James Hope @-@ Vere ( 1858 – 1933 ) who sold the estate , upon his father 's death in 1916 , to the Earl of Rosebery for £ 85 @,@ 0000 . 
 = = Early 20th century = = 
 Lord Rosebery had purchased Craigiehall as a home for his second son Neil Primrose MP , who was killed in Gaza during the First World War . In 1926 Rosebery therefore decided to lease the house and policies , although the agricultural lands continue to be farmed as part of Lord Rosebery 's neighbouring Dalmeny estate . The lease was taken by Mr James Morton , an Edinburgh textile manufacturer , who commissioned Robert Lorimer to make various alterations , the property having stood empty for ten years . Lorimer added the oriel window on the south front , and modernised many of Bruce 's remaining interiors . A water turbine was constructed in the bath house to provide electricity . 
 In 1933 Craigiehall was re @-@ let to Ernest Thompson , who turned Craigiehall into the Riverside Hotel and Country Club . Thompson operated the 25 @-@ room hotel and golf course successfully until 1939 , when Craigiehall , like many other country houses , was requisitioned for the use of the armed forces . 
 = = Army Headquarters Scotland = = 
 Various regiments were stationed at Craigiehall Camp during the Second World War , including Royal Artillery , Royal Signals , and anti @-@ aircraft units . On 12 May 1945 , the surrender of German forces in Norway was negotiated and signed at Craigiehall . A rumour , related in Major Innes ' book , states that Rudolf Hess was brought to Craigiehall after he flew to Scotland in 1941 to contact the Duke of Hamilton . This rumour is based on a photograph of Hess supposedly once on display at Craigiehall , although the story is not corroborated . 
 After the war , Ernest Thompson exercised an option of his lease allowing him to buy Craigiehall from Lord Rosebery . However , the army had still not moved out , and in 1948 offered to purchase the property from Thompson , finally completing the sale in 1951 . Through the early 1950s the Army made alterations to Craigiehall . The original roof was replaced in 1953 due to woodworm , and extra rooms added in the attic . This resulted in the loss of Bruce 's chimneys , and Burn 's dining room pediment . Internally the house was redecorated , it being considered that there was too little of the original scheme remaining to allow restoration . Another extension was added , this time to the north @-@ west , to house the staff of the General Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief ( GOC ) in Scotland . 
 Elsewhere on the Camp , the Army began replacing the wartime Nissen huts with more permanent structures . New barracks opened in 1955 , and the Headquarters of the Army in Scotland arrived the same year from Edinburgh Castle . Further land was purchased from Lord Rosebery and married quarters were built close to the river . In 1966 , a purpose @-@ built office block , by architects Bowhill Gibson and Laing , was constructed within the walled garden , and named Annandale Block in honour of the builder of Craigiehall . Craigiehall Camp was also the site of a Cold War Anti @-@ Aircraft Operations Room , built in the 1950s . 
 Following restructuring , the army in Scotland became part of the 2nd Division , whose headquarters moved to Craigiehall Camp from York . Craigiehall itself was formerly the HQ of the Black Watch regiment , and now serves as the Officers ' Mess for the camp . As of 2007 , around 250 people , including civilian and military personnel , are employed at Craigiehall . In March 2007 , the Ministry of Defence announced plans for a new headquarters building at Craigiehall . Under the plans , the existing Annandale Block would be demolished , and the walled garden in which it stands would be restored . The new building was to be constructed elsewhere on the grounds , and was granted planning permission in September 2007 . On 14 December 2007 , defence ministers from eight NATO countries met at Craigiehall to discuss the role of NATO troops involved in Afghanistan . Among the ministers attending were Des Browne from the UK , Robert Gates from the US , and Joel Fitzgibbon from Australia . A protest march was organised , attracting around 30 demonstrators . 
 In July 2011 , following a Defence Basing Review carried out by the Ministry of Defence , it was announced that Craigiehall , along with Dreghorn Barracks and Redford Barracks also in Edinburgh , would be closing in 2014 – 2015 . The review proposed a single UK Support Command , based at Aldershot , to replace three existing divisional headquarters including HQ 2nd Division , based at Craigiehall , which would be disbanded in 2012 . Other units at Craigiehall would form part of a new multi @-@ role brigade to be based at Kirknewton . Craigiehall Camp would be earmarked for disposal . Although plans to develop Kirknewton as an Army barracks were scrapped in March 2013 , in early 2016 , the UK Government announced that the site was one of 12 that will be sold as part of the strategy for the MOD estate . No date for the sale was given . In 2014 Army Headquarters Scotland was merged with 51st Infantry Brigade at <unk> , Stirling . 
 = Postman 's Park = 
 Postman 's Park is a park in central London , a short distance north of St Paul 's Cathedral . Bordered by Little Britain , Aldersgate Street , St. Martin 's Le Grand , King Edward Street , and the site of the former headquarters of the General Post Office ( GPO ) , it is one of the largest parks in the City of London , the walled city which gives its name to modern London . Its name reflects its popularity amongst workers from the nearby GPO 's headquarters . 
 Postman 's Park opened in 1880 on the site of the former churchyard and burial ground of St Botolph 's Aldersgate church and expanded over the next 20 years to incorporate the adjacent burial grounds of Christ Church Greyfriars and St Leonard , Foster Lane , together with the site of housing demolished during the widening of Little Britain in 1880 ; the ownership of the last location became the subject of a lengthy dispute between the church authorities , the General Post Office , the Treasury , and the City Parochial Foundation . A shortage of space for burials in London meant that corpses were often laid on the ground and covered over with soil , thus elevating the park above the streets which surround it . 
 In 1900 , the park became the location for George Frederic Watts 's Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice , a memorial to ordinary people who died while saving the lives of others and who might otherwise be forgotten , in the form of a loggia and long wall housing ceramic memorial tablets . Only four of the planned 120 memorial tablets were in place at the time of its opening , with a further nine tablets added during Watts 's lifetime . Watts 's wife , Mary Watts , took over the management of the project after Watts 's death in 1904 and oversaw the installation of a further 35 memorial tablets in the following four years along with a small monument to Watts . Later she became disillusioned with the new tile manufacturer and , with her time and money increasingly occupied by the running of the Watts Gallery , she lost interest in the project , and only five further tablets were added during her lifetime . 
 In 1972 , key elements of the park , including the Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice , were grade II listed to preserve their character . Following the 2004 film Closer , based on the 1997 play Closer by Patrick Marber , Postman 's Park experienced a resurgence of interest ; key scenes of both were set in the park itself . In June 2009 , a city worker , Jane Shaka ( née Michele ) , via the Diocese of London added a new tablet to the Memorial , the first new addition for 78 years . In November 2013 a free mobile app , The Everyday Heroes of Postman ’ s Park , was launched which documents the lives and deaths of those commemorated on the memorial . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 The 13th @-@ century church of St Leonard , Foster Lane , about 200 yards ( 180 m ) north of St Paul 's Cathedral on Foster Lane , was badly damaged in the 1666 Great Fire of London , and was not considered to be worth the cost of repair . Instead its parish was united with that of the nearby Christ Church Greyfriars , which was rebuilt after the fire to a design by Sir Christopher Wren ; the incumbent from that time onwards has held the joint titles of Vicar of Christ Church Greyfriars and Rector of St Leonard , Foster Lane . Although destroyed in 1666 , the ruins of St Leonard , Foster Lane , were not cleared until the early 19th century . 
 Despite the unification of the parishes , they continued to operate separate burial grounds . That of Christ Church Greyfriars was a short distance north @-@ east of the church , on the eastern side of King Edward Street , while St Leonard , Foster Lane 's , was about 50 feet ( 15 m ) further east . 
 Immediately outside the London Wall at Aldersgate , a short distance north of St Leonard , Foster Lane on Little Britain , is the church of St Botolph 's Aldersgate ( sometimes referred to as " St Botolph Without Aldersgate " , a reference to its position immediately outside the historic city gate ) . Although the original church , first mentioned in 1493 , had survived the Great Fire , it was demolished between 1754 and 1757 and replaced in 1790 by the current building . 
 St Botolph 's Aldersgate was a wealthy parish , having been granted the assets of the nearby Cluniac priory and hospital during the 16th @-@ century Dissolution of the Monasteries . The parish was historically a significant place of worship , possibly best known as the site of the evangelical conversions of John Wesley and Charles Wesley . 
 To the immediate south @-@ west of the church building , St Botolph 's Aldersgate owned an irregularly shaped churchyard enclosed by Aldersgate Street to the east , the Christ Church Greyfriars burial ground to the west , housing and the burial ground of St Leonard , Foster Lane , to the south and housing along Little Britain to the north . The churchyard was used as a burial ground and as a public open space . As with other City churchyards , as the amount of available burial space in London failed to keep pace with the growing population it came to be used exclusively as a burial ground . 
 Postman 's Park has always been situated in the ward of Aldersgate . Its association with ( and location within ) that ward was reaffirmed in the most recent boundary review that took place in 2010 ; the ward boundary will be drawn around the southern edge of the park upon boundary changes effected in 2013 . 
 = = Closure of London 's burial grounds = = 
 The severe lack of burial space in London meant that graves would be frequently reused in London 's burial grounds , and the difficulty of digging without disturbing existing graves led to bodies often simply being stacked on top of each other to fit the available space and covered with a layer of earth . Differing numbers of parishioners in each parish led to burial grounds being used at different rates , and by the mid @-@ 19th century , the ground level of the St Botolph 's Aldersgate churchyard was 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above that of the Christ Church Greyfriars burial ground , and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above that of the St Leonard , Foster Lane , burial ground . 
 In 1831 and 1848 , serious outbreaks of cholera had overwhelmed the crowded cemeteries of London , causing bodies to be stacked in heaps awaiting burial , and even relatively recent graves to be exhumed to make way for new burials . Public health policy at this time was generally shaped by the miasma theory , and the bad smells and risks of disease caused by piled bodies and exhumed rotting corpses caused great public concern . 
 A Royal Commission established in 1842 to investigate the problem concluded that London 's burial grounds were so overcrowded that it was impossible to dig a new grave without cutting through an existing one . Sir Edwin Chadwick testified that each year , 20 @,@ 000 adults and 30 @,@ 000 children were being buried in less than 218 acres ( 88 ha ) of already overcrowded burial grounds ; the Commission heard that one cemetery , Spa Fields in Clerkenwell , designed to hold 1 @,@ 000 bodies , contained 80 @,@ 000 graves , and that gravediggers throughout London were obliged to shred bodies in order to cram the remains into available grave space . 
 = = = The Burials Act 1851 = = = 
 In the wake of public concerns following the cholera epidemics and the findings of the Royal Commission , the Act to Amend the Laws Concerning the Burial of the Dead in the Metropolis ( Burials Act ) was passed in 1851 . Under the Burials Act , new burials were prohibited in what were then the built @-@ up areas of London . Seven large cemeteries had recently opened a short distance from London and temporarily became London 's main burial grounds , and in 1849 the 2 @,@ 200 @-@ acre ( 890 ha ) Brookwood Cemetery in Brookwood , Surrey , with space for 240 @,@ 000 graves , was opened by the London Necropolis Company . Connected to London by the London Necropolis Railway in 1854 , it was at the time the world 's largest cemetery . It was projected that , on the basis of one body per grave with each grave being reused after 10 years , Brookwood Cemetery would suffice to house the dead of London forever . 
 With London 's churchyards and burial grounds no longer used for new burials , in 1858 it was decided to convert the churchyard of St Botolph 's Aldersgate to a public park . On 30 November 1858 , the Churchwardens of St Botolph 's Aldersgate announced that : 
 The Churchwardens of the above parish hereby give notice that they intend to plant , pave , or cover over the churchyard and burial @-@ ground . Persons having relatives interred in the said churchyard or burial @-@ ground will be permitted ( under certain regulations ) to remove and inter the remains of such relatives in any burial @-@ ground or cemetery , without the city . Persons also , to the memory of whose relatives any tomb , monument , or inscription may have been erected therein , may ( under the like regulations ) cause such tomb or grave @-@ stones to be removed and taken away ; but such removal , in either case , must be at the expense of the persons causing the same to be done . Applications for either of the above purposes must be made , in writing , on or before Monday , the 20th day of December , 1858 . 
 = = Opening of the public park = = 
 Progress in clearing and covering the burial ground was slow , and it was not until 28 October 1880 that the churchyard was reopened as a public park . Laid out with flower beds and gravel paths , the park became a popular place for local workers to spend breaks . 
 In 1887 , the burial ground of Christ Church Greyfriars was given to the parish of St Botolph 's Aldersgate . The burial ground was cleared and the ground level raised by 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) to allow its incorporation into the new park . At this time , the burial ground of St Leonard , Foster Lane was also cleared and raised to integrate it with the new park , although it was not formally merged with the park until 1890 . 
 A short distance south of the three burial grounds , on St. Martin 's Le Grand , was the site of a collegiate church and sanctuary founded in 750 by <unk> , King of Kent , expanded in 1056 by <unk> , Earl of Essex and issued with a Royal Charter in 1068 by William the Conqueror . The site of the church was cleared in 1818 in preparation for the construction of a new headquarters and central sorting office for the General Post Office ( GPO ) , which opened in 1829 . In 1873 and 1895 the GPO building was greatly expanded in size , with the 1895 extension bordering the southern edge of the park itself . The park became extremely popular with workers in the GPO building , and soon became known as " Postman 's Park " . 
 = = = The City Parochial Foundation and the north of the park = = = 
 Between the northern border of the former St Botolph 's Aldersgate churchyard and Little Britain was a small , roughly triangular 300 @-@ square @-@ yard ( 250 m2 ) piece of land . The site of housing owned by the parish of St Botolph 's Aldersgate and demolished during the widening of Little Britain in 1880 , it had been incorporated into the new park . However , being owned by the parish , in 1891 ownership was formally passed to the newly formed City Parochial Foundation ( CPF ) , which felt itself obliged under charity law to maximise its income from the land . In October 1896 , the CPF fenced off the land from the rest of the park , and announced that it intended to lease the land for building purposes , unless the authorities were willing to purchase the land for £ 12 @,@ 000 ( about £ 1 @.@ 3 million as of 2016 ) . 
 The City of London had few open spaces , and the proposal to build on the north of the park was extremely unpopular with local residents , workers and social reformers . Henry Fitzalan @-@ Howard , the Postmaster @-@ General , persuaded the Government to contribute £ 5 @,@ 000 towards the cost , and the clergy of St Botolph 's Aldersgate launched an appeal in The Times for the remaining funds . 
 Reginald Brabazon , 12th Earl of Meath , founder and Chairman of the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association ( MPGA ) , decided to put the weight of his organisation behind the campaign , and through a combination of public donations and donations from the London County Council , Corporation of London and Kyrle Society , raised the remaining £ 7 @,@ 000 in less than six months . At this point a dispute broke out over who would be responsible for the maintenance of the park . The £ 5 @,@ 000 offer from the Treasury was conditional upon the CPF reassigning to the Post Office the £ 200 annual maintenance grant that it currently gave to St Botolph 's Aldersgate ; the CPF maintained that it was happy to do so on condition that the Post Office maintain the park in place of St Botolph 's Aldersgate , but that the Post Office was unwilling to do so . With all parties unable to agree on responsibility for maintenance , on 19 February 1898 the Treasury withdrew its offer altogether , leaving the appeal £ 5 @,@ 000 short . 
 In the wake of the Treasury 's withdrawal of funding , in May 1898 the churchwardens of St Botolph 's Aldersgate brokered a compromise with the CPF . The disputed site was split into two parts , each priced at £ 6 @,@ 000 . The western section would be purchased immediately using £ 6 @,@ 000 of the £ 7 @,@ 000 already raised , with an option to purchase the eastern section if the remaining £ 5 @,@ 000 could be raised within two years , after which the CPF would go ahead with building plans if the money could not be raised . 
 As before , the MPGA supported and assisted the new fundraising campaign . However , although the campaign was initially boosted by a £ 1 @,@ 000 donation from Octavia Hill , fundraising was slow , and by October 1898 only £ 2 @,@ 000 had been raised . The churchwardens and the MPGA began to consider ideas for initiatives which would publicise the campaign and provide a reason to justify preserving the whole of the park . 
 = = George Frederic Watts 's memorial proposals = = 
 The painter and sculptor George Frederic Watts and his second wife Mary Fraser Tytler had long been advocates of the idea of art as a force for social change . Watts had painted a series of portraits of those figures he considered to be a positive social influence , the " Hall of Fame " , which was donated to the National Portrait Gallery . As the son of a piano maker , who reportedly despised the wealthy and powerful and twice refused a baronetcy , Watts had long considered a national monument to the bravery of ordinary people . In August 1866 , he suggested to his patron Charles Rickards that he " erect a great statue to Unknown Worth " , and proposed erecting a colossal bronze figure . Unable to secure funds , the memorial remained unrealised . 
 On 5 September 1887 , a letter was published in The Times from Watts , proposing a scheme to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria . Entitled " Another Jubilee <unk> " , Watts proposed to " collect a complete record of the stories of heroism in every @-@ day life " . Watts cited the case of Alice Ayres , a servant who , trapped in a burning house , gave up the chance to jump to safety , instead first throwing a mattress out of the window to cushion the fall , before running back into the house three times to fetch her employer 's children and throwing them out of a window onto the mattress to safety before herself being overcome by fumes and falling out of the window to her death . 
 Watts by this stage had abandoned the idea of a colossal bronze figure , and proposed " a kind of Campo Santo " , consisting of a covered way and marble wall inscribed with the names of everyday heroes , to be built in Hyde Park . Despite an offer of funding from John Passmore Edwards , Watts 's suggestion was not taken up , leading Watts to comment that " if I had proposed a race course round Hyde Park , there would have been plenty of sympathisers " . Watts continued to lobby for such a memorial , with both himself and Mary Watts redrafting their wills to leave the bulk of their estate to the purpose , and considered selling his home , New Little Holland House , to finance the project . 
 = = The Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice = = 
 In 1898 a friend of Watts suggested to Henry Gamble , Vicar of St Botolph 's Aldersgate , that should the church manage to purchase the land owned by the CPF it would make a suitable site for Watts 's memorial . Watts was approached , and agreed to the suggestion . On 13 October 1898 the appeal was relaunched , with the proposal that if the remaining £ 3 @,@ 000 were raised , Watts would design and build a covered way , which in due course would be lined with memorial tablets to commemorate the bravery of ordinary people . Watts planned to build a covered way around three sides of a quadrangle , with the roof supported on stone or timber columns . 
 The MPGA were not consulted about the proposal , and the following week Lord Meath wrote to The Times and the City Press to complain about the scheme . He argued that the MPGA had devoted large amounts of time and money to prevent the park from being built on , and that while Watts 's proposal was " worthy of all encouragement and support " , Postman 's Park , at less than one acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) and surrounded by tall buildings , was an inappropriate site . The three @-@ sided design was abandoned , in favour of a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) long and 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) tall wooden loggia with a tiled roof , designed by Ernest George . The supporting wall contained space for 120 memorial tablets . St Botolph 's Aldersgate secured the necessary funds to complete the purchase of the CPF land , and Watts agreed to pay the £ 700 ( about £ 71 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) construction costs himself . 
 Work began in 1899 , and on 30 July 1900 the newly reunified park and Watts 's Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice ( also known as the Wall of Heroes ) were unveiled by Alfred Newton , Lord Mayor of London , and Mandell Creighton , Bishop of London . A short service was held in St Botolph 's Aldersgate , after which a short speech was given by Creighton in which he observed that : 
 It was a good thing that the multitude who took their recreation in this open space should have some great thoughts on which to fix their hearts , some inscriptions before their eyes recalling to them the things which had been done by those who did their duty bravely , simply and straightforwardly in the place where God had placed them . Such were , indeed , the salt of the earth , and it was by producing characters such as theirs that a nation waxed strong . 
 Watts himself , by now 83 years old , was too ill to attend the ceremony , and was represented by Mary Watts . 
 = = = William De Morgan memorial tablets = = = 
 Although Watts 's plans for the memorial had envisaged names inscribed on the wall , in the event the memorial was designed to hold panels of hand @-@ painted and glazed ceramic tiles . Watts was an acquaintance of William De Morgan , at that time one of the world 's leading tile designers , and consequently found them easier and cheaper to obtain than engraved stone . The four initial memorial tablets , installed for the unveiling , each consisted of two large custom @-@ made tiles , with each tablet costing £ 3 5s ( about £ 330 as of 2016 ) to produce . Only four tablets were installed by the time of the unveiling ceremony , and Watts already had concerns about the potential costs of installing the 120 tablets envisaged in the memorial 's design . 
 Costs were allayed by using standard 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) tiles for the next set of tablets , reducing the costs to a more manageable £ 2 per tablet . In 1902 , nine further tablets were installed , intermittently spaced along the central of the five rows , including the memorial to Alice Ayres for which Watts had lobbied . 
 The subjects of the 13 initial tiles had been personally selected by Watts , who had for many years maintained a list of newspaper reports of heroic actions potentially worthy of recognition . However , by this time he was in his eighties and in increasingly poor health , and in January 1904 the vicar and churchwardens of St Botolph 's Aldersgate formed the Humble Heroes Memorial Committee to oversee the completion of the project , agreeing to defer to Watts regarding additions to the memorial . Watts strenuously objected to the name , as " not being applicable to anything as splendid as heroic self @-@ sacrifice " , and the committee was renamed the " Heroic Self Sacrifice Memorial Committee " . 
 On 1 July 1904 George Frederic Watts died at New Little Holland House , aged 87 . He was hailed " The last great Victorian " , and a memorial service was held in St Paul 's Cathedral , 300 yards ( 270 m ) south of Postman 's Park , on 7 July 1904 . 
 On 11 July 1904 Mary Watts wrote to the Heroic Self Sacrifice Memorial Committee , stating that she intended to complete the memorial and offering to select 35 names from Watts 's list of names and to raise the £ 62 ( about £ 6 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) necessary to finance the completion of the first two rows of tablets . Mary Watts selected eleven names to complete the first row , and De Morgan provided the tiles in October 1905 . Unfortunately , five of the tiles were damaged during shipping and needed to be replaced . 
 Henry Gamble and Mary Watts also commissioned a memorial plaque from T. H. Wren , a student of the school of arts and crafts established by Watts in Compton . The relief plaque depicts Watts holding a scroll marked " Heroes " , and is captioned " The utmost for the highest " and " In memorial of George Frederic Watts , who desiring to honour heroic self @-@ sacrifice placed these records here " . Eventually , on 13 December 1905 , the eleven tiles and Wren 's memorial to Watts , placed in the centre of the monument , were unveiled by Arthur Winnington @-@ Ingram , Bishop of London , completing the first row of tiles . 
 With the first row of tablets complete , Mary Watts and the Heroic Self Sacrifice Memorial Committee decided to complete the next row as soon as possible . The Committee selected 24 names , 22 proposed by Watts before his death and two from press reports of 1905 , and De Morgan was duly commissioned to produce the new set of tablets . 
 = = = Royal Doulton = = = 
 William De Morgan was unwilling to compromise on quality or embrace the trend towards mass production , and by this time his work was significantly more expensive than similar works by other designers . Consequently , his ceramics business was becoming increasingly unviable financially . In 1906 his first novel , Joseph Vance , was published and became a great success , prompting De Morgan to close the ceramics business in 1907 to concentrate on writing . Mary Watts attempted to replicate De Morgan 's tile designs at Watts 's pottery in Compton but was unable to do so , and investigated other tile manufacturers . 
 It transpired that the only manufacturer able to supply suitable tiles was Royal Doulton , although they were unable or unwilling to replicate De Morgan 's designs , and they were duly commissioned to manufacture the 24 tiles , delivered in May 1908 . Mary Watts was unhappy with the design of the tiles , which were significantly different in colour and appearance from De Morgan 's original tiles , and they were installed without ceremony on 21 August 1908 , immediately below De Morgan 's original row of tiles . 
 In 1905 the Heroic Self Sacrifice Memorial Committee had suggested to Mary Watts that public funds be raised to complete the memorial , but she objected and promised to complete the 120 tablets at her own cost or provide funds in her will to do so . However , in 1910 she told the Committee that she was unable to fund the project , as she was devoting her time and money to the Watts Mortuary Chapel and the Watts Gallery in Compton . Work to fill the three empty rows of the memorial was abandoned . 
