 = = = = Post @-@ First World War memorials to police officers = = = = 
 On 13 June 1917 , P.C. Alfred Smith , an officer of the Metropolitan Police , was patrolling Central Street in Finsbury , approximately 900 yards ( 820 m ) directly north of Postman 's Park . At about noon , fifteen German aircraft began a bombing raid , devastating the area . Around 150 women and girls working in the nearby Debenhams factory panicked in the explosions , and ran out into the street while the air raid was still in progress . PC Smith and the manager of the factory shepherded them back to safety in the building , but Smith was caught by the blast of one of the bombs and died . 
 Following Smith 's death J. Allen Baker , Member of Parliament for Finsbury East , launched a public fund to support Smith 's widow and young son and to provide a suitable memorial to him , raising a total of £ 471 14s 2d ( about £ 24 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . On 13 June 1919 , two years to the day after Smith 's death , a memorial tablet to Smith made by Royal Doulton was unveiled at the start of the empty row directly above De Morgan 's original tiles . 
 After the addition of Smith 's memorial tablet , no further changes were made to the memorial in the years following the First World War . Although Mary Watts had always been opposed to the idea of a public subscription , in 1927 T. H. Ellis , Parish Clerk of St Botolph 's Aldersgate , approached her to propose public fundraising to complete the memorial . Mary Watts agreed and an appeal was launched in May 1929 , aiming to raise funds to repair and restore the by now run @-@ down loggia , and to install additional tablets . By this time Watts 's work was out of fashion , and the appeal was not as successful as was hoped , raising only £ 250 ( about £ 14 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . Of this total £ 30 was spent on the restoration of the loggia , leaving £ 220 for placing future tablets . 
 Disliking Royal Doulton 's tiling designs , and with her time and money increasingly devoted to the maintenance of the Watts Gallery , Mary Watts by now was losing interest in the memorial and by 1930 had handed complete control to the Heroic Self Sacrifice Memorial Committee . Neither Mary Watts nor the Committee had added new names to the list originally proposed by Watts , and thus there were no proposed names more recent than 1904 , with the vast majority dating back to the 19th century . The Committee decided that rather than use these by now dated records , they would request suggestions from relevant public bodies . The British Medical Association was asked to suggest brave medical professionals , the Metropolitan Police Service to suggest brave police officers , and , in light of the park 's name , the General Post Office was asked to suggest heroic postal workers . The Metropolitan Police suggested the names of three officers who had died while rescuing others , and on 15 October 1930 tablets to the three officers , manufactured by Royal Doulton to a similar design to their previous tablets , were added to the second row and unveiled by Hastings Lees @-@ Smith , the Postmaster @-@ General , in a ceremony also commemorating the 50th anniversary of the opening of the park , attended by Mary Watts and many police officers and relatives of those being commemorated . 
 At this time , one of De Morgan 's 1902 tablets was removed . Commemorating four workers who had died in an accident at the East Ham Sewage Works in 1895 , Watts had mistakenly listed the incident as having taken place at the West Ham Sewage Works in 1885 . The De Morgan tablet was removed and replaced with a Royal Doulton tablet giving the correct location and date . As the Doulton tablets were in such a different style to De Morgan 's , the replacement tablet was installed in the second row next to the three new tablets to police officers , rather than in the space left by the original . 
 = = = Herbert Maconoghu = = = 
 Removing the original tablet to the victims of the East Ham Sewage Works accident had left an unsightly gap in the original row of tiles . In 1931 , Mary Watts tracked down Fred Passenger , a former employee of De Morgan who had , after the closure of the business , set up his own ceramics business using De Morgan designs . Passenger was by this time working for a pottery business in Bushey Heath established by artist Ida Perrin , but Mary Watts persuaded him to produce a single panel in the style of De Morgan to fit into the empty space . Herbert Maconoghu , a schoolboy who had died in 1882 attempting to rescue two friends from drowning , had been one of the names originally suggested by Watts , and Passenger produced a tablet to Maconoghu in the style of the original central row , which was installed in April 1931 . Maconoghu was actually Herbert Moore <unk> , the son of Matthew and Martha <unk> , and he was born in <unk> in Indian where Matthew was working as a settlement officer for the Imperial Civil Service . 
 = = Postman 's Park after the death of Mary Watts = = 
 Mary Watts died in 1938 , and was buried alongside George Frederic Watts near the Watts Mortuary Chapel , which she had herself designed and built in Compton in 1901 . Following her death , and with both George and Mary Watts increasingly out of fashion , the memorial was abandoned half @-@ finished , with only 52 of the intended 120 spaces filled . In the years following Mary Watts 's death there were occasional proposals to add new names to complete the memorial , but the Watts Gallery was hostile to the plans , considering the monument in its unfinished state to be a symbol of the Watts 's values and beliefs , and that its status as a historic record of its time is what makes it of value in the present day . 
 The nave of Christ Church Greyfriars was destroyed by bombing on 29 December 1940 . By then the decline in the population of the City of London had reduced the congregation to less than 80 , and the parishes of St Leonard , Foster Lane and Christ Church Greyfriars were merged with nearby St Sepulchre @-@ without @-@ Newgate . Although parts of the ruins were cleared during a widening of King Edward Street after the Second World War , the remains of the nave of Christ Church Greyfriars became a public memorial in 1989 ; the tower is now office space . 
 St Botolph 's Aldersgate remains open as a functioning church . Unusually for an English church , because of its location in a now mainly commercial area with few local residents , services are held on Tuesdays instead of the more traditional Sundays . On 4 January 1950 , St Botolph 's Aldersgate and the surviving ruins of Christ Church Greyfriars were both designated Grade I listed buildings . 
 In 1934 , a statue of Sir Robert Peel erected in Cheapside in 1855 was declared an obstruction to traffic and removed . A proposal that it be installed in front of the Bank of England fell through , and in 1952 it was erected in Postman 's Park . In 1971 the Metropolitan Police requested that the statue be moved to the new Peel Centre police training complex , and the Corporation of London agreed . In place of Peel 's statue , a large bronze sculpture of the Minotaur by Michael Ayrton was unveiled in 1973 . Dominating the small park , in 1997 the Minotaur sculpture was moved to a new position on the raised walkway above London Wall . 
 On 5 June 1972 , the western entrance of Postman 's Park and the elaborate Gothic drinking fountain attached to the railings were Grade II listed , protecting them from further development . At this time , the Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice itself was also Grade II listed ; although considered of little architectural merit , the register notes that it is " listed as a curiosity " . 
 Postman 's Park came to increased public notice in 2004 with the release of the <unk> and Golden Globe @-@ winning film Closer , which stars Natalie Portman , Julia Roberts , Jude Law and Clive Owen , and is based on the 1997 play Closer by Patrick Marber . A key plot element in the film revolves around Postman 's Park , in which it is revealed that the character Alice Ayres ( played by Portman in the film ) has in fact fabricated her identity based on Ayres 's tablet on the Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice , which she had read at the time of her first meeting with Dan Woolf ( Jude Law ) at the start of the film . 
 = = = Leigh Pitt = = = 
 Leigh Pitt , a print technician from Surrey , had died on 7 June 2007 rescuing nine @-@ year @-@ old Harley Bagnall @-@ Taylor who was drowning in a canal in Thamesmead . His colleague , Jane Michele ( now Jane Shaka ) approached the Diocese of London to suggest that Pitt would make a suitable addition to the memorial , and despite previous opposition from the Watts Gallery to proposals to complete the memorial , on 11 June 2009 a memorial to Pitt was added to the Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice , the first new tablet added to the memorial since that of Herbert Maconoghu 78 years earlier . A spokesman for the Diocese of London said that the Diocese would now consider suitable names to be added to the memorial in future . 
 = = The Everyday Heroes of Postman ’ s Park mobile app = = 
 In November 2013 , a free mobile app entitled The Everyday Heroes of Postman ’ s Park was launched . The app provides detailed accounts of each of the fifty @-@ four incidents recorded on the Memorial and reveals the lives of the sixty @-@ two people commemorated . The app employs image recognition technology and the built @-@ in camera on the device to scan each tablet and then deliver the relevant information about the person . The app is the result of collaboration between <unk> Ventures Ltd and Dr John Price of the University of Roehampton , supported by <unk> London , a Knowledge Exchange Hub for the Creative Economy funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council ( <unk> ) . The app can be used on a range of devices including iPhone , iPad and Android devices . 
 = = The Friends of the Watts Memorial = = 
 The Friends of the Watts Memorial was established in 2015 with the primary aims of protecting , preserving and promoting the Watts Memorial to Heroic Self @-@ Sacrifice in Postman ’ s Park London and , ultimately , to work towards completing it in full as its creator , the artist George Frederic Watts originally intended . 
 The Friends is a not @-@ for @-@ profit organisation , run entirely by volunteers and governed by a <unk> Friends work with various partners , including the Bishop of London ’ s Office , the City of London Corporation and the Watts Gallery , to ensure that the Watts Memorial is maintained and conserved . It promotes and publicises the memorial , through planning and staging events , so as to raise its profile and increase public engagement and knowledge about it . The Friends also support the work of those who wish to research the history of the memorial or to undertake events related to it and it undertakes fundraising to support the conservation of the memorial and to facilitate its completion . 
 = = Styles of tiling used on the Memorial to Heroic Self Sacrifice = = 
 The tablets are arranged on the second , third and fourth of the five rows , with 24 tablets to William De Morgan 's original design in the third , central , row , the 24 tablets added in 1908 directly below in the fourth row , and more recent additions above the original tiles in the second row . The first and fifth of the five rows remain empty . The first four tablets , designed and manufactured by De Morgan and installed in 1900 , were each made from two large custom @-@ made tiles . Nine further De Morgan tablets , installed in 1902 , were made using standard tiles to reduce costs , and were the last tiles whose installation was overseen by Watts . Eleven further De Morgan tablets , along with T. H. Wren 's memorial to Watts , were added in 1905 , completing the central row of tablets . All 24 tablets of the 4th row , designed and manufactured by Royal Doulton , were added as a single batch in August 1908 . A single Royal Doulton tablet to PC Alfred Smith was added in June 1919 , followed in October 1930 by similar Royal Doulton tablets to three further police officers , and a replacement tablet with the correct details of the East Ham Sewage Works incident of 1895 . A single tablet made by Fred Passenger in the original De Morgan style , honouring schoolboy Herbert Maconoghu , was added in April 1931 to fill the gap in the centre row left by the removal of the original , incorrect tablet to the victims of the East Ham Sewage Works incident . In 2009 a 54th tablet was added , in the style of the Royal Doulton tiles , to commemorate print technician Leigh Pitt , the first addition to the wall for 78 years . 
 = SM UB @-@ 11 = 
 SM UB @-@ 11 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. UB @-@ 11 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in November . UB @-@ 11 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . She was launched and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 11 in March 1915 . 
 UB @-@ 11 's commanding officer at commissioning only remained in charge of the ship for a week . Sources do not report any more commanding officers assigned through the end of the war , so it 's not clear if the submarine remained in commission . UB @-@ 11 was reported in use as a training vessel at Kiel in September 1915 . The U @-@ boat made no war patrols and sank no ships during the war , which may indicate that the vessel remained in a training role . At the end of the war , UB @-@ 11 was deemed unseaworthy and unable to surrender at Harwich with the rest of Germany 's U @-@ boat fleet . She remained in Germany where she was broken up by Stinnes in February 1920 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . 
 UB @-@ 11 was part of the initial allotment of seven submarines — numbered UB @-@ 9 to UB @-@ 15 — ordered on 15 October from AG Weser of Bremen , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . UB @-@ 11 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 7 November . As built , UB @-@ 11 was 27 @.@ 88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7 @.@ 45 knots ( 13 @.@ 80 km / h ; 8 @.@ 57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6 @.@ 24 knots ( 11 @.@ 56 km / h ; 7 @.@ 18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 11 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 11 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 11 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . After work on UB @-@ 11 was complete at the Weser yard , she was launched on 2 March . 
 = = Career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 11 on 4 March 1915 under the command of Kapitänleutnant ( Kapt . ) Ralph Wenninger , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . Wenninger was only in command of UB @-@ 11 for a week . Sources do not indicate who , if anyone , succeeded him as commander of UB @-@ 11 , or if UB @-@ 11 remained in commission . 
 According to authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast , UB @-@ 11 had been assigned to the Kiel Periscope School by September 1915 . Uboat.net reports that UB @-@ 11 ' undertook no war patrols and had no successes against enemy ships , which may indicate that the vessel remained in use only as a training vessel . 
 At the end of the war , the Allies required all German U @-@ boats to be sailed to Harwich for surrender . UB @-@ 11 was one of eight U @-@ boats deemed unseaworthy and allowed to remain in Germany . UB @-@ 11 was broken up by Stinnes on 3 February 1920 . 
 = John de Vere , 7th Earl of Oxford = 
 John de Vere , 7th Earl of Oxford ( c . 12 March 1312 – 24 January 1360 ) was the nephew and heir of Robert de Vere , 6th Earl of Oxford who succeeded as Earl of Oxford in 1331 , after his uncle died without issue . 
 John de Vere was a trusted captain of Edward III in the king 's wars in Scotland and France , and took part in both the Battle of Crécy and the Battle of Poitiers . He died campaigning in France in 1360 . Throughout his career he was closely associated with William de Bohun , 1st Earl of Northampton , who was his brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 = = Family background and marriage = = 
 John de Vere was the only son of Alphonse de Vere , and Jane , daughter of Sir Richard Foliot . Alphonse was a younger son of Robert de Vere , 5th Earl of Oxford and apparently died shortly before 20 December 1328 , when a writ was issued for inquisitions post mortem into the land that he held direct from the King . These hearings established that Alphonse 's next heir was his son John , then aged 15 years and more . The manors concerned were Aston Sandford , Buckinghamshire , Westwick by St Albans and Great <unk> , Hertfordshire , as well as property at Beaumont and <unk> in Essex . 
 Alphonse was a brother of Robert de Vere , 6th Earl of Oxford . When the 6th Earl 's son died without issue in 1329 , he obtained licence from the king to entail his estates on his nephew , John . It was in this way that John de Vere , when his uncle died 17 April 1331 , became Earl of Oxford . He had made homage and received livery by 17 May . 
 In 1336 John married Maud de Badlesmere , who was the second of the four daughters of Bartholomew de Badlesmere , 1st Baron Badlesmere , of Badlesmere in Kent and Margaret de Clare . Maud was a co @-@ heiress of her brother Giles de Badlesmere , 2nd Baron Badlesmere . When Giles died in 1338 , this brought a significant part of the Badlesmere inheritance into de Vere 's hands . The marriage also forged a strong bond with William Bohun , Earl of Northampton , who had married Badlesmere 's third daughter , Elizabeth de Badlesmere , and thus became Oxford 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . The two campaigned together , sat on the same commissions and died the same year . 
 = = Career = = 
 De Vere 's military career began with service on Edward III 's Scottish campaigns , in the 1330s Second War of Scottish Independence . He took part in the Roxburgh campaign of 1334 – 5 , and in the summer campaign of 1335 . Later in the decade , England 's military efforts turned towards France , with the beginning of the Hundred Years ' War . In March 1340 , de Vere served in Flanders , and was therefore out of the country during Edward 's disputes with Archbishop John de Stratford . Oxford was not forced to take sides in the conflict , and has been described as a " political neutral " . 
 After a period in England , de Vere returned to the Continent in 1342 , where he served with Northampton , who had been made lieutenant of Brittany . They both took part in the Battle of Morlaix that year . The next year the two earls were sent to Scotland to relieve Lochmaben Castle , and in 1345 they were again campaigning in Brittany . Tradition has it that , returning to England , their ships were forced ashore by bad weather , and the party was robbed of their possessions by the locals . In the summer of 1346 de Vere was campaigning with the king in Normandy , and took part in the Battle of Crécy . According to the chronicler Froissart , de Vere was fighting with the Black Prince , and was among the captains who sent a request to Edward III for reinforcements when the king famously answered ' Let the boy win his spurs ' . Oxford was also at the Siege of Calais , but reportedly fell ill in 1348 , and did not take part in any major campaigning until 1355 . 
 In 1355 he was again in the company of the Black Prince , and took part in the prince 's great raid in Languedoc . 19 September 1356 , at the Battle of Poitiers , Oxford was in command of the vanguard together with the earl of <unk> de Vere 's attack on the flank of the French cavalry , with a group of archers , did much to secure the English victory . His last campaign was Edward III 's Rheims campaign in 1359 – 60 . Here he died , probably during the raid into Burgundy , on 23 or 24 January 1360 . He was buried in the de Vere family 's burial place Colne Priory in Essex . 
 = = Descendants and assessment = = 
 Maud de Vere died in 1366 . The couple had four sons and three daughters . The eldest son , John , married Elizabeth Courtenay , daughter of Hugh Courtenay , 10th Earl of Devon , but died before his father , in 1350 . ( After the death of her husband , Elizabeth married Sir Andrew Luttrell of Chilton ( in <unk> ) , Devon . ) Another son , Robert , also died in his father 's lifetime . The eldest remaining son was then Thomas , born about 1336 or 1337 , who succeeded his father in 1360 . Thomas 's son Robert de Vere , 9th Earl of Oxford succeeded at his father 's death , but with Robert 's forfeiture in 1392 , the earldom was given to Robert 's uncle Aubrey – the seventh earl 's fourth son . The eldest daughter , Margaret , married three times , while of the second , Matilda , little is known . The third daughter , Elizabeth , married Sir Hugh Courtenay , eldest son and heir of Hugh de Courtenay , 10th Earl of Devon . 
 John de Vere , in the family tradition of the " fighting de Veres " , was active in almost all major military engagements in the years from 1340 to 1360 . On the Roxburgh campaign he brought a retinue of twenty @-@ eight men @-@ at @-@ arms and twelve mounted archers . In Brittany in 1342 , the retinue had grown to forty men @-@ at @-@ arms , one banneret , nine knights , twenty @-@ nine <unk> , and thirty mounted archers . His retinue was of a diverse composition , and also included foreign mercenaries . At one point , in the Battle of Poitiers , John Hawkwood , who was later to make his fortune as a condottiero in Italy , also served with de Vere . Yet in spite of this , de Vere never distinguished himself particularly as a military commander . Neither did he receive a great amount of royal patronage , and was never made a member of the Order of the Garter . This was largely a consequence of the de Vere family 's relatively modest resources among the English peerage . As an example can be mentioned that in the late 1340 , £ 349 were owed to Oxford in arrears for his services , yet at the same time the king owed Northampton two debts of £ 782 and £ 1237 . This obstacle of resources and status John de Vere was unable to overcome either by marriage or warfare . 
 = = De Vere family tree = = 
 = The PTA Disbands = 
 " The PTA Disbands " is the 21st episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 16 , 1995 . In the episode , Edna Krabappel calls an emergency strike on behalf of the Teachers ' Union of Springfield Elementary , to protest against Principal Skinner 's miserly school spending . Students react in their own manner to the strike : Lisa becomes obsessed with a desire to be graded , while Bart enjoys the extra time he has during the day . Bart arranges to keep the teachers union and Principal Skinner at an impasse , but becomes frustrated with substitute teacher arrangements and resolves to force negotiations forward . The situation is resolved when Krabappel and Skinner agree to rent space in classroom closets to the Springfield Prison . 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden and directed by Swinton O. Scott III , with David Mirkin as show @-@ runner . The episode includes cultural references to a number of books highlighted by Edna Krabappel as having been banned by other schools – including William Shatner 's TekWar , Steal This Book by Abbie Hoffman , and The Theory of Evolution by Charles Darwin . The episode received favorable mention in books on The Simpsons and media reviews , and was cited by academicians , who analyzed portions of the episode from physics and psychology perspectives . During a 2004 strike by voice actors for The Simpsons during salary negotiations , media sources cited an iconic quote from Homer to Lisa in the episode about the teachers ' strike . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a failed attempt at a school field trip , which appears to have caused the apparent abandonment and brutal beating of the student Üter , Edna Krabappel calls an emergency strike on behalf of the Teachers ' Union of Springfield Elementary , to protest against Principal Skinner 's miserly spending on school supplies and activities . 
 As the teachers ' strike results in the closing of the school , the various student characters respond to the sudden turn of events in their own ways : Lisa becomes increasingly obsessive in her desire to be graded , Milhouse is forced by his parents to take private tutoring lessons ( which improve his education ) , Jimbo Jones finds himself immersed in the intricacies of daytime soap operas with his mother , Dolph and Kearney become easily bored with video games , and Bart revels in his newfound afternoon freedom and annoys many Springfield citizens by imitating other people to make them angry or hurt each other . In particular , Bart does what he can to keep the union and Principal Skinner at odds with each other . The two sides are at an impasse ; the union wanting a restoration of funding and Skinner maintaining that even with the spending reductions he has made , government budget cuts have squeezed the school dry . 
 After some prompting from an exasperated Marge Simpson , the parents of Springfield eventually decide to take matters into their own hands , and recruit volunteers from the community to take over as temporary teachers . This turns out to be even worse for the students than before the strike , especially as Marge becomes Bart 's new teacher after Skinner learns he has chased away previous substitutes including Moe and decided he needed use her to keep Bart in line . Jasper becomes Lisa 's new teacher and gets his beard stuck in a pencil <unk> , which makes her worried about not being able to get into her dream school Vassar College . Due to Marge 's excessive mothering of Bart , he grudgingly resolves to force the strike negotiations forward . Together with Milhouse , he tricks both Krabappel and Principal Skinner into entering Skinner 's office , which he then locks behind them . After spending several hours trapped together " like prisoners " in their own school , the two are mutually inspired with an idea to create extra revenue for more school spending . Things return to normal with the old teachers in charge , but with the school cloakrooms having been rented to the Springfield Prison . Each classroom now features several full prison cells at the back , which have the added benefit of keeping the more troublesome students in line . Snake Jailbird makes a deal with Bart to get him out of prison , promising him to " make it worth your while " , to which Bart responses shortly afterwards " I 'm listening " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden . She came in to the writers ' room and pitched the idea that there should be a teachers ' strike in an episode . Then @-@ show runner David Mirkin thought the episode had a lot of potential , and much of it is based on his experience as a child with schools running out of money . Despite the title of the episode , at no point does the PTA ( Parent @-@ Teacher Association ) actually disband . The title was suggested by Mirkin and was intended to poke fun at Crittenden , who thought the most exciting part of the teachers going on strike would be that the PTA might disband . In addition to this , Mirkin added a character to the episode who , on thinking the PTA has disbanded , jumps panicking out of a window . He jumps back in the same window when Flanders tells him the PTA has not disbanded . 
 The episode was directed by Swinton O. Scott III . In the opening shot of the episode , the bus that the children travel in to the field trip had to vibrate up and down to give the impression that it did not have bumpers and that it was falling apart . Scott said it was difficult to animate the scene because of the vibrating and the backgrounds panning . Milhouse 's tutor in the episode is based on the American actor Tony Randall . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During their field trip , the bus from Springfield Elementary arrives at the Fort Springfield civil war site and skids into a cannon , knocking one of its wheels off . The cannon then points at the tower leg of a lookout , giving the impression that it will fire at the lookout and destroy it , which is a reference to the opening sequence of the television sitcom F Troop . The lookout was also modeled after the lookout in the show . The scene in which Üter is left behind at the end of the field trip is based on a scene from the 1965 film Von Ryan 's Express . 
 Edna points at some school books and says : " The only books we have are ones that were banned by other schools . " Skinner says : " Well , the kids have to learn about TekWar sooner or later , " referencing William Shatner 's series of science fiction novels . Other books in the bookshelf include <unk> by Henry Miller , Hop on Pop by Dr. Seuss , The Satanic Verses ( " Junior Illustrated Edition " ) by Salman Rushdie , 40 Years of Playboy by Hugh Hefner , Steal This Book by Abbie Hoffman , and The Theory of Evolution by Charles Darwin . 
 Bart tells Skinner in the principal 's office that Edna told him that Skinner " folds faster than Superman on laundry day " , a reference to the comic book character Superman . That line is one of The Simpsons animator David Silverman 's favorite lines on the show . Gabe Kaplan is one of Bart 's victims on his substitute list , a reference to Kaplan and his character in the 1975 TV series Welcome Back , Kotter . The character at the bank who tells the angry crowd that their money 's in " Bill 's house , and Fred 's house " is based on James Stewart 's George Bailey character in the bank run scene from It 's a Wonderful Life . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The PTA Disbands " finished 69th in ratings for the week of April 13 – 19 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 1 . It was the 8th highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 In their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood describe " The PTA Disbands " as " Possibly the best of the school episodes . " In a review of the sixth season of The Simpsons , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide writes : " I especially like the contrasts between how Bart and Lisa accept the strike . The show doesn ’ t quite manage to soar consistently , but it has more than enough to make it positive . " In his review of the episode for TV Squad , Adam Finley comments : " I love how Bart and Lisa both handle the news differently . Bart is thrilled ... Lisa , on the other hand , can 't handle not being graded and evaluated every day , and slowly begins to lose her mind . " 
 In 2004 , when the voice actors for The Simpsons went on strike requesting additional income , The Scotsman cited a quote by Homer from the episode : " If you don 't like your job , you don 't strike . You just go in every day and do it really half @-@ assed . That 's the American Way . " The Scotsman asserted " Homer would not approve " of the strike by the voice actors . The voice actors were asking for an increase from US $ 125 @,@ 000 to $ 360 @,@ 000 per episode . The same quote by Homer to Lisa was cited by Michael Schneider in Daily Variety , who wrote : " ... insiders note that the actors work just six to seven hours to voice an episode --- which would mean $ 360 @,@ 000 for a day 's work , a figure that even Everybody Loves Raymond star Ray Romano doesn 't match . " 
 University of the Sciences in Philadelphia physics and mathematics professor Paul Halpern discusses the episode in his book What 's Science Ever Done for Us ? : What the Simpsons Can Teach Us About Physics , Robots , Life , and the Universe , and quotes Homer 's admonition to Lisa : " Lisa , in this house , we obey the laws of thermodynamics ! " at the beginning of Halpern 's section on " Mechanical Plots " . Halpern describes Lisa 's efforts to build a perpetual @-@ motion machine while bored during the teachers strike , and comments that though it is absurd in reality to order someone to obey the laws of thermodynamics , he acknowledges that " physicists sometimes don 't know the proper arena within which certain laws apply " . In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed " The PTA Disbands " among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " , writing : " Lisa gets so bored by a lack of schooling she builds a perpetual motion machine . Homer is not pleased : ' Lisa , in this house we <unk> the laws of thermodynamics . ' " 
 The episode is cited by Robert M. Arkin and Philip J. Mazzocco in their work " Self @-@ Esteem in Springfield " , in the compilation book The Psychology of The Simpsons . Arkin and Mazzocco note an exchange between Edna Krabappel and Seymour Skinner , where Skinner exclaims to Krabappel : " Oh come on Edna : We both know these kids have no future ! [ All the children stop and look at him ; he chuckles nervously ] Prove me wrong , kids . Prove me wrong . " Arkin and Mazzocco note that this example is seen as an exception , writing : " Generally , however , the Simpsons are right on target in their understanding of the importance of self @-@ esteem and the dynamics involved in the interplay between the social world and positive self @-@ regard . " 
 = Norton Internet Security = 
 Norton Internet Security , developed by Symantec Corporation , is a computer program that provides malware prevention and removal during a subscription period and uses signatures and heuristics to identify viruses . Other features included in the product are a personal firewall , email spam filtering , and phishing protection . With the release of the 2015 line in summer 2014 , Symantec officially retired Norton Internet Security after fourteen years as the chief Norton product . It is superseded by Norton Security , a rechristened adaptation of the Norton 360 security suite . 
 Symantec distributed the product as a download , a boxed Compact Disc ( CD ) copy , and as OEM software . Some retailers also distributed it on a USB flash drive . Norton Internet Security held a 61 % market share in the United States retail security suite category in the first half of 2007 . In this study , competitors , in terms of market share , included security suites from CA , Inc . , Trend Micro , and Kaspersky Lab . 
 = = Windows edition = = 
 In August 1990 Symantec acquired Peter Norton Computing from Peter Norton Norton and his company developed various applications for DOS , including an antivirus . Symantec continued the development of the acquired technologies , now marketed under the name of " Norton " , with the tagline " from Symantec " . Norton 's crossed @-@ arm pose , a registered U.S. trademark , was featured on Norton product packaging . However , his pose was later moved to the spine of the packaging , and later dropped altogether . 
 Existing users of the 2006 and newer versions can upgrade to the latest version of the Norton software without buying a new subscription . The upgraded product retains the same number of days left on a user 's subscription . 
 Releases are named by year but have internal version numbers as well . The internal version number was advanced to <unk> in the 2008 edition to match the Norton AntiVirus release of the same year . As of the 2013 ( <unk> ) release the product has dropped the year from its name , although it still is referenced in some places . 
 = = = Version 2000 ( 1 @.@ 0 , 2 @.@ 0 ) = = = 
 Norton Internet Security 2000 , released January 10 , 2000 , was Symantec 's first foray beyond virus protection and content control filters . Its release followed an alliance between Internet provider Excite @ Home and antivirus vendor <unk> to provide Internet subscribers with McAfee 's new firewall software , McAfee Personal Firewall . Version 2000s firewall , based on <unk> from <unk> , filters traffic at the packet level . It can block <unk> controls and Java applets . Other functionalities include cookie removal , and banner ad blocking . ZDNet found the ad blocker removed graphics that were not ads , breaking pages . Adjusting the settings fixed the problem , however the process was complicated . ZDNet noted the lack of information presented concerning attacks the firewall blocked . Norton LiveUpdate downloads and installs program updates . 
 The Family Edition adds parental controls . Parental controls are backed by a quality control team of 10 searching the web for inappropriate content . Found content is categorized in subject matter and placed on a blacklist of about 36 @,@ 000 sites . A designed administrator can add blocked sites , however the pre @-@ supplied blacklist cannot be viewed or edited since it is hard coded . Administrators can block certain subject matters . Another option is to block all sites , then create a whitelist of allowed sites . Family Edition can also block transmission of specified personal information . Such information is replaced with the letter " X " . However , CNN noted X @-@ rated sites are retrieved when personal information is queried by a search engine . 
 Version 2 @.@ 0 was released June 12 , 2000 
 = = = Version 2001 ( 2 @.@ 5 , 3 @.@ 0 ) = = = 
 Version 2001 ( 2 @.@ 5 ) was released September 18 , 2000 , adding support for Windows ME in addition to the Windows 9x series , Windows NT , and Windows 2000 . Following attacks by the <unk> and Anna Kournikova script viruses , this version can block malicious scripts without virus signatures , but by analyzing behavior . 
 The firewall scans for Internet @-@ enabled applications and creates access rules based on a knowledge base maintained by Symantec during installation . In PC Magazine testing , the installation took 24 minutes to complete on a 750 MHz Pentium III with 92 Internet @-@ enabled applications . Using the firewall , users can determine whether to accept cookies , Java applets , and <unk> controls on a global or per @-@ site basis . A new feature , Intrusion Detection with <unk> , can detect port scans and block further intrusion attempts . The program provides notifications for intrusion attempts , stating the severity level and providing access to threat details . Alternatively , the firewall can put the computer in stealth , essentially hiding the system . Users can configure the security level , affecting the number of notifications . Testing conducted by PC Magazine using Shields Up and Symantec 's Security Check found that the firewall successfully stealthed all ports , hiding the computer from view . A leak test was conducted to see the firewall 's ability to detect outbound connections . Each attempt was detected and the suite offered to block the attempts . 
 The Family Edition , like the prior version , includes parental controls and the information filtering feature . Parental controls come with a list of objectionable sites , separated into 32 categories . The list is updated every two weeks by Norton LiveUpdate . Using the list alone , Norton only blocks sites present on the list . Consequently , Norton may not block sites until the next update . Parents can customize the list , adding or removing sites . A list of allowed sites can be created to restrict children to those specific sites . This version uses application blocking rather than protocol or port filtering to control Internet access . Children can be restricted in what applications they used to access the Internet . A parental controls profile can be set up for each child , and settings can be automatically configured based on their age group , whether they be a child , teenager , adult , or administrator . Internet usage and violations are noted in a report presented to parents . PC Magazine found that enabling parental controls added a minute to a computer 's boot time . 
 Version 3 @.@ 0 was released March 19 , 2001 
 = = = Version 2002 ( 4 @.@ 0 , 5 @.@ 0 ) = = = 
 Version 2002 was announced August 28 , 2001 . The Family Edition was dropped , so parental controls and information filtering are bundled with this release . The installation was noted as quick and simple by both PC Magazine and CNET . An installation requires a reboot , and afterwards the Security Assistant guides users through a questionnaire to best configure the settings . A problem CNET encountered when upgrading from the prior release was the loss of customized settings . PC Magazine found the default settings , aimed at avoiding frequent notifications , were somewhat permissive . Windows 95 support was also dropped . 
 Running a full scan complies a list of Internet @-@ enabled applications . Users set permissions or accept Norton 's default settings . The firewall detects and blocks port scans and logs intrusion attempts . This version does not run a trace on attackers , however Symantec is planning an online tool to do so . To ensure rogue programs can not masquerade as trustworthy applications , Norton verifies programs against a list of digital signatures for known programs , update Tracker warns users if hackers attempt to gain access to users ' computers . The firewall blocked all access attempts from Shields Up and Port Checker . This version includes a wizard to simplify firewall setup to accommodate for multiple computers sharing an Internet connection . With this release , Norton can prevent specified personal information from being transmitted via a compatible instant messenger client , e @-@ mail , and websites . Ad @-@ blocking includes the Ad <unk> , where users can place ads that slipped past ad @-@ filtering . 
 A Professional Edition was announced December 11 , 2001 , with marketing aimed towards business owners . This version features Norton Intrusion Detection , which intercepts suspicious connections and attacks , such as the Code Red worm . Intrusion Detection focuses on Windows @-@ based attacks only . Central management is also present in this version . Administrators configure firewall and productivity settings for client computers . Productivity settings allow administrators to block newsgroups , websites , and advertisements . The suite integrates with XP user accounts ; settings can be personalized for each user . 
 = = = Version 2003 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Version 2003 was announced September 16 , 2002 , scheduled to be available for purchase later that month . This version adds Norton Spam Alert to reduce e @-@ mail spam . Spam filtering scans the whole message and its context , rather than looking for keywords to ensure accuracy . A POP3 client must be used . When a message is identified as spam , Norton inserts an identifier , by default it is " Spam Alert : " , in the subject line . Using the mail client , users can create a rule to delete or move flagged messages . Users can also create strings of text for Spam Alert to look for when classifying e @-@ mail . In PC Magazine testing , Spam Alert mistakenly classified 2 @.@ 8 percent of legitimate e @-@ mail as spam . 47 percent of spam slipped past the filter . Although false positive rate was low , the feature did not fare well at finding actual spam . 
 The updated main interface has green and red indicators to show which features are active and which need attention . The firewall has several updated features in this version . A Block Traffic button present in the main interface blocks all incoming and outgoing Internet traffic . Another new feature , the Visual Tracker , graphically maps attacks back to their origin . The firewall blocked all port scans conducted by CNET , <unk> each port . 
 Following the <unk> and Code Red worms , this version scans all incoming and outgoing traffic for suspicious data exchanges against a routinely updated database , a feature ported from Norton Internet Security 2002 Professional Edition . Connection to the offending computer is automatically severed if the traffic matches a database item . 
 Symantec announced a Professional Edition on November 19 , 2002 . Data recovery tools in this version allow users to recover deleted or malware @-@ damaged files . The inclusion of a data erasure tool allows users to delete files while minimizing the chance of recovery . Web Cleanup removes browser cache files , history , and cookies . To maintain dial @-@ up connections , Connection Keep Alive simulates online activity during periods of user inactivity . Norton Productivity Control enables users to filter Internet content and block newsgroups . When used with the User Access Manager , multiple filtering profiles can be created , assigned to different users . 
 = = = Version 2004 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Announced September 8 , 2003 , version 2004 adds adware , spyware , and keylogger protection . PC Magazine found the added protection to be weak . Out of the spyware samples Norton detected , a significant number were not removed completely , requiring manual removal . Norton also did little to prevent spyware infections . 
 Norton AntiSpam , the renamed spam filtering feature , has a set of spam rules , which cannot be viewed or edited . <unk> and blacklists of senders can be created . Users may also create their own spam definitions . AntiSpam integrates with Outlook , Outlook Express , and Eudora , allowing users to tag e @-@ mail as spam on @-@ the @-@ fly . E @-@ mail identified as spam are either quarantined by default , however the feature can be configured to delete such messages automatically . In CNET testing , AntiSpam correctly identified 94 percent of spam messages . 
 Product activation was introduced in this release . After installation , users are allowed a 15 @-@ day grace period to activate their copy of Norton Internet Security 2004 . The program will not work after the deadline without the 24 @-@ character product key . The product key used to activate a copy of Norton Internet Security ties in with an alphanumeric code based on a computer 's hardware configuration . Users may activate their product five times with the same product key , however licensing terms dictate users are allowed only to install Norton Internet Security 2004 on one computer . 
 = = = Version 2005 ( 8.x ) = = = 
 Symantec introduced Version 2005 on August 17 , 2004 . This version is sometimes referred to with the tagline of " <unk> Edition " , since spyware detection is integrated with Norton and is by default enabled . Found threats are listed , separating the ones already dealt with and the ones requiring user interaction . More detailed information is provided through a link to Symantec 's website . However , PC Pro and PC Magazine noted lengthy scan times . A full scan took 24 minutes to over half an hour , respectively . IN PC Pro testing , Norton detected 61 percent of the spyware samples , compared to an average of 68 percent for all the tested products . Removal rates were above average , 72 percent versus the average of 68 percent . Norton blocked reinstallation with a score of 48 percent , compared to the group average of 43 percent . Overall , Norton ranked fifth among the tested products . In PC Magazine testing , Norton installed slowly on infected systems and failed to install on one altogether . Contacting Symantec did not resolve the issue . 
 Other new features include Internet Worm Protection to block worms , which scan IP addresses for open ports . It also blocks inbound ports based on known and suspected exploits using signatures and heuristics . The addition of the feature follows <unk> in 2003 and <unk> in 2004 , worms that exploited vulnerability in Microsoft Windows ' operating systems . In response to emerging privacy threats — 75 percent of the threats in the last 12 months attempted to steal confidential information — this version adds phishing protection . Using the firewall component , users can create a whitelist of sites where confidential information can be transmitted . Users are alerted when information is transmitted to a site not on the list . The Outbreak Alert feature warns users of major threats as classified by Symantec , and users can press the Fix Now button to applies a set of changes to close vulnerabilities , such as blocking necessary ports used by a propagating worm . The Browser Privacy can suppress information website generally receive about its visitors , such as the browser and operating system used . The feature can also block advertisements . 
 Privacy Control can warn users when sending confidential information . It can also be configured to block the transmission . It allows users to specify how the information can sent , such as via IM or e @-@ mail . Item @-@ specific exceptions allow users to control where there data can be sent . However , PC Pro found a flaw in the information filtering feature . The way information is formatted on the list of confidential information can affect its effectiveness . For example , entering the last six digits of a credit card number will not stop the numbers from leaking if they are grouped in four digits . PC Magazine also noted the fact anyone who can login to the computer can view the database of private information . For that reason , Symantec recommends entering only the last portion of sensitive information . 
 Norton AntiSpam now scans e @-@ mails for spoofed URLs and deals with any offending e @-@ mail as spam . E @-@ mails can also be blocked based on language , however by default the filter allows all languages . AntiSpam can sync its own list of allowed senders with POP3 address books . Users can train the spam filter by pointing out valid e @-@ mail marked as spam and vice versa . Support for Yahoo ! Mail and Hotmail was added in this release . 
 = = = Version 2006 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Norton Internet Security 2006 debuted on September 26 , 2005 . The new main interface , the Norton Protection Center , aggregates all information in a central location . Security status is shown by how secure the computer is for tasks such as e @-@ mail and Internet browsing , not in the context of which features are enabled . The Protection Center can also recognize third @-@ party software protecting the computer . The new interface advertises additional products from Symantec ; some categories of protection , such as " Data Protection " , will read " No Coverage " until the user purchases and installs Norton <unk> . An additional system tray icon is created by the Protection Center . 
 The installation was noted as lengthy by PC Magazine , especially on malware @-@ infected systems . Spyware detection has been tweaked since the last release . It has been updated to better identify keyloggers . In PC Magazine testing , Norton successfully detected all 11 spyware threats and removed all but two . PC Magazine did give Norton credit even when manual removal was required . The suite also removed three of four commercial keyloggers . When attempting to install the spyware on a clean system , Norton blocked all 11 and two of the four commercial keyloggers . In most cases , it did not block the installation , however Norton did call for a scan after the spyware was installed . In PC Pro testing , Norton detected 78 percent of spyware , removed 82 percent , and blocked 65 percent from installing . 
 Norton AntiSpam was discontinued as a separate product from Symantec , now only available in Norton Internet Security . The feature can block all e @-@ mail from unknown senders , and automatically blocks messages with suspicious elements such as invisible text , HTML forms , and phishing URLs . To improve accuracy , Norton analyzes outgoing e @-@ mails and messages whose categorization is corrected by users by hitting the This is spam and This is not spam buttons . In PC Magazine testing , the feature marked one in ten valid e @-@ mail as spam and let one in every six spam messages in the inbox . 400 messages were used , and the program was allowed to process the messages for over a week . In PC Pro testing , the feature performed better , blocking 96 percent of spam , with a false positive rate of 0 @.@ 2 percent . 
 Norton recommends disabling the Windows Firewall to avoid redundant alerts . The firewall stealthed all significant ports in PC Magazine testing . Attacking the firewall itself was unsuccessful , PC Magazine was unable to stop its service , terminate its process , or disable the firewall using simulated mouse clicks . The firewall also passed PC Pro 's tests , successfully <unk> all ports . 
 Other features include Bloodhound technology , which looks for virus @-@ like behavior to better find zero day viruses . The Security Inspector looks for common vulnerabilities , including insecure user account passwords and browser insecurities . Advertisement blocking rewrites a website 's HTML to prevent advertisements from being displayed . Parental controls , an optional component , can block certain programs from accessing the Internet , such as IM clients , and restrict newsgroup access . Restrictions can be assigned to different Windows users accounts . Sites are classified in 31 categories , and the four profiles which can be assigned each block different categories of sites . Supervisors define exceptions , add global blocked sites , or block all access to sites not on a user @-@ created whitelist . Both PC Magazine and PC Pro noted the exclusion of time @-@ based restrictions . Information filtering can be controlled on a per @-@ user basis . 
 Windows 98 compatibility was dropped from this release . 
 = = = Version 2007 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The 2007 version was announced September 12 , 2006 . A tabbed interface allows users to access the Norton Protection Center and the program settings without separate tray icons and windows open . Symantec revised Norton Internet Security and made this version more modularized , which has reduced the suite 's memory usage to 10 – 15 megabytes and scan times by 30 – 35 percent . Another result is that spam filtering and parental controls are separate components to install . When installed , the features consume 100 MB of disk space . 
 Anti @-@ phishing integrates with Internet Explorer . It analyzes sites , examining the website 's URL , title , form , page layout , visible text and links , and uses a blacklist to detect phishing sites . Users are blocked access from suspected phishing sites , however are presented an option to continue . In PC Magazine testing , the feature blocked 22 of 24 phishing sites , while Internet Explorer 7 recognized 17 of the 24 sites . In PC Pro testing , the feature successfully blocked access to every phishing site it was tested against . Spam filtering no longer includes a language feature , Symantec claims it is less useful with current spam and created false positives . Tested against 1 @,@ 500 messages by PC Magazine , Norton let over half of the spam to the inbox . Five percent of valid mail were marked as spam . This version utilizes Symantec 's Veritas <unk> technology to better identify rootkits . <unk> allows Norton to find inconsistencies among files within directories and files at the volume level . A startup application manager allows users to prevent applications from launching at login . This release drops support for Windows 2000 and was compatible with Windows Vista upon its release with an update . 
 The firewall makes all decisions by itself to lessen the chance of being weakened by a misinformed decision . Applications known to be safe are allowed Internet access , and vice versa for malicious applications . Unknown ones are analyzed and blocked if they exhibit malicious behavior . In both PC Magazine and PC Pro testing , the firewall did not incorrectly block any safe applications from Internet access . All malware was blocked by the firewall . PC Magazine testing reflected the same results . The firewall also stealthed all ports . Exploits were blocked by the intrusion prevention system , which prevents threats from leveraging vulnerabilities . The system is updated whenever a vulnerability is identified for Windows @-@ based computers . Attempts to disable the firewall were unsuccessful ; registry changes , process termination , and simulated mouse clicks all failed . <unk> Windows services had no effect on the firewall since it works at the kernel driver level . This version automatically adjusts configuration for different networks based on the physical address of the gateway rather than IP addresses . 
 In PC Magazine testing , Norton detected 15 of 16 spyware samples . 13 of the 16 were removed . Against eight commercial keyloggers , the suite removed all the samples . On a clean system , Norton blocked 14 of the 16 spyware samples from installing , and stopped seven of the eight keyloggers from installing . 
 = = = Version 2008 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The 2008 version was announced on August 28 , 2007 , adding support for Windows Vista 64 @-@ bit . New features include SONAR , the Norton Identity Safe , and Browser Defender . SONAR monitors applications for malicious behavior . The Identity Safe supersedes the information filtering function ; instead of blocking personal information from leaving the computer , it stores personal information to fill <unk> . It is password protected and checks a website 's authenticity before filling any forms . Browser Defender inspects and blocks suspicious API calls , intended to stop drive @-@ by downloads . The Network Map identifies networked computers with Norton Internet Security 2008 installed . Remote monitoring allows checking the status of other installations on different computers ; problems are identified with a red " X " icon . Using the feature , users also can control network traffic between computers . It also warns users if they are using an unencrypted wireless network . The startup application manager and advertisement blocking features were dropped from this release . Information filtering , although superseded by the Identity Safe in the suite , is available separately . It can be used in conjunction with the Identity Safe . 
 Phishing protection now integrates with Mozilla Firefox . Testing by PC Magazine found that Norton blocked 94 percent of phishing sites , compared to 83 percent for Internet Explorer 7 and 77 percent for Firefox 2 . CNET identified an issue with the feature ; when anti @-@ phishing is disabled , the Identity Safe still offers users to automatically submit personal information to websites , including phishing sites . Symantec declined to call it a " flaw " , stating it is recommended to use the Identity Safe with anti @-@ phishing enabled . Alternatively , the Identity Safe could be used with Firefox and Internet Explorer 's built @-@ in anti @-@ phishing capability . 
 PC Magazine found that the firewall put all ports in stealth mode . The firewall blocked ten of 12 leak tests , used to see if malware can evade the firewall 's control of network traffic . Previous versions did not identify the tests because none carried a malicious payload . Another test was conducted using Core Impact , which successfully exploited one vulnerability on the test computer . However , other components of Norton stopped the exploit from causing harm . The other attempts were unsuccessful either because the system was invulnerable or Norton 's Intrusion Prevention System stopped it . Attempts to disable the firewall were unsuccessful by PC Magazine . On the contrary , PC Pro identified 15 open ports on a computer with Norton installed . 
 In PC Magazine testing , Norton completely detected most of the malware samples . For two @-@ thirds of the samples , all traces were removed . Norton found and removed all the commercial keyloggers . A full scan took nearly an hour to complete though , twice as long as the 2007 version . The suite blocked most of the malware from installing and all the commercial keyloggers , regardless of any modifications made to the samples . PC World noted that Norton removed 80 percent of malware @-@ associated files and Registry entries . 
 Spam filtering imports users ' address books to compile a whitelist of allowed senders . Addresses to which users send mail and e @-@ mail tagged as valid mail can be automatically added to the whitelist . Using several thousand messages , PC Magazine found that Norton marked over 40 percent of valid e @-@ mail as spam . Over 80 percent of valid newsletters were marked as spam . Norton did correctly identify 90 percent of spam e @-@ mail . 
 = = = Version 2009 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The 2009 version was released for sale September 9 , 2008 . Symantec set several goals for version 2009 while in development : complete installations under minute and a footprint of 100 MB . Average installation times range from eight to ten minutes , and the previous 2008 version had a 400 MB footprint . Other goals included reducing load time after the computer starts , from 20 – 30 seconds to 10 seconds , and file scanning times with a technology allowing Norton to skip certain trusted files . The technology works on the basis that if a piece of software runs on a significant proportion of computers , then it is safe . 
 A public beta was released July 14 . A reduction in memory consumption was made , prompted by the fact 40 percent of people contacting Symantec support had 512 MB of RAM . The beta uses about 6 MB of memory , compared to 11 MB by the prior version . To reduce scan times , Norton Insight uses data from Norton Community participants to avoid scanning files that are found on a statistically significant amount of computers . Citing a NPD Group study finding that 39 percent of consumers switching <unk> blamed performance , a CPU usage meter will be available within the final product to allow users to find the cause of high CPU usage , whether it be Norton or another program . This version features more frequent updates , a change called Norton Pulse Updates . Rather than deliver an update every eight hours , as the 2008 version does , Pulse Updates are delivered five to fifteen minutes . The Silent Mode automatically suspends alerts and updates when a program enters fullscreen mode and can be manually enabled . The suite 's activities take place while the computer is idle , and terminate once user activity is registered . The final release ( 16 @.@ 5 ) bundles spam filtering , which used to be a free download from Symantec . This release also bundles Norton Safe Web , which identifies malicious websites , compatible with Internet Explorer and Firefox . Norton Safe Web color codes search results from famous search engine such from Google and Yahoo for safety . The Norton Safe Web toolbar also includes an <unk> search box . The search box does not share code with the Ask toolbar ; instead the box redirects queries to the Ask search engine . Norton Safe Web is compatible with Internet Explorer and Firefox . Norton Safe Web . 
 <unk> conducted by <unk> Software highlights the 2009 version 's 52 second install time , 32 second scan time , and 7 MB memory utilization . Symantec funded the benchmark test and provided scripts used to benchmark each participating antivirus software . Tests were conducted in Windows Vista running on a dual core processor . PC Magazine found the suite added 15 seconds to the boot time , with a baseline of 60 seconds . Norton added less than 5 percent to the time it takes to complete file operations . 25 percent more time was taken to unzip and zip a set of files . 
 In PC Magazine testing , Norton removed most traces of 40 percent of the malware . On a similar test , specifically using commercial keyloggers , Norton was able to remove most of the keyloggers , beating other tested products . Norton blocked all attempts to install malware on a clean system . Modifications made to the samples did not fool Norton . Norton was not able to block the installation of all the commercial keyloggers . 
 Phishing protection blocked 90 percent of verified phishing websites in PC Magazine testing . Internet Explorer 7 caught 75 percent , and Firefox caught 60 percent . 
 Norton stealthed all ports , according to PC Magazine . Port scans were unsuccessful . The firewall blocked all exploit attempts by Core Impact . 
 Malware blocking and removal garnered good results PC Magazine testing . All but one malware samples contained within a folder were removed once the folder was opened . The last one was removed when executed . Modifications made to the samples did not affect detection . On a similar test , specifically using commercial keyloggers , Norton did not successfully detect all . In removing threats , Norton almost completely removed 40 percent of the malware samples and related <unk> . Norton was also able to remove more commercial keyloggers than any other product . 
 = = = Version 2010 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Version 2010 was released officially on September 8 , 2009 . This version features a technology code named , Project Quorum , which introduces reputation @-@ based threat detection to keep up with the 200 million attacks each month , many of which Symantec claims evade signature based detection . The new approach relies on Norton Community Watch , in which participants send information about the applications running on their computers . Safe applications exhibit common attributes , such as being of a known origin with known publishers . Conversely , new malware may have an unknown publisher , among other attributes . Using the data a " reputation score " is calculated and can be used to infer the likelihood of an unknown application being safe , or malicious . 
 Other facets of Quorum are parental controls and spam filtering . Norton Internet Security 2010 bundles a free subscription of <unk> , which PC Magazine found to be an improvement over the parental controls bundled with prior releases . Spam filtering uses technologies Symantec acquired from <unk> . Two filters are used to find spam : a locally installed one and a check against Symantec 's servers to see if the message is known spam . In PC Magazine testing , no valid e @-@ mail were marked as spam . However , 11 percent of spam still made it to the inbox . This was a significant improvement over prior releases . Another improvement to the product is the improved heuristic feature called SONAR 2 . It leverages reputation data to judge if a program is malicious or clean . Norton Insight has also been expanded , showing users the number of Norton Community participants who have a certain program installed , its impact of system resources , and how long it has been released . Information about the program 's origin and a graph of its resource usage is also provided . A new feature codenamed <unk> helps users understand what Norton did when malware was found . The malware 's actions and Norton 's resolution are presented to the user . Previous releases removed threats on sight and quietly warned users , potentially confusing when users are deceived in downloading rogue security software . 
 Another addition to the product is the new " Flip Screen " . With a compatible graphics card , the main display " flips over " to show the opposite side of the main interface , consisting of a chart of CPU or memory usage and a timeline of security events . Without one , the " Flip Screen " link is replaced by a " back " link , which opens the back of the windows as a separate window . 
 The product also adds a search engine labeled " Safe Search " . The custom search allows the user to filter out unsafe sites , get insight on them , and keep track of HTTP cookies . Malware removal and blocking performed well , setting or meeting records in PC Magazine testing . It achieved a detection rate of 98 % . The highest out of 12 tested antivirus products . The exception was blocking commercial keyloggers , where Norton made an above average score . File operations took 2 percent longer , and the file compression and extraction test took 4 percent longer . The only area where Norton introduced a significant delay was when the system was booting , the beta version of the suite added 31 percent to the boot time , significantly longer than prior versions . According to the Norton performance comparison website , Norton Internet Security scans 31 percent faster , is 70 percent lighter , and installs 76 percent faster than the leading Anti @-@ virus product . According to AV @-@ <unk> , Norton Internet Security was " Best Product of 2009 " , Bronze award for 98 @.@ 6 % detection rate in 2010 and Norton Internet Security 2010 blocked 99 / 100 internet threats from infecting the user 's computer . 
 = = = Version 2011 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Norton Internet Security 2011 was released for Beta testing on April 21 , 2010 . Changes include a new user interface and improved scanning of internet sites for malware . With the 2011 version , Symantec also released an application that " scans " the user 's Facebook feed for any malware links . This application does not require a valid subscription . In a test sponsored by Symantec , Norton Internet Security 2011 was the only security suite to ever achieve a 100 percent protection score in a new third @-@ party test from Dennis Labs . Improved reputation scan provides the user with an easy to understand interface on files stored on the user 's computer . Marking them as trusted , good , poor , or bad . The final version of Norton Internet Security 2011 was released on August 31 , 2010 . New features in version 2011 also include Norton Rescue Tools . These tools include Norton <unk> Recovery tool and Norton Power Eraser . 
 On December 9 , 2010 , Symantec released the 18 @.@ 5 version through Norton LiveUpdate . However , this update was later pulled due to numerous reports on the Norton forums that the update is causing system instability and freeze ups during system scans ( both full and quick scans ) . This issue only affects some customers . Users affected by this update are advised to uninstall the product , run the Norton Removal Tool , and reinstall the 18 @.@ 1 version from http : / / <unk> / <unk> . Symantec later fixed the bugs and re @-@ released the update . 
 Following the acquisition of VeriSign Security by Norton 's parent company Symantec , several of VeriSign 's features were incorporated into the 2011 edition . The new product features a new Norton logo which uses the VeriSign checkmark formerly seen in VeriSign 's own logo , as well as several new icon changes to the Norton Safe Web and Norton Identity Safe features . 
 = = = Version 2012 ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Released ( 19 @.@ 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 28 ) on September 6 , 2011 , Norton Internet Security 2012 brought new features . One of the new features included in the new release is Download Insight 2 @.@ 0 , which not only monitors files for safety but also the stability of a given file . That means that if a file is stable on Windows 7 , but unstable on Windows XP , XP users will be notified of the file 's instability . 
 Enhanced removal tools are tightly integrated for better cleanup of already infected systems . Once triggered , the new , more powerful version of Norton Power Eraser restarts the system to locate and remove fake antivirus software fake antivirus software and other deeply embedded threats that are otherwise hard to remove . A new tool called Norton Management helps manage different computers and devices equipped with Norton software from a single location . 
 Other changes in this release include SONAR 4 , Google Chrome compatibility for Identity Safe and Safe Web and the ability to store passwords and notes in the cloud . However , the License Agreement does not guarantee passwords are stored securely and provides no remedy if the cloud vault is compromised . 
 The user interface is also simplified with only three buttons . The third button opens a more advanced and complicated menu , where the user is able to manage settings and access different product features . The CPU meter that was removed from Norton 2011 , also makes a return ( only on the " advanced screen " ) . 
 Combining the netbook and desktop line , Norton Internet Security integrates Bandwidth metering , which controls the product 's traffic usage and takes it down to minimum if necessary . This is ideal for networks with limited traffic . Also , the user interface window adjusts accordingly to the size of the computer screen . 
 This version of Norton Internet Security includes several Easter eggs . Pressing Shift + 1 , 2 , 3 or 4 would change the theme to default background ( plain black ) , ray , animals , and floral respectively . Also holding Control + Win Key + Alt while pressing " performance button " to activate " Crazy Flip " , which will make the window flip head over heels . The effect would continue until the main window is closed and reopened . 
 Furthermore , scans are no longer scheduled through the Windows Task <unk> , but through the Symantec 's proprietary one , which performs tasks while the computer is idle ( i.e. , when the user is away from the computer ) . 
 = = = Version <unk> ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Version 20 ( 2013 ) began a " Version @-@ less " approach by dropping the <unk> naming convention , and will automatically update itself as new releases become available . Notable changes include a new user interface better suited for touchscreen devices , " Social Networking Protection , " which intends to protect against threats targeted at social networks , and was also the first release to officially support Windows 8 . 
 = = = Version <unk> ( 2014 ) = = = 
 This version , released on October 7 , 2013 , became the last version to be marketed by Symantec . Norton Internet Security , along with Norton <unk> and Norton 360 , have been replaced with Norton Security . 
 = = = Version <unk> ( 2015 ) = = = 
 A version 22 @.@ 5 update was released in June 2015 . It includes a restyled user interface and Windows 10 Support . 
 = = = Norton Security = = = 
 In September 2014 Norton Internet Security was streamlined into Norton Security , as part of Symantec 's streamlined Norton line . 
 = = Netbook edition = = 
 Symantec has released a special edition of Norton Internet Security optimized for netbooks . This is available as download from the Symantec website or in a USB thumb drive . Symantec states that the Netbook edition is optimized for netbooks . The main display is optimized to provide support for the 800 x 480 screen resolution . In addition , non @-@ critical tasks are delayed while the netbook is on battery . Furthermore , the Netbook edition contains complimentary access to Norton 's secure online backup and parental control to protect children as they surf the web . 
 = = Macintosh edition = = 
 = = = Version 1 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Norton Internet Security version 1 @.@ 0 for Mac was released November 1 , 2000 . It can identify and remove both Windows and Mac viruses . Other features include a firewall , advertisement blocking in the browser , parental controls , and the ability to prevent confidential information from being transmitted outside the computer . Users are prompted before such information is able to be transmitted . The incorporation of Aladdin Systems ' <unk> allows users to purge the browser cache , cookies , and browsing history within Norton 's interface . Operating system requirements call for Mac OS 8 @.@ 1 . Hardware requirements call for 24 MB of RAM , 12 MB of disk space , and a PowerPC processor . 
 = = = Version 2 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Norton Internet Security version 2 @.@ 0 for Mac was released on ( date unknown if you know please provide it ) . Version 2 @.@ 0 also ties in with the <unk> database , allowing users to trace attacking computers . Users can inform network administrators of the attacking computers for corrective actions . When running under Mac OS 8 @.@ 1 or 9 , a PowerPC processor , 24 MB of RAM , and 25 MB of free space is required . Under Mac OS X 10 @.@ 1 , a PowerPC G3 processor , 128 MB of RAM , and 25 MB of free space is required . 
 = = = Version 3 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Norton Internet Security version 3 @.@ 0 for Mac was released on ( date unknown if you know please provide it ) . The subsequent release , version 3 @.@ 0 , maintained the feature set found in version 2 @.@ 0 . The firewall now allocates internet access as needed rather than relying on user input using predefined rules . Compatibility with OS 8 was dropped . When running under OS 9 @.@ 2 , a PowerPC processor , 24 MB of RAM , and 25 MB of free space is required . Under OS X 10 @.@ 1 @.@ 5 through 10 @.@ 3 , a PowerPC G3 , 128 MB of RAM , and 150 MB of free space is required . However , version 3 @.@ 0 is not compatible with OS X 10 @.@ 4 , or " Tiger " . 
 = = = Version 4 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Version 4 @.@ 0 was released on December 18 , 2008 . Symantec also markets a bundle of Version 4 @.@ 0 and the 2009 version for Windows , intended for users with both Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X <unk> <unk> was dropped from this release . The firewall now blocks access to malicious sites using a blacklist updated by Symantec . To prevent attackers from leveraging insecurities in the Mac or installed software , exploit protection was introduced in this release . Phishing protection was introduced in this release as well . Operating system requirements call for Mac OS X 10 @.@ 4 @.@ 11 or higher . A PowerPC or Intel Core processor , 256 MB of RAM and 150 MB of free space are required . 
 = = = Version 5 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Features 
 Norton Safe Web : <unk> protects you while you surf the Web by warning you of and blocking unsafe and fake websites right in your search results . ( Mac OS ® X 10 @.@ 7 only ) 
 <unk> Technology : Blocks fraudulent phishing websites created to steal your identity and your money . 
 Smart Two @-@ Way Firewall : <unk> cybercriminals from hacking into your Mac ® , stealing your personal information and messing with your stuff . 
 Location Awareness : Lets you adjust your level of protection depending upon where you ’ re using your Mac ® ( at home , the office , the local coffee shop , on the road ) . 
 Vulnerability Protection : Updates daily to stop cybercriminals from using vulnerabilities in applications and other software to sneak threats onto your computer . 
 AntiVirus Protection : <unk> your Mac ® , iPhoto ® pictures , iTunes ® media , iMovie ® projects and all your important stuff from viruses , spyware and other threats without slowing down your computer . 
 Confidential File Guard : Password protects your stuff to keep it safe from prying eyes . 
 Daily Protection Updates : Runs in the background to protect your Mac ® — and your stuff — from new , late @-@ breaking threats . 
 Email and Instant Message Monitoring : Scans <unk> ® , iChat ® and other IMs for suspicious attachments and other tricks used to steal your identity and your hard @-@ earned money . 
 FREE <unk> Support : Symantec provides free 24 / 7 email , chat and phone support for a period of one year from initial product installation . * 
 Protection options for Mac OS X 10 @.@ 4 to 10 @.@ 7 : Includes both Norton ™ Internet Security 5 for Mac ® ( for Mac OS ® X <unk> ) 
 = = Norton vs. others = = 
 Norton Internet Security underwent considerable changes in performance after Symantec rewrote the its code for the 2009 release . Norton products now have only two running processes , using about 15 MB of RAM . According to <unk> Security Benchmark 2012 Norton AntiVirus and Norton Internet Security are the lightest suites available . AV @-@ <unk> also tested these products and gave similar results . PC Magazine recognized the 2011 and 2012 lines as the fastest and strongest in protection . PCWorld 's tests of security software put Norton Internet Security 2009 in first place . In a 2011 test conducted by PC World , Norton Internet Security was the winner . Dennis Technology Labs ( in tests sponsored by Symantec ) confirmed the performance and effectiveness of Norton 2011 and 2012 lines . 
 = = Criticism of older versions before 2009 = = 
 = = = FBI cooperation = = = 
 Symantec , in compliance with the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , <unk> Magic Lantern , a keylogger actively developed by the FBI . The purpose of Magic Lantern is to obtain passwords to encrypted e @-@ mail as part of a criminal investigation . Magic Lantern was first reported in the media by Bob Sullivan of MSNBC on November 20 , 2001 and by Ted <unk> of the Associated Press . Magic Lantern is deployed as an e @-@ mail attachment . When the attachment is opened , a trojan horse is installed on the suspect 's computer . The Trojan horse is activated when the suspect uses PGP encryption , often used to increase the security of sent e @-@ mail messages . When activated , the trojan horse will log the PGP password , which allows the FBI to decrypt user communications . Symantec and other major antivirus vendors have <unk> Magic Lantern , rendering their antivirus products , including Norton Internet Security , incapable of detecting it . Concerns include uncertainties about Magic Lantern 's full potential and whether hackers could subvert it for purposes outside the jurisdiction of the law . 
 Graham <unk> , a technology consultant from Sophos , said , " We have no way of knowing if it was written by the FBI , and even if we did , we wouldn ’ t know whether it was being used by the FBI or if it had been commandeered by a third party " . Another reaction came from Marc <unk> , chief technical officer and cofounder of <unk> Digital Security , " Our customers are paying us for a service , to protect them from all forms of malicious code . It is not up to us to do law enforcement 's job for them so we do not , and will not , make any exceptions for law enforcement malware or other tools . " 
 FBI spokesman Paul Bresson , in response to the question of whether Magic Lantern needed a court order to be deployed , said , " Like all technology projects or tools deployed by the FBI it would be used pursuant to the appropriate legal process . " 
 Proponents of Magic Lantern argue the technology would allow law enforcement to efficiently and quickly decrypt messages protected by encryption schemes . Unlike a predecessor , Carnivore , implementing Magic Lantern does not require physical access to a suspect 's computer , which would necessitate a court order . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Older versions of Norton were hard and slow to uninstall , leaving many traces and sometimes completing with errors . However , in the 2009 versions , Symantec featured their own <unk> , that removes their products better and more quickly , usually in less than a minute . Norton Removal Tool is a well known instrument that removes Norton products completely , without any trace . The tool can be downloaded from Symantec 's website 
 Symantec reports that Norton 2010 range of products feature a cleaner uninstall and over @-@ installs is the recommended update route to 2011 . 
 = = = Windows Service Packs = = = 
 When Norton Internet Security 2008 is installed , users may encounter incompatibilities upgrading to Windows XP Service Pack 3 or Windows Vista Service Pack 1 . Users report numerous invalid registry keys being added by a tool named <unk> , resulting in an empty Device Manager and missing devices such as wireless network adapters . Symantec initially blamed Microsoft for the incompatibilities but has since accepted partial responsibility . 
 Dave Cole , Symantec 's Vice President & General Manager , acknowledged that users running Norton products were experiencing problems , but said the numbers are small . Cole also said that Symantec had done " extensive testing " of its products with Windows XP SP3 , but this issue was not encountered . Cole blamed Microsoft " This is related to XP SP3 . " Microsoft recommended that users contact Windows customer support . To resolve the problem , Symantec has issued a fix intended for users before upgrading . Symantec also recommends disabling the tamper protection component in the 2008 release , dubbed <unk> . A tool to remove the added registry entries is also available from Symantec . 
 = = = Windows Vista = = = 
 Sarah Hicks , Symantec 's vice president of consumer product management , voiced concern over Windows Vista 64 @-@ bit 's PatchGuard feature . PatchGuard was designed by Microsoft to ensure the integrity of the kernel , a part of an operating system which interacts with the hardware . <unk> often hide in an operating system 's kernel , complicating removal . Mike Dalton , European president of McAfee said , " The decision to build a wall around the kernel with the assumption it can 't be breached is ridiculous " , claiming Microsoft was preventing security vendors from effectively protecting the kernel while promoting its own security product , Windows Live OneCare . Hicks said Symantec did not mind the competition from OneCare . Symantec later published a white paper detailing PatchGuard with instructions to obtain a PatchGuard exploit . After negotiations and investigations from antitrust regulators , Microsoft decided to allow security vendors access to the kernel by creating special API instructions . 
 = Japanese battleship Kawachi = 
 Kawachi ( <unk> ) was the lead ship of the two @-@ ship Kawachi @-@ class dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the first decade of the 20th century . Following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions , Kawachi was named after Kawachi Province , now a part of Osaka prefecture . During World War I she bombarded German fortifications at Tsingtao during the Battle of Tsingtao in 1914 , but saw no other combat . She sank in 1918 after an explosion in her ammunition magazine with the loss of over 600 officers and crewmen . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Kawachi class was ordered on 22 June 1907 under the 1907 Warship Supplement Program after the Russo @-@ Japanese War as Japan 's first dreadnoughts , although their construction was delayed by a severe depression . Their design was based on the Aki with a uniform 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main @-@ gun armament , although cost considerations prevented all the guns from having the same barrel length . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship had an overall length of 526 feet ( 160 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 84 feet 3 inches ( 25 @.@ 7 m ) , and a normal draft of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 20 @,@ 823 long tons ( 21 @,@ 157 t ) at normal load . Her crew ranged from 999 to 1100 officers and enlisted men . Kawachi was fitted with a pair of license @-@ built Curtis steam turbine sets , each set driving one propeller , using steam from 16 Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines were rated at a total of 25 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) for a design speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She carried enough coal and fuel oil to give her a range of 2 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Kawachi 's main armament consisted of four 50 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure , and eight 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns mounted in four twin @-@ gun turrets , two on each side of the superstructure . Kawachi 's secondary armament was ten 45 @-@ caliber 6 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns , mounted in casemates in the sides of the hull , and eight 40 @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns . The ship was also equipped with a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 3 @-@ inch 4th Year Type guns and four others were used as saluting guns . In addition , the battleship was fitted with five submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside and one in the stern . 
 The waterline main belt of the ship had a maximum thickness of 12 inches amidships . It tapered to a thickness of 5 inches ( 127 mm ) at the ends of the ship . A 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) strake of armor protected the casemates . The barbettes for the main guns were 9 – 11 inches ( 229 – 279 mm ) thick . The armor of Kawachi 's main gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 11 inches . The deck armor was 1 @.@ 1 inches ( 29 mm ) thick and the conning tower was protected by 6 to 10 inches of armor . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Kawachi was laid down at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 1 April 1909 . She was launched on 15 October 1910 in a ceremony attended by Emperor Meiji and completed on 31 March 1912 at a cost of ¥ 11 @,@ 130 @,@ 000 . On 3 October 1912 , the ship was present when the battleship Mikasa had a fire that was started by a sailor in the forward magazine . It was flooded before the fire could get out of control and Kawachi sent over fire @-@ fighting teams to assist Mikasa 's crew in case they were needed . When World War I began in August 1914 , Kawachi was at Yokosuka . 
 Together with her sister ship , Settsu , she bombarded German fortifications in October – November 1914 during the final stage of the Battle of Tsingtao . The ship was present in Yokosuka on 8 January 1915 when the victorious Second Squadron returned to Japan after the Battle of Tsingtao . She was assigned to the First Squadron from 1915 – 1917 and refitted that latter year . 
 Kawachi rejoined the First Squadron after her refit commanded by Captain Yoshimoto Masaki and entered Tokuyama Bay on the evening of 11 July 1918 . The following morning torpedo target practice was cancelled due to rough seas and the battleship remained at anchor for the rest of the day . That afternoon a loud explosion was heard at 15 : 51 in the vicinity of the starboard forward main @-@ gun turret and large quantities of smoke erupted from the turret and between the first and second funnels . Two minutes later , she began to list to starboard and capsized at 15 : 55 , only four minutes after the explosion . Over a thousand men were aboard Kawachi at the time of the explosion and over 600 were killed , with 433 survivors . 
 The Imperial Japanese Navy convened a commission to investigate the explosion the day after the incident with Vice Admiral Murakami Kakuichi as chairman . The commission first suspected arson , but no plausible suspect could be found and it reported that the cordite in her magazine might have spontaneously ignited due to decomposition . Kawachi 's magazines had been inspected in January – February 1918 , however , and no problems were discovered , which made that possibility less likely . The commission made recommendations on tighter control of production and handling of cordite that were successfully adopted by the navy . The Japanese Navy considered salvaging Kawachi , but ultimately decided that it would be too expensive and would delay the construction of one battlecruiser by over a year . Stricken from the navy list on 21 September 1918 , the wreck was later partially dismantled although most of the hull was abandoned in place to serve as an artificial reef . 
 = Volcano ( South Park ) = 
 " Volcano " is the second episode of the American animated television series South Park . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 20 , 1997 . In the episode , Stan , Kyle , Cartman and Kenny go on a hunting trip with Stan 's uncle Jimbo and his war buddy Ned . While on the trip , Stan is frustrated by his inability to shoot a living creature and Cartman tries to scare the hunting party with tales of a creature named Scuzzlebutt . Meanwhile , the group is unaware that a nearby volcano is about to erupt . 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone . It was inspired by the 1997 disaster films Volcano and Dante 's Peak , both of which Parker and Stone strongly disliked . The plot was also based on the large amount of hunting Parker and Stone witnessed while growing up in Colorado ; Stan 's hesitation about the sport mirrors Parker 's real @-@ life feelings about hunting . " Volcano " was the third episode produced , but it was broadcast as the second . Parker and Stone felt the computer animation in " Volcano " had greatly improved compared to the early episodes ; they were particularly pleased with the lava , which was made to resemble orange construction paper . 
 " Volcano " received generally positive reviews and was nominated for a 1997 Environmental Media Award . Slightly more than 1 million viewers watched the original broadcast , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode featured the first appearances of recurring characters Ned <unk> and Randy Marsh . The latter , who is also the town geologist , is established as Stan 's father in later episodes . It also marked the first of two appearances for Scuzzlebutt , who became a popular minor character and appeared in the video games South Park 10 : The Game and South Park Rally . The episode parodied the Duck and Cover educational videos from the 1950s and 1960s that advised people to hide under tables in the event of a nuclear attack . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stan 's Uncle Jimbo and his Vietnam War buddy Ned take Stan , Kenny , Kyle , and Cartman on a hunting trip in the mountains . As they arrive , Jimbo explains to the boys how to hunt . Whenever they see a creature , they shoot it after yelling , " It 's coming right for us ! " , so they can claim the shooting was in self @-@ defense . Stan does not have the proper temperament to enjoy hunting , and finds himself unable to shoot a living target . Unlike Stan , Kenny is able to shoot animals , impressing Jimbo . Meanwhile , South Park geologist Randy discovers that the mountain on which the boys are hunting is a volcano that is about to erupt . He reports his findings to the Mayor , who directs one of her aides to make appropriate decisions about the crisis . 
 During the hunting trip , Jimbo proclaims Kenny his honorary nephew , upsetting Stan . When night falls , Cartman tells the story of Scuzzlebutt , a creature that has a piece of celery in place of one of its hands and Patrick Duffy for a leg . The boys are skeptical , so Cartman decides to dress up as the creature the next morning in order to convince and scare them . When he disappears the next morning , the others set out to find him . They then see Cartman disguised as Scuzzlebutt and start shooting at him . When they catch up with Cartman at the base of the mountain , Stan tries to shoot him in order to redeem himself in his uncle 's eyes . However , he is unable to do so and the delay gives Cartman time to remove the costume . At a lower elevation , Randy orders the South Park residents to dig a trench to divert the lava away from the town . 
 Suddenly the volcano erupts . The hunters try to flee , but find themselves trapped on the other side of the trench . The real Scuzzlebutt then appears , and Jimbo apologizes to the boys for their seemingly imminent deaths , just before realizing that Scuzzlebutt is weaving a wicker basket to carry the hunting party to safety . The lava then flows through the trench just as Randy planned , but due to a miscalculation he made , the trench leads the lava to Denver , destroying it . However , in a misguided attempt to prove he can kill something and impress his uncle , Stan kills Scuzzlebutt . Unfortunately for Stan , Jimbo is less than impressed , telling Stan that he will always be his nephew but that " some things you do kill and some you don 't . " Stan does not understand , since Jimbo tried to kill Scuzzlebutt earlier . Ned states that he now understands the folly of guns and drops his rifle , which accidentally fires , killing Kenny . Finally , the boys decide that hunting is stupid and go home to watch cartoons . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Volcano " was written and directed by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone . The episode was inspired by volcano @-@ related Hollywood disaster films , such as Dante 's Peak ( 1997 ) and Volcano ( 1997 ) , which came out around the time they were writing the script ; Parker and Stone considered the films two of the worst ever made . Stone said , " If you watch this episode and then go watch Volcano , this makes more sense than Volcano does . " Debbie Liebling , who served as a South Park producer at the time of the episode 's broadcast , said the volcano erupting in South Park helped establish the setting as a place where " anything can happen " . Although Stone and Parker acknowledged that a volcano could not actually erupt in this Colorado town , they felt they were entitled to create the episode anyway because the Volcano film was set in Los Angeles ; Stone said , " If they could do it , we could . " Similarly , the duo acknowledge the tunnel built in the episode would not really divert the lava , but they included it because Parker said , " Any movie today , that 's basically how dumb they are . " 
 Another influence on the plot was the large amount of hunting Parker and Stone saw around them while growing up in Colorado . Neither of them were hunters , and Parker said Stan 's hesitation about hunting was based largely on himself and his father , who hated the idea of killing an animal even though Parker 's grandfather , like Jimbo , was enthusiastic about the sport . Parker said he feels many of the first season episodes considered taboo in 1997 would have been considered less controversial five years later , but that " Volcano " is an exception . Since the episode involved children drinking beer and threatening each other at gunpoint during hunting trips , Parker said he did not believe Comedy Central would have aired it following the Columbine High School massacre in 1999 . Parker said , " Back then , it was just sort of funny , kids pointing guns at each other , and it 's just not so funny now . " 
 South Park animators spent the first four episodes of the show trying to perfect the animation of the characters . By " Volcano " – which was produced after " Weight Gain 4000 " – , Parker and Stone felt the textures were improved , as well as smaller details like the lines around the eyes of the characters . While the series pilot " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " was animated with construction paper , subsequent episodes were made using computers . Nevertheless , Parker and Stone wanted the show to maintain its crude paper look ; for example , they specifically asked for the night sky in this episode to look like a black piece of paper with holes cut into it for stars , just as it was in the pilot episode . Stone and Parker were especially proud of the animation of the lava , which they said took hours to perfect , although they acknowledged it ended up simply resembling orange construction paper . The lava ball shooting out of the volcano and almost killing Kenny was directly inspired by the Volcano film . Parker and Stone came up with the character of Scuzzlebutt during a random conversation with Comedy Central executive Debbie Liebling . While meeting with her , they simply started drawing the character , and decided to add a celery hand and Patrick Duffy leg for no particular reason . Scuzzlebutt also appeared in a second episode , " City on the Edge of Forever " from the second season . Scuzzlebutt turning out to be a real character rather than a ridiculous story was the first instance of a common characteristic of the Cartman character , in which Cartman says outrageous and completely unrealistic things that turn out to be true . Stone commented , " He 's right more often than he 's wrong . " 
 The " Volcano " episode was in production when South Park debuted on August 13 , 1997 . Comedy Central executives did not object to most of the content of the episode , but said the scene in which Kyle <unk> while talking to Stan should have been removed because nothing happened after the fart , and they said it was not funny . Parker and Stone , however , insisted it stay in the episode , and they said the lack of any reaction whatsoever to the fart was what made it funny . During close @-@ ups of Cartman 's face while telling the story of Scuzzlebutt around the campfire , the flames from the fire stop moving . Parker and Stone noticed the consistency error after the episode was filmed , but they did not have enough time to go back and fix it before the broadcast date , so it was left in . A cat featured in the background of one of the outdoor scenes was designed to look exactly like Parker 's cat , Jake . The scene in which Ned catches fire was based on an experience Parker had during a Colorado camping trip where he tried to do an " Indian Fire Trick " , in which one pours gasoline onto a fire to create large flames . Although nobody caught fire , Parker said the trick misfired and he nearly burned down the forest . After finishing the episode , Parker and Stone realized " Volcano " was about two minutes shorter than the time length required for the episode . In order to add time to the episode , Parker and Stone added the scene with Ned singing the song " <unk> " around the fire , as well as the long freeze @-@ frame on a shocked Chef and Mayor McDaniels reacting to the news of the volcano 's imminent eruption . 
 In addition to Scuzzlebutt , " Volcano " included the first appearances of recurring characters Randy Marsh and Ned Gerblanski . In this first appearance , Randy is identified only as the South Park geologist , and it is only in the episode " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " that he is first introduced as Stan 's father . Parker , who provides the voice of Randy Marsh , said the design , voice , and personality of the character are based on his real @-@ life father , who works as a geologist for the United States Geological Survey . Parker said his father is very calm in real life and Randy 's relaxed reaction to learning of the volcano — calmly sipping his coffee — is " about how my dad would react to anything " . The look of the Ned character was based on a drawing Parker made in high school , although the character did not originally have a voice box . The voice was inspired by a waitress who worked at a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant in Boulder , Colorado , where Parker and Stone would visit while attending the University of Colorado . The duo said they would go to the restaurant just to hear her voice , but that it was so low they would lose their appetite when she took their orders . Stone and Parker had trouble creating the right voice for the character ; they tried putting the microphone directly on their throat , and also bought an actual voice box , but ultimately decided that the best way to provide the character 's voice was with natural voice simulation . 
 " Volcano " was released alongside five other episodes in a three @-@ VHS set on May 5 , 1998 , marking the first time South Park was made available on video . The episode was released on the " Volume I " video along with " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " ; other featured episodes included " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " , " Death " , " Weight Gain 4000 " , and " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " . " South Park : The Complete First Season " , a DVD box set featuring all thirteen episodes , including " Volcano " , was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but the tracks were not included on the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released on a separate CD . 
 = = Cultural references and impact = = 
 The episode features a fictional education film called Lava and You , which says lava will pass harmlessly over potential victims who duck and cover their heads . The film was inspired by actual " Duck and Cover " films from the 1950s and 1960s , in which children were instructed to hide under tables or lean against walls in the case of a nuclear weapon attack ; Parker and Stone , like many critics of the films , found the methods painfully simplistic and did not believe they would actually help in the case of such an attack . Jimbo and Ned are described as veterans of the Vietnam War , the military conflict between North Vietnam and South Vietnam that lasted from 1959 to 1975 ; Cartman , who is far too young to have participated in the war , claims to have flashbacks to his experiences in it . Patrick Duffy , the American television actor best known for his roles in the shows Dallas and Step by Step , appears in the episode as the living leg of Scuzzlebutt . Matt Stone claimed there was no particular reason Duffy was chosen as the leg except that he is such a nondescript actor : " He 's just super bland . Like , how could you possibly be a fan of Patrick Duffy ? " 
 The scene where Scuzzlebutt puts a star on top of a tree is a reference to a similar scene in the 1964 television special Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer , in which the Abominable Snow Monster places a Christmas star atop a large tree . Mount Evanston , the fictional mountain in " Volcano " , was named after the real Mount Evans in the Front Range region of the Rocky Mountains in Clear Creek County , Colorado ; Nichols Canyon in the episode was named after Kirt Nichols , a friend of Trey Parker . Jimbo blames the Democratic Party for passing overly restrictive laws on hunters and gun owners . Upon learning children are in danger due to the volcano , Mayor McDaniels seeks publicity for herself by contacting the television news programs Entertainment Tonight and Inside Edition . 
 Several lines of dialogue from " Volcano " became especially popular among South Park fans , including " It 's coming right for us ! " by Jimbo , and the two Cartman lines , " Democrats piss me off ! " and " Cartoons Kick Ass ! " , the last of which was featured on T @-@ shirts . Despite the relatively small role Scuzzlebutt played in the series , he nevertheless became a popular minor South Park character . He was included in the South Park video games South Park 10 : The Game and South Park Rally . The song " Hot Lava " , sung by the Chef in the episode , was featured on the 1998 soundtrack Chef Aid : The South Park Album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Volcano " originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 20 , 1997 . " Volcano " , like the early South Park episodes preceding it , was viewed by slightly more than 1 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . This was considered high for a cable program in the United States at the time . The Environmental Media Association nominated the episode for an Environmental Media Award in the " TV Episodic Comedy " category . However , the eventual recipient of the award was The Simpsons , for the episode " The Old Man and the Lisa " . 
 " Volcano " received generally positive reviews . USA Today critic Matt Roush praised the episode , especially the " Duck and Cover " films . The Advertiser called the episode " outrageously lewd " and " hysterically funny " . The Washington Post critic Tom Shales considered the episode funnier than its precedent " Weight Gain 4000 " . Peter Hawes of The Sunday Star @-@ Times in Auckland , New Zealand , said the episode was funny and intelligent . He said of the episode , " Once again , the US national psyche is <unk> captured by a crude cartoon . " He liked the way adults were portrayed as less sensible than the children , and he particularly enjoyed the " Duck and Cover " videos : " It is terrifyingly funny , for it is a word @-@ for @-@ word recreation of the insane Atom @-@ bomb Safety film , created and distributed in 1952 by the US government , who never for a second thought it would work . " The Daily Record of Glasgow , Scotland , praised the episode and described it as " hardcore humour " : " Love it or loathe it , you can 't ignore the adult animation series whose bite is worse than its bark . " 
 = Streeterville = 
 Streeterville is a neighborhood in the Near North Side community area of Chicago , Illinois , United States , north of the Chicago River in Cook County . It is bounded by the river on the south , the Magnificent Mile portion of Michigan Avenue on the west , and Lake Michigan on the north and east , according to most sources , although the City of Chicago only recognizes a small portion of this region as Streeterville . Thus , it can be described as the Magnificent Mile plus all land east of it . The majority of the land in this neighborhood is reclaimed sandbar . 
 The neighborhood contains a combination of hotels , restaurants , professional office centers , residential high rises , universities , medical facilities , and cultural venues . The area has undergone increased development in the early 21st century as numerous empty lots in Streeterville have been converted into commercial and residential properties , especially in the southern part of the neighborhood . The neighborhood had earlier experienced booms following World War I and World War II . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the American settlement of the Chicago area , the lake shoreline fluctuated from year to year as storm waves eroded parts of the shore and built up the shore elsewhere . By 1803 , when American troops started the construction of Fort Dearborn , a <unk> bar blocked the mouth of the river causing it to jog southwards and enter Lake Michigan at about the level of present @-@ day Madison Street . When surveyed in 1821 the Lake Michigan shoreline north of the river ran approximately along what is now North St Clair Street , just to the east of what is now Michigan Avenue . In 1834 , after a number of failed attempts to cut through the sandbar at the mouth of the river , a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ foot ( 457 @.@ 2 m ) pier was built to protect a channel cut through the bar . Silt and sand accumulated north of this pier , creating usable land that was later nicknamed " The Sands " . Squatters and a vice district encroached on the district , causing angst among the property owners . In 1857 , Chicago Mayor John Wentworth evicted these trespassers from the land . 
 In the late 1880s , George Streeter claimed that his newly acquired boat struck a sandbar just off the Chicago shoreline during a storm . Landfill dumped in an effort to create land on which to build Lake Shore Drive by the Lincoln Park Board created 186 acres ( 0 @.@ 75 km2 ) of new land along the lake front , which Streeter attempted to claim . Streeter claimed that this newly created land was his and that it was an independent territory which he called the District of Lake Michigan . 
 For the next few decades , Streeter persisted in his claims , sometimes supporting them through criminal means . A witness in Streeter 's 1902 land fraud trial testified that Streeter had purposely set out to contest the claims of the wealthy shoreline owners . Contractor Hank <unk> told the court that Streeter asked him to fill in portions of the shoreline in order to create confusion over land titles . According to <unk> , Streeter said that : " They [ the owners of the shoreline ] will have to buy us off " and that " We 'll get a million out of it " . Streeter was also motivated by the profit he gained by selling and taxing the land he claimed . 
 The local press became enamored with the story of Streeter 's brash personality and his self @-@ proclaimed district . Mayor William Hale Thompson tried to evict the Streeters for selling liquor , and after several eviction attempts and gun battles , Streeter landed in jail . In 1918 , the courts ruled against his claim of sovereignty . Today , the district is home to some of the most expensive real estate in Chicago . 
 The 1920 opening of the Michigan Avenue Bridge , which was part of the efforts to enact the Burnham Plan of 1909 , as well as the economic boom of the 1920s , brought wealth to the eastern sector of the Near North Side and paved the way for a luxury shopping district on North Michigan Avenue . Investors built high @-@ rise apartment buildings such as those in the East Lake Shore Drive Historic District , and elaborate hotels . The Bridge connected to a North Michigan avenue that served as a replacement for the former Pine Street which hosted warehouses and factory buildings near the river , and large mansions and rowhouses in northward sections in the neighborhoods of <unk> and Streeterville . Magnificent Mile architecture during the economic boom of the 1920s emphasized historicist architectural styles such as Beaux @-@ Arts classicism , Gothic revival , and vertical @-@ style modernism . The buildings redefined the Chicago skyline with stylistic variation that gave new meaning to urban context and design compatibility . 
 A post @-@ World War II construction surge occurred in the area , and in the 1950s the city pursued a plan of urban renewal . A local real estate developer named Arthur Rubloff led the revitalization of North Michigan Avenue under the banner of “ The Magnificent Mile ” . The success of this effort spurred the erection of more high @-@ rise apartments and new investment in the Near North Side . This development led to the " <unk> " of Michigan Avenue , where the buildings on both sides of the street tower above , creating an " urban canyon " . 
 = = Today = = 
 Although there is general agreement that Streeterville is bounded on the west by the Magnificent Mile , the City of Chicago and the Streeterville Organization of Active Residents , claim the boundary extends one block further to the west to Rush Street . Streeterville includes some of Chicago 's tallest skyscrapers , such as the John Hancock Center , and upscale stores , hotels , and restaurants . 
 Although its main campus is in Evanston , Illinois , Northwestern University has its Chicago campus here . The Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine is on the Chicago campus and is adjacent to several closely affiliated hospitals , including Northwestern Memorial Hospital , the Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children 's Hospital of Chicago , the Prentice Women 's Hospital , and the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago . The Prentice Women 's Hospital opened in October 2007 , and the Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children 's Hospital of Chicago opened in May 2012 . The Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago is located in Streeterville and construction of a replacement facility , also in Streeterville , was begun in 2013 . The Northwestern University School of Professional Studies and part of its Kellogg School of Management are nearby . The Northwestern University School of Law is at Chicago Avenue and Lake Shore Drive , adjacent to Lake Shore Park and Lake Michigan . Next to the Park is the Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago . The downtown campus of the University of Chicago Booth School of Business has a Chicago River setting to the south . The east side of the Magnificent Mile portion of Michigan Avenue is part of Streeterville , as are Navy Pier , the most visited attraction in Chicago , and the John Hancock Observatory , the eighth @-@ most visited attraction in Chicago . 
 The area east of Michigan Avenue and north of the Chicago River had a split personality for much of the 20th century - the northern portion upscale residential , retail , and university uses and the area near the Chicago River and Navy Pier dedicated to shipping and factories . At the end of the 1960s , however , residential complexes such as Lake Point Tower ( 1965 ) and McClurg Court Center ( 1971 ) began to appear among the warehouses and by the end of the century , residential and retail dominated the entire area . The neighborhood now has a reputation as part of an upscale residential strip that balances the more industrial western portion of the Near North Side . In 2007 , construction started on what would have been Chicago 's tallest skyscraper , the Chicago Spire . It was to be located in the southeastern corner of the neighborhood , next to Lake Shore Drive . The Chicago Spire was originally supposed to be completed in 2010 , but was later cancelled . 
 In the early 21st century , much of the southern part of the neighborhood that had previously contained warehouses and empty lots has undergone development , including the River East Center east of Columbus Drive . The River East Art Center serves as the primary retail hub apart from the Magnificent Mile . South Streeterville currently has numerous skyscrapers that are either proposed or already under construction such as a new tower at InterContinental Chicago and 500 North Lake Shore . 
 Streeterville hosts several landmarks and places that have been designated as historic districts . The East Lake Shore Drive Historic District , which consists of a row of early 20th century luxury apartments , sits on the northern edge of the district opposite Lake Michigan . The Old Chicago Water Tower District is located along Michigan Avenue where Streeterville meets the border of the River North and Gold Coast ( Chicago ) neighborhoods at Chicago Avenue . The Water Tower District contains the only public buildings that survived the 1871 Great Chicago Fire . Also , part of the Michigan – Wacker Historic District lies within Streeterville at the southern end of the Magnificent Mile and contains numerous high rises and skyscrapers built in the 1920s . 
 The neighborhood hosts several individual landmarks . The neighborhood hosts a National Historic Landmark , the Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite , the home of the first settler in Chicago . Properties in the neighborhood listed in the National Register of Historic Places include 257 East Delaware , the 860 @-@ 880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments , the Drake Hotel , the Fourth Presbyterian Church of Chicago , the Navy Pier and the Palmolive Building . Other Chicago Landmarks in the neighborhood include Allerton Hotel , Farwell Building , McGraw @-@ Hill Building , Perkins , Fellows & Hamilton Office and Studio , Tribune Tower , and the Woman 's Athletic Club . Notable buildings in the district include the skyscrapers on the Magnificent Mile : 
 John Hancock Center ( 1 @,@ 127 feet ( 344 m ) ) 
 900 North Michigan ( 871 feet ( 265 m ) ) 
 Water Tower Place ( 859 feet ( 262 m ) ) 
 Park Tower ( 844 feet ( 257 m ) ) 
 Olympia Centre ( 725 feet ( 221 m ) ) 
 One Magnificent Mile ( 673 feet ( 205 m ) ) 
 Chicago Place ( 608 feet ( 185 m ) ) 
 Palmolive Building ( 565 feet ( 172 m ) ) . 
 Non @-@ Michigan Avenue skyscrapers in the neighborhood include the following : 
 Lake Point Tower ( 645 feet ( 197 m ) ) 
 River East Center ( 644 feet ( 196 m ) ) 
 North Pier Apartments ( 581 feet ( 177 m ) ) 
 <unk> Center ( 570 feet ( 170 m ) ) 
 Elysées Condominiums ( 529 feet ( 161 m ) ) 
 401 East Ontario ( 515 feet ( 157 m ) ) 
 The Streeter ( 514 feet ( 157 m ) ) 
 Streeter Place ( 554 feet ( 169 m ) ) 
 400 East Ohio Street ( 505 feet ( 154 m ) ) . 
 Some of the notable buildings in the district that have not been designated are Wrigley Building and Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago . 
 The neighborhood hosts more than 25 hotels , including the Ritz Carlton , one of three five star hotels in the Midwestern United States , and the historic Drake Hotel . The Peninsula Hotel , another of the three five star hotels in the Midwestern United States , and the Four Seasons Hotel Chicago , the other of the Midwestern five star hotels are located in the neighborhood near Rush Street . These two hotels host the highest rated spas in Illinois . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Qatar Airways operates an office in Suite 1310 at the John Hancock Center . 
 Playboy Enterprises ' offices were on the 15th and 16th floors of 680 N. Lake Shore Drive until 2012 . 
 Several consulates are in Streeterville . Countries with consulates include Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Chile , Denmark , Greece , Japan , Lithuania , and Switzerland . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Streeterville is accessible via Lake Shore Drive with multiple direct exits in both directions . In addition , the Chicago ' L ' has a stops at Chicago and Grand stations on the Red Line , which runs along State Street immediately to the west of the neighborhood . From the Kennedy Expressway the Ohio Street exit feeds into Streeterville . Numerous Chicago Transit Authority bus routes run within the neighborhood , notably along Michigan Avenue , Grand Avenue , and Chicago Avenue . During warm @-@ weather months , water taxis and sightseeing boats ply the Chicago River along the south edge of the neighborhood and Navy Pier handles similar Lake Michigan water traffic . 
 = Operation Donnerkeil = 
 Unternehmen Donnerkeil ( Operation Thunderbolt ) was the codename for a German military operation of the Second World War . Donnerkeil was designed as an air superiority operation to support the Kriegsmarine 's ( German Navy ) Operation Cerberus , also known as the " Channel Dash " . 
 In 1941 Kriegsmarine surface vessels had carried out commerce raiding sorties in support of the German U @-@ Boats in the Battle of the Atlantic . In January 1941 Operation Berlin was launched followed by Operation Rheinübung in May 1941 . The dominance of the Royal Navy 's surface fleet prevented the German units returning to ports in the Baltic sea or Germany . The surviving ships , the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the cruiser Prinz Eugen , docked in the port of Brest , France . Throughout 1941 RAF Bomber Command attacked the ships in dock . The close proximity of the ports to Royal Air Force ( RAF ) airfields allowed a large number of sorties to be flown against the targets in quick succession . The Oberkommando der Marine ( Naval High Command ) , and Adolf Hitler himself desired to move the ships out of range from potential air raids . 
 In December 1941 the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( High Command of the Air Force ) was ordered to formulate an air superiority plan for the protection of three German capital ships to escape from France to Germany through the English Channel . General der Jagdflieger ( General of the Fighter Force ) Adolf Galland prepared the aerial assets for the operation . Both Cerberus and its supporting operation , Donnerkeil , were launched on 11 February 1942 . During the first phase of the operation the Germans achieved surprise . The German ships reached Germany on 13 February 1942 , just two days after the start of Cerberus and Donnerkeil . 
 During the Channel Dash the Luftwaffe succeeded in defeating air attacks on the German ships during the operation , thus allowing them to reach German waters . In the air battles that took place over the Channel the British suffered heavy losses for a non @-@ existent return . German losses were modest , and the operation achieved its objective . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first German Capital ships to dock at Brest were the Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , on 22 March 1941 . In the previous eight weeks , January — March , they had participated in the German Operation Berlin against Allied shipping in the Atlantic Ocean . Just nine weeks later , the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen also sought refuge in the harbour on 1 June 1941 , after the failed Operation Rheinübung ( Operation Exercise Rhine ) . However , whilst in port , the ships were in easy range of British air power and suffered frequent attacks and some damage . A ten @-@ month offensive by the RAF from 29 March 1941 succeeded in flying 2 @,@ 928 sorties against the Brest harbour , 171 in daylight . Some of these suffered heavy losses . A raid on 24 July lost 12 percent of its strength . Night bombing was safer as the Germans lacked night @-@ fighters and the 18 losses to enemy action were claimed by Anti @-@ Aircraft Artillery ( AAA ) . During the course of their campaign the RAF used more sophisticated navigation aids . On the night of the 7 / 8 December 1941 the Oboe navigation aid was employed for the first time . 
 Concerned after the loss of Bismarck , Adolf Hitler ordered the Kriegsmarine to move the ships to Germany for overhauls in preparation for their deployment to Norway . There they were to serve as a fleet in being , and as the premier naval defence for German @-@ occupied Norway . After lengthy discussions the Oberkommando der Marine opted for the shorter , but arguably more dangerous route , through the English Channel . 
 On 12 January 1942 Hitler met with the commanders of the operation at his Headquarters in East Prussia ( Wolf 's Lair ) . Present were Wilhelm Keitel , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Wehrmacht ( German Armed Forces ) , Hans Jeschonnek ( Chief of the Luftwaffe General Staff ) , Alfred Jodl ( Chief of Staff for Military Operations ) and Adolf Galland , General der Jagdflieger ( General of the Fighter Forces ) , Erich Raeder ( Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Navy ) and Vice @-@ Admiral Otto Ciliax , who was to lead the battle group ( Kampfgruppe ) . During the course of the meeting Hitler likened the German fleet to " a patient with cancer which is doomed unless they submit to an operation . An operation , on the other hand , even though it may have to be drastic , will at least offer some hope that the patient 's life may yet be saved . The passage of our ships is such an operation . It must be attempted " . Not much operational detail was discussed . The Luftwaffe was ordered to provide air cover and diversion raids against British targets . Jeschonnek promised around 250 aircraft . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Luftwaffe plan = = = 
 The OKL was not happy about supporting Cerberus . Jeschonnek remarked to Galland that if Cerberus failed then the Luftwaffe would be made a scapegoat . <unk> was to be proved right . During the 12 January 1942 meeting , the Navy demanded maximum fighter cover be given and won Hitler 's support . Should anything go wrong , the Navy would most likely blame the Luftwaffe for damage sustained by enemy air forces . During the meeting Jeschonnek stood his ground and refused to give any guarantees or to reinforce the Western Fighter Forces from other theatres . Galland was given executive power for the air operation which was given the code name Unternehmen Donnerkeil ( Operation Thunderbolt ) . The existence of the operation was so secret that both Jeschonnek and Galland had to sign secrecy pledges as they left Hitler 's Headquarters in East Prussia . 
 The details of the plan were worked out with Oberst ( Colonel ) Karl Koller , Generalfeldmarschall Hugo Sperrle 's chief of staff , Luftflotte 3 ( Air Fleet 3 ) . To assemble sufficient strength some training units had to be mobilised ( the bulk of the Jagdwaffe was in the Soviet Union owing to Operation Barbarossa ) . 
 The route was subdivided into three sectors based upon the existing Jafü ( Fighter Sector ) boundaries , but to ensure local control Max Ibel , former Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of Jagdgeschwader 27 ( Fighter Wing 27 ) was appointed Jagdfliegerführer Schiff , shortened to Jafü Schiff ( meaning Fighter Controller Ship ) and embarked onto Scharnhorst as a signals officer in order to communicate with Luftwaffe units during the operation . Eight dummy operations , involving around 450 sorties , were made from 22 January to 10 February to train for the mission . It is unclear whether the British were aware of these training missions . 
 To disrupt British radio transmissions , Wolfgang Martini 's unit , the <unk> ( Radio Enlightening Service , or Signals intelligence ) attempted to jam radio @-@ telephone frequencies . They created a subtle jamming technique which increased atmospheric interference which degraded the performance of British coastal radars . In addition Dornier Do 217s of Kampfgeschwader 2 ( Bomber Wing 2 ) was ordered to fly electronic deception missions over the western channel to divert enemy aircraft . Joachim <unk> 's Fliegerkorps IX prepared to strike at RAF bases in south @-@ west England and to engage and slow down British naval forces that might attempt an interception . <unk> 123 ( strategic or long @-@ range reconnaissance ) was responsible for maintaining reconnaissance in the channel 's east and west entrance and was to support Fliegerkorps IX . 
 To ensure constant air support , Jagdgeschwader ( Fighter Wings ) and Nachtjagdgeschwader ( Night Fighter Wings ) in the shape of Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 , were ordered to achieve a frantic pace in servicing and preparing aircraft for their next mission . To keep a constant aerial vigil over the task force , the ' black men ' ( mechanics ) had to complete rearming and refuelling in 30 minutes or less . Galland insisted that the air units aircraft should be split between high and low altitude to provide sound cover . The low altitude groups would be able to evade detection by British coastal radar . Galland demanded an umbrella of at least 16 fighters over the ships at any one time along the whole length of the channel . The fighter group would be split into two groups of eight aircraft for their respective patrol altitudes . Each formation was split into two Schwärme of four aircraft . The Schwärme tactics involved one formation flying to sea and one to land in a zigzag pattern . All Schwärme were ordered to fly back and forth along the line of ships in wide figures of eight while maintaining radio silence . Every sortie was meticulously timed to allow the fighters exactly 30 minutes over the ships , enough to maintain cover and allow the relieved units to refuel and rearm and return to start the cycle again . However , during Donnerkeil , the relieving sortie would arrive after only 20 minutes which meant the actual fighter cover for half the dash would be 32 fighters . 
 = = = British preparations = = = 
 RAF forces codenamed their response to the German action as Operation Fuller . The British Air Forces were aware that the Germans might opt to choose the English Channel as their route . Captain Norman Dening , head of the Admiralty ’ s Operational Intelligence Centre was not certain that the Germans would attempt it , though he regarded as a possibility . At the end of January he had warned that the German warships were preparing to put to sea and a major operation should be expected . Dening sent a message to First Sea Lord Dudley Pound : 
 The short cut of the German ships is via the English Channel . It is 240 miles from Brest to Cherbourg and another 120 miles from Cherbourg to the Dover straits . While ships could make the passage from Brest to Cherbourg or from Cherbourg to the Dover straits in the same dark period , they could not make the complete passage from Brest to Dover in one dark period . 
 At first sight this passage from up the Channel seems hazardous for the Germans . It is probable , however , that as their heavy ships are not fully efficient , they would prefer such a passage , relying for their security on the destroyers and aircraft which are efficient , and knowing full well that we have no heavy ships to oppose them in the Channel … 
 Taking all factors into consideration , it appears that the Germans can pass east up the Channel with much less risk than they will incur if they attempt an ocean passage . 
 Air Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of RAF Coastal Command agreed this was the probable route . He expected the Germans to make an attempt anytime after the 10 February . Unfortunately , the Air Ministry and the three RAF commands , RAF Coastal Command , RAF Bomber Command and RAF Fighter Command , believed the Germans would use the darkness for the longest and most dangerous part of the journey through the straits and would leave in daylight . The far from adequate forces at their disposal , they believed , would be best used at night . Most of RAF Bomber Command was ordered to stand down accordingly . Such an order made it totally unprepared to strike in daylight hours on 12 February . 
 Coastal Command had agreed to provide three squadrons of Bristol Beaufort torpedo bombers . The Fleet Air Arm ( FAA ) contributed one squadron of Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers . RAF Bomber Command had some 300 bombers on standby for any operation . There were problems , however . The Swordfish were very slow , and fighter escort of the aircraft was difficult . The Beaufort squadrons were all spread out and it was difficult to bring them together . One squadron was based at <unk> , Scotland , one at Thorney Island , Portsmouth , England , and one near St Eval , Cornwall , England . 
 = = Forces involved = = 
 = = = Luftwaffe = = = 
 The Luftwaffe contributed five wings to the operation . Jagdgeschwader 1 ( Fighter Wing 1 or JG 1 ) , Jagdgeschwader 2 ( JG 2 ) , Jagdgeschwader 26 ( JG 26 ) were equipped with day fighter aircraft , mostly the Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . JG 2 and JG 26 operated the Fw 190 , while JG 1 operated the Bf 109 . Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 was also pressed into the air superiority role . Its Messerschmitt Bf 110s operated in much smaller numbers . Kampfgeschwader 2 operated in a support role , mainly maritime interdiction and air raids on enemy airfields in southern England to distract the RAF from the Channel ’ s airspace . The Germans , in total , had a combined strength of 252 fighters , 30 heavy fighters and 32 bombers . JG 1 and JG 2 operated the Bf 109 , while JG 26 maintained a " monopoly " on the Fw 190 . 
 = = = RAF and FAA = = = 
 Confidence in the British bomber force was low . Having had no anti @-@ shipping attack training , their ability to inflict damage to the ships was poor . The main hope was placed in the torpedo bomber force made up mainly of the Beaufort and Swordfish aircraft of Coastal Command and the Fleet Air Arm . Beauforts of No. 42 Squadron RAF , No. 86 Squadron RAF and No. 217 Squadron RAF were made available from Coastal Command for the mission , but were short of torpedoes . The three torpedo squadrons were the only ones available on 12 February 1942 . Some 57 Bristol Beauforts had been diverted to other theatres , leaving a chronic shortage of torpedo bombers in Britain at a time when a major enemy naval operation was expected . Moreover , a further two squadrons ( No. 415 and No. 489 Squadron RAF ) had been withdrawn to convert to Handley Page Hampdens . No. 22 Squadron RAF was in the midst of a transfer to the Middle East at the time of the German operation . 
 No. 825 Squadron FAA and their Fairey Swordfish were also made available . Lockheed Hudson 's of No. 224 Squadron RAF and No. 233 Squadron RAF were also committed for reconnaissance operations . No. 22 Squadron RAF was recalled from leave to take part in any potential operation in the Channel . Hudsons from No. 407 Squadron RCAF were also available , and were placed on high alert . They took part in the fighting . RAF Bomber Command contributed its No. 5 Group RAF , containing some 242 of the 300 aircraft available to the service . 
 RAF Fighter Command committed several squadrons to the operation ; No. 1 , 19 , 91 , 41 , 118 , 129 , 137 , 234 , 401 , 403 , 607 , 316 , 411 , 452 , 485 , 137 , 128 , 64 , 65 , 72 , and 11 . 
 = = Channel Dash = = 
 = = = Contact = = = 
 During the evening of the 10 February 1942 the German flotilla prepared to undertake their operation . As they slipped anchor RAF bombers appeared over head . The German ships conducted a u @-@ turn and sped back to the dock . The RAF bombers released their bombs but did little damage . Fortunately they did not notice anything untoward . 
 Ultra intercepts had put the British on alert . However , a series of mistakes and bad luck enabled the Germans to evade detection . Three Lockheed Hudsons of Coastal Command conducted a patrol at three positions . The first , named " Stopper " , maintained surveillance between sunset and first light off the port of Brest . The Second , " Line SE " watched due north of the port , and the third , " Habo " , covered the area between Le Havre and Boulogne . The patrols lasted between 01 : 00 hours to dawn on 11 February . At 19 : 25 on the 11 February , " Stopper " took off as usual but was intercepted by a Bf 110 night fighter of NJG 1 . The Hudson evaded the Bf 110 , but its ASV equipment was unserviceable . The aircraft headed back to St. Eval , landing at 20 : 40 . Its replacement headed over the same area , reaching the location at 22 : 38 . It was too late , during the interlude , Ciliax and his ships had slipped their moorings . The “ Line SE ” Hudson should have picked up the German fleet , but in a repeat incident the ASV failed at 20 : 55 . At 21 : 50 all attempts to repair it failed , and the Hudson returned to base . No replacement took its place . Everything now depended on " Habo " , but Ciliax ’ s luck held . At dawn , mist began to form over the airfield at Thorney Island . The mist was threatening to deny a clear landing run for the Hudson , so it was recalled one hour early , just as the German ships were approaching " Habo ’ s " zone . II . / NJG 1 flew 19 sorties , protecting the ships during the night , until replaced by JG 2 at 08 : 00 . 
 For 11 hours the German fleet sailed from Brest into the English Channel to the Dover Straits . By chance , a mechanic on the radar station at Fairlight , East Sussex had just finished repairing the equipment when he picked up 27 echos at 10 : 15 on 12 February , south of Cap Gris Nez . The information was relayed to Vice @-@ Admiral Bertram Ramsay , who ordered his Air Officer liaison to contact No. 11 Group RAF to ask for armed reconnaissance . Ramsay also warned No. 16 Group RAF and the FAA squadron operating out of RAF Manston that there were possible targets were in the Channel , despite not knowing the exact number or size of the enemy vessels . The performance of the radar was down to the jamming of the sets ( <unk> ) by two Heinkel He 111s which had been flying off the south coast from their airfield near Paris . The flights ceased at 09 : 00 when installations along the French coast had taken over . The detection by Fairlight was a piece of good fortune , the Germans had assumed it to be out of action . Ten Dornier Do 217s from III . / KG 2 flew missions against Plymouth harbour and airfield , while 15 flew diversion missions to keep RAF fighters clear of the He 111s . 
 Ramsay 's request arrived at RAF Kenley . Two experienced pilots , Group Captain Francis Victor Beamish ( 10 victories ) and Wing Commander Finlay Boyd ( 14 victories ) , were sent on patrol to investigate . Flying over the channel in Spitfires , they ran into large numbers of Bf 109s protecting a large fleet of warships and dived away . Holding radio silence they kept their discovery until they landed . They sighted the ships at 10 : 42 and landed at 11 : 09 . It was another 16 minutes before Bomber Command was alerted and Ramsay did not know of the situation until 11 : 30 . Soon afterwards , at around 12 : 16 GMT , the first naval actions began between escorting <unk> and British Motor Torpedo Boats ( MTBs ) and the British were alerted . Galland ordered all low flying to cease and allowed Max Ibel and his team aboard Scharnhorst to break radio silence . Ibel then began directing Fw 190 and Bf 109s toward RAF units heading to the area . As luck would have it , as the first outnumbered British units entered the airspace over the ships , the German vessels were now at their closest point to German airfields . It allowed the Luftwaffe to offer maximum protection . 
 = = = Main assaults = = = 
 Lieutenant Commander Eugene Esmonde , acting as Squadron Leader , No. 825 Squadron FAA took off with his Fairey Swordfish formation at 12 : 25 to attack the ships . No. 411 and 64 Squadron were to escort the FAA but arrived over Manston 15 minutes late and missed the rendezvous . The only unit to keep to mission orders was Squadron Leader Brian <unk> 's No. 72 Squadron . Unaware of the Swordfish squadron 's location , they ran into each other by fortunate accident . Owing to low cloud cover , they dropped to between 50 and 100 feet . The heavy German fighter cover put an end to the protection the Spitfire 's could provide as the RAF fighters now had to look after themselves . The Spitfires and Swordfish were engaged by Fw 190s of 8 staffel and 9 staffel . / JG 26 led by Gruppenkommandeur ( Group Commander ) Gerhard Schöpfel of III . / JG 26 . The Fw 190s were just relieving fighters of JG 2 . Frail and slow , the Swordfish forced German pilots to lower their undercarriages to prevent overshooting the biplanes . In the event all six Swordfish were shot down . The Spitfires destroyed three Fw 190s in return . Several Swordfish managed to fire off their torpedoes but none found their mark . Lieutenant Commander Esmonde was shot down and killed by an Fw 190 . He was awarded the Victoria Cross . Only five of the original eighteen Swordfish crew survived . No. 41 Squadron RAF claimed three Bf 109s ( most likely from JG 1 ) destroyed and one damaged off the Belgian coast . No. 72 Squadron claimed three Fw 190s destroyed and four damaged in the battles around 13 : 00 . No. 410 Squadron claimed two Bf 109s destroyed and two damaged in the same dogfights . The German ships consumed very little ammunition , as the action had been carried out largely by the Luftwaffe . 
 The stand down order had meant RAF Bomber Command 's contribution to the proceedings came relatively late in the day . It dispatched a total of 73 bombers at between 13 : 55 and 14 : 50 ( GMT ) . None of the attackers succeeded in hitting their targets . At 14 : 35 nine Bristol Beauforts from No. 42 Squadron led by <unk> Cliff took off . Arriving over Manston at 14 : 50 they found other aircraft from No. 407 RCAF orbiting . It took nearly 30 minutes to form a proper formation . With several other squadrons they attacked the Gneisenau and Prinz Eugen at heights of between 60 and 100 feet but their torpedoes missed . No losses were suffered by No. 42 Squadron . The Hudsons struck at between 400 and 900 feet . Two RCAF bombers were lost without success . No. 217 Squadron nearly achieved a hit on Gneisenau , but the ship turned away , just missing the salvo . Later , another wave of 134 — 137 bombers intercepted the ships between 16 : 00 and 17 : 05 . Only 20 crews managed to make attacks owing to poor training ( Bomber Command crews were not trained to hit naval targets ) , a low cloud base ( 700 metres ) and poor visibility ( sea level visibility was between 1 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 000 yards ) . Nine bombers were lost . Another formation of 35 Vickers Wellington aircraft attempted a strike between 17 : 50 and 18 : 15 , losing two of their number . The most notable raid in this action was by six Beauforts from No. 86 , three from No. 217 and three from No. 22 Squadron . Wing Commander C. Flood , No. 86 Squadron led the attack in the only ASV @-@ loaded aircraft . Locating the German ships in the darkness they attacked , but heavy AAA fire scattered the bombers and no successes were achieved . Of the 242 bombers that took part in the missions , it is likely only 39 conducted attacks , though it is possible that a further 16 carried out attacks , suggesting a total of 54 aircraft actually released their bombs against the ships . Of this total 15 of those were shot down . RAF Fighter Command also threw in fighter @-@ bombers to try and inflict damage , operating Hawker Hurricanes over the Dover area . 
 The only success the British managed to achieve was to damage both the Gneisenau and Scharnhorst ( the latter seriously ) . Scharnhorst hit two mines , one at 14 : 31 GMT , and a further one at 21 : 34 GMT . Gneisenau also struck a mine at 18 : 55 GMT . Both ships recovered and steamed on . <unk> had been stopped dead in the water with engine damage after the first hit . The failure to alert Bomber Command earlier meant a chance was missed to deliver an attack on Scharnhorst when it was most vulnerable . The second and third mine hits came after nightfall , which enabled both vessels to avoid further attacks . The last RAF sighting of the ships had occurred at 18 : 00 GMT . 
 It is unclear exactly who was responsible for the damage on the German ships . It is possible that the mines were air @-@ dropped by RAF Handley Page Hampden bombers . Should this be the case , the bombers achieved far more damage than the Royal Navy and the rest of the RAF combined . 
 = = = Losses and overclaiming = = = 
 In protecting the RAF bombers , Fighter Command lost 20 fighters , 14 pilots killed and three captured . Only eight of the RAF fighters were shot down by the Luftwaffe . A further eight were shot down by AAA fire , two collided and two were lost to unknown causes . Ten of the fighters were Spitfires , six were Hawker Hurricanes and four were Westland Whirlwinds . During the air battles , mutual overclaiming took place , though the Luftwaffe was significantly worse . RAF Fighters claimed 16 Bf 109s destroyed and 13 damaged . Four Fw 190s were also claimed destroyed and six damaged . Actual German losses amounted to 17 fighters , along with five Do 217s . Human casualties amounted to 23 killed . German fighter units claimed 60 RAF aircraft shot down , with JG 26 awarded seven kills and six probable victories . Actual British losses were 41 , a number of which were lost to AAA fire . III . / KG 2 had participated in raids against RAF airfields . The Luftwaffe had flown 300 fighter and 40 bomber missions during the 11 — 12 February . 
 = = Attacks in port = = 
 The German flotilla had reached home ports on the evening of the 12 February . However , while the threat from RAF bombers in daylight had now gone , Bomber Command was soon making night bombing attacks on Kiel ’ s port . Gneisenau was moved into an inner basin alongside her depot ship , Monte Olivia . The hatches were left open and her tanks , still containing a large amount of fuel , were left unattended . RAF Bomber Command made its first attack on the night of the 25 / 26 February , when 61 bombers flew over Kiel . Monte Olivia was destroyed but Gneisenau escaped . On 26 / 27 February another 61 RAF bombers returned . A bomb penetrated Gneisenau 's foredeck and exploded . The oil fumes from the tanks ignited and the ship was engulfed in fire from her bow to the Anton turret . The entire forward part of the bow needed to be replaced . She steamed to Gdynia , in Poland on 4 April where she was decommissioned out of range of RAF bombers . Gneisenau did not put to sea again . The raid cost three aircraft , one Hampton and two Wellingtons . German casualties amounted to 16 civilians and 116 sailors dead . 
 On 27 / 28 February 1942 33 bombers flew over Wilhelmshaven looking for Scharnhorst . Cloud obscured the target area and German reports noted only three explosions . Three Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bombers were lost to unstated causes . In 1942 Scharnhorst had evaded the worst attacks from RAF Bomber Command . It was ready for redeployment by the summer , but a series of accidents , such as striking a mine and running aground meant this was delayed until the turn of the year . The ship made three unsuccessful attempts to sail to Norway . On 10 January 1943 she was spotted by RAF aircraft and turned back after reaching only the Skagerrak . Another attempt was tried in January but failed . On 3 March 1943 Scharnhorst finally made it to Norway . She would survive another eight months before being sent on her last wartime mission , Operation <unk> . During her sortie Scharnhorst was sunk at the Battle of the North Cape . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = British failures = = = 
 The failure to coordinate the FAA , RAF and Navy dispersed any counterstrike . Confusion owing to the weather and the lack of any centralised control of British sea and air forces caused each element to work independently of one another . This caused several friendly fire incidents , such as the attack by No. 217 Squadron on HMS Mackay . The most serious failure was Fighter Command ’ s failure to provide adequate protection to bomber and naval forces . Although the weather also prevented greater German fighter activity by the time the target area was reached , valuable time had been lost by bomber formations searching for their fighter escorts over the rendezvous positions which either never arrived or were given incorrect orders or direction too late to be acted upon . Little communication was enabled between fighter and bomber units , but also between the strike units themselves . Compounding the problems , RAF Bomber Command ’ s crews , which made up the majority of the strike forces , were not trained for attacks against naval targets . The only anti @-@ shipping torpedo @-@ bomber squadrons were No. 42 and 217 Squadrons of Coastal Command , which owing to logistical issues , were five torpedoes short of their total complement . 
 Air Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté , RAF Coastal Command , blamed the failure of Operation Fuller on the neglect of anti @-@ shipping aviation , not to those directing the forces during the operation or intelligence services . Joubert called for all anti @-@ shipping units to be handed over to the service . Better training , more aircraft and a higher quality of equipment would allow the RAF to avoid a repeat of the Channel Dash . The Air Ministry refused his request and instead put No. 2 Group RAF Bomber Command in support of Coastal units against enemy shipping between Cherbourg and Wilhelmshaven . Production and procurement remained in favour of Bomber Command , producing types for the strategic bombing campaign over Germany , even after the failure of Fuller . Adding to the RAF 's difficulty , most of Coastal Command 's anti @-@ shipping units were withdrawn to the more essential Mediterranean Theatre of Operations ( MTO ) , leaving Coastal Command short of naval strike aircraft in 1942 . Air Marshal Charles Portal agreed this needed to change arguing , " We agree on the importance of torpedo bomber aircraft , and this was proved completely during the passage of the Scharnhorst and Gneisenau [ and Prinz Eugen ] up the channel " . In May 1942 Joubert succeeded in procuring the new Bristol Beaufighter , which entered service in November 1942 . However , only one squadron was made operational . Despite the need for anti @-@ shipping strike aircraft , the service continued to struggle until 1943 , when Portal fulfilled his promise and more of these aircraft , including the de Havilland Mosquito , became available . 
 Donnerkeil also proved to be a watershed in electronic warfare , for by using jamming techniques , Wolfgang Martini removed British inhibitions concerning the use of ECM against the German defensive system ( Kammhuber line ) and paved the way for the debut of Window Chaff in June 1943 , which had a devastating effect on the ability of German night @-@ fighter radar defences to locate and intercept RAF bombers during the Defence of the Reich . The first step in this campaign was a British Army operation , Operation Biting , to steal a Würzburg radar set on 27 / 28 February 1942 . The British removed components and developed counter @-@ measures . The Germans responded by fortifying all radar sets , which only made them more visible for RAF aerial reconnaissance . The British also began the occasional jamming of Freya radar sets . The Germans did not realise this was happening until September 1942 . German forces also used offensive jamming of British radar , to enable fighter @-@ bomber operations over England . The British described them as a " real menace " . Radar @-@ jamming , counter @-@ measures and other innovations escalated from that point onward . 
 = = = German perspective = = = 
 Operation Donnerkeil had been an outstanding success for the Luftwaffe . The measure of success lay not in the ratio of losses , which amounted to 2 : 1 in the German favour , but the failure of the RAF , FAA and Royal Navy to intercept or at least inflict severe damage to the German warships . The meagre forces committed by the Navy had been repulsed easily by the German warships and their escorts . Heavy AAA fire had offered a helpful defence against air attack , but the German air defence had succeeded , along with poor weather , in breaking up RAF assaults on the ships . Galland , responsible for the plan , called it the high point of his career . 
 However , for the Kriegsmarine , Operation Cerberus had been operational success , but a strategic reverse . The present situation had forced them into an operation which was in effect , a strategic withdrawal from the Atlantic . From that point onwards , the German campaign in the Atlantic was to be carried by the U @-@ Boats , unsupported by a surface fleet . With the German ships removed from the French Atlantic ports , the British fleets could contain them much more effectively in Norway and the North Sea . Moreover , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau had been damaged by mines and required extensive repairs . Prinz Eugen was torpedoed and her stern collapsed just weeks after Cerberus . All three ships were out of action for extended periods . More bad luck followed , with Gneisenau being knocked out for good in February 1942 and the sinking of the Scharnhorst in December 1943 . None of the ships sailed in the Atlantic again in the intervening period , leaving the Battle of the Atlantic to be carried on by U @-@ Boat forces . 
 = Stalingrad @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Stalingrad @-@ class battlecruiser , also known as Project 82 ( Russian : <unk> крейсера <unk> 82 ) , was a Soviet Union battlecruiser design from 1941 . It was a smaller and less expensive counterpart to the Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruisers of 1939 . The original role was for a light , fast ship intended to break up attacks by Royal Navy fast cruiser forces who might attempt bombardment of Russia 's northern ports . The design would have been able to outgun any ship with similar speed , or outrun anything more heavily armed . Design work had just started when the German invasion of the Soviet Union opened and the design was put on hold . 
 The design was reimagined in 1944 , intended to operate along with the Sverdlov @-@ class cruisers and proposed aircraft carriers to make up powerful task forces able to challenge the USA 's fleet . In this role it would need to be a more powerful ship than the original design , taking over for the now @-@ cancelled <unk> . They were intended to fend off enemy attacks and protect the carriers when bad weather prevented flying . A series of at least four were planned , and Stalingrad finally began construction in 1951 . Supported primarily by Joseph Stalin and opposed by a considerable part of the naval staff , the project came to an abrupt end with Stalin 's death in 1953 . By this time a second example was under construction and abandoned on the slips , while a third never started . 
 The partially completed Stalingrad ended as a target ship for testing anti @-@ ship missiles , before being broken up around 1962 . 
 = = Background and genesis = = 
 The roots of the Project 82 @-@ class began back in May 1941 when the Main Naval Staff approved tactical requirements ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) for a medium @-@ sized cruiser between the light cruisers of the Kirov and Chapayev classes , and the Kronshtadt @-@ class battlecruisers . It was intended to fulfill the following roles : 
 Engage enemy cruisers armed with 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns 
 Destroy enemy light cruisers 
 Support its own light cruisers 
 Lay minefields 
 <unk> the enemy 's medium @-@ caliber coast defense batteries and support landing operations 
 Conduct operations against the enemy 's maritime lines of communication 
 To accomplish these missions , the Navy desired a ship of 20 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 20 @,@ 000 long tons ) or smaller , armed with eight 203 @-@ millimeter ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) and twelve 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns , twelve 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns and one triple 533 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo mount . It was to be armored to withstand 203 @-@ millimeter ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) shells with a speed not less than 36 knots ( 41 mph ; 67 km / h ) , a range of 10 @,@ 000 nmi ( 18 @,@ 520 km ) at 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) and able to carry four seaplanes launched by two catapults . Three preliminary designs were proposed in response , but only one , which displaced 25 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 000 long tons ) , was able to meet all of the requirements . However , the designers recommended an increase in the main armament caliber to 220 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) , a strengthened anti @-@ aircraft battery and reductions in the armor protection , speed , and range . 
 The opening of Operation Barbarossa a month later rendered these plans moot . Both the Project 82 and the Kronshtadt ( Project 69 ) classes were put on hold . 
 The project was revived in 1943 with a new requirement issued on 15 September . This was basically identical to the original , but added one new requirement : " Protect the operations of aircraft carriers and conduct joint operations with them . " Estimated characteristics were a displacement between 20 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 20 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 long tons ) , nine main guns between 210 – 230 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 1 in ) , a secondary battery of a dozen 130 @-@ mm dual @-@ purpose guns and thirty @-@ two 37 @-@ mm AA guns . The speed , range and aircraft requirements remained the same , although the torpedo tubes were dropped . Over a dozen preliminary designs had been proposed by May 1944 , but none were acceptable . 
 A new tactical requirement was issued in November 1944 that envisioned a more realistic displacement of 25 @,@ 000 – 26 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 000 – 26 @,@ 000 long tons ) while the speed was dropped to 33 knots ( 38 mph ; 61 km / h ) and the range to 8 @,@ 000 nmi ( 14 @,@ 820 km ) . Armament was also revised to nine 220 @-@ mm guns , sixteen 130 @-@ mm guns , thirty @-@ two 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) and twenty 23 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) AA guns . These last guns were changed to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) in 1945 . 
 Admiral Nikolai Kuznetsov believed that these ships could protect the planned Soviet aircraft carriers in bad weather from American cruisers and pushed to have them built , but the Shipbuilding Commissariat balked . It refused to begin detailed design work pleading the uncertainty of the post @-@ war building situation and the already heavy workload of its design bureau . Undeterred , the Navy continued studying cruiser designs and planned a ten @-@ year construction programme for the period 1946 – 1955 . This was based on defensive operations along the periphery of the Soviet Union against Anglo @-@ American carrier groups while submarines would attack their lines of communication . Ten of these large cruisers were envisioned as part of this construction program . When the program was discussed by the Politburo on 29 September 1945 there was no great disagreement on the large cruisers , although Stalin favored increasing the size of their main guns to 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) , but did not push the issue when Admiral Kuznetsov resisted . 
 A bigger problem was the resistance of the Shipbuilding Commissariat which said it would be impossible to lay down any ships of new design until about 1950 and that only incremental changes could be made to the designs currently in production . The Navy saw no reason why new ships , reflecting wartime experience , could not be laid down beginning in 1948 . To resolve the dispute a special commission was appointed , led by Lavrentiy Beria , which mostly sided with the Shipbuilding Commissariat in that most ships of the program would be improved versions of current designs . Four of the large cruisers were to begin construction , two each at Shipyard 402 in Molotovsk and Shipyard 444 at Nikolayev with another three planned to be laid down in 1953 and 1955 . This compromise was approved on 27 November 1945 and detailed design work began in 1946 for designs equipped with both the 220 @-@ mm and 305 @-@ mm guns . 
 This was reaffirmed by a decree of the Council of Ministers on 28 January 1947 . By August 1947 , the Navy and the Shipbuilding Ministry had winnowed down design proposals to only three , one from each armed with 305 mm guns and a joint design armed with 220 mm guns . The latter 's design was slightly smaller ( 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) ) than the Navy 's 40 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 39 @,@ 000 long tons ) design , and had an armor belt 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thinner , but was otherwise almost identical . The joint design was 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) smaller with a reduced secondary armament , but was about 1 @.@ 5 knots ( 1 @.@ 7 mph ; 2 @.@ 8 km / h ) faster . All proposals had a range of 6 @,@ 000 nmi ( 11 @,@ 110 km ) at 18 knots ( 21 mph ; 33 km / h ) . These designs weren 't reviewed until March 1948 , probably because of the need to coordinate reaction to the American Marshall Plan , and Stalin approved the Navy 's more heavily protected design . But even this was subject to more delays as the detailed specifications had to be approved and this didn 't occur until 31 August 1948 , likely delayed by the Tito – Stalin split and the start of the Berlin Blockade , both in June . 
 With the approval of the specifications , TsKB @-@ 17 , the heavy @-@ ship design bureau , began work on the sketch design to be submitted for approval to the Council of Ministers before the start of the technical design could begin . By March 1949 , four alternatives had been completed , differing mainly in the arrangement of the 130 mm guns and the boiler layout . The bureau preferred one layout and the Navy and the Shipbuilding Ministry concurred so the bureau began the technical design , without formal approval , in order to be ready to lay down the first two ships in the third quarter of 1950 as already scheduled . However , when Stalin reviewed the sketch design in September 1949 , he rejected it , ordering a smaller , faster ship capable of 35 knots ( 40 mph ; 65 km / h ) . TsKB @-@ 17 was able to produce a preliminary technical design that met Stalin 's demands by the end of the year , an amazingly fast amount of time for what should have been a very involved process . The most likely explanation is that the designers retained as much of their original work as possible and found room for the more powerful turbines and more numerous boilers necessary to attain Stalin 's specified speed by deleting the two rear twin 130 mm turrets , and their magazines , as revealed by a comparison of the 1949 and 1951 sketches . 
 The Navy didn 't like the compromises made to reduce the displacement down to Stalin 's 36 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 35 @,@ 000 long tons ) and to achieve the high speed demanded as revealed in a March 1950 meeting in the Kremlin where Stalin revealed critical points about his thoughts for these ships . When the admirals responded to his question about the purpose of these ships by saying that they were to fight the enemy 's heavy cruisers , he contradicted them and said that their purpose was to fight light cruisers : " It is necessary to increase its speed to 35 knots and create a cruiser that will cause panic among the enemy 's light cruisers , disperse and destroy them . " Furthermore he believed that they would fight close to home , defending the coastal waters of Soviet Union . " You cannot blindly copy the Americans and English , they face different conditions , their ships travel far over the ocean , out of touch with their bases . We are not considering conducting oceanic battles , but instead will fight close to our own shores , so we do not need a large ammunition supply on the ship . " The admirals also did not like the reduction in the secondary armament made to accommodate the larger machinery and extra boilers needed to reach the speed desired by Stalin , but he reminded them that most aircraft would attack the battlecruiser at heights below 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) and the ceiling of the 130 mm was far in excess of that . He also ordered a reduction in the light anti @-@ aircraft guns believing that its escorts would defend it . This design was approved by the Council of Ministers on 25 March 1950 . 
 This allowed the technical design process to begin and it was completed in December 1950 . Reviews by the Navy and Shipbuilding Ministries in February 1951 led to some significant changes to the design in April . The original form of the bow was similar to that of the Chapayev @-@ class light cruisers , but sea trials of the lead ship of that class in December 1950 — January 1951 proved that she was very wet forward , which hindered her seakeeping ability . The Stalingrad 's bow form was radically altered with a much more raked stem , its sheer and flare were greatly increased and the ship gained almost 10 m ( 32 ft 10 in ) in length , possibly in response to the Chapayev 's problems . In addition the thickness of her belt armor was increased from 150 to 180 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) , possibly in response to weight savings elsewhere . This final design was submitted for approval on 4 June 1951 , but preparations for the working design drawings began before it was approved . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Stalingrad class were 260 meters ( 853 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline , and 273 @.@ 6 meters ( 897 ft 8 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 32 meters ( 105 ft 0 in ) , a maximum draft of 9 @.@ 2 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) forward , 8 @.@ 8 meters ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft , and displaced 36 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 35 @,@ 900 long tons ) at standard load and 42 @,@ 300 tonnes ( 41 @,@ 600 long tons ) at full load . They were the first large Soviet @-@ built ships with a flush deck . The hull was completely welded to save weight and they used longitudinal framing throughout . <unk> height was estimated at 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 ft 6 in ) , presumably in the design load condition . The ships had a triple bottom underneath the armored citadel that had a height of 2 @.@ 25 meters ( 7 ft 5 in ) and 23 main watertight compartments . They had a crew of 1712 men plus space for 30 when acting as a flagship . 
 The cost for each ship was estimated at 1 @.@ 168 billion rubles , almost four times the 322 million rubles for a Sverdlov @-@ class cruiser . The ship was intended to be commanded by a rear admiral , with its executive officer , political officer and the heads of the gunnery and engineering divisions as captains 1st rank . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The high speed demanded of the Stalingrads required four TV @-@ 4 geared steam turbines , each producing 70 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 52 @,@ 199 kW ) and driving one propeller . They were powered by twelve water @-@ tube boilers at a pressure of 66 kg / cm2 ( 6 @,@ 472 kPa ; 939 psi ) at a temperature of 460 ° C ( 860 ° F ) . The machinery was arranged on the unit system so that one hit couldn 't knock out all the boilers or all the turbines and immobilize the ship . Two boiler compartments , each with three boilers , were situated underneath the forward funnel , with a turbine compartment for the wing shafts immediately aft and this arrangement was repeated for the two center shafts . 5 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ) of fuel oil were carried which gave a range of 5 @,@ 000 nmi ( 9 @,@ 260 km ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ) . Maximum speed was 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 40 @.@ 9 mph ; 65 @.@ 7 km / h ) . 
 Eight 750 kW turbo @-@ generators drove the <unk> , 50 Hz electrical system in addition to four 1000 kW Diesel generators located outside each end of the armored citadel for a total capacity of 10 @,@ 000 kW . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The armor scheme of the battlecruisers was quite complex with armor plates of no less than 25 different thicknesses used . Although only designed to withstand cruiser shellfire no less than 10 @,@ 400 tonnes ( 10 @,@ 200 long tons ; 11 @,@ 500 short tons ) , or 29 % of the total displacement was devoted to armor . The citadel armor was intended to provide an immunity zone against 8 in ( 200 mm ) armor @-@ piercing shells at ranges between 13 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 – 14 @,@ 000 m ) and 34 @,@ 000 yards ( 31 @,@ 000 m ) . The remainder of the armor was intended to resist 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) high explosive shells and 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) HE bombs . 
 The belt armor was 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) thick and inclined outwards at an angle of 15 ° to maximize its effectiveness against both plunging and horizontal fire . It had a vertical height of 5 @.@ 25 m ( 17 @.@ 2 ft ) , 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 ft 7 in ) of which was below the design waterline . It covered approximately 60 % of the ship 's waterline or about 156 m ( 512 ft ) . 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor covered the hull side above the belt as protection from splinters . The forward end of the armored citadel was closed off by a 140 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick transverse bulkhead on the forward end and 125 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) aft . The deck armor in the citadel ranged in thickness , from 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) for the upper deck , a 70 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) middle deck — increased to 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) over the handling rooms for the 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) gun turrets — and a lower splinter deck of 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) , which increased outboard to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) . The waterline forward of the citadel was protected by a 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) splinter belt all the way to the bow , with a similar extension aft to the steering gear compartment . The middle deck behind this splinter belt was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The steering gear was protected by 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) of armor on the sides , a 70 – 100 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) deck and a 200 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) armored bulkhead aft . 
 Additional armored plates were fixed to the third bulkhead of the underwater protection system to protect against diving shells hitting below the level of the waterline belt . Their thicknesses varied depending on location and ranged oddly from 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) amidships to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) over the 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) magazines . The main battery turrets were protected by 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of armor on the faces and 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) on the sides and 125 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) of armor on the roofs . Their barbettes had a maximum of 235 mm ( 9 @.@ 3 in ) on their forward faces and 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) on the after face . Below the main deck they were protected by only 195 – 155 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 1 in ) of armor . The 130 mm turrets were only protected by 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) of armor as splinter protection . 
 The forward conning tower had a forward face of 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) that thinned down to 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) on the aft section with a 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) roof . Its controls and cable runs were protected by a 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) tube and the lower part of the conning tower 's supporting structure was protected with 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) plates . Aft there was a lightly protected auxiliary control station with 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) sides . Between the middle and lower decks the funnel uptakes were protected by 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of armor and 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) between the upper and middle decks . A 125 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) upper and 175 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) lower grating protected the boilers from shells and fragments entering through the uptake openings . 
 The torpedo protection system was developed on the basis of model tests and full @-@ scale trials using the incomplete hull of the prewar battlecruiser Kronshtadt and was expected to resist a torpedo warhead equivalent to 400 – 500 kg ( 880 – 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of TNT . It was made up of an external bulge with four <unk> bulkheads . The first was 8 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick , the second was 8 – 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 – 0 @.@ 98 in ) , the third was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) and the fourth 15 – 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) . Presumably the thinner thicknesses were at the ends of the ships where the bulkheads were squeezed together . The outer space was left empty , but the two middle spaces were filled with oil that was intended to be exchanged with sea water as it was consumed , and the inner space was also to be left empty . One curious feature was that the first and second bulkheads were concave in profile . Apparently this was believed to improve their protective qualities , although there is no indication of how it did this . " The total depth of the system was about 4 – 4 @.@ 5 m ( 13 – 15 ft ) amidships , which seems rather shallow . " The triple bottom underneath the armored citadel was believed to protect the ship against a charge equivalent to 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of TNT five meters below the ship 's hull . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Rather than use the Tsarist @-@ era 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) MK @-@ 3 @-@ 12 gun as originally planned , or use the 305 @-@ mm / 54 guns ordered for the <unk> , it was decided in 1947 to adopt a new and more powerful 61 @-@ caliber gun of the same size that was to use three newly designed triple SM @-@ 6 turrets . Each individual gun weighed 101 @.@ 58 t ( 99 @.@ 98 long tons ; 111 @.@ 97 short tons ) and the complete turret weighed 1 @,@ 370 t ( 1 @,@ 350 long tons ; 1 @,@ 510 short tons ) . The guns could be depressed to − 4 ° and elevated to 50 ° at a rate of 10 ° per second . Traverse speed was 4 @.@ 5 ° per second and each turret was ordinarily remotely controlled from the More @-@ 82 main fire control director , but could be locally controlled if necessary . They fired 467 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 030 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 950 m / s ( 3 @,@ 100 ft / s ) to a maximum range of around 53 @,@ 070 m ( 58 @,@ 040 yd ) using 209 kg ( 461 lb ) of propellant . Their rate of fire was 3 @.@ 26 rounds per minute and 80 rounds were stowed aboard for each gun . One barrel was completed in December 1953 for evaluation purposes after the ships were canceled earlier that year . 
 The 130 @-@ mm 58 @-@ caliber guns were also a new design . They were to be fitted in a new twin @-@ gun BL @-@ 109A dual @-@ purpose mount . Each individual gun weighed 4 @.@ 88 t ( 4 @.@ 80 long tons ; 5 @.@ 38 short tons ) and the complete turret weighed 65 @.@ 2 t ( 64 @.@ 2 long tons ; 71 @.@ 9 short tons ) . The guns in this mount could depress to -8 ° and elevate to 83 ° at a rate of 20 ° a second . Traverse speed was 20 ° per second . The guns fired 33 @.@ 4 @-@ kilogram ( 74 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 950 – 1 @,@ 000 m / s ( 3 @,@ 100 – 3 @,@ 300 ft / s ) to a maximum horizontal range of 32 @,@ 390 m ( 35 @,@ 420 yd ) using 12 @.@ 92 kg ( 28 @.@ 5 lb ) of propellant . Their rate of fire was 15 rounds per minute and 200 rounds were stowed for each gun . 
 Twenty @-@ four 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 78 @-@ caliber light anti @-@ aircraft guns were to be carried by the Stalingrads in six quadruple SM @-@ 20 @-@ <unk> power @-@ driven , fully enclosed mounts . Two mounts were fitted on each side of the forward funnel and the last two were superimposed above the rear main gun turret . Each individual gun weighed 402 @.@ 8 kg ( 888 lb ) and the complete mount weighed 9 @.@ 75 t ( 9 @.@ 60 long tons ; 10 @.@ 75 short tons ) . The guns in this mount could depress to <unk> ° and elevate to 85 ° at a rate of 25 ° a second . Traverse speed was 30 ° per second . The gun fired 1 @.@ 41 @-@ kilogram ( 3 @.@ 1 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 080 m / s ( 3 @,@ 500 ft / s ) to a maximum horizontal range of 12 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 yd ) . Its rate of fire was 75 rounds per minute and 800 rounds were carried for each gun . 
 Forty 25 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) 79 @-@ caliber AA guns were carried in ten quadruple powered BL @-@ 120 mounts . These were designed especially for the Stalingrads and were fully , if lightly , armored against splinters . Each individual gun weighed 101 kg ( 223 lb ) and the complete mount weighed 4 t ( 3 @.@ 9 long tons ; 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . The guns in this mount could depress to -5 ° and elevate to 90 ° at a rate of 25 ° a second . Traverse speed was 70 ° per second . The gun fired .281 @-@ kilogram ( 0 @.@ 62 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 900 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) to a maximum effective range of 2 @,@ 400 – 2 @,@ 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 100 yd ) . Its effective rate of fire was 240 rounds per minute and 1200 rounds were carried for each gun . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 Target data for the More @-@ 82 director was derived from the Zalp ( NATO designation Half Bow ) fire @-@ control radar and Grot rangefinding radars mounted on turrets Nos. 2 and 3 . These were backed up by a single KDP @-@ 8 @-@ 10 optical director mount fitted with 8 @-@ meter ( 26 ft ) and 10 @-@ meter ( 33 ft ) rangefinders . Some of the BL @-@ 109A mounts were to fitted for range @-@ finding radars , probably <unk> @-@ B ( NATO designation Egg Cup ) , but they were ordinarily controlled by three SPN @-@ 500 directors , one for each pair of gun mounts . The SPN @-@ 500s carried a 4 @-@ meter ( 13 ft ) rangefinder as well as Yakor ( NATO designation Sun Visor ) fire @-@ control radar . Air search capability was provided by the Fut @-@ N ( NATO designation Slim Net ) radar with anti @-@ aircraft fire control provided by Fut @-@ B ( NATO designation Hawk Screech ) radars . 
 The main air @-@ search radar was the Giuis @-@ 2 ( NATO designation Cross Bird ) , a Soviet development of the wartime British Type 291 radar . It had a range of 80 km ( 50 mi ) against aerial targets and 20 km ( 12 mi ) against surface targets . The main surface @-@ search radar was Rif @-@ A ( NATO designation Ball End ) that had a range of 40 km ( 25 mi ) against surface targets . The Stalingrads also had Neptun and Nord navigational radars . Soviet electronics were still fairly primitive during this period and the trials of the light cruiser Sverdlov , which carried many of these systems , revealed that the effective range of the Rif @-@ A surface @-@ search radar was less than that of the Yakor and Zalp fire @-@ control radars . There were also problems transferring data from the Giuis @-@ 2 air @-@ search radar to the Yakor and Fut @-@ B anti @-@ aircraft fire @-@ control radars , which was a serious problem when dealing with high @-@ speed aircraft . The Giuis @-@ 2 also interfered with ultra @-@ shortwave radio reception . 
 <unk> radar @-@ jammers were mounted on either side of the mainmast as well as a <unk> system on the foremast . <unk> @-@ 1P infrared detectors were carried on either side of the superstructure . <unk> @-@ MO and <unk> @-@ MZ antenna comprised the IFF system . A <unk> sonar was also fitted in addition to various radio direction finders . 
 = = = Missile variant = = = 
 The TsKB @-@ 17 design bureau proposed variants of the design with both cruise and ballistic missiles . The ballistic missiles would have been launched from vertical tubes replacing the forward turrets , and in one version , the entire main armament . The proposal was dropped because both types would have needed a fully stabilized launching platform to give them any chance of hitting their targets and that the ballistic missiles would need three hours of preparation time . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Three ships were started : 
 The first sections of Stalingrad had been laid down in November 1951 in Slipway " O " of the Marti South Shipyard in Nikolayev where a Sovetsky Soyuz @-@ class battleship , Sovetskaya Ukraina , had begun construction in 1938 , but the slipway itself was in need of reconstruction and its lower end was occupied by the hull of the Sverdlov @-@ class light cruiser Mikhail Kutuzov which was scheduled for launch at the end of 1952 . Moskva 's keel was laid down in September 1952 by the Baltic Works in Leningrad . The unnamed third ship was laid down at Yard 402 , at Molotovsk around October 1952 , Soviet sources refer to her proposed names as Kronshtadt or Arkhangelsk . A fourth ship was apparently ordered from Yard 402 , but was never laid down . 
 Stalingrad 's formal keel @-@ laying was on 31 December 1951 and it was hoped that she could be launched on 6 November 1953 , the eve of the 36th anniversary of the October Revolution . But deliveries of steel , armor , machinery and other equipment were delayed or arrived out of sequence , despite extraordinary efforts by the Ministry of Shipbuilding , and slowed construction enough so that she fell about six months behind schedule and the same was more or less true for the other ships . By 1 January 1953 Stalingrad was intended to be 42 @.@ 9 % complete , but was actually only 18 @.@ 8 % done . Moskva was planned to be 11 @.@ 5 % finished , but was only 7 @.@ 5 % done . And the unnamed ship was intended to be 5 @.@ 2 % along , but was only 2 @.@ 5 % complete . 
 These ships were canceled on 18 April 1953 , after Stalin 's death on 5 March , by the Ministry of Transport and Heavy Machinery , and the hulls of Moskva and the third ship were scrapped on the slipways later that year . The Ministry ordered in June that Stalingrad 's hull , which was about 70 % ready for launching , be used for weapons tests . Her hull was launched on 16 April 1954 and her stern , which was more or less complete , was dismantled — her bow hadn 't been built when work was suspended a year earlier — and the central , 150 @-@ meter ( 490 ft ) long , section was modified for her new role . 
 = = Career as a target hulk = = 
 Stalingrad 's hull was towed from Nikolayev on 19 May 1955 by three tugs , but was driven ashore by high winds on 23 May at the southern entrance to Sevastopol Bay . She grounded on a very rocky bottom in very shallow water only about 50 m ( 160 ft ) from shore . A number of the ordinary methods to refloat a ship couldn 't be used because she was very nearly empty and so nothing could be off @-@ loaded and the rocky bottom meant that it couldn 't be excavated out from underneath her . The first attempt used brute force provided by the cruisers Molotov and Kerch to unsuccessfully tow her off . Several other attempts were made using explosive charges to create shock waves that would pivot her stern into deeper water in combination with tugs attempting to pull her around , but these were counterproductive in that several holes were blown in her sides which flooded several compartments and grounded her that much more firmly . At this time a more detailed assessment was made of the situation and 259 steel projections were discovered on the underside of her hull , left over from her launching cradles . These ranged in length from 40 – 169 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 7 in ) and totally invalidated all calculations about the amount of force required to free her . 
 The capsizing of the battleship Novorossiysk in Sevastopol harbor on 29 October 1955 delayed salvage operations on Stalingrad until the end of the year . The hull had to be patched , the water pumped out and all the projections removed to raise the stern slightly with pontoons , pivot into deeper water , then trim it down to elevate the bow off the bottom and pull it free . These preparations were very time @-@ consuming and it wasn 't until mid @-@ July 1956 that it could be pulled off the rocks into Sevastopol harbor where she was given more permanent repairs . She was then moved to the Naval Firing Range between Yevpatoria and Sevastopol where it was used as a target for seven P @-@ 1 or KSS anti @-@ ship missiles fired from the converted Sverdlov @-@ class cruiser Admiral Nakhimov in December 1956 . The missiles penetrated the upper and main decks and devastated the upper hull , but there was no appreciable change in the ship 's draught . Details are not known about other tests , although she reportedly served as a target for P @-@ 15 Termit ( SS @-@ N @-@ 2 Styx ) missiles and a wide variety of armor @-@ piercing munitions . By the early 1960s her usefulness had come to an end and she was scrapped , possibly in 1962 . 
 = July 2009 Ürümqi riots = 
 The July 2009 Ürümqi riots were a series of violent riots over several days that broke out on 5 July 2009 in Ürümqi , the capital city of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region ( XUAR ) , in northwestern People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) . The first day 's rioting , which involved at least 1 @,@ 000 Uyghurs , began as a protest but escalated into violent attacks that mainly targeted Han people . People 's Armed Police were deployed , and two days later hundreds of Han people clashed with both police and Uyghurs . PRC officials said that a total of 197 people died , among those killed most of them are Hans , with 1 @,@ 721 others injured and many vehicles and buildings destroyed ; however , Uyghur exile groups say the death toll is higher . Many men disappeared during wide @-@ scale police sweeps in the days following the riots ; Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) documented 43 cases and said figures for real disappearances were likely to be much higher . 
 Rioting began when the police confronted the march calling for a full investigation into the Shaoguan incident , a brawl in southern China several days earlier in which two Uyghurs had been killed . However , observers disagree on what caused the protests to become violent . The PRC central government alleged that the riots themselves were planned from abroad by the World Uyghur Congress ( WUC ) and its leader Rebiya Kadeer , while Kadeer denies fomenting the violence in her fight for Uyghur " self @-@ determination . " Uyghur exile groups claim that the escalation was caused by the police 's use of excessive force . 
 Chinese media coverage of the Ürümqi riots was extensive , and was compared favourably to that of the unrest in Tibet in 2008 . When the riots began , communications were immediately cut off . In the weeks that followed , official sources reported that over 1 @,@ 000 Uyghurs were arrested and detained ; Uyghur @-@ run mosques were temporarily closed . The communication limitations and armed police presence remained in place as of January 2010 . By November 2009 , over 400 individuals faced criminal charges for their actions during the riots . Nine were executed in November 2009 , and by February 2010 , at least 26 had received death sentences . 
 = = Background = = 
 Xinjiang is a large central @-@ Asian region within the People 's Republic of China comprising numerous minority groups : 45 % of its population are Uyghurs , and 40 % are Han . Its heavily industrialised capital , Ürümqi , has a population of more than 2 @.@ 3 million , about 75 % of whom are Han , 12 @.@ 8 % are Uyghur , and 10 % are from other ethnic groups . 
 In general , Uyghurs and the mostly Han government disagree on which group has greater historical claim to the Xinjiang region : Uyghurs believe their ancestors were indigenous to the area , whereas government policy considers present @-@ day Xinjiang to have belonged to China since around 200 BC . According to PRC policy , Uyghurs are classified as a National Minority rather than an indigenous group — in other words , they are considered to be no more indigenous to Xinjiang than the Han , and have no special rights to the land under the law . The People 's Republic has presided over the migration into Xinjiang of millions of Han , who dominate the region economically and politically . 
 Uyghur nationalists often incorrectly claim that 5 % of Xinjiang 's population in 1949 was Han , and that the other 95 % was Uyghur , erasing the presence of <unk> , Huis , Mongols , <unk> and others , and ignoring the fact that Hans were around one third of Xinjiang 's population in 1800 , during the time of the Qing Dynasty . Professor of Chinese and Central Asian History at Georgetown University , James A. Millward wrote that foreigners often mistakenly think that Urumqi was originally a Uyghur city and that the Chinese destroyed its Uyghur character and culture , however , Urumqi was founded as a Chinese city by Han and Hui ( <unk> ) , and it is the Uyghurs who are new to the city . While a few people try to give a misportrayal of the historical Qing situation in light of the contemporary situation in Xinjiang with Han migration , and claim that the Qing settlements and state farms were an anti @-@ Uyghur plot to replace them in their land , Professor James A. Millward pointed out that the Qing agricultural colonies in reality had nothing to do with Uyghur and their land , since the Qing banned settlement of Han in the Uyghur Tarim Basin and in fact directed the Han settlers instead to settle in the non @-@ Uyghur Dzungaria and the new city of Urumqi , so that the state farms which were settled with 155 @,@ 000 Han Chinese from 1760 @-@ 1830 were all in Dzungaria and Urumqi , where there was only an insignificant amount of Uyghurs , instead of the Tarim Basin oases . 
 At the start of the 19th century , 40 years after the Qing reconquest , there were around 155 @,@ 000 Han and Hui Chinese in northern Xinjiang and somewhat more than twice that number of Uyghurs in southern Xinjiang . A census of Xinjiang under Qing rule in the early 19th century tabulated ethnic shares of the population as 30 % Han and 60 % Turkic , while it dramatically shifted to 6 % Han and 75 % Uyghur in the 1953 census , however a situation similar to the Qing era @-@ demographics with a large number of Han has been restored as of 2000 with 40 @.@ 57 % Han and 45 @.@ 21 % Uyghur . Professor Stanley W. <unk> noted that today 's demographic situation is similar to that of the early Qing period in Xinjiang . In northern Xinjiang , the Qing brought in Han , Hui , Uyghur , <unk> , and Kazakh colonists after they exterminated the <unk> Oirat Mongols in the region , with one third of Xinjiang 's total population consisting of Hui and Han in the northern are , while around two thirds were Uyghurs in southern Xinjiang 's Tarim Basin . 
 Although current PRC minority policy , which is based on affirmative actions , has reinforced a Uyghur ethnic identity that is distinct from the Han population , some scholars argue that Beijing unofficially favours a monolingual , <unk> model that is based on the majority . The authorities also crack down on any activity that appears to constitute separatism . These policies , in addition to long @-@ standing cultural differences , have sometimes resulted in " resentments " between Uyghur and Han citizens . On one hand , as a result of Han immigration and government policies , Uyghurs ' freedoms of religion and of movement are curtailed , while most Uyghurs argue that the government deliberately downplays their history and traditional culture . On the other hand , some Han citizens view Uyghurs as benefiting from special treatment , such as preferential admission to universities and exemption from the one @-@ child policy , and as " harbouring separatist aspirations " . 
 Tensions between Uyghurs and Han have resulted in waves of protest in recent years . Xinjiang has been the location of several instances of violence and ethnic clashes , such as the <unk> Incident of 1997 , the 2008 Kashgar attack , widespread unrest preceding the Olympic Games in Beijing , as well as numerous minor attacks . 
 = = = Immediate causes = = = 
 The riots took place several days after a violent incident in Shaoguan , Guangdong , where many migrant workers are employed as part of a programme to alleviate labour shortages . According to state media , a disgruntled former worker disseminated rumours in late June that two Han women had been raped by six Uyghur men . Official sources later said they found no evidence to support the rape allegation . Overnight on 25 – 26 June , tensions at the Guangdong factory led to a full @-@ blown ethnic brawl between Uyghurs and Hans , during which two Uyghur co @-@ workers were killed . Exiled Uyghur leaders alleged the death toll was much higher . While the official Xinhua News Agency reported that the person responsible for spreading the rumours had been arrested , Uyghurs alleged that the authorities had failed to protect the Uyghur workers , or to arrest any of the Han people involved in the killings . They organised a street protest in Ürümqi on 5 July to voice their discontent and to demand a full government investigation . 
 At some point the demonstration became violent . A government statement called the riots a " pre @-@ empted , organised violent crime [ ... ] instigated and directed from abroad , and carried out by outlaws . " Nur Bekri , chairman of the Xinjiang regional government , said on 6 July that overseas separatist forces had taken advantage of the Shaoguan incident " to instigate Sunday 's unrest and undermine the ethnic unity and social stability " . The government blamed the exiled independence group World Uyghur Congress ( WUC ) for coordinating and instigating the riots over the internet . Government sources blamed the WUC leader Rebiya Kadeer in particular , citing her public speeches after the Tibetan unrest and phone recordings in which she had allegedly said that something would happen in Ürümqi . Chinese authorities accused a man who they alleged to be a key WUC member of inciting ethnic tensions by circulating a violent video , and urging Uyghurs , in an online forum , to " fight back [ against Hans ] with violence " . Jirla Isamuddin , the mayor of Ürümqi , claimed that the protesters had organised online via such services as QQ Groups . China Daily asserted that the riots were organised to fuel separatism and to benefit Middle East terrorist organisations . Kadeer denied fomenting the violence , and argued that the Ürümqi protests and their descent into violence were triggered by heavy policing , discontent over Shaoguan and " years of Chinese repression " , rather than by the intervention of separatists or terrorists ; Uyghur exile groups claimed that violence erupted when police used excessive force to disperse the crowd . 
 All parties , then , agree that the protests were organised beforehand ; the main points of contention are whether the violence was planned or spontaneous , and whether the underlying tensions reflect separatist inclinations or a desire for social justice . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Initial demonstrations = = = 
 Demonstrations began on the evening of 5 July with a protest in the Grand Bazaar , a prominent tourist site , and crowd reportedly gathering at the People 's Square area . The demonstration began peacefully , and official and eyewitness accounts reported that it involved about 1 @,@ 000 Uyghurs ; the WUC said approximately 10 @,@ 000 protesters took part . 
 On 6 July , XUAR chairman Nur Bekri presented an official timeline of the previous day 's events , according to which more than 200 demonstrators gathered in People 's Square in Ürümqi at about 5 p.m. local time , and about 70 of their leaders were detained . Later , a crowd gathered in the mostly Uyghur areas of South <unk> Road , <unk> , and Shanxi Alley ; by 7 : 30 p.m. , more than one thousand were gathered in front of a hospital in Shanxi Alley . At about 7 : 40 p.m. , more than 300 people blocked the roads in the Renmin Road and <unk> area . According to Bekri , rioters began to smash buses at 8 : 18 p.m. , after police " controlled and dispersed " the crowd . 
 How the demonstrations became violent is unclear . Some say the police used excessive force against the protesters ; the World Uyghur Congress quickly issued press releases saying that the police had used deadly force and killed " scores " of protesters . Kadeer has alleged that there were agents provocateurs among the crowds . Others claim that the protesters initiated the violence ; for example , an Uyghur eyewitness cited by The New York Times said protesters began throwing rocks at the police . The government 's official line was that the violence was not only initiated by the protesters , but also had been premeditated and coordinated by Uyghur separatists abroad . The local public security bureau said it found evidence that many Uyghurs had travelled from other cities to gather for the riot , and that they had begun preparing weapons two or three days before the riot . 
 = = = Escalation and spread = = = 
 After the confrontation with police turned violent , rioters began hurling rocks , smashing vehicles , breaking into shops , and attacking Han civilians . At least 1 @,@ 000 Uyghurs were involved in the rioting when it began , and the number of rioters may have risen to as many as 3 @,@ 000 . Jane Macartney of The Times characterised the first day 's rioting as consisting mainly of " Han stabbed by marauding gangs of Uighurs " ; a report in The Australian several months later suggested that religiously moderate Uyghurs may also have been attacked by rioters . Although the majority of rioters were Uyghur , not all Uyghurs were violent during the riots ; there are accounts of Han and Uyghur civilians helping each other escape the violence and hide . About 1 @,@ 000 police officers were dispatched ; they used batons , live ammunition , tasers , tear gas and water hoses to disperse the rioters , and set up roadblocks and posted armoured vehicles throughout the city . 
 During a press conference , Mayor Jirla Isamuddin said that at about 8 : 15 p.m. , some protesters started to fight and loot , overturned guardrails and smashed three buses before being dispersed . At 8 : 30 p.m. , violence escalated around South <unk> Road and <unk> Street area , with rioters torching police patrol cars and attacking passers @-@ by . Soon , between 700 and 800 people went from the People 's Square to <unk> and <unk> area , " fighting , smashing , looting , torching and killing " along the way . At 9 : 30 p.m. , the government received reports that three people had been killed and 26 injured , 6 of whom were police officers . Police reinforcements were dispatched to hotspots of People 's Square , <unk> , <unk> Road , <unk> and South Xinhua Road . Police took control of the main roadways and commercial districts in the city at around 10 pm , but riots continued in side streets and alleyways , with Hans attacked and cars overturned or torched , according to the mayor . Police then formed small teams and " swept " the entire city for the next two days . A strict curfew was put in place ; authorities imposed " comprehensive traffic control " from 9 : 00 pm Tuesday to 8 : 00 am Wednesday " to avoid further chaos " . 
 The official news agency , Xinhua , reported that police believed agitators were trying to organise more unrest in other areas in Xinjiang , such as Aksu and the Yili Prefecture . Violent protests also sprang up in Kashgar , in southwestern Xinjiang , where the South China Morning Post reported many shops were closed , and the area around the mosque was sealed off by a People 's Liberation Army platoon after confrontations . Local Uyghurs blamed the security forces for using excessive force — they " attacked the protesters and arrested 50 people " . Another clash was reported near the mosque on Tuesday , 7 July , and an estimated 50 people were arrested . Up to 12 @,@ 000 students at the Kashgar Teaching Institute were confined to campus since Sunday 's riots , according to the Post . Many of the institute 's students had apparently travelled to Ürümqi for the demonstrations there . 
 = = = Casualties and damage = = = 
 During the first hours of the rioting , state media only reported that three people had been killed . The number rose sharply , though , after the first night 's rioting ; at midday on Monday , 6 July , Xinhua announced that 129 people had died . In the following days the death toll reported by various government sources ( including Xinhua and party officials ) gradually grew , with the last official update on 18 July placing the tally at 197 dead , 1 @,@ 721 injured . The World Uyghur Congress has claimed that the death toll was around 600 . 
 Xinhua did not immediately disclose the ethnic breakdown of the dead , but journalists from The Times and The Daily Telegraph reported that most of the victims appeared to have been Han . For instance , on 10 July Xinhua stated that 137 of the dead ( out of the total of 184 that was being reported at that time ) were Han , 46 Uyghur , and 1 Hui . There were casualties among the rioters as well ; for example , according to official accounts , a group of 12 rioters attacking civilians were shot by police . In the months following the riots , the government maintained that the majority of casualties were Han and hospitals said that two @-@ thirds of the injured were Han , although the World Uyghur Congress claims that many Uyghurs were killed as well . According to the official count released by the Chinese government in August 2009 , 134 of the 156 civilian victims were Han , 11 Hui , 10 Uyghur , and 1 Manchu . Uyghur advocates continue to question these figures , saying that the number of ethnic Uyghurs remains understated . Xinhua reported that 627 vehicles and 633 constructions were damaged . 
 The Ürümqi municipal government initially announced that it would pay ¥ 200 @,@ 000 as compensation , plus another ¥ 10 @,@ 000 as " funeral expense " for every " innocent death " caused by the riot . The compensation was later doubled to ¥ 420 @,@ 000 per death . Mayor Jirla Isamuddin estimated that the compensations will cost at least ¥ 100 million . 
 = = = After 5 July = = = 
 The city remained tense while journalists invited into the city witnessed confrontational scenes between Chinese troops and Uyghurs demanding the release of family members who they said had been " arbitrarily " arrested . Uyghur women told The Daily Telegraph reporter that police entered Uyghur districts in the night of 6 July , burst through doors , pulled men and boys from their beds , and rounded up 100 suspects . By 7 July , officials reported that 1 @,@ 434 suspected rioters had been arrested . A group of 200 to 300 Uyghur women assembled on 7 July to protest what they said was " indiscriminate " detention of Uyghur men ; the protest led to a tense but non @-@ violent confrontation with police forces . Rebiya Kadeer claimed that " nearly 10 @,@ 000 people " had gone missing overnight . Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) later documented 43 cases of Uyghur men who disappeared after being taken away by Chinese security forces in large @-@ scale sweeps of Uyghur neighbourhoods overnight on 6 – 7 July , and said that this was likely to be " just the tip of the iceberg " ; HRW allege that young men , mostly in their 20s , had been unlawfully arrested and have not been seen or heard from as of 20 October 2009 
 On 7 July , there were large @-@ scale armed demonstrations by ethnic Han in Ürümqi . Conflicting estimates of the Han demonstrators ' numbers were reported by the western media and varied from " hundreds " to as high as 10 @,@ 000 . The Times reported that smaller fights were frequently breaking out between Uyghurs and Hans , and that groups of Han citizens had organised to take revenge on " Uyghur mobs " . Police used tear gas and roadblocks in an attempt to disperse the demonstration , and urged Han citizens over loudspeakers to " calm down " and " let the police do their job " . Li Zhi , party chief of Ürümqi , stood on the roof of a police car with a megaphone appealing to the crowd to go home . 
 Mass protests had been quelled by 8 July , although sporadic violence was reported . In the days after the riots , " thousands " of people tried to leave the city , and the price for bus tickets rose as much as fivefold . 
 On 10 July , city authorities closed Ürümqi mosques " for public safety " , saying it was too dangerous to have large gatherings and that holding Jumu 'ah , traditional Friday prayers , could reignite tensions . Large crowds of Uyghurs gathered for prayer anyway , however , and police decided to let two mosques open to avoid having an " incident " . After prayers at the White Mosque , several hundred people demonstrated over people detained after the riot , but were dispersed by riot police , with five or six people arrested . 
 Over 300 more people were reported arrested in early August . According to the BBC , the total number of arrests in connection with the riots was over 1 @,@ 500 . The Financial Times estimated that the number was higher , citing an insider saying that some 4 @,@ 000 arrests had already taken place by mid July , and that Ürümqi 's prisons were so full that newly arrested people were being held in a People 's Liberation Army warehouse . According to the Uyghur American Association , several other Uyghur journalists and bloggers were also detained after the riots ; one of them , journalist <unk> <unk> , was later sentenced to 15 years in prison for having spoken to foreign media . In the most high @-@ profile case , Ilham <unk> , an ethnic Uyghur economist at Minzu University of China , was arrested two days after the riots over his criticisms of the Xinjiang government . 
 = = Reactions and response = = 
 = = = Domestic reaction = = = 
 = = = = Communications black @-@ out = = = = 
 Mobile phone service and internet access were limited both during and after the riots . China Mobile phone service was cut " to prevent the incident from spreading further " . Outbound international calls throughout Xinjiang were blocked , and Internet connections in the region had been locked down or non @-@ local websites blocked . Reporting from Ürümqi 's Hoi Tak Hotel on 9 July , <unk> reported that the foreign journalists ' hotel was the only place in the city with Internet access , although the journalist could not send text messages or place international phone calls . Many unauthorised postings on local sites and Google were removed by censors ; images and video footage of the demonstrations and rioting , however , were soon found posted on Twitter , YouTube , and Flickr . Many Xinjiang @-@ based websites became inaccessible worldwide , and internet access within Ürümqi remained restricted nearly a year following the riots ; it was not restored until 14 May 2010 . 
 = = = = Government = = = = 
 Chinese state @-@ controlled television broadcast graphic footage of cars being smashed and people being beaten . Officials reiterated the party line : XUAR chairman Nur Bekri delivered a lengthy address on the situation and on the Shaoguan incident , and claimed that the government of both Guangdong and Xinjiang had dealt with the deaths of the workers properly and with respect . Bekri further condemned the riots as " premeditated and planned " ; <unk> <unk> , chairman of the Standing Committee of the Xinjiang Regional People 's Congress , blamed 5 July riots on " extremism , separatism and terrorism " . 
 The Chinese media covered the rioting extensively . Hours after troops stopped the rioting , the state invited foreign journalists on an official fact @-@ finding trip to Ürümqi ; journalists from more than 100 media organisations were all corralled into the downtown Hoi Tak Hotel , sharing 30 internet connections . Journalists were given unprecedented access to <unk> and hospitals . The Financial Times referred to this handling as an improvement , compared to the " public @-@ relations disaster " of the Tibetan unrest in 2008 . 
 In an effort to soothe tensions immediately after the riots , state media began a mass publicity campaign throughout Xinjiang extolling ethnic harmony . Local television programmes united Uyghur and Han singers in a chorus of " We are all part of the same family " ; <unk> who " acted heroically " during the riots were profiled ; loud @-@ <unk> trucks blasted slogans in the streets . A common slogan warned against the " three forces " of terrorism , separatism and extremism . 
 President Hu Jintao curtailed his attendance of the G8 summit in Italy , convened an emergency meeting of the Politburo , and dispatched Standing Committee member Zhou Yongkang to Xinjiang to " <unk> [ e ] stability @-@ preservation work in Xinjiang " . South China Morning Post reported a government source saying Beijing would re @-@ evaluate the impact on arrangements for the country 's forthcoming 60th anniversary celebrations in October . Guangdong 's CPC Provincial Committee Secretary , Wang Yang , noted that the government policies towards ethnic minorities " definitely need adjustments " , otherwise " there will be some problems . " A security planner said the authorities planned to fly in more troops from other stations to raise the number of armed police presence to 130 @,@ 000 before the 60th anniversary celebrations in October . 
 After the riots , the Chinese government exercised diplomatic pressure on nations that Rebiya Kadeer was scheduled to visit . In late July , India declined Kadeer a visa " on the advice of Beijing " , and Beijing summoned the Japanese ambassador in protest of a trip Kadeer made to Japan . When Kadeer visited Australia in August to promote a film about her life , China officially complained to the Australian government and asked for the film to be withdrawn . 
 = = = = Internet response = = = = 
 The response to the riots on the Chinese blogosphere was markedly more varied than the official response . Despite blocks and censorship , Internet watchers monitored continued attempts by netizens to publish their own thoughts on the causes of the incident or vent their anger about the violence . While some bloggers were supportive of the government , others were more reflective of the event 's cause . On numerous forums and news sites , government workers quickly removed comments about the riots . Common themes were calls for punishment for those responsible ; some posts evoked the name of Wang Zhen , the general who is reviled and feared by many Uyghurs for repression after the communist takeover of Xinjiang in 1949 . 
 = = = International reactions = = = 
 = = = = International organisations = = = = 
 United Nations : Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon urged all sides to exercise restraint , and called on China to take measures to protect the civilian population as well as respect the freedoms of citizens , including freedom of speech , assembly and information . Human rights chief Navi Pillay said she was " alarmed " over the high death toll , noting this was an " extraordinarily high number of people to be killed and injured in less than a day of rioting . " She also said China must treat detainees humanely in a way that adheres to international norms . 
 Shanghai Cooperation Organisation : said it sympathised with the family members of those innocent people killed in the riot ; it said that its member states regard Xinjiang as an inalienable part of the People 's Republic of China and believe the situation in Xinjiang is purely China 's internal affairs . Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov condemned rioters for " Using separatist slogans and provoking ethnic intolerance . Officials from both neighbouring Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan said they were braced for " an influx of refugees " and tightened border controls . Despite the Kazakh government support , over 5 @,@ 000 Uyghurs protested on 19 July in former capital Almaty against Chinese police use of deadly force against the rioters . 
 Organisation of the Islamic Conference : decried the " disproportionate use of force " , calling on Beijing to " bring those responsible to justice swiftly " and urging China to find a solution to the unrest by examining why it had erupted . 
 European Union : leaders expressed concern , and urged the Chinese government to show restraint in dealing with the protests : German Chancellor Angela Merkel urged respect for the rights of minorities ; Italian President Giorgio Napolitano brought up human rights at a press conference with Hu Jintao , and said that " economic and social progress that is being achieved in China places new demands in terms of human rights . " 
 = = = = Countries = = = = 
 Turkey , which has a vocal Uyghur minority and is a majority @-@ Turkic nation , officially expressed " deep sadness " , and urged the Chinese authorities to bring the perpetrators to justice . Its Prime Minister , Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , said the incident was " like genocide " , while Trade and Industry Minister <unk> <unk> called for a boycott on Chinese goods . The violence against Uyghurs also caused lots of Turkish people to gather for protests against PRC , mostly targeting Chinese embassies and consulates in Turkey 's various cities . The Turkish stance sparked a significant outcry from Chinese media . Rebiya Kadeer claimed that Turkey is hampered from interfering with Uyghurs because it recognizes that its own Kurdish issue may get interfered with by China in retaliation . An appeal for Chinese products to be boycotted by <unk> <unk> failed . 
 Arab countries politically supported China in the OIC with especially Saudi Arabia and Egypt helping China squash any potential anti @-@ Chinese motion by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation on the Uyghurs , Egypt viewed its own internal sectarian problems like China 's and Sudan was also concerned about external interference in its internal problems as well , while Indonesia had to deal with its own internal Islamists and emphasized that there was no religious conflict but instead ethnic based disturbances in Xinjiang to calm the situation down . Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , and Egypt helped China kill off a statement on the Xinjiang situation in the OIC . There has been no public reaction by the Arab League , Saudi Arabia and Iran on the situation and China has built stronger relations with Iran and Saudi Arabia due to their influence in the Islamic world . 
 Afghanistan , Cambodia , and Vietnam said they believed the Chinese government was " taking appropriate measures " , their statements backed " the territorial integrity and sovereignty of China " . Micronesian Vice President Alik Alik condemned the riot as a " terrorist act " . 
 Iran said it shared the concerns of Turkey and the OIC , and appealed to the Chinese government to respect the rights of the Muslim population in Xinjiang . 
 The Japanese government was monitoring the situation , with concern ; Singapore urged restraint and dialogue ; while the ROC government in Taiwan strongly condemned all those who instigated the violence . Premier Liu Chiao @-@ <unk> also urged restraint and expressed hope that the Chinese authorities will demonstrate the " greatest possible leniency and tolerance in dealing with the aftermath " and respect the rights of ethnic minorities . Taiwan denied a visa to Kadeer in September 2009 , alleging she had links to the East Turkestan Islamic Movement , classed as a terrorist organisation by the United Nations and United States . 
 Switzerland called for restraint , and sent condolences to the families of victims and urged China to respect freedom of expression and the press . Prime Minister Kevin Rudd of Australia urged restraint to bring about a " peaceful settlement to this difficulty . " Serbia stated that it opposed separatism and supports the " resolution of all disputes by peaceful means . " Belarus noted with regret the loss of life and damage in the region , and hoped that the situation would soon normalise . 
 There was violence in the Netherlands and in Norway : the Chinese embassy in the Netherlands was attacked by Uyghur activists who smashed windows with bricks , the Chinese flag was also burnt . There were 142 arrests , and China closed the embassy for the day . About 100 Uyghurs protested outside the Chinese embassy in the Norwegian capital . Eleven were detained , and later released without charge . Protesters from a coalition of Indonesian Islamist groups attacked guards at the Chinese embassy in Jakarta and called for a jihad against China . Pakistan said there were some " elements " out to harm Sino @-@ Pakistan ties would not damage or destabilise the interests of the two countries . Sri Lanka stressed the incident was an internal affair of China and was confident that efforts by the Chinese authorities would restore normalcy . 
 Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Lawrence Cannon urged " dialogue and goodwill " to help resolve grievances and prevent further deterioration of the situation . The spokesman for the Obama administration said the United States regretted the loss of life in Xinjiang , was deeply concerned and called on all sides to exercise restraint . U.S. State Department spokesman Ian Kelly , said " it 's important that the Chinese authorities act to restore order and prevent further violence . " The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom expressed " grave concern " over repression in China , and called for an independent investigation on the riots and targeted sanctions against China . 
 = = = = Other organisations = = = = 
 Amnesty International : called for an " impartial and independent " inquiry into the incident , adding that those detained for " peacefully expressing their views and exercising their freedom of expression , association and assembly " must be released and others ensured to receive a fair trial . 
 Human Rights Watch : urged China to exercise restraint and to allow an independent inquiry into the events , which would include addressing Uyghur concerns about policies in the region . It also added that China should respect international norms when responding to the protests and only use force proportionately . 
 Al @-@ Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb ( <unk> ) : According to London @-@ based risk analysis firm Stirling Assynt , Algeria @-@ based <unk> issued a call to attack Chinese workers in North Africa . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 Chen <unk> , China editor on the BBC World Service , remarked at the improvement in media management by Xinhua : " To be more credible , it released video footage a few hours after the event , not two weeks . " Peter Foster of the Daily Telegraph observed that " long @-@ standing China commentators have been astonished at the speed at which Beijing has moved to seize the news agenda on this event , " and attributed it to his belief that " China doesn 't have a great deal to hide " . A University of California , Berkeley academic agreed that the Chinese authorities had become more sophisticated . The New York Times and AFP recognised the Chinese learnt lessons from political protests around the world , such as the so @-@ called colour revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine , and the 2009 Iranian election protests , and concluded that Chinese experts had studied how modern electronic communications " helped protesters organize and reach the outside world , and for ways that governments sought to counter them . " 
 But Willy Lam , fellow of the Jamestown Foundation , sceptically said that the authorities were " just testing the reaction " . He believed that if the outcome of this openness was poor they would " put the brakes on " as they did after the 2008 Sichuan earthquake . There were instances of foreign journalists being taken into custody by the police , to be released shortly thereafter . On 10 July , officials ordered foreign media out of Kashgar , " for their own safety . " Xia Lin , a top official at Xinhua , later revealed that violence caused by both sides during and after the riots had been downplayed or wholly unreported in official news channels , for the fear that the ethnic violence would spread beyond Ürümqi . 
 A People 's Daily op @-@ ed rebuked certain western media outlets for their " double standards , biased coverage and comments " . It said that China failed to receive fair " repayment " from certain foreign political figures or media outlets for its openness and transparent attitude . The author said " a considerable number of media outlets still intentionally or inadvertently minimised the violent actions of the rioters , and attempted to focus on so @-@ called racial conflict . " However , D 'Arcy Doran from Agence France @-@ Presse welcomed the increased openness for foreign media , but contrasted their reporting to Chinese media , which closely followed the government line to focus mainly on injured Hans whilst ignoring the " Uyghur story " or reasons behind the incident . 
 Many early reports of the riots , starting with one from Reuters , used a picture purporting to show the previous day 's riots . The photo , showing large number of People 's Armed Police squares , was one taken of the 2009 Shishou riot and originally published on 26 June by Southern Metropolis Weekly . The same picture was mistakenly used by other agencies ; it was on the website of The Daily Telegraph , but was removed a day later . In an interview with Al Jazeera on 7 July , WUC leader Rebiya Kadeer used the same Shishou photograph to defend the Uyghurs in Ürümqi . A World Uyghur Congress representative later apologised , explaining that the photo was chosen out of hundreds for its image quality . 
 On 3 August , Xinhua reported that two of Rebiya Kadeer 's children had written letters blaming her for orchestrating the riots . A Germany @-@ based spokesman for the WUC rejected the letters as fakes . A Human Rights Watch researcher remarked their style was " suspiciously close " to the way the Chinese authorities had described rioting in Xinjiang and the aftermath . He added that " it 's highly irregular for [ her children ] to be placed on the platform of a government mouthpiece [ ... ] for wide dispersion . " 
 = = Aftermath and long @-@ term impact = = 
 = = = Arrests and trials = = = 
 In early August , the Ürümqi government announced that 83 individuals had been " officially " arrested in connection with the riots . China Daily reported in late August that over 200 people were being charged and that trials would begin by the end of August . Although this was denied both by a provincial and a local Party official , Xinjiang authorities later announced that arrest warrants had been issued to 196 suspects , of which 51 had already been prosecuted . Police also requested that the <unk> approve the arrest of a further 239 people , and detention of 825 more , China Daily said . In early December , 94 " fugitives " were arrested . 
 The state first announced criminal charges against detainees in late September , when it charged 21 people with " murder , arson , robbery , and damaging property " . 14 @,@ 000 security personnel were deployed in Ürümqi from 11 October , and the next day a Xinjiang court sentenced six men to death , and one to life imprisonment , for their roles in the riots . All six men were Uyghurs , and were found guilty of murder , arson and robbery during the riots . Foreign media said the sentences appeared to be aimed at <unk> the anger of the Han majority ; the WUC denounced the verdict as " political " , and said there was no desire to see justice served . Human Rights Watch said that there were " serious violations of due process " at the trials of 21 defendants relating to July protests . It said the trials " did not meet minimum international standards of due process and fair trials " – specifically , it said that the trials were carried out in a single day without prior public notice , that the defendants ' choice of lawyers was restricted , and that the Party had given judges instructions on how to handle the cases . Xinhua , on the other hand , noted that the proceedings were conducted in both the Chinese and Uyghur languages , and that evidence had been carefully collected and verified before any decisions were made . 
 By February 2010 , the number of death sentences issued had increased to at least 26 , including at least one Han and one female Uyghur . Nine of the individuals sentenced were executed in November 2009 ; based on previous government statements , eight were Uyghur and one was Han . 
 = = = Later unrest and security measures = = = 
 Starting in mid @-@ August , there was a string of attacks in which as many as 476 individuals may have been stabbed with hypodermic needles . Officials believed that the attacks were targeting Han civilians and had been perpetrated by Uyghur separatists . In response to both concern over the attacks and dissatisfaction over the government 's slowness in prosecuting people involved with the July riots , thousands of Hans protested in the streets . On 3 September , five people died during the protests and 14 were injured , according to an official . The next day , the Communist Party Chief of Ürümqi , Li Zhi , was removed from his post , along with the police chief , Liu <unk> ; the provincial Party secretary Wang <unk> was replaced in April 2010 . 
 While the city became calmer after these events , and the government made great efforts to show that life was returning to normal , an armed police presence did remain . As late as January 2010 , it was reported that police were making patrols five or six times a day , and that patrols were stepped up at night . Shortly before the first anniversary of the rioting , the authorities installed more than 40 @,@ 000 surveillance cameras around Ürümqi to " ensure security in key public places " . 
 = = = Legislation and investigation = = = 
 In late August , the central government passed a law outlining standards for the deployment of armed police during " rebellion , riots , large @-@ scale serious criminal violence , terror attacks and other social safety incidents . " After the protests in early September , the government issued an announcement banning all " unlicensed marches , demonstrations and mass protests " . The provincial government also passed legislation banning the use of the internet to incite ethnic separatism . 
 In November , the Chinese government dispatched some 400 officials to Xinjiang , including senior leaders such as State Council secretary general Ma Kai , Propaganda department head Liu Yunshan , and United Front chief Du Qinglin , to form an ad hoc " Team of Investigation and Research " on Xinjiang , ostensibly intended on studying the policy changes to be implemented in response to the violence . In April 2010 , hardliner party chief Wang <unk> was replaced by Zhang <unk> , a more conciliatory figure . The government authorized transfer payments totalling some $ 15 billion from eastern provinces to Xinjiang to aid in the province 's economic development , and announced plans to establish a special economic zone in Kashgar . 
 China has installed a grassroots network of officials throughout Xinjiang , its predominantly Muslim north @-@ west frontier region , to address social risks and spot early signs of unrest : Hundreds of cadres have been transferred from southern Xinjiang , the region ’ s poorest area , into socially unstable neighbourhoods of Ürümqi ; a policy has been implemented where if all family members are unemployed , the government arranges for one person in the household to get a job , ; official announcements are calling upon university students to register for those payouts . The areas around slums are being redeveloped to reduce social risks , opening way to new apartment blocks . However , independent observers believe that fundamental inequalities need to be addressed , and the mindset must change for there to be any success ; Ilham <unk> warned that the new policy could attract more Han immigration , and further alienate the Uyghur population . 
 = = = Public services and Internet access = = = 
 It took until at least early August for public transport to be fully restored in the city . According to Xinhua , 267 buses had been damaged during the rioting ; most were back in operation by 12 August . The government paid bus companies a total of ¥ 5 @.@ 25 million in compensation . Despite the resumption of transportation services , and the government 's efforts to encourage visitors to the region , tourism fell sharply after the riots ; on the National Day holiday in October , Xinjiang had 25 % fewer tourists than it did in 2008 . 
 Ürümqi public schools opened on schedule in September for the fall semester , but with armed police guarding them . Many schools began first @-@ day classes by focusing on patriotism . 
 On the other hand , Internet and international telephone service in Ürümqi remained limited for nearly a year after the riots . As late as November , most of the Internet was still inaccessible to residents and international phone calls were impossible ; as late as December , most web content hosted outside the autonomous region remained off @-@ limits to all but a few journalists , and residents had to travel to Dunhuang 14 hours away to access the Internet normally . Within the city , only about 100 local sites , such as banks and regional government websites , could be accessed . Both incoming and outgoing international phone calls were disallowed , so Ürümqi residents could only communicate by calling intermediaries in other cities in China who would then place the international calls . The communications blackout generated controversy even within China : Yu Xiaofeng of Zhejiang University criticised the move , and many Ürümqi locals said it hurt businesses and delayed recovery , whereas David Gosset of the Euro @-@ China forum argued that the government had the right to shut down communications for the sake of social stability ; some locals believed that getting away from the Internet even improved their quality of life . 
 In late December , the government began restoring services gradually . The websites for Xinhua and the People 's Daily , two state @-@ controlled media outlets , were made accessible on 28 December , the web portals Sina.com and <unk> on 10 January 2010 , and 27 more websites on 6 February . But access to websites was only partial : for instance , users could browse forums and blogs but not post on them . China Daily reported that limited e @-@ mail services were also restored in Ürümqi on 8 February , although a BBC reporter writing at approximately the same time said e @-@ mail was not accessible yet . Text messaging on cell phones was restored on 17 January , although there was a limit to how many messages a user could send daily . Internet access was fully restored in May 2010 . 
 = Fish in a Drawer = 
 " Fish in a Drawer " is the seventeenth episode of the fifth season of Two and a Half Men and the 113th episode overall . The episode was written by Evan <unk> , Sarah Goldfinger , Carol Mendelsohn and Naren Shankar , the writers of CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , who swapped shows with the writing staff of Two and a Half Men . 
 The episode revolves around Teddy Leopold ( Robert Wagner ) , who is found dead on Charlie ( Charlie Sheen ) ' s bed during his mother 's wedding reception . A crime scene investigation crew searches Charlie 's house , trying to find out who murdered Teddy . " Fish in a Drawer " aired May 5 , 2008 on CBS , and was watched by approximately 13 million viewers , making it the night 's third most watched show , behind CSI : Miami and Dancing with the Stars . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the reception of Evelyn and Teddy 's wedding , Charlie still wants to marry Courtney , his new stepsister , and decides to go up to his room with her . When they lie down on the bed , in the dark , Courtney discovers that she is lying on something , when Charlie turns on the light he finds Teddy lying dead on his bed with his pants around his knees , and lipstick on his " Hoo Hoo " When Charlie tells Alan , they find out they have an even bigger problem : telling their mother . After pulling Evelyn away from the piano , they tell her and she then cashes in their honeymoon tickets for a trip for one to Fiji before calling the police . 
 After the police arrive and examine the crime scene , Charlie , Alan , Evelyn , Berta , Courtney , and Jake are brought to the station for separate questioning . Charlie ends up being more obsessed with his attractive interrogator ( Jamie Rose ) , Alan is afraid of going to jail and can not talk straight , Evelyn spends more time complaining about their coffee , Berta turns out to be a waste of time , and Jake talks about food . It gets clear pretty soon that Evelyn is an easy target , since almost all of her prior husbands had died . Evelyn mentions her first husband died from food poisoning , explaining she was a young bride and didn 't know you couldn 't " keep fish in a drawer " . 
 After the files of Teddy and his daughter Courtney come back , the crime team discovers that their real names are Nathan Krunk and Sylvia Fishman , and they are not even related . It turns out that Sylvia and Nathan actually were con artists . The crime team thought that Nathan was murdered , because of the bruise on the back of his head , but it was revealed that he died of a heart attack , while attempting to have sex with Sylvia . The bruise had occurred two days earlier , when he bumped his head while having sex with Sylvia . As the police lead Sylvia away , Charlie attempts to tell her off for conning him , but he can only manage to say " I 'll wait for you . " 
 = = Production = = 
 In 2007 , Chuck Lorre , the creator of Two and a Half Men , contacted Carol Mendelsohn , the show runner of CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , about a crossover . The first reactions to this were that it was a stupid idea . CSI writer and executive producer Naren Shankar commented that when Mendelsohn first told him about the idea he replied : " What a nut " . However , that same year , the idea resurfaced , when Lorre and Mendelsohn met at the World Television Festival in Banff . Upon hearing this , the cast of both shows were surprised and not interested , but they eventually jumped aboard . In an interview with The New York Post , before the idea was fully worked out , Mendelsohn described the possible crossover as " a great challenge " . 
 When Mendelsohn was giving a talk , she accidentally mentioned the crossover , as a result Variety was already inquiring about the crossover episodes that same day . Mendelsohn eventually revealed the crossover at the Banff event in Canada . After the episode was taped , Lorre stated : " The biggest challenge for us was doing a comedy with a murder in it . Generally our stories are a little lighter . Would our audience go with a dead body in it ? There was a moment where it could have gone either way . I think the results were spectacular . It turned out to be a really funny episode . " " Fish in a Drawer " was written by Carol Mendelsohn and Naren Shankar and directed by Jeff Melman . As an inside joke , George Eads , who plays crime scene investigator Nick Stokes on CSI made a cameo as a guest at the wedding reception . Three days after the initial airing of " Fish in a Drawer " , " Two And a Half Deaths " , the corresponding CSI episode , aired on CBS . However , in an early Zap2it interview , both Mendelsohn and Lorre stated that this might be the last time a crossover like this might occur . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Fish in a Drawer " was broadcast on May 5 , 2008 on CBS , and was watched by 13 @.@ 61 million viewers , making it the night 's third most watched show , behind CSI : Miami and Dancing with the Stars . The episode was the fifth most watched program on CBS in the week of May 5 to May 11 , 2008 . Allison Waldman of AOL 's TV Squad , stated that she found the corresponding CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode Emmy Award worthy , while she found " Fish in a Drawer " , " not rip @-@ roaring , but still good " . Andy <unk> of Zap2it , said that he was attracted to the episode due to the news about the crossover , he stated he found the Faux @-@ Catherine " brilliant " and that " the grainy flashbacks were the best parts " . 
 <unk> Ferrell submitted this episode for consideration for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , but did not end up being nominated , being nominated the previous year . The director of this episode , Jeff Melman , also submitted this episode for consideration for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series , but was neither nominated as well . 
 = Cambodian Civil War = 
 The Cambodian Civil War was a conflict that pitted the forces of the Communist Party of Kampuchea ( known as the Khmer Rouge ) and their allies the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( North Vietnam ) and the Viet Cong against the government forces of the Kingdom of Cambodia and , after October 1970 , the Khmer Republic , which were supported by the United States ( U.S. ) and the Republic of Vietnam ( South Vietnam ) . 
 The struggle was complicated by the influence and actions of the allies of the two warring sides . People 's Army of Vietnam ( North Vietnamese Army ) involvement was designed to protect its Base Areas and sanctuaries in eastern Cambodia , without which the prosecution of its military effort in South Vietnam would have been more difficult . The Cambodian coup of 18 March 1970 put a pro @-@ American , anti @-@ Vietnamese government in power and ended Cambodia 's neutrality in the Vietnam War . The North Vietnamese Army ( PAVN ) was now threatened by a newly unfriendly Cambodian government . 
 Between March and June 1970 , the North Vietnamese moved many of its military installations further inside Cambodia to protect them from U.S. incursions and bombing , capturing most of the northeastern third of the country in engagements with the Cambodian army . The North Vietnamese turned over some of their conquests and provided other assistance to the Khmer Rouge , thus empowering what was at the time a small guerilla movement . The Cambodian government hastened to expand its army to combat the North Vietnamese and the growing threat of the Khmer Rouge . 
 The U.S. was motivated by the desire to buy time for its withdrawal from Southeast Asia , to protect its ally in South Vietnam , and to prevent the spread of communism to Cambodia . American and both South and North Vietnamese forces directly participated ( at one time or another ) in the fighting . The U.S. assisted the central government with massive U.S. aerial bombing campaigns and direct material and financial aid . 
 After five years of savage fighting , the Republican government was defeated on 17 April 1975 when the victorious Khmer Rouge proclaimed the establishment of Democratic Kampuchea . 
 The conflict was part of the Second Indochina War ( 1959 – 1975 ) which also consumed the neighboring Kingdom of Laos , South Vietnam , and North Vietnam individually referred to as the Laotian Civil War and the Vietnam War respectively . The Cambodian civil war led to the Cambodian Genocide , one of the bloodiest in history . 
 = = Setting the stage ( 1965 – 1970 ) = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 During the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 1960s , Prince Norodom Sihanouk 's policies had protected his nation from the turmoil that engulfed Laos and South Vietnam . Neither the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) nor North Vietnam disputed Sihanouk 's claim to represent " progressive " political policies and the leadership of the prince 's domestic leftist opposition , the Pracheachon Party , had been integrated into the government . On 3 May 1965 , Sihanouk broke diplomatic relations with the U.S. , ended the flow of American aid , and turned to the PRC and the Soviet Union for economic and military assistance . 
 By the late 1960s , Sihanouk 's delicate domestic and foreign policy balancing act was beginning to go awry . In 1966 , an agreement was struck between the prince and the Chinese , allowing the presence of large @-@ scale People 's Army of Vietnam ( PAVN ) and NLF troop deployments and logistical bases in the eastern border regions . He had also agreed to allow the use of the port of Sihanoukville by communist @-@ flagged vessels delivering supplies and material to support the PAVN / NLF military effort in Vietnam . These concessions made questionable Cambodia 's neutrality , which had been guaranteed by the Geneva Conference of 1954 . 
 Sihanouk was convinced that the PRC , not the U.S. , would eventually control the Indochinese Peninsula and that " our interests are best served by dealing with the camp that one day will dominate the whole of Asia – and coming to terms before its victory – in order to obtain the best terms possible . " 
 During the same year , however , he allowed his pro @-@ American minister of defense , General Lon Nol , to crack down on leftist activities , crushing the Pracheachon by accusing its members of subversion and subservience to Hanoi . Simultaneously , Sihanouk lost the support of Cambodia 's conservatives as a result of his failure to come to grips with the deteriorating economic situation ( exacerbated by the loss of rice exports , most of which went to the PAVN / NLF ) and with the growing communist military presence . 
 On 11 September , Cambodia held its first open election . Through manipulation and harassment ( and to Sihanouk 's surprise ) the conservatives won 75 percent of the seats in the National Assembly . Lon Nol was chosen by the right as prime minister and , as his deputy , they named Prince Sirik Matak ; an ultraconservative member of the Sisowath branch of the royal clan and long @-@ time enemy of Sihanouk . In addition to these developments and the clash of interests among Phnom Penh 's politicized elite , social tensions created a favorable environment for the growth of a domestic communist insurgency in the rural areas . 
 = = = Revolt in Battambang = = = 
 The prince then found himself in a political dilemma . To maintain the balance against the rising tide of the conservatives , he named the leaders of the very group he had been oppressing as members of a " counter @-@ government " that was meant to monitor and criticize Lon Nol 's administration . One of Lon Nol 's first priorities was to fix the ailing economy by halting the illegal sale of rice to the communists . Soldiers were dispatched to the rice @-@ growing areas to forcibly collect the harvests at gunpoint , and they paid only the low government price . There was widespread unrest , especially in rice @-@ rich Battambang Province , an area long @-@ noted for the presence of large landowners , great disparity in wealth , and where the communists still had some influence . On 11 March 1967 , while Sihanouk was out of the country in France , a rebellion broke out in the area around Samlaut in Battambang , when enraged villagers attacked a tax collection brigade . With the probable encouragement of local communist cadres , the insurrection quickly spread throughout the whole region . Lon Nol , acting in the prince 's absence ( but with his approval ) , responded by declaring martial law . Hundreds of peasants were killed and whole villages were laid waste during the repression . After returning home in March , Sihanouk abandoned his centrist position and personally ordered the arrest of Khieu Samphan , Hou Yuon , and Hu Nim , the leaders of the " counter government " , all of whom escaped into the northeast . 
 Simultaneously , Sihanouk ordered the arrest of Chinese middlemen involved in the illegal rice trade , thereby raising government revenues and placating the conservatives . Lon Nol was forced to resign , and , in a typical move , the prince named new leftists to the government to balance the conservatives . The immediate crisis had passed , but it engendered two tragic consequences . First , it drove thousands of new recruits into the arms of the hard @-@ line maquis of the Cambodian Communist Party ( which Sihanouk labelled the Khmers rouges ( " Red Khmers " ) ) . Second , for the peasantry , the name of Lon Nol became associated with ruthless repression throughout Cambodia . 
 = = = Communist regroupment = = = 
 While the 1967 insurgency had been unplanned , the Khmer Rouge tried , without much success , to organize a more serious revolt during the following year . The prince 's decimation of the <unk> Chon and the urban communists had , however , cleared the field of competition for Saloth Sar ( also known as Pol Pot ) , Ieng Sary , and Son Sen — the Maoist leadership of the <unk> . They led their followers into the highlands of the northeast and into the lands of the Khmer Loeu , a primitive people who were hostile to both the lowland Khmers and the central government . For the Khmer Rouge , who still lacked assistance from the North Vietnamese , it was a period of regroupment , organization , and training . Hanoi basically ignored its Chinese @-@ sponsored allies , and the indifference of their " fraternal comrades " to their insurgency between 1967 and 1969 would make an indelible impression on the Khmer Rouge leadership . 
 On 17 January 1968 , the Khmer Rouge launched their first offensive . It was aimed more at gathering weapons and spreading propaganda than in seizing territory since , at that time , the adherents of the insurgency numbered no more than 4 – 5 @,@ 000 . During the same month , the communists established the Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea as the military wing of the party . As early as the end of the Battambang revolt , Sihanouk had begun to reevaluate his relationship with the communists . His earlier agreement with the Chinese had availed him nothing . They had not only failed to restrain the North Vietnamese , but they had actually involved themselves ( through the Khmer Rouge ) in active subversion within his country . At the suggestion of Lon Nol ( who had returned to the cabinet as defense minister in November 1968 ) and other conservative politicians , on 11 May 1969 , the prince welcomed the restoration of normal diplomatic relations with the U.S. and created a new Government of National Salvation with Lon Nol as his prime minister . He did so " in order to play a new card , since the Asian communists are already attacking us before the end of the Vietnam War . " Besides , PAVN and the NLF would make very convenient scapegoats for Cambodia 's ills , much more so than the minuscule Khmer Rouge , and ridding Cambodia of their presence would solve many problems simultaneously . The Americans took advantage of this same opportunity to solve some of their own problems in Southeast Asia . 
 = = = Operation Menu and Operation Freedom Deal = = = 
 Although the U.S. had been aware of the PAVN / NLF sanctuaries in Cambodia since 1966 , President Lyndon B. Johnson had chosen not to attack them due to possible international repercussions and his belief that Sihanouk could be convinced to alter his policies . Johnson did , however , authorize the reconnaissance teams of the highly classified Military Assistance Command , Vietnam Studies and Observations Group ( SOG ) to enter Cambodia and gather intelligence on the Base Areas in 1967 . The election of Richard M. Nixon in 1968 and the introduction of his policies of gradual U.S. withdrawal from South Vietnam and the Vietnamization of the conflict there , changed everything . On 18 March 1969 , on secret orders from Nixon , the U.S. Air Force carried out the bombing of Base Area 353 ( in the Fishhook region opposite South Vietnam 's Tay Ninh Province ) by 59 B @-@ 52 Stratofortress bombers . This strike was the first in a series of attacks on the sanctuaries that lasted until May 1970 . During Operation Menu , the Air Force conducted 3 @,@ 875 sorties and dropped more than 108 @,@ 000 tons of ordnance on the eastern border areas . Only five high @-@ ranking Congressional officials were informed of the bombing . 
 Later it was claimed by Nixon and Kissinger that Sihanouk had given his tacit approval for the raids , but this is debatable . According to Kenton Clymer , Sihanouk 's public denunciations of Hanoi 's military presence in Cambodia and support for the Khmer Rouge are not evidence of tacit complicity : " Sihanouk was never asked to approve the B @-@ 52 bombings , and he never gave his approval . " Sihanouk privately sanctioned hot pursuit of North Vietnamese forces in under @-@ populated areas , but this was " not closely related " to the B @-@ 52 strikes . Sihanouk publicly condemned the bombing . Hanoi remained quiet about the bombing , not wishing to advertise the presence of its forces in " neutral " Cambodia . 
 Operation Freedom Deal followed Operation Menu . Under Freedom Deal , from 19 May 1970 to 15 August 1973 , U.S. bombing of Cambodia extended over the entire eastern one @-@ half of the country and was especially intense in the heavily populated southeastern one @-@ quarter of the country , including a wide ring surrounding the largest city of Phnom Penh . In large areas , according to maps of U.S. bombing sites , it appears that nearly every square mile of land was hit by bombs . 
 The effectiveness of the U.S. bombing on the Khmer Rouge and the death toll of Cambodian civilians is disputed . With limited data , the range of Cambodian deaths caused by U.S. bombing may be between 40 @,@ 000 and 150 @,@ 000 . Another impact of the U.S. bombing and the Cambodian civil war was to destroy the homes and livelihood of many people . This was a heavy contributor to the refugee crisis in Cambodia with two million people — more than 25 percent of the population — displaced from rural areas into the cities , especially Phnom Penh which grew from about 600 @,@ 000 in 1970 to an estimated population of nearly 2 million by 1975 . The Cambodian government estimated that more than 20 percent of the property in the country had been destroyed during the war . 
 It has been argued that the U.S. intervention in Cambodia contributed to the eventual seizure of power by the Khmer Rouge , that grew from 4 @,@ 000 in number in 1970 to 70 @,@ 000 in 1975 . This view has been disputed , with documents uncovered from the Soviet archives revealing that the North Vietnamese offensive in Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with Nuon Chea . It has also been argued that U.S. bombing was decisive in delaying a Khmer Rouge victory . 
 = = Overthrow of Sihanouk ( 1970 ) = = 
 = = = Lon Nol coup = = = 
 While Sihanouk was out of the country on a trip to France , anti @-@ Vietnamese rioting ( which was semi @-@ sponsored by the government ) took place in Phnom Penh , during which the North Vietnamese and NLF embassies were sacked . In the prince 's absence , Lon Nol did nothing to halt these activities . On 12th , the prime minister closed the port of Sihanoukville to the North Vietnamese and issued an impossible ultimatum to them . All PAVN / NLF forces were to withdraw from Cambodian soil within 72 hours ( on 15 March ) or face military action . 
 Sihanouk , hearing of the turmoil , headed for Moscow and Beijing in order to demand that the patrons of PAVN and the NLF exert more control over their clients . On 18 March 1970 , Lon Nol requested that the National Assembly vote on the future of the prince 's leadership of the nation . Sihanouk was ousted from power by a vote of 92 – 0 . Heng Cheng became president of the National Assembly , while Prime Minister Lon Nol was granted emergency powers . Sirik Matak retained his post as deputy prime minister . The new government emphasized that the transfer of power had been totally legal and constitutional , and it received the recognition of most foreign governments . There have been , and continue to be , accusations that the U.S. government played some role in the overthrow of Sihanouk , but conclusive evidence has never been found to support them . 
 The majority of middle @-@ class and educated Khmers had grown weary of the prince and welcomed the change of government . They were joined by the military , for whom the prospect of the return of American military and financial aid was a cause for celebration . Within days of his deposition , Sihanouk , now in Beijing , broadcast an appeal to the people to resist the usurpers . Demonstrations and riots occurred ( mainly in areas contiguous to PAVN / NLF controlled areas ) , but no nationwide groundswell threatened the government . In one incident at Kompong Cham on 29 March , however , an enraged crowd killed Lon Nol 's brother , Lon Nil , tore out his liver , and cooked and ate it . An estimated 40 @,@ 000 peasants then began to march on the capital to demand Sihanouk 's reinstatement . They were dispersed , with many casualties , by contingents of the armed forces . 
 = = = Massacre of the Vietnamese = = = 
 Most of the population , urban and rural , took out their anger and frustrations on the nation 's Vietnamese population . Lon Nol 's call for 10 @,@ 000 volunteers to boost the manpower of Cambodia 's poorly equipped , 30 @,@ 000 @-@ man army , managed to swamp the military with over 70 @,@ 000 recruits . Rumours abounded concerning a possible PAVN offensive aimed at Phnom Penh itself . Paranoia flourished and this set off a violent reaction against the nation 's 400 @,@ 000 ethnic Vietnamese . 
 Lon Nol hoped to use the Vietnamese as hostages against PAVN / NLF activities , and the military set about rounding them up into detention camps . That was when the killing began . In towns and villages all over Cambodia , soldiers and civilians sought out their Vietnamese neighbors in order to murder them . On 15 April , the bodies of 800 Vietnamese floated down the Mekong River and into South Vietnam . 
 The South Vietnamese , North Vietnamese , and the NLF harshly denounced these actions . Significantly , no Cambodians — including the Buddhist community — condemned the killings . In his apology to the Saigon government , Lon Nol stated that " it was difficult to distinguish between Vietnamese citizens who were Viet Cong and those who were not . So it is quite normal that the reaction of Cambodian troops , who feel themselves betrayed , is difficult to control . " 
 = = = FUNK and GRUNK = = = 
 From Beijing , Sihanouk proclaimed that the government in Phnom Penh was dissolved and his intention to create the Front uni national du <unk> or FUNK ( National United Front of Kampuchea ) . Sihanouk later said " I had chosen not to be with either the Americans or the communists , because I considered that there were two dangers , American imperialism and Asian communism . It was Lon Nol who obliged me to choose between them . " 
 The North Vietnamese reacted to the political changes in Cambodia by sending Premier Phạm Văn Đồng to meet Sihanouk in China and recruit him into an alliance with the Khmer Rouge . Saloth was also contacted by the Vietnamese who now offered him whatever resources he wanted for his insurgency against the Cambodian government . Saloth and Sihanouk were actually in Beijing at the same time but the Vietnamese and Chinese leaders never informed Sihanouk of the presence of Saloth or allowed the two men to meet . Shortly after , Sihanouk issued an appeal by radio to the people of Cambodia to rise up against the government and support the Khmer Rouge . In doing so , Sihanouk lent his name and popularity in the rural areas of Cambodia to a movement over which he had little control . In May 1970 , Saloth finally returned to Cambodia and the pace of the insurgency greatly increased . After Sihanouk showed his support for the Khmer Rouge by visiting them in the field , their ranks swelled from 6 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 fighters . 
 The prince then allied himself with the Khmer Rouge , the North Vietnamese , the Laotian Pathet Lao , and the NLF , throwing his personal prestige behind the communists . On 5 May , the actual establishment of FUNK and of the Gouvernement royal d <unk> nationale du <unk> or GRUNK ( Royal Government of National Union of Kampuchea ) , was proclaimed . Sihanouk assumed the post of head of state , appointing Penn Nouth , one of his most loyal supporters , as prime minister . 
 Khieu Samphan was designated deputy prime minister , minister of defense , and commander in chief of the GRUNK armed forces ( though actual military operations were directed by Pol Pot ) . Hu Nim became minister of information , and Hou Yuon assumed multiple responsibilities as minister of the interior , communal reforms , and cooperatives . GRUNK claimed that it was not a government @-@ in @-@ exile since Khieu Samphan and the insurgents remained inside Cambodia . Sihanouk and his loyalists remained in China , although the prince did make a visit to the " liberated areas " of Cambodia , including Angkor Wat , in March 1973 . These visits were used mainly for propaganda purposes and had no real influence on political affairs . 
 For Sihanouk , this proved to be a marriage of convenience that was spurred on by his thirst for revenge against those who had betrayed him . For the Khmer Rouge , it was a means to greatly expand the appeal of their movement . Peasants , motivated by loyalty to the monarchy , gradually rallied to the GRUNK cause . The personal appeal of Sihanouk , and widespread US aerial bombardment helped recruitment . This task was made even easier for the communists after 9 October 1970 , when Lon Nol abolished the loosely federalist monarchy and proclaimed the establishment of a centralized Khmer Republic . 
 The GRUNK was soon caught between the competing Communist powers : North Vietnam , China , and the Soviet Union . During the visits which Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai and Sihanouk paid to North Korea in April and June 1970 , respectively , they called for the establishment of a " united front of the five revolutionary Asian countries " ( China , North Korea , North Vietnam , Laos , and Cambodia , the last being represented by the GRUNK ) . While the North Korean leaders enthusiastically welcomed the plan , it soon foundered on Hanoi ’ s opposition . Having realized that such a front would exclude the Soviet Union and implicitly challenge the hegemonic role that the DRV had arrogated to itself in Indochina , the North Vietnamese leaders declared that all communist states should join forces against " American imperialism . " Indeed , the issue of Vietnamese versus Chinese hegemony over Indochina greatly influenced the attitude Hanoi adopted towards Moscow in the early and mid @-@ 1970s . During the Cambodian civil war , the Soviet leaders , ready to acquiesce in Hanoi ’ s dominance over Laos and Cambodia , actually insisted on sending their aid shipments to the Khmer Rouge through the DRV , whereas China firmly rebuffed Hanoi 's proposal that Chinese aid to Cambodia be sent via North Vietnam . Facing Chinese competition and Soviet acquiescence , the North Vietnamese leaders found the Soviet option more advantageous to their interests , a calculation that played a major role in the gradual pro @-@ Soviet shift in Hanoi 's foreign policies . 
 = = Widening war ( 1970 – 1971 ) = = 
 = = = North Vietnamese offensive in Cambodia = = = 
 In the wake of the coup , Lon Nol did not immediately launch Cambodia into war . He appealed to the international community and to the United Nations in an attempt to gain support for the new government and condemned violations of Cambodia 's neutrality " by foreign forces , whatever camp they come from . " His hope for continued neutralism availed him no more than it had Sihanouk . On 29 March 1970 , the North Vietnamese had taken matters into their own hands and launched an offensive against the Cambodian army with documents uncovered from the Soviet archives revealing that the offensive was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with Nuon Chea . The North Vietnamese overran most of northeastern Cambodia by June 1970 . 
 On 29 April 1970 , South Vietnamese and U.S. units unleashed a limited , multi @-@ pronged Cambodian Campaign that Washington hoped would solve three problems : First , it would provide a shield for the American withdrawal from Vietnam ( by destroying the PAVN logistical system and killing enemy troops ) in Cambodia ; second , it would provide a test for the policy of Vietnamization ; third , it would serve as a signal to Hanoi that Nixon meant business . Despite Nixon 's appreciation of Lon Nol 's position , the Cambodian leader was not even informed in advance of the decision to send troops into his country . He learned about it only after it had begun from the head of the U.S. mission , who had himself learned about it from a radio broadcast . 
 Extensive logistical installations and large amounts of supplies were found and destroyed , but as reporting from the American command in Saigon disclosed , still larger amounts of military material had already been moved further from the border to shelter it from the incursion into Cambodia by the U.S. and South Vietnam . 
 On the day the incursion was launched , the North Vietnamese launched an offensive ( Campaign X ) of its own against FANK forces at the request of the Khmer Rouge and in order to protect and expand their Base Areas and logistical system . By June , three months after the removal of Sihanouk , they had swept government forces from the entire northeastern third of the country . After defeating those forces , the North Vietnamese turned the newly won territories over to the local insurgents . The Khmer Rouge also established " liberated " areas in the south and the southwestern parts of the country , where they operated independently of the North Vietnamese . 
 = = = Opposing sides = = = 
 As combat operations quickly revealed , the two sides were badly mismatched . Government troops , were now renamed the Forces <unk> Nationales <unk> or FANK ( Khmer National Armed Forces ) and thousands of young urban Cambodians flocked to join it in the months following the removal of Sihanouk . With the surge of recruits , however , FANK expanded well beyond its capacity to absorb the new men . Later , given the press of tactical operations and the need to replace combat casualties , there was insufficient time to impart needed skills to individuals or to units , and lack of training remained the bane of FANK 's existence until its collapse . 
 During the period 1974 – 1975 , FANK forces officially grew from 100 @,@ 000 to approximately 250 @,@ 000 men , but probably only numbered around 180 @,@ 000 due to payroll padding by their officers and due to desertions . U.S. military aid ( ammunition , supplies , and equipment ) was funneled to FANK through the Military Equipment Delivery Team , Cambodia ( <unk> ) . Authorized a total of 113 officers and men , the team arrived in Phnom Penh in 1971 , under the overall command of CINCPAC Admiral John S. McCain , Jr . The attitude of the Nixon administration could be summed up by the advice given by Henry Kissinger to the first head of the liaison team , Colonel Jonathan Ladd : " Don 't think of victory ; just keep it alive . " Nevertheless , McCain constantly petitioned the Pentagon for more arms , equipment , and staff for what he <unk> viewed as " my war " . 
 There were other problems . The officer corps of FANK was generally corrupt and greedy . The inclusion of " ghost " soldiers allowed massive payroll padding ; ration allowances were kept by the officers while their men starved ; and the sale of arms and ammunition on the black market ( or to the enemy ) was commonplace . Worse , the tactical ineptitude among FANK officers was as common as their greed . Lon Nol frequently bypassed the general staff and directed operations down to battalion @-@ level while also forbidding any real coordination between the army , navy , and air force . 
 The common soldiers fought bravely at first , but they were saddled with low pay ( with which they had to purchase their own food and medical care ) , ammunition shortages , and mixed equipment . Due to the pay system , there were no allotments for their families , who were , therefore , forced to follow their husbands / sons into the battle zones . These problems ( exacerbated by continuously declining morale ) only increased over time . 
 At the beginning of 1974 , the Cambodian army inventory included 241 @,@ 630 rifles , 7 @,@ 079 machine guns , 2 @,@ 726 mortars , 20 @,@ 481 grenade launchers , 304 recoilless rifles , 289 howitzers , 202 APCs , and 4 @,@ 316 trucks . The Khmer navy had 171 vessels ; the Khmer air force had 211 aircraft , including 64 North American T @-@ 28s , 14 Douglas AC @-@ 47 gunships and 44 helicopters . American embassy military personnel – who were only supposed to coordinate the arms aid program – sometimes found themselves involved in prohibited advisory and combat tasks . 
 When PAVN forces were supplanted , it was by the tough , rigidly indoctrinated peasant army of the Khmer Rouge with its core of seasoned leaders , who now received the full support of Hanoi . Khmer Rouge forces , which had been reorganized at an Indochinese summit held in Guangzhou , China in April 1970 , would grow from 12 – 15 @,@ 000 in 1970 to 35 – 40 @,@ 000 by 1972 , when the so @-@ called " Khmerization " of the conflict took place and combat operations against the Republic were handed over completely to the insurgents . 
 The development of these forces took place in three stages . 1970 to 1972 was a period of organization and recruitment , during which Khmer Rouge units served as auxiliaries to PAVN . From 1972 to mid @-@ 1974 , the insurgents formed units of battalion and regimental size . It was during this period that the Khmer Rouge began to break away from Sihanouk and his supporters and the collectivization of agriculture was begun in the liberated areas . Division @-@ sized units were being fielded by 1974 – 1975 , when the party was on its own and began the radical transformation of the country . 
 With the fall of Sihanouk , Hanoi became alarmed at the prospect of a pro @-@ Western regime that might allow the Americans to establish a military presence on their western flank . To prevent that from happening , they began transferring their military installations away from the border regions to locations deeper within Cambodian territory . A new command center was established at the city of Kratié and the timing of the move was propitious . President Nixon was of the opinion that : 
 " We need a bold move in Cambodia to show that we stand with Lon Nol ... something symbolic ... for the only Cambodian regime that had the guts to take a pro @-@ Western and pro @-@ American stand . " 
 = = = Chenla II = = = 
 During the night of 21 January 1971 , a force of 100 PAVN / NLF commandos attacked Pochentong airfield , the main base of the Republican Air Force . In this one action , the raiders destroyed almost the entire inventory of government aircraft , including all of its fighter planes . This may have been a blessing in disguise , however , since the air force was composed of old ( even obsolete ) Soviet aircraft . The Americans soon replaced the airplanes with more advanced models . The attack did , however , stall a proposed FANK offensive . Two weeks later , Lon Nol suffered a stroke and was evacuated to Hawaii for treatment . It had been a mild stroke , however , and the general recovered quickly , returning to Cambodia after only two months . 
 It was not until 20 August that FANK launched Operation Chenla II , its first offensive of the year . The objective of the campaign was to clear Route 6 of enemy forces and thereby reopen communications with Kompong Thom , the Republic 's second largest city , which had been isolated from the capital for more than a year . The operation was initially successful , and the city was relieved . The PAVN and Khmer Rouge counterattacked in November and December , annihilating government forces in the process . There was never an accurate count of the losses , but the estimate was " on the order of ten battalions of personnel and equipment lost plus the equipment of an additional ten battalions . " The strategic result of the failure of Chenla II was that the offensive initiative passed completely into the hands of PAVN and the Khmer Rouge . 
 = = Agony of the Khmer Republic ( 1972 – 1975 ) = = 
 = = = Struggling to survive = = = 
 From 1972 through 1974 , the war was conducted along FANK 's lines of communications north and south of the capital . Limited offensives were launched to maintain contact with the rice @-@ growing regions of the northwest and along the Mekong River and Route 5 , the Republic 's overland connections to South Vietnam . The strategy of the Khmer Rouge was to gradually cut those lines of communication and squeeze Phnom Penh . As a result , FANK forces became fragmented , isolated , and unable to lend one another mutual support . 
 The main U.S. contribution to the FANK effort came in the form of the bombers and tactical aircraft of the U.S. Air Force . When President Nixon launched the incursion in 1970 , American and South Vietnamese troops operated under an umbrella of air cover that was designated Operation Freedom Deal . When those troops were withdrawn , the air operation continued , ostensibly to interdict PAVN / NLF troop movements and logistics . In reality ( and unknown to the American Congress and public ) , they were utilized to provide tactical air support to FANK . As a former U.S. military officer in Phnom Penh reported , " the areas around the Mekong River were so full of bomb craters from B @-@ 52 strikes that , by 1973 , they looked like the valleys of the moon . " 
 On 10 March 1972 , just before the newly renamed Constituent Assembly was to approve a revised constitution , Lon Nol announced that he was suspending the deliberations . He then forced Cheng Heng , the chief of state since Sihanouk 's deposition , to surrender his authority to him . On the second anniversary of the coup , Lon Nol relinquished his authority as chief of state , but retained his position as prime minister and defense minister . 
 On 4 June , Lon Nol was elected as the first president of the Khmer Republic in a blatantly rigged election . As per the new constitution ( ratified on 30 April ) , political parties formed in the new nation , quickly becoming a source of political factionalism . General Sutsakhan stated : " the seeds of democratization , which had been thrown into the wind with such goodwill by the Khmer leaders , returned for the Khmer Republic nothing but a poor harvest . " 
 In January 1973 , hope was renewed when the Paris Peace Accord was signed , ending the conflict ( for the time being ) in South Vietnam and Laos . On 29 January , Lon Nol proclaimed a unilateral cease @-@ fire throughout the nation . All U.S. bombing operations were halted in hopes of securing a chance for peace . It was not to be . The Khmer Rouge simply ignored the proclamation and carried on fighting . By March , heavy casualties , desertions , and low recruitment had forced Lon Nol to introduce conscription and , in April , insurgent forces launched an offensive that pushed into the suburbs of the capital . The U.S. Air Force responded by launching an intense bombing operation that forced the communists back into the countryside after being decimated by the air strikes . The US Seventh Air Force argued that the bombing prevented the fall of Phnom Penh in 1973 by killing 16 @,@ 000 of 25 @,@ 500 Khmer Rouge fighters besieging the city . 
 By the last day of Operation Freedom Deal ( 15 August 1973 ) , 250 @,@ 000 tons of bombs had been dropped on the Khmer Republic , 82 @,@ 000 tons of which had been released in the last 45 days of the operation . Since the inception of Operation Menu in 1969 , the U.S. Air Force had dropped 539 @,@ 129 tons of ordnance on Cambodia / Khmer Republic . 
 = = = Shape of things to come = = = 
 As late as 1972 – 1973 , it was a commonly held belief , both within and outside Cambodia , that the war was essentially a foreign conflict that had not fundamentally altered the nature of the Khmer people . By late 1973 , there was a growing awareness among the government and population of the fanaticism , total lack of concern over casualties , and complete rejection of any offer of peace talks which " began to suggest that Khmer Rouge fanaticism and capacity for violence were deeper than anyone had suspected . " During the Civil War , although data is sparse , demographic evidence suggests that the Khmer Rouge caused several times more civilian casualties than the entire U.S. bombing of Cambodia . 
 Reports of the brutal policies of the organization soon made their way to Phnom Penh and into the population foretelling the violence that was about to consume the nation . There were tales of the forced relocations of entire villages , of the summary execution of any who disobeyed or even asked questions , the forbidding of religious practices , of monks who were defrocked or murdered , and where traditional sexual and marital habits were <unk> . War was one thing , the offhand manner in which the Khmer Rouge dealt out death , so contrary to the Khmer character , was quite another . Reports of these atrocities began to surface during the same period in which North Vietnamese troops were withdrawing from the Cambodian battlefields . This was no coincidence . The concentration of the PAVN effort on South Vietnam allowed the Khmer Rouge to apply their doctrine and policies without restraint for the first time . 
 The Khmer Rouge leadership was almost completely unknown by the public . They were referred to by their fellow countrymen as <unk> prey – the forest army . Previously , the very existence of the communist party as a component of GRUNK had been hidden . Within the " liberated zones " it was simply referred to as " <unk> " – the organization . During 1973 , the communist party fell under the control of its most fanatical members , Pol Pot and Son Sen , who believed that " Cambodia was to go through a total social revolution and that everything that had preceded it was anathema and must be destroyed . " 
 Also hidden from scrutiny was the growing antagonism between the Khmer Rouge and their North Vietnamese allies . The radical leadership of the party could never escape the suspicion that Hanoi had designs on building an Indochinese federation with the North Vietnamese as its master . The Khmer Rouge were ideologically tied to the Chinese , while North Vietnam 's chief supporters , the Soviet Union , still recognized the Lon Nol government as legitimate . After the signing of the Paris Peace Accords , PAVN cut off the supply of arms to the Khmer Rouge , hoping to force them into a cease @-@ fire . When the Americans were freed by the signing of the accords to turn their air power completely on the Khmer Rouge , this too was blamed on Hanoi . During the year , these suspicions and attitudes led the party leadership to carry out purges within their ranks . Most of the Hanoi @-@ trained members were then executed on the orders of Pol Pot . 
 As time passed , the need of the Khmer Rouge for the support of Prince Sihanouk lessened . The organization demonstrated to the people of the ' liberated ' areas in no uncertain terms that open expressions of support for Sihanouk would result in their liquidation . Although the prince still enjoyed the protection of the Chinese , when he made public appearances overseas to publicize the GRUNK cause , he was treated with almost open contempt by Ministers Ieng Sary and Khieu Samphan . In June , the prince told Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci that when " they [ the Khmer Rouge ] have sucked me dry , they will spit me out like a cherry stone . " 
 By the end of 1973 , Sihanouk loyalists had been purged from all of GRUNK 's ministries and all of the prince 's supporters within the insurgent ranks were also eliminated . Shortly after Christmas , as the insurgents were gearing up for their final offensive , Sihanouk spoke with the French diplomat Etienne <unk> 'h . He said that his hopes for a moderate socialism akin to Yugoslavia 's must now be totally dismissed . Stalinist Albania , he said , would be the model . 
 = = = Fall of Phnom Penh = = = 
 By the time the Khmer Rouge initiated their dry @-@ season offensive to capture the beleaguered Cambodian capital on 1 January 1975 , the Republic was in chaos . The economy had been gutted , the transportation network had been reduced to air and water systems , the rice harvest had been reduced by one @-@ quarter , and the supply of freshwater fish ( the chief source of protein ) had declined drastically . The cost of food was 20 times greater than pre @-@ war levels and unemployment was not even measured anymore . Phnom Penh , which had a pre @-@ war population of around 600 @,@ 000 , was overwhelmed by refugees ( who continued to flood in from the steadily collapsing defense perimeter ) , growing to a size of around two million . These helpless and desperate civilians had no jobs and little in the way of food , shelter , or medical care . Their condition ( and the government 's ) only worsened when Khmer Rouge forces gradually gained control of the banks of the Mekong . From the riverbanks , their mines and gunfire steadily reduced the river convoys bringing relief supplies of food , fuel , and ammunition to the slowly starving city ( 90 percent of the Republic 's supplies moved by means of the convoys ) from South Vietnam . After the river was effectively blocked in early February , the U.S. began an airlift of supplies . This became increasingly risky , however , due to communist rocket and artillery fire , which constantly rained down on the airfields and city . The Khmer Rouge cut off supplies to the city for more than a year before it fell on 17 April 1975 . Reports from journalists stated that the Khmer Rouge shelling " tortured the capital almost continuously , " inflicting " random death and mutilation " on millions of trapped civilians . 
 Desperate , yet determined , units of Republican soldiers , many of whom had run out of ammunition , dug in around the capital and fought until they were overrun as the Khmer Rouge advanced . By the last week of March 1975 , approximately 40 @,@ 000 communist troops had surrounded the capital and began preparing to deliver the coup de grace to about half as many Republican forces . 
 Lon Nol resigned and left the country on 1 April , hoping that a negotiated settlement might still be possible if he was absent from the political scene . Saukam Khoy became acting president of a government that had less than three weeks to live . Last @-@ minute efforts on the part of the U.S. to arrange a peace agreement involving Sihanouk ended in failure . When a vote in the U.S. Congress for a resumption of American air support failed , panic and a sense of doom pervaded the capital . The situation was best described by General Sak Sutsakhan ( now FANK chief of staff ) : 
 " The picture of the Khmer Republic which came to mind at that time was one of a sick man who survived only by outside means and that , in its condition , the administration of medication , however efficient it might be , was probably of no further value . " 
 On 12 April , concluding that all was lost , the U.S. evacuated its embassy personnel by helicopter during Operation Eagle Pull . The 276 evacuees included U.S. Ambassador John Gunther Dean , other American diplomatic personnel , Acting President Saukam Khoy , senior Khmer Republic government officials and their families , and members of the news media . In all , 82 U.S. , 159 Cambodian , and 35 third @-@ country nationals were evacuated . Although invited by Ambassador Dean to join the evacuation ( and much to the Americans ' surprise ) , Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak , Long Boret , Lon Non ( Lon Nol 's brother ) , and most members of Lon Nol 's cabinet declined the offer . All of them chose to share the fate of their people . Their names were not published on the death lists and many trusted the Khmer Rouge 's assertions that former government officials would not be murdered , but would be welcome in helping rebuild a new Cambodia . Later , they were all executed by the Khmer Rouge . 
 After the Americans ( and Saukam Khoy ) had departed , a seven @-@ member Supreme Committee , headed by General Sak Sutsakhan , assumed authority over the collapsing Republic . By 15 April , the last solid defenses of the city were overcome by the communists . In the early morning hours of 17 April , the committee decided to move the seat of government to <unk> <unk> Province in the northwest . Around 10 : 00 , the voice of General Mey Si Chan of the FANK general staff broadcast on the radio , ordering all FANK forces to cease firing , since " negotiations were in progress " for the surrender of Phnom Penh . The war was over but the terrible dreams of the Khmer Rouge were about to come to fruition in the newly proclaimed Democratic Kampuchea . Khmer Rouge troops immediately began to forcibly empty the capital city , driving the population into the countryside and killing tens of thousands in the process . The Year Zero had begun . 
 = William Owsley = 
 William Owsley ( March 24 , 1782 – December 9 , 1862 ) was an associate justice on the Kentucky Court of Appeals and the 16th Governor of Kentucky . He also served in both houses of the Kentucky General Assembly and was Kentucky Secretary of State under Governor James Turner Morehead . 
 Owsley studied law under John Boyle . After briefly serving in the state legislature , he was appointed by Governor Charles Scott to serve alongside Boyle on the Kentucky Court of Appeals . During his service on the court , Owsley was involved in the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . In 1824 , the state legislature , unhappy with the court 's rulings against debt relief legislation , attempted to abolish the court and replace it with a new court . For a time , both courts operated simultaneously , and both claimed to be the court of last resort in the state . Supporters of the old court won control of the legislature and abolished the new court in 1826 . Owsley resigned from the Court of Appeals two years later . 
 In 1831 , Owsley returned to the state legislature , where he served until Governor Morehead appointed him secretary of state in 1834 . He resumed his legal practice in 1836 and in 1843 , retired from that profession . The next year , he was nominated for governor on the Whig ticket and defeated William O. Butler in the general election . Through fiscally conservative policies , he was able to reduce the state 's debt . In spite of his opposition to the Mexican @-@ American War , large numbers of Kentucky 's citizens volunteered for military service . Owsley 's popularity declined sharply when he attempted to remove Benjamin Hardin as Secretary of State . Hardin successfully challenged his removal in court , then resigned in protest of Owsley 's actions and charged him with practicing nepotism in his appointments . After his term as governor , Owsley never again sought public office . He died December 9 , 1862 and was buried in <unk> Cemetery in Danville , Kentucky . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Owsley was born March 24 , 1782 in Virginia . He was the third of thirteen children born to William and Catherine ( Bolin ) Owsley . Owsley was a first cousin to U.S. Representative Bryan Owsley , whose father Anthony was the elder William Owsley 's brother . In 1783 , his family relocated to Lincoln County , Kentucky , settling between the settlements of Crab Orchard and Stanford . He was of English ancestry . Owsley was dedicated to his studies in the public schools of the area , and obtained a better education than most of his peers . On March 30 , 1802 , he was appointed adjutant of the 26th Regiment of the Kentucky Militia . 
 For a time , Owsley taught at a country school , and in 1803 , he married Elizabeth Gill , one of his students . Gill was almost seventeen ; Owsley was twenty @-@ one . The couple had six children . During his time as a teacher , Owsley also studied surveying and eventually became a deputy surveyor . Later , he served as a deputy sheriff under his father , who was High Sheriff of Lincoln County . While in this capacity , he attracted the attention of John Boyle , who offered Owsley the use of his library . Owsley availed himself of this opportunity , and read law with Boyle . In 1809 , Owsley opened a legal practice in Garrard County . 
 = = Kentucky Court of Appeals = = 
 Owsley 's political career began in 1809 when he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives , serving one term . Governor Charles Scott appointed him to the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1810 , where he served alongside his teacher , John Boyle . Soon after Owsley 's appointment , the legislature reduced the number of justices on the court , and Owsley resigned his seat . He was elected to the state House again in 1811 . When a vacancy on the Court of Appeals occurred in 1813 , Governor Isaac Shelby re @-@ appointed Owsley to the court . 
 One of the court 's most crucial decisions during Owsley 's tenure was in the case of Commonwealth of Kentucky v. James Morrison , which held that the Bank of the United States did not have the right to establish branches in Kentucky . The Supreme Court of the United States later overturned this ruling . 
 A second important decision in which Owsley was a participant was the case of Blair , etc. v. Williams , which invalidated the Kentucky <unk> Act of 1820 . This law granted debtors a two @-@ year grace period in repaying their debts unless their creditors would accept notes from the Bank of Kentucky . Owsley and his colleagues opined that this law was in violation of the Contract Clause of the U.S. Constitution . The decision was extremely unpopular with the Commonwealth 's citizens , but it was re @-@ affirmed by the court 's opinion in the related case of Lapsley v. <unk> and Barr . 
 Following these decisions , the General Assembly attempted to remove all three justices from their positions , but lacked the two @-@ thirds majority required for impeachment . The Assembly then attempted to abolish the Court of Appeals and create a new one , beginning the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . The members of the existing court – Owsley , John Boyle , and Benjamin Mills – continued functioning in that role , while a new court of four pro @-@ relief justices was organized by the legislature . For a time , both courts claimed to be the court of last resort in Kentucky , but by 1826 , supporters of the Old Court won control of the legislature and abolished the New Court . 
 Having seen the court through the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy , Chief Justice Boyle resigned in 1826 . In December 1828 , Mills and Owsley also resigned . Their resignations were an attempt to silence criticism from the defeated New Court faction that they held their seats in defiance of the will of the people . Old Court supporters hoped both men would be re @-@ nominated and re @-@ confirmed by the legislature , making the New Court 's charge less credible . Accordingly , newly elected governor Thomas Metcalfe submitted both men to the legislature for confirmation , but the nominations were defeated in the state senate . Thus ended Owsley 's tenure on the court . It was , at the time , the longest tenure of any Court of Appeals justice except John Boyle . Owsley returned to his legal practice , and his case load soon compelled him to move to Frankfort . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 Owsley returned to the state House in 1831 , and served in the state senate from 1832 to 1834 . He also served as a presidential elector for Henry Clay in 1833 . When James Turner Morehead ascended to the governorship upon the death of John Breathitt , he appointed Owsley Secretary of State for his shortened term from 1834 to 1836 . In 1843 , Owsley retired from the practice of law and purchased a farm in Boyle County . 
 In 1844 , Owsley was elected governor on the Whig ticket , defeating Democrat William O. Butler by a vote of 59 @,@ 792 to 55 @,@ 089 . A fiscal conservative , Owsley reduced the state 's deficit slightly , and was reluctant to rebuild the state penitentiary , which was damaged by fire . Despite his reluctance to spend , he urged the General Assembly to increase funding for public education . " Nothing but money will do it , " proclaimed Owsley , " and it is left to the appropriate department – the legislature – to determine on the expediency or <unk> of raising it . " In response , the Assembly passed only a small tax to benefit public education . Education made progress during Owsley 's tenure , largely due to his appointment of Robert J. Breckinridge as public school superintendent in 1847 . Breckinridge is credited as the architect of Kentucky 's antebellum educational system . 
 In 1845 , Secretary of War William L. Marcy requested that Kentucky provide militiamen to bolster Zachary Taylor 's forces in the new state of Texas . Owsley all but refused the request , but when word of Marcy 's request reached the citizens of the state , they volunteered in great numbers and rushed to reinforce Taylor . Owsley was similarly lethargic in responding to Marcy 's call for troops for service in the Mexican – American War . He joined fellow Kentucky Whigs John J. Crittenden and Henry Clay in deriding the conflict as " Mr. Polk 's War " . However , postal workers in the state opened Marcy 's letter before delivering it to Owsley and had spread the word that the federal government had once again requested troops . By the time Owsley made the formal call for volunteers on May 22 , 1846 , an entire regiment of Kentucky troops had already been organized . Despite his personal opposition to the war , Owsley boasted in his report to Marcy that the Commonwealth had raised 13 @,@ 700 volunteers , more than five times the number requested of him . 
 Later , Owsley 's tenure would be marred by a conflict with Benjamin Hardin , his Secretary of State . Hardin believed that by supporting Owsley in the gubernatorial election , he would obtain some influence in Owsley 's choices for other appointments . Tensions between Hardin and Owsley worsened as Hardin became increasingly frustrated with his lack of influence . On September 1 , 1846 , Owsley removed Hardin from his cabinet , charging that Hardin had abandoned his duties because he did not reside in Frankfort . Hardin challenged this premise for his removal , and when Owsley nominated George B. Kinkead to replace Hardin , the state senate voted 30 — 8 that no vacancy existed . The Kentucky Court of Appeals upheld this decision . <unk> , Hardin then resigned , charging Owsley with practicing nepotism . In the Kentucky Constitution of 1850 , the governor was stripped of his power to remove the Secretary of State from office . 
 Following his term as governor , Owsley retired to his farm in Danville , Kentucky , where he lived until the death of his wife in 1858 . After this , he lived with his children until he died December 9 , 1862 . He is buried at <unk> Cemetery in Danville . Owsley County , Kentucky is named in his honor . Pleasant Retreat , his home in Garrard County during his early political career , is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Bianca Ryan = 
 Bianca Taylor Ryan ( born September 1 , 1994 ) is an American singer , songwriter , musician and actress from Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Ryan was the first winner of NBC 's America 's Got Talent at the age of eleven . She auditioned for Talent in 2006 and amazed the judges with her big voice . Singing two Broadway show tunes along the way , Ryan was announced as the winner of season one on August 17 . Her eponymous first album was released later in 2006 , followed by two Christmas albums . Two singles followed in 2007 and 2010 ; also in 2010 , she made an acting appearance in a music video by The Wrecking . The video for her first new release in four years , a cover of the John Legend song " All of Me " , was posted to her YouTube channel in March 2014 . Her original song " Alice " was self @-@ released in May 2015 . 
 In 2012 , Ryan joined the cast of the independent film We Are Kings , portraying one of two down @-@ on @-@ their @-@ luck teen musicians who are guided by an angel to save an elder bluesman from freezing to death . The film premiered in September 2014 , and the video for her single " Broken Down House " was released in October . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bianca Ryan is the second of five children of Shawn and Janette Ryan , who moved from New Jersey to Philadelphia when Bianca was three years old . Her father , a fan of The Rolling Stones , named her after Mick Jagger 's ex @-@ wife . She has an older brother , Shawn , and three younger siblings , Isabella , Jagger and Evangelina . Ryan is " mostly " Irish and calls herself a mix of Japanese , Irish , Italian , German and Cherokee . " I 'm basically just America ... the melting pot . " 
 Ryan 's singing talent came as something of a surprise to her family , given that she was an award @-@ winning tap dancer as a child . Ryan said she did not even attempt to sing until she was eight years old and started enjoying LeAnn Rimes and country music . Shawn Ryan started sharing his record collection with his daughter , and Bianca " fell in love " with rhythm and blues and soul music . She convinced him to take her to an audition for Star Search , where her performance of " Think " impressed the judges and shocked her father . " I 'd never heard her sing like that . " During the Junior Singers competition , Bianca Ryan lost to <unk> Baker . Ryan later won Amateur Kids Night on Showtime at the Apollo . 
 Ryan has sung the Star @-@ Spangled Banner for several professional sports teams , including the Philadelphia Eagles , the New York Knicks and its Westchester affiliate , and the New York Mets . 
 = = America 's Got Talent = = 
 In 2006 , Ryan learned that American Idol judge Simon Cowell was serving as executive producer for an upcoming competition titled America 's Got Talent , and the tryouts in New York were happening on the same day as a family outing in the city . Ryan almost left without performing when she looked at the other contestants and saw a lady with a beard " probably about , like , two feet long , " juggling torches . She decided to stay when her father told her the grand prize was US $ 1 million . For her televised audition , she chose the Dreamgirls show tune " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " , surprising the audience and the judges with her powerful voice . The video of her audition performance quickly became popular on YouTube . 
 For the semi @-@ finals of the show Ryan performed " Piece of My Heart " . The judges praised her performance , but they did not think the song was right for Ryan . She rebounded for her finals performance , singing " I Am Changing " ( also from Dreamgirls ) ; judge David Hasselhoff called her " the best " in the competition , while Piers Morgan predicted she would win . During the finale results aired on August 17 , 2006 , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Bianca Ryan was announced by emcee Regis Philbin as the winner of season one of America 's Got Talent . 
 Ryan made a brief appearance during the show 's season two finale in 2007 . In a video recorded during Live Nation 's <unk> tour , she wished good luck to the top two finalists . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = 2006 – 09 : Bianca Ryan and holiday albums = = = = 
 One week after her victory , Ryan announced on her website that she had flown to New York to meet with representatives from a record label and some of the recording industry 's top songwriters . The Northeast Times reported the same day that Ryan met with Grammy Award @-@ winning producer David Foster and was being managed by Peter Rudge . 
 Ryan signed a five @-@ album record deal with SYCOmusic as part of Columbia Records on September 18 , 2006 . She was the first U.S. artist to sign with SYCOmusic ; during the press conference , Simon Cowell called Ryan " potentially one of the best singers I have ever heard in my life . " The following month , Ryan was in Los Angeles to record her first CD . The self @-@ titled debut was released on November 14 , 2006 , featuring cover versions of " The Rose " and " I Believe I Can Fly " , and original songs like " I Wish That " and " Pray for a Better Day " . Eight days later , the album debuted at No. 57 on the Billboard album charts , showcasing " her gargantuan chops and sweet charm " . Matt Collar of AllMusic added that the arrangements were " grandiose " for someone of Ryan 's age , but they were " more than matched by her truly impressive vocal talent . " Los Angeles Daily News reviewer Sandra Barrera wrote that Ryan handled the songs " like the old pro that her big , powerful voice makes you think she is " . 
 One month later , the EP Christmas Everyday ! was released as a promotional giveaway . She then joined several artists in a televised 2006 Christmas performance for President George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush at the National Building Museum to benefit the Children 's National Medical Center . 
 Ryan 's first concert tour took her across the United States as the special guest artist for <unk> in 2007 . That August , she released the single " That 's Not Me " . 
 In 2008 , Ryan left SYCOmusic / Columbia Records ; she released her second holiday @-@ themed EP , True Meaning of Christmas , on November 3 , 2009 , on the indie Music Forever label . This second collection , co @-@ written with Anthony Marinelli and Siedah Garrett , included updated versions of " The Christmas Song " and " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ; the title track featured a duet with gospel pop singer Brent Jones . 
 = = = = 2010 – present : Singles , videos and upcoming EP = = = = 
 In 2010 , Bianca Ryan wrote and recorded a song inspired by Twilight : New Moon called " In My Head " . The single was released digitally on August 21 through the indie label Tuned In Music and Media , followed by performances at Trump Plaza in Atlantic City , New Jersey . 
 Ryan was asked in October 2012 about the differences between her debut album and her future projects . She said she didn 't get to choose what songs went on her first CD , and while the experience she gained by working with people like David Foster and Kara DioGuardi was amazing , " I didn 't feel like it was really me . ... You can relate to songs that you write . " Ryan spent much of her teen years out of the spotlight . She explained in 2014 that she had put her career on hold to go back to school even though , as it turned out , she hated high school — besides " a couple of stalkers " , she was mostly ignored by other students and didn 't make any friends until after school was over . Nevertheless , she " wanted to live a life , and have purpose and things to write about " due to her passion for writing music . Ryan told <unk> in February that she was working with industry veterans like Quincy Jones on a new EP featuring her own work , which she called more " mainstream " than anything she had written before . Ryan described her musical style as a blend of neo soul , R & B and pop . 
 She also went back to work on her YouTube channel in 2014 . Her cover of " All of Me " was uploaded in March . 
 In 2015 , Ryan created a music video for " Alice " , an original song she had written years earlier . The video was funded in part by a Kickstarter project and was self @-@ released in May 2015 . It features dancer Chloe Lukasiak , who called the video her favorite project since leaving Dance Moms . The single was released via Ryan 's own label through iTunes , Google Play and <unk> . Her cover of " God Bless the Child " was released on iTunes in July . 
 Ryan plans to go on tour in support of her upcoming EP . She was a featured performer at the <unk> Music and Arts Festival in Mount Holly , New Jersey , in August 2015 . Performances in November included the Macy 's Christmas Window unveiling and the <unk> / Dunkin ' Donuts Thanksgiving Parade , both in Philadelphia . 
 = = = Acting = = = 
 Ryan made several early attempts to be an actress , trying out unsuccessfully for such projects as Camp Rock and Hannah Montana . She made her acting debut in a walk @-@ off appearance in the 2005 film 12 and Holding ; her character is shown at a school function singing the final line of " Oh ! Susanna " , thanking the audience , and leaving the stage . She returned to acting five years later , playing the lead role in the music video for " About to Fall " by The Wrecking . 
 In 2012 , Ryan joined the cast of We Are Kings , an independent , crowdsourced feature film . She portrayed one of two homeless musicians who join up with a runaway rapper to help an elder bluesman raise the money he needs to save his comatose wife and their repossessed blues club . Ryan and her co @-@ stars wrote their own original songs for We Are Kings . Her first single from the film , " Broken Down House " , was released in November 2014 . 
 Upon the film 's release , LA Weekly called Ryan , Long and Pryce " so bursting with talent that it 's impossible to pick a favorite " while the Los Angeles Times looked past the " discordant " acting to praise the " palpable , soulful authenticity " of the music . " I could use an acting coach , " Ryan admitted , " but , see , I 'm honest . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums and EPs = = = 
 Bianca Ryan ( 2006 ) 
 Christmas Everyday ! [ sic ] ( 2006 , 2007 ) 
 True Meaning of Christmas ( 2009 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Mary Wittenberg = 
 Mary Wittenberg ( née Robertson ) was the President and Chief Executive Officer of New York Road Runners ( NYRR ) through May 18 , 2015 . Wittenberg oversaw the TCS New York City Marathon and several other races , events , and programs that draw over 300 @,@ 000 yearly participants . 
 Under Wittenberg 's leadership , NYRR helped develop new initiatives such as the World Marathon Majors Series and several community programs that have introduced running to underprivileged children . For her efforts related to the TCS New York City Marathon , an article in the New York Times stated that Wittenberg " has transformed the New York City Marathon from traditional to competitive to innovative . " 
 A former competitive runner , Wittenberg won the 1987 Marine Corps Marathon . She participates in many NYRR races . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Wittenberg was born in Buffalo , New York , and raised in a large and athletic Irish Catholic family . She was the oldest of seven children , and played softball , baseball and basketball — sports that her father coached . In high school , she focused on cheerleading , and also starred on a champion West Side Rowing Club team . Wittenberg went on to attend Canisius College , and was a coxswain for the men 's crew team that won a championship for small colleges . 
 During her senior year in College , Wittenberg took up running . She won a few local races and trained with Canisius ' men 's cross country team . Wittenberg also trained with the men 's cross country team while attending law school at University of Notre Dame . While training with this group , she finished 16th at the Chicago Marathon with a time of 2 : 46 . 
 After law school , Wittenberg moved to Richmond , Virginia to work for the Hunton & Williams law firm . She would spend busy days working in the office , marathon training with the University of Richmond cross country team , and studying to pass the bar . In 1987 , she won the Marine Corps Marathon in a time of 2 : 44 : 34 . Wittenberg used a late surge to overtake the leaders in the second half of the race . 
 Wittenberg 's strong performance at the Marine Corps Marathon qualified her for the 1988 Olympic marathon trials . However , she soon required surgery for a knee injury , and a back ailment forced her to drop out of the qualifying race . Wittenberg ran in only two more marathons due to injuries and a focus on her law career . 
 = = New York Road Runners = = 
 = = = CEO = = = 
 In the early 1990s , Wittenberg worked as an attorney who specialized in international trade deals for U.S. banks . In 1994 , her firm transferred her to New York City . It was there that she was made a partner for her law firm . However , in 1998 Wittenberg opted for a career change , as she wanted to devote time to start a family . 
 Despite taking a significant pay cut , Wittenberg began work for New York Road Runners as Vice President and Chief Operating Officer . Her initial responsibilities ranged from overseeing NYRR publications to administering membership and race scoring . She helped secure the deal that made ING a title sponsor for the race . In 2005 , Wittenberg was named President and Chief Executive of NYRR , and became the first female director of a major international marathon . NYRR administers the TCS New York City Marathon . 
 Under Wittenberg 's leadership , a significant change was made for women <unk> to receive more prize money than their male counterparts . NYRR 's budget has increased significantly , as has the viewership for the TCS New York City Marathon . NYRR and Wittenberg also administered the 2008 U.S. Men 's Marathon Olympic Trials . During this event , former collegiate star Ryan Shay suffered a heart attack and died while competing in the race . Wittenberg 's sensitive handling of the tragic news at the post @-@ race press conference was cited as an example of her " class and compassion " . 
 = = = Running = = = 
 While CEO of NYRR , Wittenberg spearheaded innovative programs to increase running 's popularity as a spectator sport . The NYRR has partnered with five other major marathons ( London , Boston , Berlin , Chicago and Tokyo ) to create the World Marathon Majors Series . Runners compete in these races to earn a cumulative standing , similar to NASCAR 's Sprint Cup . 
 NYRR also provides financial support for the USA Distance Project , which is composed of training groups throughout the country for post @-@ collegiate distance runners . As of November 2009 , the NYRR have donated $ 750 @,@ 000 to the Distance Project in a three @-@ year span . After <unk> Keflezighi 's victory and five other American men finishing in the top ten of the 2009 New York Marathon , Wittenberg was very optimistic about the future of U.S. men 's distance running . She said " I think this is just the start of delivering on the day " and " this has been a long time coming . " Wittenberg and NYRR 's financial support efforts for U.S. distance running was also noted after Keflezighi 's victory . NYRR is also a prominent supporter of National Running Day , which is dedicated to celebrate and promote the sport . 
 = = = Community = = = 
 Wittenberg expanded NYRR 's presence in the community by providing running classes for various levels of runners , establishing running programs for children through the NYRR Foundation , and setting up an online coaching network . Wittenberg is also involved with programs to prevent childhood obesity , and was a guest of Michelle Obama 's at the White House for the President 's Task Force on Childhood Obesity . The New York Daily News wrote in an article , " Wittenberg is emphatic in her conviction that her job isn 't just to put on top pro races , but to cultivate healthy living and be a force for good in the community . " The many programs , events and races that the NYRR administers draws more than 300 @,@ 000 yearly participants . 
 = = = In the media = = = 
 NYRR has received some attention for the high entry and application fees for the New York City Marathon . In 2009 , the entry fee was raised , for both NYRR members and non @-@ members , making it most expensive premium marathon in the United States . Also , there have been complaints about a non @-@ refundable fee for those who merely apply to gain entry to the race . Wittenberg said that the application fee is necessary due to the weak economy and to ensure commitment from those applying . 
 After both the Men 's and Women 's 2012 Olympic Trials were awarded to Houston , Wittenberg expressed surprise and frustration with the USATF 's process of picking a host city . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Wittenberg has received notable praise for her work at NYRR . Deena Kastor , an American record holder and Olympic Bronze medalist in the Marathon , said of Wittenberg : " In a very short amount of time , she has made so many positive changes in this sport " . <unk> Flanagan , also an American record holder and an Olympic Bronze Medalist in the 10 @,@ 000 m , commented " What Phil Knight is to Nike , Mary is to distance running . " Olympic Sportswriter Philip Hersh was so impressed with Wittenberg 's work with NYRR , he suggested that she be named CEO of USA Track and Field . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 NYRR holds over fifty races yearly , and though no longer a <unk> , Wittenberg participates in several of these races . In 2006 she competed in 18 races , and in 2007 , she ran 20 . Despite her busy schedule , she often runs and cross @-@ trains in Central Park , and starts the day of the New York Marathon with a pre @-@ dawn run . 
 Wittenberg lives in the Upper East Side of New York City , and is married with two sons . Her family attends St. Ignatius Loyola . 
 = Saints Row IV = 
 Saints Row IV is an open world action @-@ adventure video game in the Saints Row series developed by Volition and published by Deep Silver . The player @-@ character is the leader of the 3rd Street Saints , a street gang that has become the world 's most powerful and popular organization , and must fend off an alien invasion after becoming President of the United States and receiving superpowers . The player is free to explore their environment while completing main and side missions at their leisure . The game incorporates elements from science fiction video games and films , and continues the series ' reputation for over @-@ the @-@ top parody . It was released on August 20 , 2013 , for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 , and was later ported to PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Linux in 2015 . 
 The game was Volition 's first after its sale to Koch Media in early 2013 . The supernatural and superpower concept for the game started in Enter the Dominatrix , a cancelled expansion planned for Saints Row : The Third , which the team expanded into Saints Row IV . Volition later released a " director 's cut " of Enter the Dominatrix as downloadable content for Saints Row IV alongside How the Saints Saved Christmas , other weapons , costumes , and vehicle packs , and a standalone expansion , Saints Row : Gat out of Hell ( which serves as the epilogue to the story ) . Saints Row IV received several limited and summative edition releases , and was briefly banned in Australia . 
 Reviewers praised Saints Row IV 's humor and character customization options , but criticized its lack of challenge . It sold over one million copies in its first week , though cumulative sales figures have not been released . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Similar to previous Saints Row series games , Saints Row IV is an open world action game with third @-@ person shooter elements wherein the player is free to explore the environment and , at their leisure , play story or side missions . As the leader of the Saints , a street gang that has become the world 's most " powerful and popular " organization , the player is elected President of the United States , receives superpowers , and fends off an alien invasion . Most often the player will engage in shooting and racing activities , though other activities vary from fighting crowds of zombies , shoot @-@ outs in tanks , side @-@ scrolling brawlers , fights against supersized , <unk> energy drink cans , and using a dubstep gun to interrupt 1950s Americana . The player @-@ character receives elemental powers and superpowers that greatly increase their jump height and running speed , such that the player can hop over buildings and outrun vehicles . The elemental powers include abilities to shoot fire and ice projectiles , telekinetically toss things , and create shockwaves upon landing jumps . As the player progresses through the game , they can optionally upgrade their abilities and weapons skill tree by using collectible " data clusters " scattered around town . If the player becomes too rowdy , the alien race 's police analogue will intervene . As in previous games , the player @-@ character 's look and feel is entirely customizable via a robust character editor feature . 
 The game is set in a nearly identical simulation of Steelport , the fictional city setting from Saints Row : The Third , though individual story missions have new , custom @-@ designed levels . Saints Row IV 's story parodies science fiction video games , especially Mass Effect 2 , as well as films like The Matrix and Zero Dark Thirty , and other " nerd culture " . Some story missions are propelled by individual characters ' existential crises , as each Saint character is stuck in a personal simulation of their own hell , and must be rescued by the player . Other elements borrowed from video game culture include BioWare @-@ style character romances games and a Metal Gear @-@ style mission with an unhelpful partner . 
 City districts are " liberated " from alien occupation as the player completes side missions in occupied districts . Liberated districts increase the player 's hourly income , which can be spent on weapons , skills , and perks . Side missions include Insurance Fraud ( where the player jumps into traffic to collect insurance money ) , demolition derby @-@ style Mayhem , and superpowered foot races . Saints Row IV has a two @-@ player cooperative mode . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
