 = = = King St Stephen ( 1000 – 1038 ) = = = 
 Stephen was crowned the first king of Hungary on either December 25 , 1000 , or January 1 , 1001 . He consolidated his rule through a series of wars against semi @-@ independent local rulers , including his maternal uncle , Gyula . He proved his kingdom 's military strength when he repelled an invasion by Conrad II , Holy Roman Emperor , in 1030 . <unk> , other natural obstacles , and barricades made of stone , earth or timber provided defense at the kingdom 's borders . A wide zone known as <unk> was intentionally left uninhabited for defensive purposes along the frontiers . Most of the early medieval fortresses in Hungary were made of earth and timber . 
 Stephen I 's views on state administration were summarized around 1015 in a work known as Admonitions . Stating that " the country that has only one language and one custom is weak and fragile " , he emphasized the advantages of the arrival of foreigners , or " guests " . Stephen I developed a state similar to the monarchies of contemporary Western Europe . Counties , the basic units of administration , were districts organized around fortresses and headed by royal officials known as ispáns , or counts . Stephen I founded dioceses and at least one archbishopric , and established Benedictine monasteries . He prescribed that every tenth village was to build a parish church . The earliest churches of the 10th century were simple wood constructions , but the royal basilica at Székesfehérvár was built in Romanesque style . Stephen I 's laws were aimed at the adoption , even by force , of a Christian way of life . He especially protected Christian marriage against polygamy and other traditional customs . Decorated belts and other items of pagan fashion also disappeared . Commoners started to wear long woolen coats , but wealthy men persisted with their silk kaftans decorated with furs . 
 If any warrior debased by lewdness abducts a girl to be his wife without the consent of her parents , we decreed that the girl should be returned to her parents , even if he did anything by force to her , and the abductor shall pay ten steers for the abduction , although he may afterwards have made peace with the girl 's parents . 
 From a legal perspective , Hungarian society was divided into freemen and serfs , but intermediate groups also existed . All freemen had the legal capacity to own property , to sue and to be sued . However , most of them were bound to the monarch or to a wealthier landlord , and only " guests " could freely move . Among freemen living in lands attached to a fortress , the " castle warriors " served in the army , and the " castle folk " cultivated the lands , forged weapons or rendered other services . All freemen were to pay a special tax , the " pennies of freemen " to the monarchs . With a transitory status between freemen and serfs , peasants known as <unk> were exempt from it . <unk> theoretically lacked legal personality , but in practice they had their own property : they cultivated their masters ' land with their own tools , and kept 50 – 66 percent of the harvest for themselves . Stephen I 's laws and charters suggest that most commoners lived in sedentary communities which formed villages . An average village was made up of no more than 40 semi @-@ sunken timber huts with a corner hearth . Many of the villages were named after a profession , implying that the villagers were required to render a specific service to their lords . 
 = = = Pagan revolts , wars and consolidation ( 1038 – 1116 ) = = = 
 Stephen I survived his son , Emeric , which caused a four @-@ decade crisis . Stephen considered his cousin , Vazul , unsuitable for the throne and named his own sister 's son , the Venetian Peter Orseolo , as his heir . Vazul was blinded and his three sons were expelled , thus Peter succeeded his uncle without opposition in 1038 . However , Peter 's preference for his foreign courtiers led to a rebellion , which ended with his deposition in favor of a native lord , Samuel Aba , who was related to the royal family . Supported by Emperor Henry III , Peter Orseolo returned and expelled Samuel Aba in 1044 . During his second rule , he accepted the emperor 's suzerainty . His rule ended with a new rebellion , on this occasion aimed at the restoration of paganism . However , there were many lords who opposed the destruction of the Christian monarchy . They proposed the crown to Andrew , one of Vazul 's sons , who returned to Hungary , defeated Peter and suppressed the pagans in 1046 . His cooperation with his brother , Béla , a talented military commander , ensured the Hungarians ' victory over Emperor Henry III , who attempted to conquer the kingdom two times : in 1050 and 1053 . 
 A new civil war broke out when Duke Béla claimed the crown for himself in 1059 , but his three sons accepted the rule of Solomon , Andrew I 's son , in 1063 . Initially , the young king and his cousins cooperated ; for instance , they jointly defeated the Pechenegs plundering Transylvania in 1068 . The power conflict in the royal family caused a new civil war in 1071 . It lasted up to Solomon 's abdication in favor of one of his cousins , Ladislaus in the early 1080s . 
 King Ladislaus promulgated laws that prescribed draconian punishments against criminals . His laws also regulated the payment of customs duties , tolls payable at fairs and fords , and of the tithes . He forbade Jews from holding Christian serfs , and introduced laws aiming at the conversion of local Muslims , who were known as <unk> . 
 No one shall buy or sell except in the market . If , in violation of this anyone buys stolen property , everyone shall perish : the buyer , the seller , and the witnesses . If , however , they agreed to sell something of their own , they shall lose that thing and its price , and the witnesses shall lose as much too . But if the deal was made in the market , and agreement shall be concluded in front of a judge , a toll @-@ gatherer , and witnesses , and if the purchased goods later appear to be stolen , the buyer shall escape penalty ... 
 The death of Ladislaus ' brother @-@ in @-@ law , King Zvonimir of Croatia , in 1089 or 1090 created an opportunity for him to claim Croatia for himself . His troops soon occupied most of Croatia ; only a native claimant , Petar Svačić , resisted in the Petrova Mounts . Nevertheless , hereafter Croatia and Hungary remained closely connected for more than nine centuries . Ladislaus I appointed his nephew , Álmos , to administer Croatia . Although a younger son , Álmos was also favored against his brother , Coloman , when the king was thinking of his succession . Even so , Coloman succeeded his uncle in 1095 , while Álmos received a separate duchy under his brother 's suzerainty . Throughout Coloman 's reign , the brothers ' relationship remained tense , which finally led to the blinding of Álmos and his infant son . 
 Coloman routed two bands of crusaders who were plundering the Western borderlands and defeated Petar Svačić in Croatia . The late 14th @-@ century Pacta conventa states that Coloman was crowned king of Croatia after concluding an agreement with twelve local noblemen . Although most probably a forgery , the document reflects the actual status of Croatia proper , which was never incorporated into Hungary . In contrast , the region known as Slavonia , between the Petrova Mounts and the river Dráva , became closely connected to Hungary . Here many Hungarian noblemen received land grants from the monarchs . Zadar , Split and other Dalmatian towns also accepted Coloman 's suzerainty in 1105 , but their right to elect their own bishops and leaders remained unchained . In Croatia and Slavonia , the sovereign was represented by governors bearing the title ban . Likewise , a royal official , the voivode , administered Transylvania , the eastern borderland of the kingdom . 
 Like Ladislaus I , Coloman proved to be a great legislator , but he prescribed less severe punishments than his uncle had done . He ordered that transactions between Christians and Jews were to be put into writing . His laws concerning his Muslim subjects aimed at their conversion , for instance , by obliging them to marry their daughters to Christians . The presence of Jewish and Muslim merchants in the kingdom was due to its role as a crossroad of trading routes leading towards Constantinople , Regensburg and Kiev . Local trade also existed , which enabled Coloman to collect the <unk> , the traditional in @-@ kind tax of Slavonia , in cash . 
 The kingdom , with its average population density of four or five people per 1 square kilometre ( 0 @.@ 39 sq mi ) , was sparsely populated . The <unk> streets or districts in Eger , Pécs and Nagyvárad ( Oradea , Romania ) point at the presence of " guests " speaking a Western Romance language , while the <unk> and <unk> place names refer to German @-@ speaking colonists throughout the entire kingdom . Most subjects of the early medieval Hungarian monarchs were peasants . They only cultivated the most fertile lands , and moved further when the lands became exhausted . Wheat was the most widely produced crop , but barley , the raw material for home brew , was also grown . Animal husbandry remained an important sector of agriculture , thus millet and oats were produced for fodder . Fishing and hunting also contributed to nourishing , since even peasants were allowed to hunt in the royal forests that covered large territories in the kingdom . 
 = = = Colonisation and expansion ( 1116 – 1196 ) = = = 
 Unsuccessful wars with the Republic of Venice , the Byzantine Empire and other neighboring states characterized the reign of Coloman 's son , Stephen II , who succeeded his father in 1116 . The earliest mention of the Székelys is in connection with the young king 's first war against the Duchy of Bohemia . The Hungarian @-@ speaking Székelys lived in scattered communities along the borders , but their groups were moved to the easternmost regions of Transylvania in the 12th century . Stephen II died childless in 1131 . During the reign of the blind Béla II , the kingdom was administered by his wife , Helena of Rascia , who ordered the massacre of the lords who had opposed her husband 's rule . Boris Kalamanos , an alleged son of King Coloman , who attempted to seize the throne from Béla II , received no internal support . 
 Béla II 's son , Géza II , who ascended the throne in 1141 , adopted an active foreign policy . He supported Uroš II of Rascia against Emperor Manuel I Komnenos . He promoted the colonization of the border zones . Flemish , German , Italian , and Walloon " guests " arrived in great numbers and settled in the Szepesség region ( Spiš , Slovakia ) and in southern Transylvania . Géza even recruited Muslim warriors in the Pontic steppes to serve in his army . Abu Hamid , a Muslim traveler from Al @-@ Andaluz refers to mountains that " contain lots of silver and gold " , which points at the importance of mining and gold panning already around 1150 . 
 If anyone of the rank of count has even in a trivial matter offended against the king or , as sometimes happens , has been unjustly accused of this , an emissary from the court , though he be of very lowly station and unattended , seizes him in the midst of his retinue , puts him in chains , and drags him off to various forms of punishment . No formal sentence is asked of the prince through his peers , ... no opportunity of defending himself is granted the accused , but the will of the prince alone is held by all as sufficient . 
 Géza II was succeeded in 1162 by his eldest son , Stephen III . However , his uncles , Ladislaus II and Stephen IV , claimed the crown for themselves . Emperor Manuel I Komnenos took advantage of the internal conflicts and forced the young king to cede Dalmatia and the Szerémség region ( Srem , Serbia ) to the Byzantines in 1165 . Stephen III set an example for the development of towns by granting liberties to the Walloon " guests " in Székesfehérvár , including their immunity of the jurisdiction of the local ispán . 
 When Stephen III died childless in 1172 , his brother , Béla III , ascended the throne . He reconquered Dalmatia and the Szerémség in the 1180s . A contemporary list shows that more than 50 percent of his revenues derived from the annual renewal of the silver currency , and from tolls , ferries and markets . According to the list , his total income was the equivalent of 32 tonnes of silver per year , but this number is clearly exaggerated . Béla III emphasized the importance of making records on judicial proceedings , which substantiates reports in later Hungarian chronicles ' of his order regarding the obligatory use of written petitions . Landowners also started to put their transactions into writing , which led to the appearance of the so @-@ called " places of authentication " , such as cathedral chapters and monasteries authorized to issue deeds . Their emergence also evidences the employment of an educated staff . Indeed , students from the kingdom studied at the universities of Paris , Oxford , Bologna and Padua from the 1150s . 
 Aspects of 12th @-@ century French culture could also be detected in Béla III 's kingdom . His palace at Esztergom was built in the early Gothic style . Achilles and other names known from the Legend of Troy and the Romance of Alexander ( two emblematic works of chivalric culture ) were also popular among Hungarian aristocrats . According to a scholarly view , " Master P " , the author of the Gesta Hungarorum , a chronicle on the Hungarian " land @-@ taking " , was Béla III 's notary . 
 = = Development of the Estates of the realm = = 
 = = = Age of Golden Bulls ( 1196 – 1241 ) = = = 
 Béla III 's son and successor , Emeric , had to face revolts stirred up by his younger brother , Andrew . Furthermore , incited by Enrico Dandolo , Doge of Venice , the armies of the Fourth Crusade took Zadar in 1202 . Emeric was succeeded in 1204 by his infant son , Ladislaus III . When the young king died in a year , his uncle , Andrew , mounted the throne . Stating that " the best measure of a royal grant is its being immeasurable " , he distributed large parcels of royal lands among his partisans . Freemen living in former royal lands lost their direct contact to the sovereign , which threatened their legal status . Royal revenues decreased , which led to the introduction of new taxes and their farming out to Muslims and Jews . 
 Andrew II was strongly influenced by his wife , Gertrude of Merania . She openly expressed her preference for her German compatriots , which caused her assassination by a group of local lords in 1213 . A new uprising broke out while the king was in the Holy Land on his crusade in 1217 and 1218 . Finally , a movement of the royal servants , who were actually free landholders directly subordinated to the sovereign , obliged Andrew II to issue his Golden Bull in 1222 . It summarized the royal servants ' liberties , including their tax exemption . Its last provision authorized the secular and spiritual lords to " resist and speak against " the sovereign " without the charge of high treason " . The Golden Bull also prohibited the employment of Muslims and Jews in royal administration . This ban was confirmed when Andrew II , urged by the prelates , issued the Golden Bull 's new variant in 1231 , which authorized the archbishop of Esztergom to excommunicate him in case of his departure from its provisions . For non @-@ Christians who continued to be employed in the royal household , Archbishop Robert of Esztergom placed the kingdom under interdict in 1232 . Andrew II was forced to take an oath , which included his promise to respect the privileged position of clergymen and to dismiss all his Jewish and Muslim officials . A growing intolerance against non @-@ Catholics is also demonstrated by the transfer of the Orthodox monastery of Visegrád to the Benedictines in 1221 . 
 Andrew II made several attempts to occupy the neighboring Principality of Halych . His son , Béla , persuaded a group of Cumans to accept Andrew II 's suzerainty in 1228 and established a new march in Oltenia ( known as the Banate of Szörény ) in 1231 . Béla IV succeeded his father in 1235 . His attempt to reacquire crown lands alienated by his predecessors created a deep rift between the monarch and the lords just as the Mongols were sweeping westward across the Eurasian steppes . 
 The king was first informed of the Mongol threat by Friar Julian , a Dominican monk who had visited a Hungarian @-@ speaking population in Magna Hungaria , in 1235 . In the next years , the Mongols routed the Cumans who dominated the western parts of the Eurasian steppes . A Cuman chieftain , <unk> , agreed to accept Béla IV 's supremacy ; thus he and his people were allowed to settle in the Great Hungarian Plain . However , the Cumans ' nomadic lifestyle caused many conflicts with local communities . The locals even considered them as the Mongols ' allies . 
 = = = Mongol invasion ( 1241 – 1242 ) = = = 
 Batu Khan , who was the commander of the Mongol armies invading Eastern Europe , demanded Béla IV 's surrender without a fight in 1240 . The king refused , and ordered his barons to assemble with their retinue in his camp at Pest . Here , a riot broke out against the Cumans and the mob massacred the Cuman leader , <unk> . The Cumans soon departed and pillaged the central parts of the kingdom . The main Mongol army arrived through the northeastern passes of the Carpathian Mountains in March 1241 . Royal troops met the enemy forces at the river Sajó , where the Mongols won a decisive victory in the battle of Mohi on April 11 , 1241 . From the battlefield , Béla IV fled first to Austria , where Duke Frederick II held him for ransom . Thereafter , the king and his family found refuge in Klis Fortress in Dalmatia . The Mongols first occupied and thoroughly plundered the territories east of the river Danube . They crossed the river when it was frozen in early 1242 . A contemporary account by Abbot Hermann of Niederalteich stated that " the Kingdom of Hungary , which had existed for 350 years , was destroyed " . 
 [ The Mongols ] " burnt the church " [ in Nagyvárad ( Oradea , Romania ) ] " , together with the women and whatever there was in the church . In other churches they perpetrated such crimes to the women that it is better to keep silent ... Then they ruthlessly beheaded the nobles , citizens , soldiers and canons on a field outside the city . ... After they had destroyed everything , and an intolerable stench arose from the corpses , they left the place empty . People hiding in the nearby forests came back to find some food . And while they were searching among the stones and the corpses , the " [ Mongols ] " suddenly returned and of those living whom they found there , none was left alive . 
 However , the kingdom did not cease to exist . Batu Khan withdrew his entire army when he was informed of the death of the Great Khan , Ögödei in March 1242 . Nevertheless , the invasion and the famine that followed it had catastrophic demographic consequences . At least 15 percent of the population died or disappeared . Transcontinental trading routes disintegrated , causing the decline of Bács ( Bač , Serbia ) , Ungvár ( Uzhhorod , Ukraine ) and other traditional centers of commerce . Local Muslim communities also disappeared , indicating they had suffered especially heavy losses during the invasion . 
 = = = Last <unk> ( 1242 – 1301 ) = = = 
 After the Mongol withdrawal , Béla IV abandoned his policy of recovering former crown lands . Instead , he granted large estates to his supporters , and urged them to construct stone @-@ and @-@ mortar castles . He initiated a new wave of colonization that resulted in the arrival of a number of Germans , Moravians , Poles , and Romanians . The king re @-@ invited the Cumans and settled them in the plains along the Danube and the Tisza . A group of Alans , the ancestors of the <unk> people , seems to have settled in the kingdom around the same time . 
 New villages appeared , consisting of timber houses built side by side in equal parcels of land . For instance , the settlement network of the so far scarcely inhabited forests of the Western Carpathians ( in present @-@ day Slovakia ) began to develop under Béla IV . Huts disappeared , and new rural houses consisting of a living room , a kitchen and a pantry were built . The most advanced agricultural techniques , including asymmetric heavy ploughs , also spread throughout the kingdom . 
 Internal migration was likewise instrumental in the development of the new domains emerging in former royal lands . The new landholders granted personal freedom and more favorable financial conditions to those who arrived in their estates , which also enabled the peasants who decided not to move to improve their position . Béla IV granted privileges to more than a dozen towns , including Nagyszombat ( Trnava , Slovakia ) and Pest . 
 Although threatening letters sent to Béla IV by the khans of the Golden Horde proved that the danger of a new Mongol invasion still existed , he adopted an expansionist foreign policy . Frederick II of Austria died fighting against Hungarian troops in 1246 , and Béla IV 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Rostislav Mikhailovich , annexed large territories along the kingdom 's southern frontiers . However , conflicts between the elderly monarch and his heir , Stephen , caused a civil war in the 1260s . 
 Béla IV and his son jointly confirmed the liberties of the royal servants , hereafter known as noblemen in 1267 . By that time , " true noblemen " were legally differentiated from other landholders . They held their estates free from any obligation , but everybody else ( even the ecclesiastic nobles , Romanian cneazes and other " conditional nobles " ) owed services to their lords in exchange for the lands they held . In a growing number of counties , local nobility acquired the right to elect four or two " judges of the nobles " to represent them in official procedures . The idea of equating the Hungarian " nation " with the community of noblemen also emerged in this period . It was first expressed in Simon of Kéza 's Gesta Hungarorum , a chronicle written in the 1280s . 
 The wealthiest landholders forced the lesser nobles to join their retinue , which increased their power . One of the barons , Joachim of the Gutkeled clan , even captured Stephen V 's heir , the infant Ladislaus , in 1272 . Stephen V died some months later , causing a new civil war between the Csák , Kőszegi , and other leading families who attempted to control the central government in the name of the young Ladislaus IV . He was declared to be of age in 1277 at an assembly of the spiritual and temporal lords and of the noblemen 's and Cumans ' representatives , but he could not strengthen royal authority . Ladislaus IV , whose mother , Elisabeth , was a Cuman chieftain 's daughter , preferred his Cuman kin , which made him unpopular . He was even accused of initiating a second Mongol invasion in 1285 , although the invaders were routed by the royal troops . 
 When Ladislaus IV was murdered in 1290 , the Holy See declared the kingdom a vacant fief and granted it to his sister 's son , Charles Martel , crown prince of the Kingdom of Naples . However , the majority of the Hungarian lords chose Andrew , the grandson of Andrew II , even though his father 's legitimacy was dubious . Andrew became the first monarch to take an oath on respecting the liberties of the Church and the nobility before his coronation . He regularly convoked the prelates , the lords and the noblemen 's representatives to assemblies known as Diets , which started to develop into a legislative body . However , the kingdom disintegrated into autonomous provinces , each ruled by powerful noblemen ( including Matthew Csák , Ladislaus Kán , and Amadeus Aba ) who ignored the king 's authority . The powerful Croatian lord , Paul I Šubić of Bribir , even dared to invite the late Charles Martel 's son , the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Charles Robert , to Hungary in 1300 . The young pretender was marching from Croatia towards Buda when Andrew III unexpectedly died on January 14 , 1301 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With Andrew III 's death , the male line of the House of Árpád became extinct , and a period of anarchy began . Charles Robert was crowned king with a provisional crown , but most lords and bishops refused to yield to him because they regarded him as a symbol of the Holy See 's attempts to control Hungary . They elected king the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Wenceslaus of Bohemia , who was descended from Béla IV of Hungary in the female line . However , the young king could not consolidate his position because many lords , especially those who held domains in the southern region of the kingdom , continued to support Charles Robert . Wenceslaus left Hungary for Bohemia in the summer of 1304 . After he inherited Bohemia in 1305 , he abandoned his claim to Hungary in favor of Otto III , Duke of Bavaria . 
 Otto , who was a grandson of Béla IV of Hungary , was crowned king , but only the Kőszegis and the Transylvanian Saxons regarded him as the lawful monarch . He was captured in Transylvania by Ladislaus Kán , who forced him to leave Hungary . The majority of the lords and prelates elected Charles Robert king at a Diet on October 10 , 1307 . He was crowned king with the Holy Crown of Hungary in Székesfehérvár by the Archbishop of Esztergom , as it was required by customary law , on August 27 , 1310 . During the next decade , he launched a series of military campaigns against the oligarchs to restore royal authority . Charles Robert reunited the kingdom after the death of the most powerful lord , <unk> Csák , which enabled him to conquer Csák 's large province in the northeast of Hungary in 1321 . 
 = Third Perso @-@ Turkic War = 
 The Third Perso @-@ Turkic War was the third and final conflict between the Sassanian Empire and the Western Turkic Khaganate . Unlike the previous two wars , it was not fought in Central Asia , but in Transcaucasia . Hostilities were initiated in 627 AD by Khagan Tong Yabghu of the Western Göktürks and Emperor Heraclius of the Eastern Roman Empire . Opposing them were the Sassanid Persians , allied with the Pannonian Avars . The war was fought against the background of the last Byzantine @-@ Sassanid War and served as a prelude to the dramatic events that changed the balance of powers in the Middle East for centuries to come ( Battle of Nineveh , Islamic conquest of Persia ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the First Siege of Constantinople by the Avars and Persians , the beleaguered Byzantine Emperor Heraclius found himself politically isolated . He could not rely on the Christian Armenian potentates of Transcaucasia , since they were branded as heretics by the Orthodox Church , and even the king of Iberia preferred to befriend the religiously tolerant Persians . Against this dismal background , he found a natural ally in Tong Yabghu . Earlier in 568 , the Turks under <unk> had turned to Byzantium when their relations with Persia soured over commerce issues . 
 In 625 , Heraclius dispatched to the steppes his emissary , named Andrew , who promised to the Khagan some " staggering riches " in return for military aid . The khagan , on his part , was anxious to secure the Chinese @-@ Byzantine trade along the Silk Route , which had been disrupted by the Persians in the aftermath of the Second Perso @-@ Turkic War . He sent word to the Emperor that " I shall take revenge on your enemies and will come with my valiant troops to your help " . A unit of 1 @,@ 000 horsemen fought their way through Persian Transcaucasia and delivered the Khagan 's message to the Byzantine camp in Anatolia . 
 = = Siege of Derbent = = 
 Early in 627 , the Göktürks and their Khazar allies approached the Caspian Gates at Derbent . This newly built stronghold was the only gate to the fertile land of Aghvania ( modern @-@ day Azerbaijan ) . Lev Gumilev observes that the lightly armed militia of Aghvania was no match against the hordes of heavy cavalry led by Tong Yabghu . His troops stormed Derbent and swarmed over Aghvania , plundering it thoroughly . The fall and sack of Derbent was described in detail by the Armenian historian Movses <unk> , thought to have been an eyewitness to the event : 
 The fall of the fortress that had been considered impregnable sparked panic all over the country . <unk> forces withdrew to their capital , <unk> , from whence they made for the Caucasus Mountains . The Göktürks and Khazars overtook them near the village of <unk> , where they were either slain or taken prisoner . The conquerors imposed upon Aghvania a heavy system of taxation , as reported by Movses : 
 = = Siege of Tbilisi = = 
 The next objective of the Turkic @-@ Byzantine offensive was the Kingdom of Iberia , whose ruler Stephanus was a tributary to Khosrau II of Persia . In the words of Movses <unk> , the Khazars " encircled and besieged the famous and great sybaritic trade city of Tbilisi , " whereupon they were joined by Emperor Heraclius with his mighty army . 
 Heraclius and Tong Yabghu ( called Ziebel in the Byzantine sources ) met under the walls of <unk> . The yabgu rode up to the emperor , kissed his shoulder and made a bow . In return , Heraclius hugged the barbarian ruler , called him his son , and crowned him with his own diadem . During the ensuing feast the Khazar leaders received ample gifts in the shape of earrings and clothes , while the <unk> was promised the hand of the emperor 's daughter , Eudoxia <unk> . 
 The siege dragged on without much progress , punctuated by frequent sallies on the part of the besieged ; one of these claimed the life of their king . After two months the Khazars retreated to the steppe , promising to return by the autumn . Tong Yabghu left young Böri Shad , either his son or nephew , in charge of the remaining forty thousand which were to assist Heraclius during the siege . Before long these departed as well , leaving the Byzantines to continue the siege alone and prompting jeers from the besieged . 
 When the Georgians ironically referred to the Emperor as " the goat , " hinting at his incestuous marriage , Heraclius recalled a passage from the Book of Daniel about the two @-@ horned ram overthrown by the one @-@ horned goat . He interpreted this as a good sign and struck southward against Persia . On 12 December 627 he appeared on the bank of the Tigris and clashed with Persian forces near the ruins of Nineveh . In January he ravaged the environs of the Persian capital Ctesiphon , signalling a sea @-@ change in the Persian @-@ Byzantine relations . 
 = = Conclusion = = 
 After the triumph of Heraclius , Tong Yabghu hastened to resume the siege of Tiflis and successfully stormed the city in winter . " With their swords raised , they advanced on the walls , and all this multitude , climbing upon each other 's shoulders , rose up the walls . A black shadow fell upon the <unk> citizens ; they were vanquished and lost their ground , " Movses narrates . Although the Georgians surrendered without further resistance , the city was looted and its citizens were massacred . The Persian governor and the Georgian prince were tortured to death in the presence of Tong Yabghu . 
 The Gokturks , renowned for their expertise in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , never excelled in siegecraft . For this reason Gumilev attributes the taking of Tiflis to the Khazars . There are good reasons for believing that this success encouraged Tong Yabghu to grander designs . This time he planned to incorporate Aghvania into his khaganate , rather than to wield a usual campaign of plunder . Before returning to <unk> he instructed Böri Shad and his generals to " spare the lives of the rulers and nobles of that land , in as much as they come out to meet my son , surrender to my rule , concede their towns , castles , and trade to my troops " . 
 These words indicate that Tong Yabghu was eager to retain control of the westernmost portion of the Silk Route , as he tightened his grip of its other segments all the way east to China . In April 630 Böri Shad determined to expand his control of Transcaucasia and sent his general <unk> Tarkhan with as little as 30 @,@ 000 cavalry to invade Armenia . Using a characteristic ploy of nomadic warriors , <unk> Tarkhan ambushed and annihilated a Persian force of 10 @,@ 000 dispatched by Shahrbaraz to counter the invasion . Turks knew the Sassanid respond would be harsh , they plundered cities and withdrew their forces back to the steppes . 
 = 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka = 
 The 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka refer to the wave of attacks directed against Christian churches and prayer halls in the Indian city of Mangalore and the surrounding area of southern Karnataka in September and October 2008 by Hindu <unk> organisations , Bajrang Dal and the Sri Ram Sena . The attacks were widely perceived by Christians in southern Karnataka to be punishment from right @-@ wing Hindu nationalist organisations because they had been outspoken about Christian persecution in Orissa , after the assassination of Hindu monk Swami <unk> Saraswati allegedly by local christian community and also because the New Life Fellowship Trust ( <unk> ) , a non @-@ denominational Christian Church , was alleged by Bajrang Dal to be responsible for forced conversions of Hindus to Christianity . 
 Several isolated incidents against Christians were reported from 17 August onwards , and on 29 August some 45 @,@ 000 institutions across India participated in a " prayer for peace and communal harmony " in response to the ongoing anti @-@ Christian violence in Orissa . St. Aloysius College , a Jesuit institution in Mangalore , and some other 2000 Christian schools in Karnataka went on strike for varying periods between 29 August and 5 September prior to the attacks , protesting against the events in Orissa , in defiance of the orders of the government who stated that it was to be a regular work day . This led to government denouncement of the Christian institutions in the state for disobeying orders and led to a Bajrang Dal demonstration outside the St. Aloysius College , two weeks prior to the main attacks . The attacks began on 14 September , when a group of youths from the Bajrang Dal went inside the chapel of Adoration Monastery of the Sisters of St @-@ Clare near the Milagres Church in Hampankatta and desecrated it . Some 20 churches or prayer halls , including Catholic and Protestant churches and temples belonging to the Jehovah 's Witnesses and other evangelical sects , and colleges were damaged in towns and villages in the Mangalore taluk and other parts of Dakshina Kannada district , Udupi district and Chikkamagaluru district . A few Christian institutions were later attacked in Bangalore and Kasaragod district . Out of frustration and anger , the Christian community responded to the attacks within hours and began protesting . In Karkala , the Catholics of Karkala deanery staged a protest on 15 September and organised a 3 kilometre silent protest march . The protestors blocked arterial city roads in their masses , especially in places such as Hampankatta , Kulshekar , Bejai , <unk> and Thokottu and rang bells in almost all the churches of Mangalore , calling parishioners to their churches . The protests led to strong police suppression with lathi charges and tear gas , making around 150 arrests and injuring 30 to 40 people . The incident marked the first time that Catholics had ever resorted to violence in Mangalore when provoked . Between 15 September and 10 October , a new wave of anti @-@ minority attacks began against Christian communities in the Indian states of Kerala , Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Andhra Pradesh , Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Jharkhand , New Delhi , Punjab , Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand , as well as Muslim communities in Gujarat and Maharashtra . 
 The September 2008 attacks had political significance , given that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) Karnataka state government , led by B. S. Yeddyurappa , were also accused of involvement and backing the anti @-@ Christian campaigns and that the police were reported to have had knowledge of the imminent attacks but failed to prevent them . The police were criticised for their reaction to the protests and a report by a committee of human rights activists set up in the aftermath to examine the causes of the attacks claimed that they had used the event as a pretext to assault the community , rather than defend it . Justice B. K. Somasekhara of Karnataka , however , concluded that the police and government helped maintain order and were not responsible for the attacks . In response to the alleged forcible conversions of involvement , the Vishwa Hindu Parishad ( VHP ) gave a three @-@ month deadline for New Life Fellowship Trust ( <unk> ) to stop all conversion activities in Mangalore . The Roman Catholic Diocese of Mangalore declared that it would distance itself from the New Life Fellowship Trust . 
 In February 2011 , retired Justice M. F. Saldanha , formerly of the Bombay High Court , was outspoken against the protests and published a report in which he described the attacks as " state @-@ sponsored terrorism " and that the attacks were part of " communal forces " at work attacking Christian institutions on the coastal belt of India . The report and continued denial by the state government of being implicated in the attacks led to more than 100 @,@ 000 Christians representing some 45 Christian denominations and secular organisations leading a silent march in Mangalore on 21 February . Following the publications of the reports and subsequent protests , the government of Karnataka announced that it would drop 338 cases against Christians who had protested in the attack , and in December 2011 a further 23 cases against Christians were dropped . 
 = = Background and cause = = 
 Mangalore has long been a major Christian centre in India . In 1526 , under the viceroyship of Lopo Vaz de Sampaio , the Portuguese took possession of Mangalore and Christianity began to spread . Many Christians migrated to South Canara from Goa . The Mangalorean Catholics were persecuted by Tipu Sultan during his reign between 1782 to 1799 and many were forcibly converted to Islam . On 24 February 1784 , Tipu rounded up 60 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 Mangalorean Catholics and transported them to Seringapatam . They were held there in captivity for 15 years , until Tipu was killed by the British at the Battle of Seringapatam on 4 May 1799 . Only 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 of those Catholics taken captive in 1784 survived . In the latter half of the 19th century , Protestant missionaries began working in Mangalore and surrounding communities , and the Vicariate of Mangalore was established in 1853 . Mangalore , noted for its many churches and the strong representation of Catholics , was at one time known as the " Rome of the East " . However it is also noted as a pilgrimage centre for Hindus , given its numerous Hindu temples and shrines . Between 1991 and 2011 , the percentage of Christians living in India reportedly dropped from 2 @.@ 7 per cent to 2 @.@ 2 per cent , a declining figure which has been linked to ongoing difficulties facing Christians in a predominantly Hindu nation . In 2008 , an estimated 320 @,@ 300 Christians were living in the Dakshina Kannada district . 
 Several explanations of the cause of the September 2008 attacks have been postulated . Many Christians believe that the attacks were a direct response from right @-@ wing Hindu organisations who were targeting the people of Mangalore and the surrounding area because they had been outspoken about persecution of Christians in Orissa . St. Aloysius College , a Jesuit institution in Mangalore , and some other 2000 Christian schools in Karnataka , went on strike for varying periods between 29 August and 5 September prior to the attacks , protesting against anti @-@ Christian persecution in Orissa , contrary to the orders of the government who stated that they were to be regular work days . Primary and secondary education minister <unk> Hegde <unk> , responding to the shutting down of the Christian educational institutions in Karnataka , had directed the public education department to issue show @-@ cause notices to schools that had objected to the violence against Christians in Orissa . A Christian institution in Shimoga had reportedly received a notice from the education ministry of Karnataka during the strike saying , " The VHP and Bajrang Dal have conducted a protest against the closure of schools and criticised your action . They have submitted letters requesting action against you for this . In this context , you are asked to show cause as to why action should not be initiated against you for using religion as an excuse to announce a holiday and as to why permission to run your institution should not be withdrawn . " State Home Minister V. S. Acharya explained the reason for the notices , " All Christian institutions are grant @-@ in @-@ aid institutions of the government and they should have had the courtesy to inform us before declaring a holiday . Their decision to act unilaterally cannot be tolerated . " The education minister was backed by the State President D. V. Sadananda Gowda , who issued a statement in which he stated that Christian education institutions had committed a crime by declaring holiday without obtaining the state government 's permission . However , the Indian National Congress ( INC ) condemned Hegde 's statement to take action against Christian education institutions and the leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly , Mallikarjun <unk> , stated that " The minister 's statement is not proper . It may lead to law and order problem in the State . " Bajrang Dal proponents protested with banners outside the St. Aloysius College gates and across Mangalore on Saturday 31 August , the day after the college had closed for a holiday , chanting slogans such as , " Jai Mata Di " ( Hail to the Mother ) and " Bharat Mata ki jai " ( Hail Mother India ) . It should be noted , however , that the closure of the schools in Mangalore were not alone ; some 45 @,@ 000 institutions across India had participated on 29 August in a " prayer for peace and communal harmony " in response to the events in Orissa . 
 Another explanation is that the attacks were an angry response by Bajrang Dal over the allegations that the New Life Fellowship Trust were indulging in forceful religious conversion of Hindus and distribution of vulgar literature slandering Hindu gods and goddesses . Bajrang Dal claimed that nearly 15 @,@ 000 people had been forced to adopt Christianity as their religion in Mangalore alone in the past year after monitoring the situation . In the book <unk> , written by Andhra Pradesh Pastor <unk> Suryanarayana Rao , it was also reported that the New Life Fellowship Trust had denigrated and defamed Hindu gods , causing anger amongst the Bajrang Dal . Hindu activists also alleged that excerpts from Rao 's book had been published in pamphlets to spread its influence . Mahila Parishat leader Asha Jagadish believed that the attacks were solely motivated by religious conversion by New Life and claimed that her neighbour was forcefully converted into Christianity to marry a Christian girl , further stating , " The Holy Saint School in Bangalore , where I studied up to fifth standard , did not allow me to wear kumkum or bangles according to Hindu tradition . " Fr . Francis Serrao , rector of St. Aloysius College , stated that he believed the attacks were not due to conversion , but was rather a reflection of the struggle between Christianity and Brahmanism and theorised that Christian ideology and Brahmin ideology can never coexist as " Christianity propagates love and Brahmanism propagates hate . " 
 = = Attacks = = 
 Incidences of violence against Christians had been reported during the month prior to the main attacks . On 17 August 2008 , demonstrators performed a <unk> ( hunger strike ) outside the <unk> church in Jayanagar , Davangere and again on 24 August at Nitya Jeeva <unk> church , burning Christian literature in both events . No complaints or arrests were made in either of the events . Three days later , on 27 August , a Christian prayer hall and its pastor in <unk> , <unk> taluk of the <unk> district , were attacked , leading to eight arrests . Then on 7 September , a group of about 300 individuals attacked the <unk> <unk> Church in Bada , Davangere district , vandalising it and burning the Bibles . Ten people were arrested at the scene in Bada . The multiple premeditated attacks started on 14 September 2008 , with some 20 churches attacked in Karnataka ; of which 14 were attacked within one hour . These included Catholic and Protestant churches as well as temples belonging to the Jehovah 's Witnesses and the New Life Fellowship Trust . The attacks began when a group of some 15 youths on motorbikes from the Bajrang Dal , a Hindu nationalist organisation which aims to achieve the " reversing of the invasions by Muslim conquerors and British imperialism " , arrived at the chapel of Adoration Monastery of the Sisters of St @-@ Clare in Hampankatta around 10 @.@ 15 am , shouting a pro @-@ Bajrang Dal slogan . They entered the monastery and attacked it with <unk> , desecrating the tabernacle and the Eucharist , the 15 feet ( 5 m ) high golden coloured monstrance ( regarded by the nuns as the most sacred object in the church ) , a crucifix , the oil lamps , the vases on the altar , and a few statues of saints . A couple praying in the chapel at the time were also beaten by the intruders . Two nuns were also reportedly injured . Around the same time , a group of 30 to 35 people on motorbikes wearing masks attacked the empty Church of South India building at <unk> , armed with iron pipes , cricket stumps and sticks , shouting pro @-@ Bajrang Dal slogans . Aside from damage to the buildings , windows and religious iconography , furniture , Bibles , and other Christian literature were damaged in various churches . A gang of about 30 youths had made an attempt to ransack a prayer hall of the New Life Fellowship Trust , but their efforts were thwarted by the police . 
 Around 8 @.@ 30 pm on 14 September , miscreants pelted stones at the chapel of Padua Pre @-@ university College , a Christian college located at Nanthoor , badly damaging its windows . Around 9 @.@ 30 pm , miscreants badly damaged a statue located in front of Carmelites ' house in <unk> , near <unk> . The Church of St. Sebastian in Permannur was badly damaged , including its windows and furniture . The Holy Cross Church at Kulshekar and St. Joseph , The Worker Church at Vamanjoor were also damaged . Police reports confirmed that Our Lady 's Grotto at <unk> Technical Institute and properties at the Infant Jesus Higher Primary School and Mary Hill Convent were also damaged by the miscreants on the night of 14 September . K. A. Abraham , pastor of Divine Deliverance Prayer Centre at <unk> in <unk> , claimed that over 25 miscreants had attacked his prayer hall , and they were reported to have smashed the window panes , ransacked equipment and set a motorcycle and car on fire . Later , in the early hours of 15 September , individuals broke into the St. George Church belonging to the Syro Malabar Catholic Rite of the Belthangady Diocese in <unk> , Dakshina Kannada district , 70 km from Mangalore and burned the Bible , the carpet , prayer books and desecrated holy icons . <unk> also ransacked the St. Thomas Church in <unk> in Chikkamagaluru district . Seven or eight masked men arriving on scooters were reported to have desecrated the large statue of St. Antony at St. Ann 's Friary on Jail Road in Bejai , throwing flower pots to smash its glass covering . The official report into the attacks later claimed that the Bajrang Dal were the likely suspects for the attacks on churches in Chikkamagaluru district , including the Christian Believers ' Prayer Hall , <unk> Church in <unk> and Carmel <unk> <unk> in Kudremukh , and had also harassed people gathered at <unk> High School in Mangalore . Several people also reportedly invaded the house and prayer meeting of a neo @-@ convert in <unk> of <unk> taluk . Other areas affected by the attacks include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Jayapura , <unk> , Thokottu , Bantwal , Belthangady , Udupi , <unk> , <unk> , Karkala , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Individuals were also targeted during the event ; in <unk> , two men and two children were attacked by a Hindu mob near <unk> Bridge while on their way to their hometown in a private car , and in Kalladka , the Souza Textile owner and his wife were attacked by unidentified people . Two separate stabbing incidents were also reported in Kalladka , and the two men affected were admitted to hospital with serious injuries . 
 On 16 September , a 100 @-@ year @-@ old statue of Mary at the St. Mary 's Church in Kolar was damaged by vandals , St. George Church in <unk> was desecrated and attempted to be burned by vandals , and over 20 vandals desecrated the Rima Worship Centre at Adyar . On 18 September , vandals shattered the glass encasing of the Mother Mary statue of the Presentation Girls School in Dharwad and on 19 September , a gang of vandals on motorbikes pelted stones at the St. Xavier 's Church in <unk> Kody in Mangalore taluk and destroyed the idols . On 21 September , a further four attacks were reported , including Brethren Christa <unk> prayer hall near <unk> in Kodagu district , the Believers ' Church in <unk> , Mangalore taluk , and two churches in Bangalore ; St. James Church in <unk> near Hebbal and Lumbini Gardens , which had two gold plated crowns and cash from the offering box stolen and the main sacrament vandalised ; and the Holy Church in the Name of Jesus at <unk> had the casing around the Infant Jesus smashed and the statue damaged . In <unk> , a group were reported to have pelted stones at a church and fled . A Catholic school was also attacked in Kasaragod district in Kerala . Between 15 September and 10 October , Hindu nationalists directed a wave of attacks <unk> Christian communities in Kerala , Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Andhra Pradesh , Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Jharkhand , New Delhi , Punjab , Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand , and Muslim communities in Gujarat and Maharashtra . 
 = = = Christian protests = = = 
 In response to the attacks in areas such as Hampankatta , <unk> , Vamanjoor , Thokottu and Bantwal , the Christian community began protesting . The protestors blocked arterial city roads in their masses , especially in places such as Hampankatta , Kulshekar , Bejai , <unk> and Thokottu and rang bells in almost all the churches of the city , calling parishioners to their churches . In Hampankatta , over 4 @,@ 000 Christians united to defend the Milagres Church and protest . Violence broke out at the Adoration monastery as police began caning the protestors with sticks and bursting teargas shells to disperse them , while they pelted stones at police vans and police . The police were reported to have caused further damage to the Adoration monastery by throwing back stones and glass bottles to restrain the protestors . Union Minister of Labour and Employment Oscar Fernandes and MLA B. <unk> Rai arrived at the Hampankatta scene at 6 pm . In Karkala , the Catholics of Karkala deanery staged a protest on 15 September condemning the attacks and the desecration of the crucifix and sacrament at Adoration Monastery in particular and organised a 3 kilometre silent protest march from the bus stand to the taluk headquarters and submitted a memorandum to <unk> Laxman Singh . The protests involved over 2 @,@ 500 people and among those present were incumbent parish priest John Barboza , Valerian Fernandes , <unk> parish priest Valerian Fernandes , Attur parish priest Arthur Pereira , <unk> parish priest Ronald Miranda , Paschal Menezes , <unk> parish priest Alex <unk> , Michael D 'Silva , <unk> parish priest Michael Lobo , <unk> parish priest Alwyn D <unk> and many other priests and nuns in the area . The Christian protestors also clashed with police at St. Sebastian Church in the Permannur area of Ullal on the outskirts of Mangalore , shouting slogans and throwing stones at the police for their failure to arrest the perpetrators of the attacks . The police arrested several Christians after firing into the air and being involved in a lathi charge . A witness in Permannur claimed that Christians attacked the houses of Hindus in retaliation , shouting slogans against the BJP government . Four people of pro @-@ Hindu organisations were reportedly injured at Kalladka and <unk> on the outskirts of the Mangalore when their vehicles were attacked and were pelted with stones . Ten people , including one of the Sri Ram Sena activists , were reportedly stabbed during the protests and according to the police , the situation was used by some to settle personal scores and not all stabbing incidents were related to attack on churches and the subsequent violence in the city . The Sri Ram Sena protested against the stabbing of one of their activists by organising a shutdown of educational institutions and shops . The district administration responded by declaring a holiday for all educational institutions in Mangalore taluk , and extended prohibitory orders under the Section 144 Criminal Procedure Code for two more days in the wake of the attacks and protests as a precaution . 
 Over 25 Christians were initially arrested by the police during the Adoration incident , in comparison to seven young members of the Bajrang Dal who had initiated the attacks . Chief Minister B. S. Yeddyurappa later stated in a press conference that a total of 153 people had been arrested during the attacks and resultant protests within a two @-@ day period and that some had been charged with looting , arson and rioting , saying that they would be " punished in accordance with the provisions of the law under they were charged . " The BBC reported that over 170 people had been arrested during the events . However , Superintendent of Police in Mangalore , N. <unk> Kumar , claimed to have made just 89 arrests in total . Four policemen , half a dozen people and journalist Anil <unk> were reportedly injured in the Adoration incident , and three police vehicles damaged . The police stated that over 30 people were injured and eight police vehicles had been damaged in the overall attacks , and that nearly 40 people and 20 police were injured in the attacks in total . Several of the injured were taken to Father Muller Medical College and Wenlock District Hospital . Although three churches were attacked in neighbouring Udupi district , it remained peaceful during the aftermath . 
 Many congregations gathered in their churches upon hearing news of the attacks , volunteering to spend the night there to protect them from further attacks . The local Catholic leaders demanded a peaceful bandh on 15 September in and around the city of Mangalore , and as a response Catholic traders and transport owners closed their shops and stopped their vehicles . A memorandum was submitted to the district council at 10 @.@ 30 am , seeking protection for the lives and property of Christians . Prayers were to be held in all the 48 churches of the district on Wednesday , 17 September . On 6 October 2008 , some 10 @,@ 000 people from civil society and religious organisations organised a march to protest against the anti @-@ Christian perpetrators of the attacks . 
 = = = Reports of state and police misconduct = = = 
 The Christian community of Mangalore accused the police of doing nothing to prevent attacks by Hindu radicals . Mangalore Police Superintendent N. <unk> Kumar himself admitted that the police did have information that pro @-@ Hindu organisations were planning to attack Christian places of worship in the district , but failed to do anything about it . The Christian community accused the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) government under B. S. Yeddyurappa of involvement in the attacks and backing the anti @-@ Christian campaigns . In response to the report that the police had information , Fr . Henry Sequeira , chancellor of the Mangalore Diocese said , " If the police knew about this in advance and still could not prevent the attacks , then we have no hope . " However , Superintendent Kumar had made security arrangements near the New Life Prayer Centre in <unk> and had successfully barred the miscreants from entering and vandalising the centre at that particular location , leading to a violent conflict with the police . The police were also criticised by Christians for using excessive force in suppressing the protests and aggressively subduing Christian protesters whilst failing to punish the offending Hindu nationalist perpetrators ; photographs and video footage has emerged of the beating of some of the protestors with canes . Caning by the police was also reported at <unk> and Farangipet . 
 <unk> D 'Souza , a resident of Permannur , alleged that the police took him into custody and tortured him and opened a baseless case against him , sending him to jail for 11 days . Lance Rego , a Mangalore resident , claimed that " many of the police personnel who entered the premises of Holy Cross Church at Kulshekar were wearing helmets usually worn by two @-@ wheeler drivers and not the ones meant for police personnel . Hence , I wonder whether they were police personnel or cadres of the Bajrang Dal . " Another resident , Marcel Henry <unk> , alleged that " prohibitory orders were imposed on those who were inside the church compound and not on the Bajrang Dal cadres who were outside the church compound and were pelting stones " . <unk> Saldanha of Kulshekar alleged that the police used tear @-@ gas shells which were past their expiry date on the premises , and that exposure to the gas resulted in problems with her eyesight . Many Catholic women reported incidents of police violence to the Deputy Commissioner M. <unk> Rao and other government officials , revealing their bruises , and demanding that action be taken against them . 
 Girija Vyas , President of the National Commission for Women ( NCW ) , met with the affected women of Mangalore and visited various hospitals , schools and parishes in the area , and expressed concern at the way in which the police had handled the event . Two police constables , <unk> and <unk> , were suspended following a stone throwing incident within <unk> police jurisdiction , in which windows of a church had been smashed . Chief Minister of State Yeddyurappa stated that senior civil and police officials of the districts would be held responsible if attacks on churches and prayer halls occurred in areas under their jurisdiction , further stating : " Strict action will be taken against you [ the police ] without fear or favour " . In Dakshina Kanada district , community members reported that the administration had attempted to have Superintendent of Police N. Satish Kumar transferred . However , the official report into the attacks initiated by the government , released on January 2011 , contradicted this and stated " the impression and allegations that the top police officers and the district administration had colluded with the attackers in attacking the churches or places of worship has no merit . The concerned police in all districts did their best and have been successful in nabbing most of such miscreants and large number of charge @-@ sheets have been filed in various courts which have to finally adjudicate their identity . " 
 Mahendra Kumar , the former state convener of the Bajrang Dal , claimed that he was incarcerated for 42 days in Mangalore before being released on conditional bail by Karnataka High Court Justice Ashok B. <unk> on 25 October 2008 , and was used as a scapegoat by the BJP regime to " save the government from further embarrassment after the church attacks and on instructions from the Sangh Parivar leaders . The police had originally protested against his being released on bail , a week after the attacks . Kumar stated that the BJP government in permitting the attacks had " fallen low on values and is engrossed in corruption . " 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Political response = = = 
 Prime Minister Manmohan Singh spoke to Karnataka Governor <unk> Thakur and Chief Minister B. S. Yeddyurappa by phone from his Delhi residence in the aftermath of the attacks on churches and Christians , and expressed shock at the attacks . He directed the chief minister to take immediate steps to provide ample protection to religious institutions and maintain communal harmony . The Udupi district Congress committee submitted a memorandum to Deputy Commissioner P. <unk> , demanding that the state government initiate legal action and punish the culprits of the attacks . The Congress party opposition leader Mallikarjun <unk> said , " The BJP is responsible for the attacks . It is creating social disharmony " further adding that they were " actively inciting further violence " against Christians in the state . Special Home Secretary M. L. <unk> visited some of the areas affected by the attacks and said that the state government " needs to do more and arrest all those responsible for the attacks . " 
 Yeddyurappa strongly denied any involvement of his government in the attacks , but admitted that the police were to blame for not taking precautionary measures , describing it as a " dereliction of duty " . He believed the attacks were a response from " some vested interest trying to tarnish the secular image of his government " . He said at the press conference , " My government is committed to maintaining peace and harmony in the state ; law and order has been top priority by my government .... Nobody is above law , irrespective of caste and creed the culprits will be punished " . The state government ensured that special security was given to important places of worship throughout the state in the aftermath of the attacks and Yeddyurappa set up a corps of detectives to investigate . He promised the Christian community leaders that all churches and shrines vandalised in the districts of Dakshina Kannada , Udupi , and Chikkamagaluru during the attacks would be restored and paid a visit to all of the areas affected by communal riots and attacks . Some politicians such as former Prime Minister and Janata Dal ( Secular ) ( JDS ) national president H.D. Deve Gowda and M. P. Prakash also visited the Christian institutions in the aftermath . In February 2010 , Yeddyurappa allocated ₹ 500 millions for Christian development projects in Karnataka in his state budget , the first time he had ever done so . 
 The Home Ministry advised the Karnataka government to do all it could in its power to prevent the recurrence of the attacks and to restore faith in the authorities in the region , asking for them to strongly suppress violence and vandalism and to punish the offenders . Senior BJP leader L. K. Advani , during his two @-@ day visit to Assam and Meghalaya , denounced the attacks in Orissa and Karnataka , saying , " I strongly condemn these acts of violence and vandalism . The law must take its course and the culprits must be brought to justice . " Former defence minister George Fernandes wrote to Yeddyurappa urging him to restore peace and challenging radicals to prove alleged conversions . Deve Gowda wrote a letter to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh asking for him to impose a " blanket ban " on the Bajrang Dal and Sri Ram Sena in the wake of the attacks , remarking that it " would send a categorical message across the world that secular India will not tolerate fascism , fanaticism and fundamentalism of any colour or kind . " He described the attacks as nothing but " state sponsored <unk> " , and accused the Karnataka government of trying to turn the state into a " Hindutva laboratory " . 
 = = = Religious response = = = 
 The Bishop of Mangalore Diocese Aloysius Paul D 'Souza stated that Christians were " deeply hurt " over the desecration of the Holy Cross and Sacred Sacrament in the Adoration monastery . The Archbishop of Bangalore Archdiocese , Bernard Moras , who met with Yeddyurappa in the aftermath of the attacks said , " I want to tell you , Mr. Yeddyurappa we are wounded ! " Fr . William Menezes , the public relations officer of the Mangalore Diocese , said : " After consulting various leaders and based on the assurance given by Chief Minister B. S. Yeddyurappa , district in @-@ charge Minister J. Krishna <unk> , the police and district administration , we hereby appeal to our community to stop agitation immediately to maintain peace . " Fr . Prashant <unk> , former principal of St. Aloysius College said in response to the attacks and resultant protests , " The retaliation from the Christian community you saw was happening for the very first time in the history of the state . It was not the correct response , I condemn it , but then our youth have started imitating the enemy . There is a lot of fear . We don 't know when the stones will rain on our roofs . We are even scared to talk . " Fr . Joseph <unk> , Bishop of Belthangady , also said that Christian community of Belthangady was deeply hurt and shocked at the attacks , saying that " We strongly condemn the act . We are not violent and do not believe in violence . We respect the administration and the law of the country . We respect all religions . We , the Christian minority community , need protection from kinds of anti @-@ social , anti @-@ religious activities " . The community leaders in a press conference also appealed internationally , stating " we want to bring to the notice of the world and human right commissions and authorities in Canada to use their diplomatic channels about the total collapse of law and order in Mangalore and other parts of India , and the failure of the state to protect the lives of the clergy and the minority community " . 
 Joseph Dias , General Secretary of the Mumbai @-@ based Catholic Secular Forum ( CSF ) , visited most of the churches attacked in Karnataka during the event and said : 
 " The vested political and economic interests are hitting back with vengeance . Christians are sitting ducks , where no or negligible retaliation expected . The Church works in areas , where even the government dares not to go because it is not profitable . The Church 's education , healthcare and social services in these backward areas has empowered the weak , poor and deprived vested interests of vote banks and cheap labour . The emancipation through education , healthcare , awareness of alternatives and provision of opportunities have set the oppressed classes free from the clutches of the upper caste or rich Hindus and slavery of their political masters . These interests are therefore hitting back at the Christians to maintain their hold on those , whom they have been exploiting since ages ... We condemn those indulging in conversion by force or inducement . Catholics do not accept a conversion , unless it comes from the heart . But the saffron brigade raises this bogey , since in believes in <unk> 's ( Nazi Propaganda Chief Joseph Goebbels ) [ sic ] principle of repeating a lie umpteen times , so that it will stick . Another ploy is to divide us into Catholics and Protestants , so that they can divide and rule . This makes it easy for Hindutva radicals to take the remaining Christian population . Those who criticise groups that convert by inducement , must realise that an individual , who converts , will do so only if he finds his previous religion with limitations and Christianity a better faith . " 
 Indian Christian expatriates in the Middle East united to condemn the attacks . In Kuwait City , Indian Catholics met in Kuwait Cathedral under Reverend Fr . <unk> D <unk> on 15 September to voice their support to the Catholic community in Mangalore . They held a special " Prayer Service for Peace & Solidarity " on 18 September at the Cathedral auditorium . In Doha , Qatar , advisory and executive committee members of the Mangalore Cultural Association met on 17 September at the residence of Felix Lobo and denounced the attacks . In the United States on 17 September , many Christian leaders from various organisations met at the residence of Bishop , Rt. Rev. Dr. Jacob <unk> of Syro Malabar Catholic Mission ( <unk> ) and announced a day of prayer vigil , fasting and a peace rally at the Syro Malabar Cathedral in Bellwood , Illinois on 28 September . Fr . George <unk> , Vicar General of the Diocese , urged all Christians to " unite under one umbrella " , and Jos Anthony <unk> , the Regional Vice @-@ President of <unk> , urged the communities to unite , regardless of religions . Rev. M. J. Thomas of the Church of South India said " since many Indian Churches and American local Churches are expected to join in the peace seeking rally , this will be a history making event . " Various Hindu leaders , including those from Ayodhya , also denounced the attacks . 
 Mahendra Kumar , one of the leaders of the Hindu militant youth organisation , denied that any Catholic churches were attacked by his group but reportedly accepted responsibility for the attacks on prayer halls belonging to the New Life Fellowship Trust . He stated that the Bajrang Dal were not against Christianity in the region , but were offended by the alleged forced conversions . Kumar had initially denied any involvement in the attacks before being arrested on 20 September . When asked again at a later date however if he had accepted responsibility for the attacks , he denied it . Kumar resigned from Bajrang Dal on 1 October 2008 after witnessing a Hindu woman who had decided to commit suicide with her three children but was saved by Christian missionaries . He stated " That was the time I realised that life is more important than dharma ( religion ) . A lot needs to be done for the betterment of life . My dream is to build a society that values life more than religion . In jail I read several literary works . I joined Bajrang Dal so that we could mobilise the youth for a good cause , but at the end of the day all our concepts were politically motivated . " In February 2011 , after the commission reports into the attacks were published , Kumar formally apologised to the public for the attacks and accused the BJP Government of corruption . On 21 February 2011 he joined the JDS , declaring , " I am today shedding the shackles of communalism to strive for communal harmony , for which the JDS is working . " His successor Suryanarayana also denied any involvement in the attacks . Some pro @-@ Hindu elements believed that the attacks were politically motivated by the main opposition parties in the state rather than being purely based upon religious indifference , especially the Milagres Church attack . 
 In response to the alleged forced conversions , the VHP gave a 3 @-@ month deadline for New Life Fellowship Trust to stop all conversion activities in Mangalore . Bishop Aloysius Paul D 'Souza declared that the Mangalore Diocese would distance itself from the New Life Fellowship Trust , stating that the " Catholic Church does not believe in forceful religious conversion " . However , this was opposed by Margaret Alva , General Secretary of the All India Congress Committee ( AICC ) . She stated , " Christians were a microscopic minority in India . We must put aside the differences between our various sects and come together to fight fascist forces . " She further described the stance taken by the diocese as " improper " . Alva also objected to the peace agreement between the local Catholic leadership and the VHP in which the latter had allegedly laid down a code of ethics for the Christians to follow , and remarked that " the Indian Constitution is the only code of ethics for all Indians " . An investigation in the Udupi district headed by Mohammad Shafi Qureshi , Chairman of the National Commission for Minorities ( <unk> ) , failed to discover any evidence of forced conversion . Qureshi stated that his commission had not received any report of forced conversion from the district administration of Udupi district and said , " Every Indian had the right to profess and propagate any religion . Conversion by force is not permitted " . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 An initial report by a committee , composed of some 17 human rights activists from Orissa , Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu , Puducherry , Karnataka and Maharashtra , which formed to look into the violence in Mangalore , stated that the attacks were carried out by the Bajrang Dal and the Sri Ram Sena . They asserted that the event was a " pretext by the police to let loose a savage assault on the community and its sacred institutions " , and that the police " conducted themselves as activists of the Bajrang Dal and not as officers of the law , under the benign gaze of the friendly state government . " The police were reported to be " more interested in interrogating the nuns than in investigating the assaults . " The National Commission for Minorities asked for a ban on the Bajrang Dal , after conducting reports into events in Orissa and Karnataka . 
 Retired Justice M. F. Saldanha , formerly of the Bombay High Court , was outspoken against the protests and published a report in 2011 investigating the attacks on Christian institutions and people , written up after he visited 413 locations , examined 673 witnesses and 2 @,@ 114 victims of the attacks . He described the attacks as " state @-@ sponsored terrorism " , and concluded that " the attacks and incidents which took place were instigated and pre @-@ planned . They were not only supported by the state , but were also covered up for by the state . " The report also stated , " The responsibility for this devolves squarely on Home Minister V. S. Acharya and the Chief Minister B S <unk> " . Saldanha believes that the " communal forces " at work attacking Christian institutions are also part of an anti @-@ Islam movement on the coastal belt of India . This was later backed by Joseph Dias of the Catholic Secular Forum who said that the Karnataka riots were " part of a wider plan of radical Hindutva elements targeting the Christian community after the Muslim community " , which had manifested in all of the BJP @-@ ruled states of India . Saldanha further stated , " There is 100 per cent evidence of two things : the state machinery and the police had a role in attacks on churches . There is <unk> and photographic evidence of police entering places of worship . " 
 The official commission enquiring into the attacks on Christians , originally constituted on 19 September 2009 for a period of three months , had been extended ten times , causing dismay amongst local Christians . Yeddyurappa initially stated that a judicial inquiry into the attacks was unnecessary , as he believed that the state police were competent enough to investigate and bring the perpetrators to justice themselves . Jesuit priest Fr . M. K. George remarked that " The government does not seem to be serious about the early release of the commission report ... the government is lacking the political will to act " . Revd . Manohar Chandra Prasad criticised the government for " soft pedaling " and believed that the extension was an indication of the government 's " step @-@ motherly " attitude toward Christians . The official report of Justice B. K. Somasekhara , initiated by Yeddyurappa 's BJP @-@ led state government was eventually made public in January 2011 , in which it stated that the attacks were suspected to have been initiated by the Bajrang Dal , denying any involvement of the state government and the police , " true Hindus " , or any cover @-@ up in the attacks after collecting 2 @,@ 204 exhibits and 30 materials related to the attacks , 25 spot inspections and examining attacks on 57 churches in Karnataka . The report stated , " There is no basis to apprehension of Christian petitioners that politicians , BJP , mainstream Sangh Parivar and State Government directly or indirectly are involved in the attacks . No politicians or representative of any political party in the state who politicised the incidents of attack for their benefits immediately did not come before the commission with their affidavits or to give evidence or opinion in the matter . " The report — which cost around ₹ 30 million and took over 28 months , 300 sittings , and 800 pieces of recorded evidence to be realised — concluded that the district authorities and the police had , in most cases , taken the " appropriate steps regarding the Church and the people including the required protection . " Somasekhara concluded that the attacks were " carried out by ' misguided elements ' following circulation of literature insulting Hindu gods and reports of conversion activity by some Christian groups " and that " the Roman Catholic church and its leaders were not involved in conversion . " In the case of Chikkamagaluru district , Somasekhara noted that " the Government may enquire and withdraw the privileges to every people who is indulging or getting converted in such illegal activities of conversions commercially . " The report was widely criticised by the Christian community for being " biased " and activists belonging to the Religious Christian Minority Wing of the JDS burnt a copy of the Somasekhara report . Archbishop of Bangalore Archdiocese Bernard Moras rejected the Somasekhara report , stating , " It has failed to address the terms of reference of the Commission and has failed to do justice to the Christian community . " He demanded that the state government launch a Central Bureau of Investigation probe into the attacks , also saying that " we will make a representation to the government putting forth our demand . We will make a representation to the chief minister , the governor , various organisations including the Human Rights and the Central government " . Bajrang Dal State convener Suryanarayana also disputed the veracity of the Somasekhara report in its statements about the Bajrang Dal involvement and former Bajrang Dal state convener Mahendra Kumar . He issued a statement saying that " Bajrang Dal had no role to play in the incidents of attacks on churches and the statement given by Mr. Kumar during the attacks in 2008 were his personal views and the organisation had clarified this aspect then . However , Uday Kumar Shetty , the president of the district unit of the BJP , approved of the report , believing that the report was correct in its assertion that the Sangh Parivar were not involved in the attacks . 
 = = 2011 protest = = 
 On 20 February 2011 , following the publication of Saldanha 's and Somasekhara 's contradictory reports on the attacks on churches , more than 100 @,@ 000 Christians representing some 45 Christian denominations and secular organisations gathered in Mangalore to protest . Present was Bishop Aloysius Paul D 'Souza of Mangalore Diocese , Bishop Emeritus C. L. Furtado and Bishop John S. Sadananda of the CSI Karnataka Southern Diocese , AICC general secretary Oscar Fernandes , Bishop Lawrence <unk> of the Catholic Syro @-@ Malabar Diocese of Belthangady , <unk> Mar <unk> of the Syro @-@ Malankara Diocese of Puttur , Diocesan Vicar @-@ General <unk> Denis M. Prabhu ; and some 24 new @-@ generation churches united under the Karnataka Missions Network ( <unk> ) including the Campus Crusade for Christ ( CCC ) , Operation Mobilization <unk> ( OMB ) , Good News Book Centre ( <unk> ) , All India Catholic Union ( <unk> ) , Catholic Association of South Kanara ( CASK ) , and International Federation of Karnataka Christian Associations ( <unk> ) . Secular organisations participating in the protest included Udupi <unk> <unk> Vedike ( <unk> ) , the People 's Union for Civil Liberties ( <unk> ) , the DK District Committee , the local unit of the Democratic Youth Federation of India ( DYFI ) , and the Muslim <unk> Sangha ( VS ) and Muslim <unk> groups . The protest rally was " organised against a backdrop of an apparent whitewash by the B. K. Somasekhara Commission concerning Hindu radicals and government agencies . " The protesters tied black cloths over their mouths and carried black flags as they walked silently for about a kilometre in one of the strongest Christian areas of the city . George <unk> , a Catholic lay leader who guided the march , stated that the black " symbolised that the action of the government and its commission have silenced Christians . " Rev. Alwyn <unk> of the Full Gospel Church said that " This is a sea of Christianity that is wounded by the attacks on the churches by the fundamental groups . The government should look at the faith and patience of these people and give justice . " On 17 February 2011 , Ronald <unk> , Chairman of <unk> and Higher Education Minister V. S. Acharya submitted a memorandum to Yeddyurappa , demanding that the cases filed against Christian youths be dropped . Following the publications of the reports and subsequent protests , the government of Karnataka announced that it would drop 338 cases against Christians who had protested in the attacks . In December 2011 , 23 cases against Christians were dropped upon request by the Karnataka Christians International and the Mangalore Diocese . 
 = Minority Treaties = 
 Minority Treaties refer to the treaties , League of Nations Mandates , and unilateral declarations made by countries applying for membership in the League of Nations and United Nations . Most of the treaties entered into force as a result of the Paris Peace Conference . 
 The treaties conferred basic rights on all the inhabitants of the country without distinction of birth , nationality , language , race or religion and protected the rights of all nationals of the country who differed in race , religion , or language from the majority of the inhabitants of the country . The country concerned had to acknowledge the clauses of the treaty : as fundamental laws of state ; and as obligations of international concern placed under the guarantee of the League of Nations , or United Nations . 
 = = Background = = 
 The protection of religious and minority rights had been a matter of international concern and the subject of protections ever since the days of the Peace of Westphalia . The concept of granting title to a territory on the basis of minority rights treaties started in the 1870s with Serbia , Montenegro , and Romania . 
 At the Versailles Peace Conference the Supreme Council established ' The Committee on New States and for The Protection of Minorities ' . All the new successor states were compelled to sign minority rights treaties as a precondition of diplomatic recognition . It was agreed that although the new States had been recognized , they had not been ' created ' before the signatures of the final Peace Treaties . Clemenceau noted in an aide @-@ <unk> attached to the Polish treaty that the minority protections were consistent with diplomatic precedent : 
 This treaty does not constitute any fresh departure . It has for long been the established procedure of the public law of Europe that when a State is created , or when large accessions of territory are made to an established State , the joint and formal recognition of the Great Powers should be accompanied by the requirement that such States should , in the form of a binding International convention undertake to comply with certain principles of Government . In this regard I must recall for your consideration the fact that it is to the endeavors and sacrifices of the Powers in whose name I am addressing you that the Polish nation owes the recovery of its independence . It is by their decision that Polish sovereignty is being restored over the territories in question , and that the inhabitants of these territories are being incorporated into the Polish nation .... ... There rests , therefore , upon these Powers an obligation , which they cannot evade , to secure in the most permanent and solemn form guarantees for certain essential rights which will afford to the inhabitants the necessary protection , whatever changes may take place in the internal constitution of the Polish State . 
 The new treaties gave minorities the right to appeal directly to the League or UN General Assembly . In the case of the Mandates and the UN Partition Plan for Palestine <unk> clauses provide for the International Court 's jurisdiction . The victorious powers attempted to ensure the stable development of the region between defeated Germany and Soviet Russia , a region characterized by the existence of many ethnic groups and the emergence of new nations . The idea behind the Minority Treaties was that by subjecting those countries to the scrutiny of others and to the threat of sanction and intervention from the newly created international body , the League of Nations , the rights of minorities would be safeguarded . 
 As with most of the principals adopted by the League , the Minorities Treaties were a part of the Wilsonian idealist approach to international relations , and as with the League itself , the Minority Treaties were increasingly ignored by the respective governments , with the entire system mostly collapsing in the late 1930s . Despite the political failure they remained the basis of international law . After World War II the legal principles were incorporated in the UN Charter and a host of international human rights treaties . 
 Many international law norms and customary practices developed in the inter @-@ war years by the League of Nations are still in use today . The procedures for managing intrastate and inter @-@ ethnic issues include international supervision , regional economic unions , minority protection , plebiscites , and territorial partition . The Palestine and Bosnian Partition Plans and European Union practice are modern examples of conditioning recognition of statehood on human rights , democracy , and minority protection guarantees . 
 = = Bilateral treaties = = 
 There were several bilateral Minority Treaties , each signed between one of the countries in question and the League . The treaties were signed between the League and some of the newly established nations : Poland , Yugoslavia ( also known then as the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ) , Czechoslovakia . Similar treaties were also imposed on Greece and Entente @-@ allied Romania in exchange for their territorial enlargement , and on some of the nations defeated in the First World War ( Hungary , Austria , Bulgaria , Turkey ) . At the same time , Albania , Lithuania , Estonia , Latvia and , outside of Europe , Iraq were persuaded to accept minority obligations as part of the terms of their admission to the League of Nations . 
 The Polish treaty ( signed in June 1919 , as the first of the Minority Treaties , and serving as the template for the subsequent ones ) is often referred to as either the Little Treaty of Versailles or the Polish Minority Treaty ; the Austrian , Czechoslovak and Yugoslavian treaties are referred to as Treaty of St Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye ( 1919 ) ; the Romanian treaty as the Treaty of Paris ( 1919 ) , the Greek as the Treaty of Sèvres ( 1920 ) ; the Hungarian as the Treaty of Trianon ( 1920 ) , the Bulgarian as the Treaty of Neuilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine ( 1919 ) , and the Turkish as the Treaty of Lausanne ( 1923 ) . In most of the above cases the minority treaties were only one of many articles of the aforementioned treaties . 
 = = = List of unilateral declarations = = = 
 Declaration by the government of Albania , issued 2 October 1921 . 
 Declaration by the government of Latvia , issued 19 July 1923 , heard by the Council of the League on 11 September 1923 . 
 Declaration by the government of Lithuania , issued 12 May 1922 . 
 Declaration by the government of Bulgaria , issued 29 September 1924 . 
 Declaration by the government of Greece , issued 29 September 1924 . 
 = = = List of bilateral treaties = = = 
 Austrian – Czechoslovak treaty , concluded 7 June 1920 . <unk> exchanged in Vienna , March 10 , 1921 . Registered in League of Nations Treaty Series on 29 March 1921 . Supplemented by additional protocol relating to Carlsbad on 23 August 1920 . 
 = = = List of multilateral treaties = = = 
 Treaty between the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and Poland ( June 28 , 1919 ) ; 
 Treaty between the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and Czechoslovakia ( September 10 , 1919 ) 
 Treaty between the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( September 10 , 1919 ) 
 Treaty between the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and Greece ( August 10 , 1920 ) 
 Treaty between the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and Roumania , signed at Paris on 9 December 1919 and went into effect on 16 July 1920 . Ratified by the British government on 12 January 1921 , by the Japanese government on 25 January 1921 and by the Italian government on 3 March 1921 . Registered in League of Nations Treaty Series on 21 July 1921 . 
 = = System = = 
 The Minority Treaties were the basis of the League 's system of minorities . Their aim was to protect the minorities without alienating the majority of the countries ' population . The procedure was centered on the Council of the League ( rather than the more encompassing Assembly ) which had the right and obligation to raise complaints of treaty violations . Individual Council members had the unique privilege of placing complaints on the agenda , even through the petitions for that could be sent from any source . The majority of cases , however , has never been handled by the council . Before reaching the Council , the petition passed through : the minority section of the Secretariat which selected the petitions according to some criteria ( prohibition of violent language , integrity of the state , complaints about specific violations ... ) , tried a first mediation and asked for supplementary information ; the special committee of three that was appointed by the council and had the faculty of : 
 dismissing the petition ; 
 trying a second stage of mediation 
 submitting the question to the Council , which had the opportunity to seek a final agreement between the parties . If the accused government and the League could not reach a satisfactory compromise , the final decision was referred to the Permanent Court of International Justice ( most cases were solved by negotiations between affected governments before the International Court intervention ) . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Minority Treaties , recognized as history 's first minority treaties , were an important step in protection of minorities and recognition of human rights , bringing the subject to an international forum . In them , for the first time , states and international communities recognized that there are people living outside normal legal protection and who required an additional guarantee of their elementary rights from an external body , as protection within individual states itself may not be sufficient . Among issues successfully resolved by the Minority Treaties was the Åland crisis . 
 Nonetheless , the treaties were also subject to past and present criticism . The countries subject to the treaties saw it as limiting their sovereignty and infringing their right for self @-@ determination , as the League was allowed to influence national , religious and educational policy in those countries , and suggesting that they were not competent enough to deal with their internal matters . Further criticism centered on the treaties not being obligatory for the established countries ( like France , Germany , United Kingdom or Russia ) . The Western countries , who dictated the treaties in the aftermath of the First World War , saw minority safeguards as unnecessary for themselves , and trusted that they could fulfill the " standard of civilization " . It was the new Central and Eastern European countries that were not trusted to respect those rights , and , of course , Bolshevik Russia , still in the throes of the Russian Revolution , was a separate case . 
 This inequality further offended the smaller countries . Finally , this inequality also meant that the minority rights were not seen as a universal right ; it was exclusively a foreign policy issue , and thus populations that had no state to back up their claims were relatively disadvantaged when compared to ones backed up by a powerful state or group of interests . 
 With the decline of League of Nations in the 1930s , the treaties were increasingly considered unenforceable and useless . The League Council , charged with enforcing the various minority treaties , often failed to act upon complaints from minorities . There was an unwritten rule that state policies aimed at the cultural assimilation of minorities should be ignored as the " minor evil " with regard to the rights enshrined in the Minority Treaties when those policies were seen as guaranteeing the internal stability of the state concerned . 
 When the Council did review cases , the reviews were commonly dominated by the countries whose ethnic groups were affected and that tried not only to resolve the problem of mistreatment of their minorities but also score other political goals on the international scene , sometimes even sacrificing the very minority in question ( German and Hungarian governments are recognized as having abused the system the most ) . Also , of course , the League , lacking its own army , could not coerce any state to adhere to its recommendations . 
 Even before Adolf Hitler seized control of Germany in 1933 , the problems with the Minority Treaties were evident . Various European governments continued to abuse minorities , the latter loudly protested , their complaints were exploited by interested parties with ulterior motives , and the League interfered as little as possible . The system suffered an apparent death blow with Poland 's rejection of its treaty in 1934 . 
 = = = Renewed interest = = = 
 Judge Sir Hersch Lauterpacht explained the legal effectiveness of the operation of this system of minority protection treaties . He pointed out the Court 's determination to discourage the evasion of these international obligations , and its repeated affirmation of 
 the self @-@ evident principle of international law that a State cannot invoke its municipal law as the reason for the non @-@ fulfillment of its international obligations . 
 The United Nations established a formal minority rights protection system as an integral part of the Plan for the Future Government of Palestine . 
 The status of the treaties was questioned by the United Nations Secretariat in 1950 , but a modern @-@ day Chairman @-@ Rapporteur of the UN Working Group on Minorities subsequently advised that no competent UN organ had made any decision which that extinguish the obligations under those instruments . He added that it was doubtful whether that could even be done by the United Nations . The provision that ' No discrimination of any kind shall be made between the inhabitants on the ground of race , religion , language or sex . ' is enshrined in a multitude of international human rights conventions and the UN Charter itself . 
 Li @-@ ann Thio , a professor of international and human rights law at the National University of Singapore noted that many international law norms and customary practices developed in the inter @-@ war years by the League of Nations are still in use today . She specifically addressed the procedures for managing intrastate and inter @-@ ethnic issues through ( 1 ) international supervision , ( 2 ) supranational integration , ( 3 ) minority protection , ( 4 ) plebiscites , and ( 5 ) partitions . She cited the Palestine and Bosnian Partition Plans and 1990s European practice as examples of conditioning recognition of statehood on human rights , democracy , and minority protection guarantees . 
 The International Court of Justice performed a legal analysis of the status of the territory of Palestine in order to determine the applicable law , before seeking to establish whether that law had been breached . The Court said that in addition to the general guarantees of freedom of movement under Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , account had to be taken of specific guarantees of access to the Christian , Jewish and Islamic Holy Places . It noted that minority and religious rights had been placed under international guarantee by Article 62 of the Treaty of Berlin , 13 July 1878 , and observed that those " existing rights " had been preserved in accordance with the safeguarding provisions of Article 13 of the League of Nations Mandate and a chapter of General Assembly resolution 181 ( II ) on the future government of Palestine . 
 The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples recognized the urgent need to respect and promote the rights of indigenous peoples affirmed in treaties , agreements and other constructive arrangements with States . It also noted that the rights affirmed in treaties , agreements and other constructive arrangements between States and indigenous peoples are , in some situations , matters of international concern , interest , responsibility and character . In many instances the minority rights treaties provided for arbitration and granted the International Court of Justice jurisdiction to resolve disputes . 
 = Over There ( Fringe ) = 
 " Over There " is the two @-@ part second season finale of the Fox science fiction drama series Fringe . They are the 22nd and 23rd episodes of the season , and the 42nd and 43rd episodes of the series overall . Both parts were written by Academy Award @-@ winning screenwriter Akiva Goldsman , together with showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman . Goldsman also served as director , his first such credit since the season premiere . 
 Fringe 's premise is based on the idea of two parallel universes , our own and the Other Side , each of which contains historical idiosyncrasies . The two universes began to clash in 1985 , after Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) stole the parallel universe version of his son , Peter , following his own son 's death . The finale 's narrative recounts what happens when Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) is taken back to the Other Side by his real father , dubbed " Walternate " ( Noble ) . FBI agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) and Walter lead a team of former Cortexiphan test subjects to retrieve him , after discovering that Peter is an unwitting part of Walternate 's plans to bring about the destruction of our universe using an ancient doomsday device . 
 In the finale , the main characters spend the longest amount of time in the parallel universe to date . The writers sought to emphasize the differences between the two worlds : Anna Torv created a unique personality and physical demeanor for her character 's doppelgänger , Fauxlivia ; DC Comics designed special covers based upon some of their classic editions to display in the Other Side . These and other popular culture differences were noted and appreciated by critics , persuading the writers to add more in the third season . The episodes mark the first appearance of recurring character Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) , as well as the return of actors Leonard Nimoy and Kirk Acevedo as William Bell and Agent Charlie Francis , respectively . 
 Although originally intended to air on the same night , the two parts were broadcast in the United States a week apart . On its initial airing on May 13 , 2010 , an estimated 5 @.@ 99 million viewers watched part one . Part two aired on May 20 , and was viewed by an estimated audience of 5 @.@ 68 million . Both episodes received overwhelmingly positive reviews , and the season was chosen for a significant number of " best of " lists by various media outlets ; many critics praised the second episode 's cliffhanger in particular . The finale was included in most of the categories at Entertainment Weekly 's voter @-@ driven TV Season Finale Awards , placing first in two . Pinkner , Wyman , and Goldsman submitted both episodes for the drama writing and directing categories for the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , and Nimoy submitted his work from the second episode for consideration in the Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series category ; none received a nomination . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) and FBI agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) discover that Peter Bishop ( Joshua Jackson ) has agreed to return with his real father , dubbed " Walternate " ( Noble ) , to his own universe called the Other Side , which runs parallel to ours . One of the mysterious Observers ( Michael Cerveris ) leaves Olivia a note indicating that Peter is named in a prophecy as the one responsible for the end of the world . To warn Peter of his impending role , the Fringe Division work with biotechnology corporation Massive Dynamic to come up with a way to cross over . They form a plan that takes advantage of Olivia 's universe @-@ hopping ability , and recruit three other Cortexiphan test subjects who have unique abilities : Nick Lane ( David Call ) , Sally Clark ( Pascale Hutton ) , and James Heath ( Omar Metwally ) , two of whom appeared in previous episodes . The team — composed of Walter , Olivia , Nick , Sally , and James — successfully arrives on the Other Side . James dies shortly after arrival , but the rest manage to escape the alternate reality 's Fringe Division , who had used their special technology to detect their arrival . It is revealed that Walternate is the Secretary of Defense on the Other Side . 
 Peter reunites with his real mother , Elizabeth ( Orla Brady ) , while Walter 's team journeys to meet with William Bell ( Leonard Nimoy ) at Central Park . But instead of Bell the alternate Fringe Division appears , and attacks Walter 's team . Nick is shot and Sally stays with him ; she produces a suicidal fireball that torches both her and Nick to ashes and severely burns the Other Side Fringe Division 's principal investigator Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) . Walter is shot and walks to the hospital . Olivia follows her alternate counterpart and encounters Bell , who insists he did not betray their location to the Fringe Division and tells her that Walter is in trouble . Walternate is seen in the room housing the doomsday device Peter will be a part of , and leaves with its final component . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 Walternate learns of Walter 's presence in the hospital and dispatches " Fauxlivia " ( Torv ) and " Alt @-@ Charlie " ( Kirk Acevedo ) to apprehend him , but before their arrival Bell and Olivia liberate Walter and escape . Fauxlivia sees a surveillance shot of Olivia and Walter and decides to confer with Walternate about the doppelgängers . During a discussion in his office , Walternate lies to Peter about the doomsday machine 's real purpose , claiming it can help to heal both worlds . Fauxlivia meets Peter in Walternate 's office and subsequently drives him to his new apartment . Walter and Bell travel to Harvard to collect some equipment necessary for the journey back to their own universe , and Walter reveals his intense dislike for Bell , whom he considers to have been a selfish war profiteer while he himself was locked away for seventeen years . Bell tells Walter that the parallel universe equivalent of himself died in a car accident as a young man . Olivia confronts Fauxlivia , who recognizes that Olivia has feelings for Peter . The women fight , and after rendering Fauxlivia unconscious Olivia dyes her hair to assume Fauxlivia 's identity . Meanwhile , Peter discovers that the machine is symbiotic and needs a particular human to control it — him . 
 Olivia and an oblivious alt @-@ Charlie visit Peter to take him to a safe location . Olivia knocks out alt @-@ Charlie and reveals herself to Peter , informing him of the machine 's real purpose and Walternate 's intentions . Peter tells her that he does not belong in either reality , following which Olivia admits her romantic feelings for him and convinces him to leave with her . The couple race to meet Walter and Bell at the Opera House , where Fauxlivia and a team of Fringe Commandos catch up with them . Bell and Olivia hold off the assault while Peter and Walter set up the dimensional device to enable their return home . Lacking a fuel source for the device , Bell sacrifices himself to create a nuclear reaction , using his body 's unstable molecular state . Close to death , Bell reveals that he removed Walter 's memories at his own request , and he and Walter are reconciled . Olivia , Walter , and Peter return home . Peter tells Walter he will never understand him , but because Walter traveled to another universe twice to save him — which has " gotta count for something " — he forgives him . Olivia is revealed to be Fauxlivia , infiltrating Our Side , when she arrives at a typewriter communication station to await orders . The Olivia from our world is then seen in a military detention center on the Other Side . Walternate visits and stares at Olivia without speaking before leaving her in the dark , in solitary confinement . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " Over There " was written by Academy Award @-@ winning screenwriter and frequent Fringe collaborator Akiva Goldsman , together with showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman . Goldsman directed the episodes , his first such credit since the season premiere . He explained the finale in a January 2010 interview with Entertainment Weekly : " We 're trying to do the last two episodes as a singular event , a little bit more movie @-@ like . It 's really one big story . We 're approaching it like a mini @-@ feature . It 'll have a singular narrative drive . " They originally intended for the two parts to air on the same night , but Fox told them it would be shown on two nights , a week apart . The episodes first aired in the United States on May 13 and May 20 , 2010 . The writers , finding the script to be easily divisible , ended the first episode with William Bell and Olivia meeting outside Fauxlivia 's apartment , and began the second with Bell helping Walter escape from the hospital . 
 Pinkner and Wyman brought back the " Cortexiphan kids " , introduced in the first two seasons , because they felt that part of the storyline was really interesting . They wanted the end of the season to be a " beautiful culmination of everything " while traveling to the Other Side . The show had been developing a parallel universe storyline since its conception , but " Over There " marked the longest time spent in that world thus far . Pinker explained the idea of two worlds : " One of the big themes of the show is how small choices that you make define you as a person and can change your life in large ways down the line . " Wyman said that the parallel universe " is a reminder to our viewers that your life is what your choices are . " The two began discussing details about the Other Side early on , especially what the differences between the two universes would be . Pinkner commented in an interview with the Los Angeles Times that " a lot of them are ideas that we jokingly threw out . Some of them , like the notion of zeppelins or the Statue of Liberty if we didn 't let it oxidize or the Grand Central Hotel , we 're not making up . Had the Hindenburg not blown up , zeppelins would be passenger air ships docking at the Empire State Building . That was the plan . We opened ourselves to the standard that it had to be possible . " Pinkner later elaborated , " We 're interested in world building and all that stuff is the texture that actually makes it a world . The richness of detail is what makes it feel real . " They used comic books as one way to subtly differentiate the two worlds . Goldsman , Wyman , and actor Joshua Jackson are longstanding comic book fans and decided to make the character of Peter a fan as well . Goldsman called on his friend Geoff Johns , Chief Creative Officer at DC Comics . He arranged for DC to specially design ten alternate covers for some of their most iconic editions , which were displayed in Peter 's apartment on the Other Side . Visual effects company Eden FX created Peter 's apartment and the alternate New York skyline visible outside his window . When fans reacted positively to these detailed characteristics written into the parallel universe , the producers stated their intention to show a lot more similar details in the third season . 
 The finale introduces parallel @-@ universe versions of familiar characters , including the Fauxlivia version of Olivia Dunham , both played by actress Anna Torv . One topic of conversation among fans , journalists , and those working on the show was what to call the alternate Olivia to differentiate the two . Names varied , with many using " Fauxlivia " , " Bolivia " , and / or " Altlivia " . The writers chose Fauxlivia because a character in a season three episode referred to her as such . Torv and Akiva Goldsman discussed various ways to differentiate the two depictions of Olivia ; ultimately two different physical <unk> were created . Torv wanted to make the new character " completely different " , but she and Goldsman recognized that the two share some major similarities , as they both are in the same profession and are " fundamentally , genetically really the same person . " According to Torv , Fauxlivia holds herself differently and has " a different silhouette . She 's got a little firefighter , a little military in her . " Torv further explained , " Olivia wants to be the best , but [ Fauxlivia ] just wants to win ; " " There 's just a front @-@ footedness I think to [ her ] , simply because she just doesn 't carry the weight of the world on her shoulders like Olivia does . Olivia 's mum died when she was really little , and [ Fauxlivia ] ' s mum is still around . There 's lots of little , subtle differences . " The producers discussed cutting her hair , but ultimately decided on the auburn hair color to differentiate her . They also made her " a little bit more playful " . Pinkner describes shooting the Fauxlivia scenes in the DVD audio commentary : " When [ Torv ] first showed up on set in this different guise , she had really embodied this other character in a very playful and sexy way . She turned a lot of heads . " Goldsman remarked that Torv 's depiction of Fauxlivia was actually much closer to the actress ' real personality than her performance as Olivia . The producers were so pleased with her Fauxlivia depiction that they thought " it really opened up a bunch of possibilities ... it went from ' let 's see if this experiment works ' to ' how can we get more of this ? ' " 
 " Over There " marks the first time Olivia meets Fauxlivia . Their meeting was one of the first scenes to be shot ; this caused Anna Torv to be anxious about her new character 's traits " coming across " , as she had not yet developed all her mannerisms for Fauxlivia . While filming the conversation between the two , they did not use a double ; Torv memorized the timing and where she should be looking and pointing her gun , and the characters were filmed one at a time . Torv commented about the scene , " You 're talking to air . Learning both sides ... was tough . " For the fight scene that followed , Torv had to block and aim her gun carefully while being mindful of her movements and the camera 's location — though she was aided by stunt doubles . Torv credits the crew for successfully completing the scene : " I give them all the credit in the world . It took a while . They had to change the makeup , change the clothes , change the hair , change every little thing , every time they [ moved ] the camera . " 
 A later scene depicts Walter in a hospital recovering from a gunshot wound . Olivia and William Bell try to smuggle him out . As it was a real emergency room in a Vancouver hospital , the crew had only one day of shooting . One of the scenes included " monitor acting " , in which Torv had to react to a blank computer screen , because the writers had not yet chosen what images they wanted to display . The scene between Olivia , Walter , and Bell was originally set in a coffee shop , but the producers changed their minds when they realized they needed more funding for the finale . Consequently , they began " hawking " the scene in the hopes of gaining a sponsor . KFC responded , agreeing to pay them for shooting the scene at one of their locations . Walternate 's office scenes were shot in a mortuary overlooking a cemetery . Goldsman had Joshua Jackson react in different ways during his first meeting with Fauxlivia , including showing " anger and <unk> " . He ultimately decided he would be " quite taken with her " . For the second episode 's cliffhanger , the producers worried about making it as " provocative " as the first season 's . They were originally going to have Olivia sacrifice herself to allow Peter and Walter 's return to Our Side , but changed their minds when Wyman suggested she be secretly swapped with Fauxlivia instead . Wyman commented , " We were ecstatic when we figured [ the cliffhanger ] out . " Co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams and other cast members were also pleased with it , with Abrams calling it " different , but I think equally impactful . " They wrote the cliffhanger before they knew whether the series had been renewed — they would have had to make an " eleventh @-@ hour redraft " had the show been canceled by Fox . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 On April 5 , 2010 , Entertainment Weekly reported that Dirty Sexy Money actor Seth Gabel had been cast as the lead Fringe investigator in the parallel universe , and would be making his first appearance in the finale as a possible recurring character . Jeff Pinkner described the character as " the scientist @-@ cop @-@ leader of the team on the Other Side . " In an interview with TV Guide , Gabel commented that during shooting he felt that he looked " like such a doofus holding a gun , " but changed his mind when he saw the finished production . Gabel elaborated , " I was so scared that I wouldn 't pull it off . Once I saw myself being a scientist @-@ slash @-@ FBI hero , I felt more confident and relaxed . " His character is caught in a large explosion in the finale , but Gabel confirmed , in a Chicago Tribune interview , that his character would be returning for the third season . He states that the parallel universe has " special technology than can heal burns " . 
 The finale marked the return of actor Kirk Acevedo as the Other Side FBI agent Charlie Francis . In the DVD audio commentary , the producers admit they " faced a bit of hatred " when they killed off Acevedo 's character near the beginning of the season . They were aware the entire time that Charlie exists in the parallel universe , and that " nobody ever dies on Fringe " . Acevedo describes the parallel universe version of his character as someone who is " so much more fun . " He is subtly different , with a lighter personality ; he jokes around more , and is less " doom and gloom " than the original character . Some viewers refer to the new character as " alt @-@ Charlie " to differentiate the two . The actor , the producers , and some fans have called the new character " <unk> " in reference to a scar on his cheek , which takes ten minutes to apply before shooting , according to Acevedo . Previous guest actors Orla Brady , Lily Pilblad , Ari Graynor , Omar Metwally , Ryan McDonald , and David Call appear in the finale , as well as new guest stars Philip Winchester and Pascale Hutton . 
 Some cast members portray alternate versions of their characters , including John Noble , Lance Reddick , and Jasika Nicole . Noble described his doppelgänger — nicknamed " Walternate " by Walter — as " [ physically ] the same man and the same actor . " He continued , " I think of [ Walternate ] as a soldier . He 's like a general in the army . He 's very upright , he 's very strong . " Reddick called alt @-@ Broyles " a great patriot and a great mind , " but " a bit of a maverick , so I guess we 'll see just how that loyalty and relationship plays out . " Nicole based " alterna @-@ Astrid " ' s characteristics on her sister , who has Asperger syndrome , partly by avoiding eye contact with the other characters when relaying information to them and by focusing solely on the data in front of her . 
 Though guest actor Leonard Nimoy was reluctant to return after completing his three @-@ episode commitment on the show that had ended with the season 's tenth episode , he returned for the season finale when the producers " essentially called him up and pleaded " . They discussed their plans for the character , and " told him it was a story we couldn 't tell without him . " He " graciously agreed . " " Over There " marked Nimoy 's longest appearance on Fringe , a longer and " much more involv [ ed ] " shoot of roughly seven days was required . Despite Leonard Nimoy 's planned exit from the show , the show 's producers have said that nothing is final in the Fringe world . Pinkner commented that Nimoy 's retirement from acting obviously hinders his character 's possible return but , " if Leonard chooses to come back , there is a story in place that we 'd love to tell . " Wyman elaborated that " I think it 's fair to say that you have not experienced the last of William Bell " . When the producers told Nimoy their ideas for Bell 's storyline in the third season , he returned for some brief voice and animation work in the episode " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 A number of popular culture references are used to subtly differentiate the two universes . The American drama series The West Wing is beginning its 11th season in the parallel universe , and US politicians Barack Obama and Sarah Palin are in one of the show 's advertisements . The parallel universe 's Statue of Liberty is still its original shiny copper . " We imagined that Over There , they really liked copper and they cleaned it all the time , " one of the creators says . Liberty Island is the location of Fringe Division and the Department of Defense on the Other Side . The Hotel Attraction project by Catalan architect Antoni Gaudí was built in 1908 in the parallel universe , whereas in our world it never went past initial planning . Former president Richard Nixon is shown on a dollar coin in the parallel universe , rather than Dwight Eisenhower . Fauxlivia finds a twenty @-@ dollar bill from Our Side and questions who Andrew Jackson is , implying that he was either never president or is far less known in their universe . Civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr. is shown on their version of the bill , which has been nicknamed a " junior " . 
 Aviator Charles Lindbergh is less well known in the parallel universe , and the famous kidnapping of his son presumably did not occur , as Fauxlivia expresses confusion when his name is brought up . When Walter , Bell , and Olivia are on the Other Side eating at KFC , Walter puts on a Brooklyn Dodgers baseball cap . Unlike in Our Side , the team never moved to Los Angeles . The parallel universe has a number of famous comic book issues from DC Comics , similar to Our Side , but with notable differences . For instance , the Red Arrow and Red Lantern exist on the Other Side , rather than the green versions of both characters in our universe , and there are different members in the Justice League . Fauxlivia 's cellphone ringtone is taken from the 1975 film The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Other films , both real and invented , are also shown in the parallel universe , such as Superman vs. Batman 2 , Indiana Jones and the Hex of the Hydra , Star Wars : Legion of Droids , Splash 7 , Smokey and the Bandit : The Final Lap and Mask vs. Joker . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 Fox renewed Fringe for a third season in early March 2010 . The episodes aired on May 13 and May 20 , 2010 , in the United States and Canada . On May 17 Fox announced that the show would remain in its Thursday timeslot for the new season . A deleted scene cut from the finale featured Walternate and Peter discussing the fictional band " Violet Sedan Chair " while driving a Ford Taurus ; the scene 's reference to a " Ford exclusive " , as well as the perceived " loving shots " of the car , caused it to be noted as a prime example of product placement by some critics . The scene was advertised during the second episode 's commercial breaks in the US , advising viewers to view the clip at Fox 's official website . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released two science lesson plans for grade school children focusing on the science seen in both parts of " Over There " ; the first part 's intention was to have " students learn about how the various forms of energy can be converted into other forms of energy and how these conversions can be used to either disperse or concentrate energy . " The second part 's purpose was for " students [ to ] learn about how various types of sensors can be used to remotely collect information about a geographical area , which allows for unique scientific analyses and discoveries . " 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , upon its original US broadcast , part one garnered an estimated 5 @.@ 99 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 6 / 6 ratings share among all households . It received a 2 @.@ 3 / 7 ratings share among adults 18 – 49 . In keeping with the rest of its second season , Fringe 's ratings suffered due to tough competition from episodes of CBS 's CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy , as these programs were also broadcast in the same time slot . Fringe and its lead @-@ in , Bones , helped Fox place third for the night , behind CBS and ABC . The second part was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 68 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 0 ratings share among adults 18 – 49 . This was a 13 percent fall in the 18 – 49 ratings share from the previous week , as the second episode faced competition from the season finale of CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and the two @-@ part season finale of Grey 's Anatomy . " Over There 's " second part helped Fox place third for total viewers that night , behind CBS and ABC , and tie with NBC for third place among viewers 18 – 49 . 
 The finale aired on two separate nights in the United Kingdom . The first part was scheduled to air on May 25 , 2010 , on the UK 's Sky1 , but was put back a week to make room for the series finale of Lost . The first part aired on June 1 in the UK , with an estimated 195 @,@ 000 viewers tuning in . The second part aired on June 8 to an estimated 246 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The first part of the finale received critical acclaim . Ramsey Isler of IGN thought it " fantastic , " because it was " a great story that leads us into one hell of a conclusion to the season , " and that it " right away [ gave ] us the deepest , most exciting look into the alternate universe we 've seen so far . " He rated it 9 @.@ 0 / 10 . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly and MTV 's Josh Wigler agreed on this last point , with Tucker noting the first part " was a complete success and a blast at giving us a fully lived @-@ in alternate universe . " Noel Murray of The Onion 's A.V. Club graded the first part with an A − , calling it " a fun , exciting episode that nicely set up next week 's finale " . Isler , Wigler , and Murray loved the return of the <unk> subjects ; Murray docked the episode a half point , explaining " I love the idea of Olivia & The <unk> so much that I 'm bummed Fringe burned through the group so quickly . " Critic Andrew Hanson , writing for the Los Angeles Times , noted that because of the parallel universe focus , the first part felt like the following season 's premiere . He praised the opening scene , and believed the scenes between Peter and his mother helped " ground the episode . They might be out of pace with the action and drama pouring out of every other moment , but there was weight and emotion . Bravo Joshua Jackson and Orla Brady . Bravo . " Ken Tucker noted that the scenes with Peter and his true mother indicated " a great , <unk> use of a sci @-@ fi trope " . MTV 's Josh Wigler praised Torv 's performance , but wished the two @-@ part finale was not broken up , explaining " I could have easily tuned in for another several hours . Heck , I could watch an entire parallel series focused solely on the alternate universe ! " 
 Like part one , the second part premiered to critical acclaim . IGN 's Ramsey Isler wrote that it " changed the whole landscape of the show 's main plot arc . Although there were some rough spots in the execution of this story , overall it 's one hell of a way to end the season . " He rated the episode 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . While praising Noble 's performance , Isler criticized some plot aspects . He was " kind of torn " on the Peter @-@ Olivia kiss , wished Peter and the doomsday device had been set up more for the third season , and believed the Olivia @-@ Fauxlivia interaction to be " a little strange , " as the two went from discussing their respective families to " ass kicking " . Isler did praise the fight itself . Ken Tucker praised the acting and the writers , noting " The fact that the series can accommodate a fan like me only confirms what a well @-@ wrought piece of pop culture Fringe has become . " Tucker included the second part of the season in his mid @-@ year " Top 10 " list for 2010 , partly attributing this ranking to Fringe " offer [ ing ] the season 's best cliffhanger " , alongside Breaking Bad . Noel Murray declared that he enjoyed part two slightly more , grading it an A. He praised Torv and Noble 's performances for " inhabiting their respective worlds so well " , and Goldsman for " [ shooting ] this episode with an emphasis on the characters more than the setting " . 
 Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times felt the second part fulfilled all of the criteria for an incredible season finale : the season 's arc had a " pay @-@ off " he " didn 't see coming " in the aftermath of Walternate crossing universes to take back Peter ; the entire episode was an " event " because it spent more time in the parallel universe than ever before , and it had an " A + cliffhanger " . MTV 's Fringe reviewer Josh Wigler enjoyed the ending , calling it " one heck of a cliffhanger ! " James Poniewozik from Time Magazine positively compared both parts of the finale to The X @-@ Files , writing that , unlike that series , Fringe 's standalone episodes contribute to the overall mythology of the show . To him the finale " demonstrates how well the show now manages to balance its far @-@ fetched sci @-@ fi with grounded character storylines . " Poniewozik concluded his review by expressing that it was not as strong as " Peter " , but " ' Over There ' was a season @-@ ender that did what it should — left me wanting more " . 
 Many critics praised the many subtle differences between the two universes , while others lauded Leonard Nimoy 's appearance as William Bell and his scenes with Walter . Website blogger io9 listed both parts of " Over There " as one of the select few " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to understand the show , referring to it as " one of the most epic season finales ever " . Another io9 reviewer called the ending one of the " best SF / fantasy cliffhangers ever shown on television " in a September 2010 list . The finale helped propel Fringe onto a number of 2010 " best of television " lists , including Digital Spy , Entertainment Weekly , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , The Daily Beast , The New York Times , TV Squad , the New York Post , and IGN ; the last of these named Fringe the best sci @-@ fi series of 2010 , beating fellow nominees Lost , Caprica , and Stargate Universe . Some critics predicted that , because of the increased focus on looking into the alternate universe and advancing its mythology , Fringe 's " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episodes would become less frequent . This could make it more difficult for casual viewers to follow the show in its third season . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Writers J.H. Wyman , Jeff Pinkner , and Akiva Goldsman submitted both parts of " Over There " for consideration in the Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , and director Goldsman made a submission of both parts for the Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series category . None of the three secured a nomination . Leonard Nimoy submitted part two for consideration in the Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series category . He and fellow guest actor Peter Weller ( who appeared in " White Tulip " ) were not chosen for nominations . At Entertainment Weekly 's June 2010 voter @-@ driven TV Season Finale Awards , Fringe was nominated for multiple awards , and won in several categories . The Olivia @-@ Fauxlivia swap was named the " Best Non @-@ Romantic Cliff @-@ hanger " of the season and placed third for the " Single Most Clever Twist " , but it also came in third place for " Single Weakest Twist " . The ending scene with Walternate and Olivia was voted the winner of the " <unk> Image " category . Olivia 's kiss with Peter finished in fifth place for the " Best Kiss " category , and her fight with Fauxlivia placed second in the " Best Fight " category . In the " Biggest Regret That I Didn 't See the Finale , I Just Read About It " category Fringe won third place . 
 = Grim Fandango = 
 Grim Fandango is an adventure game developed and published by LucasArts in 1998 for Microsoft Windows , with Tim Schafer as the game 's project leader . It is the first adventure game by LucasArts to use 3D computer graphics overlaid on pre @-@ rendered , static backgrounds . As with other LucasArts adventure games , the player must converse with other characters and examine , collect , and use objects correctly to solve puzzles in order to progress . 
 Grim Fandango 's world combines elements of the Aztec belief of afterlife with style aspects of film noir , including The Maltese Falcon , On the Waterfront and Casablanca , to create the Land of the Dead , through which recently departed souls , represented in the game as calaca @-@ like figures , must travel before they reach their final destination , the Ninth Underworld . The story follows travel agent Manuel " Manny " Calavera as he attempts to save Mercedes " Meche " Colomar , a newly arrived but virtuous soul , during her long journey . 
 The game received universal acclaim from critics , who praised its artistic design and overall game direction in particular . Grim Fandango was selected for several gaming awards at the time of release , and is often listed as one of the greatest video games of all time . However , the game was considered a commercial failure and factored into LucasArts ' termination of their adventure game development , contributing to the decline of the adventure game genre . 
 A remastered version of Grim Fandango was announced during Sony 's press conference at E3 2014 , and was developed by Schafer 's current studio Double Fine Productions with help from Sony to secure the property after Disney 's acquisition and closure of the LucasArts studio . The remastered title , featuring improved character graphics and textures , an orchestrated score , and directors ' commentary , was released on January 27 , 2015 for the PlayStation 4 , PlayStation Vita , Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux platforms . Android and iOS versions were released on May 5 , 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Grim Fandango is an adventure game , in which the player controls Manuel " Manny " Calavera ( <unk> being Spanish for ' skull ' ) as he follows Mercedes " Meche " Colomar in the Underworld . The game uses the GrimE engine , pre @-@ rendering static backgrounds from 3D models , while the main objects and characters are animated in 3D . The player controls Manny 's movements and actions with a keyboard , a joystick , or a gamepad . Manny must collect objects that can be used with either other collectible objects , parts of the scenery , or with other people in the Land of the Dead in order to solve puzzles and progress in the game . The game lacks any type of HUD . Unlike the earlier 2D LucasArts games , the player is informed of objects or persons of interest not by text floating on the screen when the player passes a cursor over them , but instead by the fact that Manny will turn his head towards that object or person as he walks by . The player reviews the inventory of items that Manny has collected by watching him pull each item in and out of his coat jacket . Manny can engage in dialogue with other characters through conversation trees to gain hints of what needs to be done to solve the puzzles or to progress the plot . As in most LucasArts adventure games , the player can never die or otherwise get into a no @-@ win situation ( that prevents completion of the game ) . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Grim Fandango takes place in the Land of the Dead ( the Eighth Underworld ) , where recently departed souls aim to make their way to the Land of Eternal Rest ( the Ninth Underworld ) . Good deeds in life are rewarded by access to better travel packages to assist in making the journey of the soul , the best of which is the Number Nine , a train that takes four minutes to reach the gate to the Ninth Underworld . Souls who did not lead a kind life are left to travel through the Land of the Dead on foot , which would take around four years . Such souls often lose faith in the existence of the Ninth Underworld and instead find jobs in the Land of the Dead . The travel agents of the Department of Death act as the Grim Reaper to escort the souls from the mortal world to the Land of the Dead , and then determine which mode of transport the soul has merited . Each year on the Day of the Dead , these souls are allowed to visit their families in the Land of the Living . 
 The souls in the Land of the Dead appear as skeletal calaca figures . Alongside them are demons that have been summoned to help with the more mundane tasks of day @-@ to @-@ day life , such as vehicle maintenance . The souls themselves can suffer death @-@ within @-@ death by being " sprouted " , the result of being shot with " <unk> " <unk> darts that cause flowers to grow out through the bones . Many of the characters are Mexican and occasional Spanish words are interspersed into the English dialog , resulting in Spanglish . Many of the characters smoke , following a film noir tradition ; the manual asks players to consider that every smoker in the game is dead . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game is divided into four acts , each taking place on November 2 on four consecutive years . Manuel " Manny " Calavera is a travel agent at the Department of Death in the city of El Marrow , forced into his job to work off a debt " to the powers that be " . Manny is frustrated with being assigned clients that must take the four @-@ year journey and is threatened to be fired by his boss , Don <unk> , if he does not come up with better clients . Manny steals a client , Mercedes " Meche " Colomar , from his co @-@ worker Domino Hurley . The Department computers assign Meche to the four @-@ year journey even though Manny believes she should have a guaranteed spot on the " Number Nine " luxury express train due to her pureness of heart in her life . After setting Meche on her way , Manny investigates further and finds that Domino and Don have been rigging the system to deny many clients Double N tickets , hoarding them for the boss of the criminal underworld , Hector LeMans . LeMans then sells the tickets at an exorbitant price to those that can afford it . Manny recognizes that he cannot stop Hector at present and instead , with the help of his driver and speed demon Glottis , he tries to find Meche on her journey in the nearby Petrified Forest . During the trip Manny encounters Salvador " Sal " <unk> , the leader of the small underground organization Lost Souls Alliance ( LSA ) , who is aware of Hector 's plans and recruits Manny to help . Manny arrives at the small port city of Rubacava and finds that he has beaten Meche there , and waits for her to show up . 
 A year passes , and the city of Rubacava has grown . Manny now runs his own nightclub off a converted <unk> near the edge of the Forest . Manny learns from Olivia <unk> that Don has been " sprouted " for letting the scandal be known and that Meche was recently seen with Domino leaving the port . Manny gives chase and a year later tracks them to a coral mining plant on the Edge of the World . Domino has been holding Meche there as a trap to lure Manny . All of Domino 's clients who had their tickets stolen are also being held there and used as slave labor , both to make a profit with the coral mining and as a way to keep Hector 's scandal quiet . Domino tries to convince Manny to take over his position in the plant seeing as he has no alternative and can spend the rest of eternity with Meche but he refuses . After rescuing Meche , Manny defeats Domino by causing him to fall into a rock crusher . Manny , along with Meche , Glottis and all the souls being held at the plant then escape from the Edge of the World . 
 The three travel for another year until they reach the terminus for the Number Nine train before the Ninth Underworld . Unfortunately , the Gate Keeper to the Ninth Underworld won 't let the souls progress without their tickets , mistakenly believing they have sold them . Meanwhile , Glottis has fallen deathly ill . Manny learns from demons stationed at the terminus that the only way to revive Glottis is to travel at high speeds to restore Glottis ' purpose for being summoned . Manny and the others devise a makeshift fuel source to create a " rocket " train cart , quickly taking Manny and Meche back to Rubacava and saving Glottis ' life . The three return to El Marrow , now found to be fully in Hector 's control and renamed as Nuevo Marrow . Manny regroups with Sal and his expanded LSA and with the help of Olivia , who volunteered to join the gang earlier in Rubacava , and is able to learn about Hector 's current activities . Further investigation reveals that Hector not only has been hoarding the Number Nine tickets , but has created counterfeit versions that he has sold to others . Manny tries to confront Hector but is lured into another trap by Olivia , who has also captured Sal , and is taken to Hector 's greenhouse to be sprouted . Manny is able to defeat Hector after Sal sacrifices himself to prevent Olivia from interfering . Manny and Meche are able to find the real Double N tickets , including the one that Meche should have received . Manny makes sure the rest of the tickets are given to their rightful owners ; in turn , he is granted his own for his good deeds . Together , Manny and Meche board the Number Nine for their happy journey to the Ninth Underworld while Glottis who can 't join them waves tearfully goodbye . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background and project inception = = = 
 Grim Fandango 's development was led by project leader Tim Schafer , co @-@ designer of Day of the Tentacle and creator of Full Throttle and the more recent Psychonauts and Brütal Legend . Schafer had begun work on the game soon after completing Full Throttle in June 1995 , though he conceived the idea of a Day of the Dead @-@ themed adventure before production on the latter began . Grim Fandango was an attempt by LucasArts to rejuvenate the graphic adventure genre , in decline by 1998 . According to Schafer , the game was developed on a $ 3 million budget . It was the first LucasArts adventure since Labyrinth not to use the SCUMM engine , instead using the Sith engine , pioneered by Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II , as the basis of the new GrimE engine . The GrimE engine was built using the scripting language Lua . This design decision was due to LucasArts programmer Bret <unk> 's interest in the language , and is considered one of the first uses of Lua in gaming applications . The game 's success led to the language 's use in many other games and applications , including Escape from Monkey Island and Baldur 's Gate . 
 = = = 3D design = = = 
 Grim Fandango mixed static pre @-@ rendered background images with 3D characters and objects . Part of this decision was based on how the calaca figures would appear in three dimensions . There were more than 90 sets and 50 characters in the game to be created and rendered ; Manny 's character alone comprised 250 polygons . The development team found that by utilizing three @-@ dimensional models to pre @-@ render the backgrounds , they could alter the camera shot to achieve more effective or dramatic angles for certain scenes simply by re @-@ rendering the background , instead of having to have an artist redraw the background for a traditional 2D adventure game . The team adapted the engine to allow Manny 's head to move separately from his body to make the player aware of important objects nearby . The 3D engine also aided in the choreography between the spoken dialog and body and arm movements of the characters . Additionally , full @-@ motion video cutscenes were incorporated to advance the plot , using the same in @-@ game style for the characters and backgrounds to make them nearly indistinguishable from the actual game . 
 = = = Themes and influences = = = 
 The game combines several Aztec beliefs of the afterlife and underworld with 1930s Art Deco design motifs and a dark plot reminiscent of the film noir genre . The Aztec motifs of the game were influenced by Schafer 's decade @-@ long fascination with folklore , stemming from an anthropology class he took at University of California Berkeley , and talks with folklorist Alan <unk> , with Schafer recognizing that the four @-@ year journey of the soul in the afterlife would set the stage for an adventure game . Schafer stated that once he had set on the Afterlife setting : " Then I thought , what role would a person want to play in a Day of the Dead scenario ? You 'd want to be the grim reaper himself . That 's how Manny got his job . Then I imagined him picking up people in the land of the living and bringing them to the land of the dead , like he 's really just a glorified limo or taxi driver . So the idea came of Manny having this really mundane job that looks glamorous because he has the robe and the scythe , but really , he 's just punching the clock . " Schafer recounted a Mexican folklore about how the dead were buried with two bags of gold to be used in the afterlife , one on their chest and one hidden in their coffin , such that if the spirits in the afterlife stole the one on the chest , they would still have the hidden bag of gold ; this idea of a criminal element in the afterlife led to the idea of a crime @-@ ridden , film noir style to the world , triggered too many ideas that they had to then trim down . The division of the game into four years was a way of breaking the game 's overall puzzle into four discrete sections . Each year was divided into several non @-@ linear branches of puzzles that all had to be solved before the player could progress to the next year . 
 Schafer opted to give the conversation @-@ heavy game the flavor of film noir set in the 1930s and 1940s , stating that " there 's something that I feel is really honest about the way people talked that 's different than modern movies " . He was partially inspired by novels written by Raymond Chandler and Dashiell Hammett . Several film noir movies were also inspiration for much of the game 's plot and characters . Tim Schafer stated that the true inspiration was drawn from films like Double Indemnity , in which a weak and undistinguished insurance salesman finds himself entangled in a murder plot . The design and early plot are fashioned after films such as Chinatown and Glengarry Glen Ross . Several scenes in Grim Fandango are directly inspired by the genre 's films such as The Maltese Falcon , The Third Man , Key Largo , and most notably Casablanca : two characters in the game 's second act are directly modeled after the roles played by Peter Lorre and Claude Rains in the film . The main villain , Hector LeMans , was designed to resemble Sydney Greenstreet 's character of Signor Ferrari from Casablanca . His voice was also modeled after Greenstreet , complete with his trademark chuckle . 
 Visually , the game drew inspiration from various sources : the skeletal character designs were based largely on the calaca figures used in Mexican Day of the Dead festivities , while the architecture ranged from Art Deco skyscrapers to an Aztec temple . The team turned to LucasArts artist Peter Chan to create the calaca figures . The art of Ed " Big Daddy " Roth was used as inspiration for the designs of the hot rods and the demon characters like Glottis . 
 Originally , Schafer had come up with the name " Deeds of the Dead " for the game 's title , as he had originally planned Manny to be a real estate agent in the Land of the Dead . Other potential titles included " The Long Siesta " and " Dirt Nap " , before he came up with the title Grim Fandango . 
 = = = Dialogue and music = = = 
 The game featured a large cast for voice acting in the game 's dialog and cutscenes , employing many Latino actors to help with the Spanish slang . Voice actors included Tony Plana as Manny , María Canals as Meche , Alan Blumenfeld as Glottis , and Jim Ward as Hector . Schafer credits Plana for helping to deepen the character of Manny , as the voice actor was a native Spanish speaker and suggested alternate dialog for the game that was more natural for casual Spanish conversations . The game 's music , a mix of an orchestral score , South American folk music , jazz , swing and big band sounds , was composed at LucasArts by Peter McConnell and inspired by the likes of Duke Ellington and Benny Goodman as well as film composers Max Steiner and Adolph Deutsch . The score featured live musicians that McConnell knew or made contact with in San Francisco 's Mission District , including a mariachi band . The soundtrack was released as a CD in 1998 . 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 Originally , the game was to be shipped in the first half of 1998 but was delayed ; as a result , the game was released on October 30 , 1998 , the Friday before November 2 , the actual date of the Day of the Dead celebration . Even with the delay , the team had to drop several of the puzzles and characters from the game , including a climactic five @-@ step puzzle against Hector LeMans at the conclusion of the game ; Schafer later noted that they would have needed one to two more years to implement their original designs . 
 = = = Remastered version = = = 
 = = = = Acquisition of rights and announcement = = = = 
 A remastered release of Grim Fandango was announced in June 2014 during Sony Computer Entertainment 's press event of the 2014 Electronic Entertainment Expo , with a simultaneous release for the PlayStation 4 , PlayStation Vita , Microsoft Windows , Mac OS X , and Linux platforms on January 27 , 2015 . It was later released for Android and iOS on May 5 , 2015 . 
 The remastered version was predicated on the transition of LucasArts from a developer and publisher into a licensor and publisher in 2013 shortly after its acquisition by Disney . Under new management , LucasArts licensed several of its intellectual properties ( IP ) , including Grim Fandango , to outside developers . Schafer was able to acquire the rights to the game with financial assistance from Sony , and started the process of building out the remaster within Double Fine Productions . Schafer said that the sale of LucasArts to Disney had reminded them of the past efforts of former LucasArts president Darrell <unk> to release the older LucasArts titles as Legacy Properties , such as the 2009 rerelease of The Secret of Monkey Island . Schafer also noted that they had tried to acquire the property from Lucasarts in the years prior , but the frequent change in management stalled progress . When they began to inquire about the rights with Disney and LucasArts following its acquisition , they found that Sony , through their vice president of publisher and developer relations Adam Boyes , was also looking to acquire the rights . Boyes stated that Sony had been interested in working with a wide array of developers for the PlayStation 4 , and was also inspired to seek Grim Fandango 's after seeing developers like Capcom and Midway Games revive older properties . Boyes ' determination was supported by John <unk> , VP of Production for Disney Interactive , who also shared memories of the game , and was able to bring in contacts to track down the game 's assets . After discovering they were vying for the same property , Schafer and Boyes agreed to work together to acquire the IP and subsequent funding , planning to make the re @-@ release a remastered version . Sony did not ask for any of IP rights for the game , instead only asking Double Fine to give the PlayStation platforms console exclusivity in exchange for funding support , similar to their Pub Fund scheme they use to support independent developers . 
 = = = = Challenges = = = = 
 A major complication in remastering the original work was having many of the critical game files go missing or on archaic formats . A large number of backup files were made on Digital Linear Tape ( <unk> ) which Disney / LucasArts had been able to recover for Double Fine , but the company had no drives to read the tapes . Former LucasArts sound engineer Jory Prum had managed to save a <unk> drive and was able to extract all of the game 's audio development data from the tapes . 
 Schafer noted at the time of Grim Fandango 's original development , retention of code was not as rigorous as present day standards , and in some cases , Schafer believes the only copies of some files were unintentionally taken by employees when they had left LucasArts . As such , Schafer and his team have been going back through past employee records to try to trace down any of them and ask for any files they may have saved . In other cases , they have had difficulty in identifying elements on the low @-@ resolution artwork of the original game , such as an emblem on one character 's hat , and have had to go looking for original concept art to figure out the design . 
 Once original assets were identified , as to be used to present the " classic " look of the game in the Remastered editor , Double Fine worked to improve the overall look for modern computers . The textures and lighting models for the characters were improved , in particular for Manny . Schafer has likened the remastering approach to The Criterion Collection film releases in providing a high @-@ fidelity version of the game without changing the story or the characters . 
 In addition to his own developers , Schafer reached out to players who had created unofficial patches and graphical improvements on the original game , and modifications needed to keep it running in <unk> , and gained their help to improve the game 's assets for the remastered version . One such feature was a modified control scheme that converted the game 's movement controls from the tank @-@ style controls to a point and click @-@ style interface . Schafer noted they created the game with tank @-@ style control as it was popular with other games like Resident Evil at the time , but recognized it did not work well within the adventure game genre . Schafer contacted Tobias Pfaff who created the point @-@ and @-@ click modification to obtain access to his code to incorporate into the remastered version . 
 = = = = Later development and new features = = = = 
 Double Fine demonstrated an in @-@ progress version of the remastered game at the 2014 IndieCade event in October 2014 ; new features included higher @-@ resolution textures and improved resolution for the character models as well as having real @-@ time lighting models , and the ability to switch back and forth between this presentation and the original graphics at the touch of a control . The remastered game runs in 4 : 3 aspect ratio but has an option to stretch this to a 16 : 9 ratio rather than render in a native 16 : 9 ratio . The remaster includes improvements to the control scheme developed by Pfaff 's patch and other alternate control schemes in addition to the original tank @-@ like controls , including analogue controls for console versions and point @-@ and @-@ click controls for computer versions . The game 's soundtrack was fully orchestrated through performances of the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra ( who also performed the soundtrack for Double Fine 's Broken Age ) . The remastered version also includes developer commentary , which can be activated via the options menu and listened to at various points in the game . The PlayStation version also features cloud saving between the PS4 and Vita versions . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = = Original soundtrack = = = 
 Grim Fandango has an original soundtrack that combines orchestral score , South American folk music , jazz , bebop , swing , and big band music . It also has various influences from traditional Russian , Celtic , Mexican , Spanish , and Indian strings culture . It was composed and produced by Peter McConnell at LucasArts . Others credited are Jeff Kliment ( Engineer , Mixed By , Mastered ) , and Hans Christian <unk> ( Additional Music Production ) . 
 The soundtrack was released in 1998 as a CD album with 32 tracks and sold at the LucasArts company store . 
 The soundtrack was very well received . IGN called it a " beautiful soundtrack that you 'll find yourself listening to even after you 're done with the game " . <unk> said " the compositions and performances are so good that listening to this album on a stand @-@ alone basis can make people feel like they 're in a bar back then " . RPGFan said " the pieces are beautifully composed , wonderfully played ( ... ) . has a stellar soundtrack with music that easily stands alone outside the context of the game . This CD was an absolute pleasure to listen to and comes highly recommended . " Game Revolution in its game review praised as one of the " most memorable soundtracks ever to grace the inside of a cranial cavity where an ear drum used to be . " PC Gamer in its 2014 list of Top 100 Games , acclaimed Grim Fandango for including " one of the best soundtracks in PC gaming history " . 
 In 1999 's Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Annual Interactive Achievement Awards , the soundtrack was nominated in the category of " Outstanding Achievement in Sound and Music " . It was also lauded by GameSpot , which awarded it the " Best PC Music awards " , and included it in the " Ten Best PC Game Soundtracks " list in 1999 . 
 = = = Remastered soundtrack = = = 
 Peter McConnell announced that the game 's soundtrack will be fully orchestrated through performances of the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra for the remastered version of the game being released in 2015 . After the original Pro Tools sound files were recovered , McConnell found that some of the samples he had used originally did not sound good , and the team opted to re @-@ orchestrate the score . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Grim Fandango gained critical acclaim upon its release . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the game scores of 93 % and 94 / 100 . Critics lauded the art direction in particular , with GameSpot rating the visual design as " consistently great " . PC Zone emphasized the production as a whole calling the direction , costumes , characters , music , and atmosphere expertly done . They also commented the game would make a " superb film " . The San Francisco Chronicle stated " Grim Fandango feels like a wild dance through a cartoonish film @-@ noir adventure . Its wacky characters , seductive puzzle @-@ filled plot and a nearly invisible interface allow players to lose themselves in the game just as cinemagoers might get lost in a movie . " The Houston Chronicle , in naming Grim Fandango the best game of 1998 along with Half @-@ Life , complimented the graphics calling them " jaw @-@ dropping " and commented that the game " is full of both dark and light humor . " IGN summed its review up by saying the game was the " best adventure game " it had ever seen . 
 The game also received criticisms from the media . Several reviewers noted that there were difficulties experienced with the interface , requiring a certain learning curve to get used to , and selected camera angles for some puzzles were poorly chosen . The use of elevators in the game was particularly noted as troublesome . The review from Adventure Gamers expressed dislike of the soundtrack , and , at times , " found it too heavy and not well suited to the game 's theme " . A Computer and Video Games review also noted that the game had continuous and long data loading from the CD @-@ ROM that interrupted the game and " spoils the fluidity of some sequences and causes niggling delays " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Grim Fandango won several awards after its release in 1998 . PC Gamer selected the game as the 1998 " Adventure Game of the Year " . The game won IGN 's " Best Adventure Game of the Year " in 1998 , while GameSpot awarded it their " Best of E3 1998 " , " PC Adventure Game of the Year " , " PC Game of the Year " , " Best PC Graphics for Artistic Design " , and " Best PC Music awards " . GameSpot named Grim Fandango its Game of the Year for 1998 , and in the following year included the game in their " Ten Best PC Game Soundtracks " and was selected as the 10th " Best PC Ending " by their readership . In 1999 , Grim Fandango won " Computer Adventure Game of the Year " for the 1999 Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Annual Interactive Achievement Awards . It was also nominated for " Game of the Year " , " Outstanding Achievement in Art / Graphics " , " Outstanding Achievement in Character or Story Development " and " Outstanding Achievement in Sound and Music " that same year . 
 Grim Fandango has been included in several publishers ' " Top Games " lists well after its release . GameSpot inducted the game into their " Greatest Games of All Time " in 2003 citing , " Ask just about anyone who has played Grim Fandango , and he or she will agree that it 's one of the greatest games of all time . " GameSpy also added the game to their Hall of Fame in 2004 , further describing it as the seventh " Most Underrated Game of All Time " as of 2003 . Adventure Gamers listed Grim Fandango as the seventh " Top Adventure Game of All Time " in 2004 ; in their 2011 list of " Top 100 All @-@ Time Adventures " it was listed as # 1 . In 2007 , IGN included the game in the " Top 25 PC Games " ( as 15th ) and " Top 100 Games of All Time " ( at 36th ) , citing that " LucasArts ' second @-@ to @-@ last stab at the classic adventure genre may very well be the most original and brilliant one ever made . " Grim Fandango remained as the 20th in the Top 25 PC Games in IGN 's 2009 list . 
 = = = = Lists of awards and rankings = = = = 
 = = = Sales and aftermath = = = 
 Grim Fandango sales were poor despite the positive reception given to the game . Initial estimates suggested that the game sold well during the 1998 holiday season . Total cumulative worldwide sales are estimated between 100 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 units . The game is commonly considered a commercial failure , even though LucasArts stated that " Grim Fandango met domestic expectations and exceeded them worldwide " . Tim Schafer has affirmed that the game was profitable . 
 While LucasArts proceeded to produce Escape from Monkey Island in 2000 , they canceled development of sequels to Sam & Max Hit the Road and Full Throttle stating that " After careful evaluation of current market place realities and underlying economic considerations , we 've decided that this was not the appropriate time to launch a graphic adventure on the PC . " Subsequently , the studio dismissed many of the people involved with their adventure games , some of whom went on to set up Telltale Games , creating an episodic series of Sam & Max games . These events , along with other changes in the video game market towards action @-@ based games , are seen as primary causes in the decline of the adventure game genre . Grim Fandango 's underperformance was seen as a sign that the genre was commercially " dead " to rival Sierra , as well . LucasArts stated in 2006 that they do not plan on returning to adventure games until the " next decade " . Ultimately the studio stopped developing video games in 2013 after The Walt Disney Company acquisition of Lucasfilm , and was dissolved shortly thereafter . 
 Tim Schafer left LucasArts shortly after Grim Fandango 's release , and created his own company , Double Fine Productions , in 2000 along with many of those involved in the development of Grim Fandango . The company has found similar critical success with their first title , Psychonauts . Schafer stated that while there is strong interest from fans and that he " would love to go back and spend time with the characters from any game [ he 's ] worked on " , a sequel to Grim Fandango or his other previous games is unlikely as " I always want to make something new . " With the help of developers such as Double Fine and Telltale Games , adventure games saw a resurgence in the 2010s , with financially successful titles such as Broken Age , The Walking Dead , and The Wolf Among Us . 
 = = = Remastered version = = = 
 Grim Fandango Remastered has received similar positive reception as the original release , with many critics continuing to praise the game 's story , characters , and soundtrack . They also found the developer 's commentary to be very insightful to the history of the game . Reviewers were disappointed at the lack of an auto @-@ save system , as well as the game not receiving a full high @-@ definition upgrade , leaving the higher @-@ resolution characters somewhat out of place with the original 3D backgrounds . Many reviewers also noted that the puzzles , though a staple of the day when Grim Fandango was first released , remain somewhat obtuse with solutions that are not clear even after the player solves them , and that a hint system , as was added to the Monkey Island remake , would have been very helpful . The game 's pacing , also unchanged from the original version , was also found harder to grasp considering the direction taken in modern games , in both the pacing within the game 's four acts , and the time taken to move around and between rooms . In his review for Eurogamer , Richard Cobbett warned players to " be careful of rose @-@ tinted memories " , that while the remastered version is faithful to the original , it does show aspects of the original game that have become outdated in more modern video game development . Wired 's Laura Hudson considered the remastered version highlighted how the original game was " an artifact of its time , an exceptional piece of interactive art wrapped inextricably around the technology and conventions of its time in a way that reveals both their limitations and the brilliance they were capable of producing " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2005 The Guardian characterized the game as " The last genuine classic to come from LucasArts , the company that helped define adventure games , Tim Schafer 's noir @-@ pastiche follows skull @-@ faced Manny Calavera through a bureaucratic parody of the Land of the Dead . With a look that takes from both Mexican mythology and art deco , Grim Fandango is as unique an artistic statement as mainstream gaming has managed to offer . While loved by devotees , its limited sales prompted LucasArts to back away from original adventures to simply exploit franchises . " 
 Eurogamer 's Jeffrey Matulef , in a 2012 retrospective look , believed that Grim Fandango 's combination of film noir and the adventure game genre was the first of its kind and a natural fit due to the script @-@ heavy nature of both , and would later help influence games with similar themes like the Ace Attorney series and L.A. Noire . 
 Grim Fandango has been considered a representative title demonstrating video games as an art form ; the game was selected in 2012 as a candidate for public voting for inclusion within the Smithsonian Institution 's " The Art of Video Games " exhibit , while the Museum of Modern Art seeks to install the game as an exhibit as part of its permanent collection within the Department of Architecture and Design . 
 The game was included in the " Game Masters " exhibition , organized in 2012 by the Australian Centre for the Moving Image ( ACMI ) ; an event devoted to explore the faces and the history behind computer games . Tim Schafer was featured as the creative force behind Grim Fandango , within the exhibition section called " Game Changers " , crediting him along a few other visionary game designers for having " pushed the boundaries of game design and storytelling , introducing new genres , creating our best @-@ loved characters and revolutionising the way we understand and play games " 
 Grim Fandango has been the centerpiece of a large fan community for the game that has continued to be active more than 10 years after the game 's release . Such fan communities include the Grim Fandango Network and the Department of Death , both of which include fan art and fiction in addition to other original content . 
 In an interview with Kotaku after the announcement of the remake , Schafer stated that he has long considered the aspect of a Grim Fandango sequel to further expand on the setting that was created for the game . He felt the story would be a difficult component , as either they would have to figure a means to bring Manny back from his final reward , or otherwise build the story around a new character . However , one option he has considered to alleviate the issue is by creating an adventure game using an open @-@ world mechanic similar to the Grand Theft Auto series . 
 = Peter de Maulay = 
 Peter de Maulay or Peter de <unk> ( died 1241 ) was a nobleman and administrator who was one of King John of England 's " evil counsellors " . First appearing in the historical record in 1202 , Maulay was in England by 1204 and serving as an official of John . During the rebellions of the end of John 's reign , Maulay supported the king and was given custody of the king 's younger son as well as important prisoners . Maulay continued to serve the new king after 1216 but ran into difficulties with the regents for the young King Henry III and was accused of treason in 1221 . Although cleared of the treason accusation , Maulay retired to his lands in late 1221 . In 1223 Maulay 's lands at Upavon were confiscated by the king but were returned within a few months . Upavon was again confiscated in 1229 and given to another noble , but in 1233 King Henry regranted the manor to Maulay , an event which led to a revolt by Richard Marshal , the Earl of Pembroke , against the king . In 1241 Maulay went on crusade and died in late 1241 , probably in the Holy Land while on crusade . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Maulay 's parentage is unknown , but he originated from the Maulay region in Poitou . He appears to have had a younger brother named Aimery , who possibly was the same as an Aimery de Maulay who owned lands in <unk> and La Rochelle between 1218 and 1259 . In a monastic chronicle , Peter is said to have relinquished his lands in France to Aimery in 1204 , after the overlordship of the lands passed from King John of England to King Philip II of France . Peter 's first appearance in the historical record was in 1202 , when he received land around Loudun in exchange for <unk> . Under John , he was appointed an usher in the king 's household , where he soon became a close advisor of the king . He was considered one of the " evil counsellors " of John by the chronicler Roger of Wendover . 
 After John 's loss of Normandy , Maulay went to England and was given the manor of Upavon in Wiltshire . His grant of the manor was at the king 's pleasure , because the manor , which had been held by a noble who forfeited his land in England by staying in Normandy after its loss , would need to be restored to its rightful holder if John recovered Normandy . He served as an envoy to Rome in 1213 and in 1214 was in command of royal forces at La Rochelle in France . In 1214 he married Isabella , the daughter and heiress of Robert of Thornham . Robert had died in 1211 , so through his wife , Maulay acquired the Barony of Mulgrave in Yorkshire . Maulay paid the king 7000 marks as a fine for the right to marry Isabella , one of the highest fines paid for the right to marry under John . According to the medieval chronicler Ralph of Coggeshall , Maulay was the murderer of John 's nephew Arthur of Brittany . 
 When the barons of England revolted against John in 1215 , Maulay was given command of Corfe Castle by John . Along with Corfe , Maulay was also given custody of John 's younger son , Richard of Cornwall . He was also given Gomshall in Surrey . In 1216 he was given the office of Sheriff of Dorset and Somerset , where he made a name for himself with his exactions and heavy profiteering . Besides the custody of Richard of Cornwall , Maulay was also responsible for supervising the confinement of John 's niece , Eleanor of Brittany , who , as the daughter of Geoffrey II , Duke of Brittany , elder brother of King John , had a strong claim to the English throne and had been held captive since 1202 . At times , he was also responsible for keeping John 's wife , Isabella of <unk> and his heir , Prince Henry , safe from rebels , as long as they were at Corfe . 
 = = Under Henry III = = 
 Maulay remained in office under the new king , Henry III , who succeeded to the throne in late 1216 . While at Corfe , he had custody of William of Lancaster , who had been captured by the royalist side at Rochester in 1215 . Ranulf de Blondeville , the Earl of Chester , attempted to secure William 's freedom but was rebuffed by Maulay , leading the earl to threaten to depart England and the king 's cause and go on crusade . In early 1217 Maulay was ordered by the regent , William Marshal , to surrender control of Sherborne Castle and Somerset to William Longespee , the Earl of Salisbury , to help secure the return of Longespee to the royal cause . But Maulay refused to do so . In October 1217 , Maulay was summoned to the royal court to answer charges that he had waged a private war against the earl over control of Somerset , and that he had broken a truce that had held between the two men . The dispute was finally solved in February 1218 when Maulay was confirmed by the regent as custodian of Sherborne Castle and in the office of Sheriff of Somerset . Maulay compensated Longespee for his loss with a payment of 500 pounds , and a further payment of 1000 pounds by the government and custody of a royal ward . 
 Maulay received a total of <unk> marks by 1221 from ransoms paid by 16 prisoners he held at Corfe . He also paid nothing into the Exchequer from Somerset or Dorset for the period from 1218 to 1220 , with the total owed to the government amounting to a bit over 1500 pounds . Maulay 's extortions , however , led to him losing custody of Richard of Cornwall in 1220 . 
 Maulay brought Richard of Cornwall to London to attend his brother 's second coronation , which occurred on 17 May 1220 . 
 = = Treason accusations = = 
 On 20 May 1221 Maulay was accused of treason by Richard Mucegros and Hubert de Burgh before the king . The specific crime was alleged to be a plot to hand over Eleanor of Brittany , then held at Corfe Castle , to King Louis IX of France . Maulay was imprisoned for a short time , but on 4 June was released after surrendering Corfe to the king . He was allowed to retain his sheriffdom . The accusation may have owed more to the fact that Maulay had recently taken Mucegros ' lands into custody because Mucegros had failed to make a payment due for a royal fine . The event may also have been used by de Burgh as an opportunity to weaken Maulay 's patron and de Burgh 's rival for power , Peter des Roches , while des Roches was out of England . The loss of Corfe by one of des Roches ' primary supporters would have weakened des Roches ' standing and power . In July Peter des Roches returned to England and in late July was instrumental in the clearing of Maulay from the charges of treason . Maulay was not given back custody of Corfe , but on 29 July the royal government discharged the 7000 marks that Maulay still owed for his marriage fine . The stated reason for the release of this debt was to compensate Maulay for his expenses while controlling Corfe , but the real reason appears to have been to compensate for the loss of Corfe . In late 1221 Maulay agreed to go on crusade with Peter des Roches and Falkes de Breauté , another of des Roches supporters . The loss of Damietta in September meant that the three men postponed their departure , and in November 1221 Maulay was replaced as sheriff . In return for Maulay 's agreement to the ouster , the Exchequer wrote off more debts that Maulay owed the government , this time over 8800 marks . Maulay retired to his lands in Yorkshire . 
 = = Upavon case = = 
 In February 1223 , Maulay forfeited Upavon to the king . This was part of a string of confiscations that struck at supporters of des Roches , including William de Cantilupe , Breauté , and Robert de Vieuxpont , by taking back grants that had been made earlier and which were held at the king 's will . The seizures were made to teach the nobles a lesson and curb their dissension from the royal government , which was in the hands of Roches ' rival de Burgh . Most of the manors , including Upavon , were returned to their previous holders in April after a settlement between de Burgh and those who resented his government . Around this time Maulay began work on the castle of Mulgrave Castle , in Yorkshire , which was part of his wife 's inheritance . In June and July 1224 , Maulay was present at on the royal side at the siege of Bedford Castle , which was held by de Breauté against the government . In 1225 Maulay claimed that he had sworn to King John that he would not give up custody of the royal castles until after John 's son came of age . Maulay lost Upavon to the king again in 1229 , with the king <unk> Upavon to Gilbert Basset . This grant to Basset was by charter , with the lands to be held in fee . Maulay claimed that he only gave up his tenure because of threats by de Burgh . 
 Maulay returned to royal service in 1230 when he joined the royal expedition to Brittany and was once more at the royal court in 1232 as a follower of Peter des Roches . Maulay regained Upavon in 1233 , after the king reopened the case . Henry justified his action as being exercised " per <unk> nostrum " , or through his own will . Henry opened a case of quo warranto , and then declined to recognize his own charter as valid , thus granting the manor to Maulay . Although the case could be made that Maulay 's right to the manor was better than Basset 's , it is more probable that the dispute over Upavon and its ownership was the opening move in an effort to curtail the influence of Richard Marshall , the Earl of Pembroke . It was also an attempt to turn back grants made by the king to de Burgh 's supporters , now that de Burgh had fallen from power . The royal actions led to conflict between Henry III and the barons , because of Henry 's grant of the manor to Basset . The restoration to Maulay and Basset 's deprivation were considered illegal by many of the nobles , and led to a revolt by Basset and Marshal , who was Basset 's overlord . Maulay was seen as a non @-@ Englishman who was profiting over a popular English noble , Basset . Maulay was briefly in disgrace but managed to return to favour , and was named constable of Devizes in January 1234 , his first royal appointment since 1221 . He was granted the office of Sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1236 , perhaps owing these offices more to his former ward , Richard of Cornwall , than to his patron des Roches , who fell from power in 1234 . Des Roches ' loss of power did not adversely affect Maulay 's royal service . Maulay was present at the baptism of Prince Edward , and was one of the nobles who raised the infant from the baptismal font . 
 = = Last years and legacy = = 
 Maulay had vowed to go on crusade in 1220 , and in 1241 he finally set out for the Holy Land , along with Richard of Cornwall . He died later in 1241 , probably while still in the Holy Land . His wife died before him and his heir was his son Peter de Maulay . Besides his heir , Maulay had two other sons – Robert and Stephen , and a daughter , Hilary , who married Piers de Brus , son and heir of Piers de Brus , the Lord of Skelton . Maulay had endowed a chantry at Meaux Abbey in Yorkshire in memory of his wife . He also confirmed grants of lands to Eskdale Priory , a Grandmontine house founded by Isabella 's father , and to Nostell Priory . Maulay was also a benefactor of the Knights of Saint Thomas , a military religious order for Englishmen . 
 = Henry Wells ( general ) = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Henry Wells , KBE , CB , DSO ( 22 March 1898 – 20 October 1973 ) was a senior officer in the Australian Army . Serving as Chief of the General Staff from 1954 to 1958 , Wells ' career culminated with his appointment as the first Chairman , Chiefs of Staff Committee , a position marking him as the professional head of the Australian Military . He served in this capacity from March 1958 until March 1959 , when he retired from the army . 
 Born in Victoria , Wells began his career in the Australian Army in 1916 when he entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon . Graduating as a lieutenant three years later , he served in a variety of staff and instructional positions before the outbreak of the Second World War . Initially posted to the 7th Division as a staff officer in 1940 , Wells was promoted to lieutenant colonel and made senior liaison officer to I Corps . Serving in Greece and North Africa , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his leadership at El Alamein . Transferred to the South West Pacific theatre in 1943 as a brigadier , he served in the New Guinea Campaign with the headquarters of II Corps and later in the Borneo campaign with I Corps . 
 Wells was promoted to major general in 1946 and appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff . Following promotion to lieutenant general , he was made Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , British Commonwealth Forces Korea from 1953 to 1954 , serving during the last days of the war . In retirement , Wells was a director of several companies . Aged 75 , he died in 1973 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Wells was born in the Victorian town of Kyneton on 22 March 1898 , the youngest of seven children to Arthur Wells , a draper , and his wife Elizabeth ( née Carter ) . Educated at Kyneton High School , Wells entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in February 1916 , where he was a keen sportsman . Graduating from the college in December 1919 , he was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Australian Army , and posted to England for further training . 
 On his return to Australia , Wells was appointed as adjutant and quartermaster of the 8th Light Horse Regiment in 1921 . The following year , he was allocated to the 9th Light Horse Regiment . In February 1926 , Wells was briefly appointed brigade major of the 6th Cavalry Brigade , before becoming an instructor at the Small Arms School , Sydney , during July . On 14 December that year , Wells married Lorna Irene <unk> in a ceremony at St John 's Church of England , Cessnock ; the couple would later have two sons . 
 During 1927 , Wells was assigned to the Royal Military College , Duntroon as a company commander and promoted to captain that December . Returning to the Small Arms School as an instructor in 1931 , he was dispatched to England and attended the Staff College , Camberley between 1935 and 1936 . Arriving back in Australia , Wells was made adjutant and quartermaster of the 4th / 3rd Battalion , and later brigade major of the 1st Infantry Brigade . During 1938 , he was reposted to Royal Military College , Duntroon as a lecturer on tactics . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Greece and North Africa = = = 
 On 15 May 1940 , Wells transferred to the Second Australian Imperial Force for active service during the Second World War . Promoted to major , he was posted to the headquarters of the 7th Division . Wells proceeded with the division to the Middle East , where , on arriving in December , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and posted as senior liaison officer to I Corps . During this time , the Australian 6th Division and I Corps Headquarters were diverted for service in the Greek Campaign . 
 Wells arrived in Greece on 7 March 1941 , with an advance party of Lieutenant General Sir Thomas Blamey 's I Corps staff . On 10 April , a plan was formulated to withdraw Greek and Commonwealth troops from their positions in the <unk> pass of the Vermion Mountains to the River Aliakmon . To carry this out , Blamey despatched Wells to coordinate the movement of the 12th Greek Division west to its new position . The withdrawal began on 12 April , but the force 's movement was hampered because of lack of vehicles and the division did not arrive until late evening the following day . During this time , Wells travelled between I Corps Headquarters and the 12th Greek Division , organising and coordinating the division 's movement , despite frequent air attacks on the roads . 
 On 24 April 1941 , Wells embarked from Greece along with the remainder of the I Corps Headquarters during the British and Commonwealth withdrawal . Commended for his " conspicuous skill , ability and energy " and fostering " mutual confidence and goodwill between the Allied forces " , Wells was recommended for the Distinguished Service Order , but was subsequently appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his services in Greece . The announcement of the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 30 December 1941 . Then Brigadier Stanley Savige later wrote of Wells during the campaign : " Tireless in his long journeys , helpful in every possible way , and courageous in all circumstances " . For his " gallant and distinguished services " during this time , Wells was additionally Mentioned in Despatches . 
 Following Greece , the headquarters of I Corps returned to Palestine . Wells was made General Staff Officer , 2nd Grade ( GSO2 ) , the deputy chief of staff in charge of planning operations . I Corps was alerted to take part in the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign , in spite of the fact that since Blamey had been promoted to Deputy Commander in Chief Middle East Command , the corps lacked a commanding officer . General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson — the British commander in Palestine and Transjordan — believed that I Corps ' loss of transport and signal equipment precluded it from participating in the campaign from the outset . Instead , Wilson attempted to exercise command from the King David Hotel . This proved to be a serious error , as his staff were preoccupied with political and administrative issues , and were too remote from the battlefields to exercise the close command required . Following a series of reverses , I Corps headquarters was sent for on 18 June , and Lieutenant General John Lavarack assumed command that day . The headquarters was confronted by a difficult situation , with almost all reserves committed . Lavarack began regrouping his force , concentrating the 7th Division for a decisive thrust towards Beirut . Hard fighting was required before the campaign was brought to a successful conclusion . 
 Promoted to colonel , Wells became General Staff Officer , 1st Grade ( GSO1 ) , to the 9th Division in November 1941 . As such , he was the 9th Division 's chief of staff , responsible for the full range of staff activities . On 28 June 1942 , Wells accompanied Lieutenant General Sir Leslie Morshead — Commander of the 9th Division — to Cairo , where they received orders tasking the 9th Division with the defence of Cairo . The pair spent that night and the following day organising plans for the move , before Morshead received further orders on 30 June cancelling his previous instructions and directing the division instead be dispatched to Alexandria ; the move took place on 1 July . Two days later , it was decided that the 24th Infantry Brigade would be sent forward to reinforce the position at El Alamein . The brigade was lacking in equipment , and Wells spent that day arranging equipment for the unit as well as overseeing its preparation ; the brigade moved forward the next day . The divisional headquarters proceeded to El Alamein on 7 July , and was posted to the northern flank of the British front line . The unit then spent the remainder of the month in action against Axis forces in the area . For his " distinguished services " during this period , Wells was Mentioned in Despatches a second time . 
 On 23 October 1942 , the British and Commonwealth forces under Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery launched an offensive against Axis forces at El Alamein . The 9th Division took part in the battle , and was initially tasked with the seizure of a section of the <unk> Line . Over the proceeding twelve days , the Australians heavily contributed to the assault , with Morshead and his staff coordinating the 9th Division 's operations ; success was claimed on 4 November . Praised for his " ability of high order " , Wells was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his efforts in training and preparing the division before the battle , in addition to his labours during the engagement . The notification for the decoration was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 11 February 1943 . 
 In late November 1942 , the members of the 9th Division returned to Palestine . In January , the unit embarked from North Africa and sailed home to Australia in preparation for service against the Japanese in the South West Pacific . 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 Wells arrived back in Australia during February 1943 . On 15 March , Morshead was appointed to command II Corps , and Wells was transferred along with him to the unit 's headquarters as Brigadier , General Staff . He was promoted to temporary brigadier in April . During this time , the combat forces of the corps undertook training in both jungle and amphibious warfare in preparation for its planned deployment to New Guinea . Wells took an active hand in organising these exercises , before he moved with the corps headquarters to New Guinea during October . 
 The movement of II Corps coincided with the vicious fighting around the Huon Peninsula and Finisterre Range . Wells assisted in the planning and coordination of operations over the subsequent months , which culminated in the seizure of Madang during April 1944 . Wells was awarded his third Mention in Despatches during this time for his " exceptional services in the field " . 
 In April 1944 , II Corps was redesignated as I Corps and returned to Australia , where it established itself on the Atherton Tableland in Queensland . The following month , Wells proceeded to Land Command Headquarters in Sydney , where he attended a conference on staff appointments . He returned to the corps eleven days later . During this period , Wells was once again active in organising the unit 's training off the Queensland coast , before he was granted a period of leave during August ; he returned to duty on 26 September . On 19 July 1945 , Wells was upgraded to a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his " exceptional ability and outstanding devotion to duty " in conjunction with the " valuable assistance " given throughout the New Guinea campaign to the General Officer Commanding New Guinea Force . 
 During March 1945 , Wells acted as one of the eight pallbearers for Major General George Alan Vasey at the latter 's funeral . Vasey had been killed in a plane crash just off the coast of Cairns , while en route to assume command of the 6th Division in New Guinea . That same month , it was decided that I Corps would lead an assault against the island of Borneo . As a consequence , headquarters of I Corps moved to Morotai , where it opened on 24 April . The initial Borneo landings took place on 1 May , with the Australian force in action at Tarakan . Over the proceeding engagements , Wells assisted in the organisation and implementation of the operations in Borneo . As the war drew to a close in September 1945 , Wells returned to Australia and was posted to Army Headquarters in Melbourne . 
 = = Senior command = = 
 In March 1946 , Wells was briefly posted as director of military operations at Army Headquarters , before being promoted to temporary major general and appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff . The following year , he embarked for the United Kingdom where he attended the Imperial Defence College in London . During this time , Wells attended an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace , where he was presented with his Commander of the Order of the British Empire by King George VI . On his return to Australia in 1949 , Wells was made Commandant of the Royal Military College , Duntroon . He served in this position until February 1951 , when he was appointed General Officer Commanding Southern Command with the rank of temporary lieutenant general . In June of that year , Wells acted as one of the ten pallbearers to Field Marshal Sir Thomas Blamey at his state funeral in Melbourne . 
 Wells was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , British Commonwealth Forces Korea , in 1953 . Assuming the role on 11 February , he led the Commonwealth contingent for the next twenty @-@ one months as the Korean War was coming to an end . Like his predecessors in the position , Wells exercised administrative command only , and had no direct control over battlefield operations . Though its incumbents were considered to have performed well , the role garnered little credit for helping facilitate combat success but was a soft target for criticism when operations did not run smoothly . Wells had been sent to Korea with no instructions regarding the withdrawal of troops and — as armistice talks appeared on the verge of success — he was closely involved in liaison with the heads of Commonwealth governments regarding General Mark Clark 's requests for their commitment to retain forces in the theatre for some period following the end of hostilities . 
 Raised to substantive lieutenant general on 12 April 1954 , Wells was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the Queen 's Birthday Honours that June . He was commended for his " exceptional meritorious service " in Korea , and awarded the United States ' Legion of Merit in the degree of Commander . Presented with the decoration by General John E. Hull on 19 October , Wells returned to Australia three days later . In December , he was made Chief of the General Staff ; the professional head of the Australian Army . Wells ' appointment coincided with the commitment of Australian forces to the Malayan Emergency , and as such he presided over the deployment of soldiers to the engagement as well as the formation of the first regular brigade group . He was upgraded to a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1956 New Years Honours . 
 On 23 March 1958 , Wells was appointed the first Chairman , Chiefs of Staff Committee ( COSC ) ; the professional head of the Australian Military . The position had previously existed as an extension to the responsibilities of the senior service chief — either the Chief of Naval Staff , Chief of the General Staff or Chief of the Air Staff — but Wells was the first to occupy the position as a separate post . The chairmanship of COSC was created as part of the Australian government 's response to a review of the Defence group of departments conducted by Lieutenant General Sir Leslie Morshead in 1957 , which recommended greater centralisation of the armed forces . Although the Chairman was the Government 's principal military advisor and reported directly to the Minister for Defence , Wells was not promoted and remained at the same rank as the heads of the Navy , Army and Air Force . He was also hampered by being given only a small staff . The role of the Chairman , COSC was not strengthened until 1965 , when Air Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger — who had been appointed to the position in 1961 — was promoted to air chief marshal so that he out @-@ ranked the service heads . Wells served in this capacity until his retirement from the Australian military on 22 March 1959 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In retirement , Wells was appointed as a director to several companies , including Broken Hill South Ltd , Metal Manufactures Ltd , Navcot Australia Pty Ltd and <unk> Line ( Australia ) Pty Ltd . During April 1961 , Wells was appointed honorary colonel of the Royal Victoria Regiment . Described as " somewhat reserved and taciturn " during his life , Wells died at <unk> , Victoria , on 20 October 1973 , and was survived by his wife and their two sons . His funeral service took place with full military honours at Toorak Presbyterian Church , after which he was cremated . In his will , Wells bequeathed a sizable proportion of his estate to Junior Legacy , Melbourne . Wells Road , a street in Duntroon , Australian Capital Territory , is named in his honour . 
 = C. D. Howe = 
 Clarence Decatur " C. D. " Howe , PC ( 15 January 1886 – 31 December 1960 ) was a powerful Canadian Cabinet minister , representing the Liberal Party . Howe served in the governments of Prime Ministers William Lyon Mackenzie King and Louis St. Laurent continuously from 1935 to 1957 . He is credited with transforming the Canadian economy from agriculture @-@ based to industrial . During the Second World War , his involvement in the war effort was so extensive that he was nicknamed the " Minister of Everything . " 
 Born in Massachusetts , Howe moved to Nova Scotia as a young adult to take up a professorship at Dalhousie University . After working for the Canadian government as an engineer , he began his own firm , and became a wealthy man . In 1935 , he was recruited as a Liberal candidate for the Canadian House of Commons by then Opposition leader Mackenzie King . The Liberals won the election in a landslide , and Howe won his seat . Mackenzie King appointed him to the Cabinet . There , he took major parts in many new enterprises , including the founding of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) and Trans @-@ Canada Air Lines ( today Air Canada ) . When World War II began in 1939 , Howe played a crucial role in Canada 's war effort , and recruited many corporate executives ( as " dollar @-@ a @-@ year @-@ men " ) to serve as executives in wartime enterprises . 
 Howe 's impatience with the necessity for parliamentary debate of his proposals won him few friends , and he was often accused of dictatorial conduct by the Opposition . As the Liberal government entered its third decade , it and Howe came to be seen as arrogant . The Government 's attempt to impose closure in the 1956 Pipeline Debate led to major controversy in the House of Commons . In the 1957 election , Howe 's actions and policies were made an issue by Opposition leader John Diefenbaker . Howe faced a serious challenge in his riding , but was expected to make speeches elsewhere as a major Liberal leader . Howe lost his seat in the election , and Diefenbaker became Prime Minister , ending almost 22 years of Liberal rule . Howe returned to the private sector , accepting a number of corporate directorships . The former minister died suddenly of a heart attack in December 1960 . 
 = = Early years and academic career = = 
 Howe was born and raised in Waltham , Massachusetts , in the United States . The Howes were well @-@ regarded in the local community , and William Howe , Clarence 's father , was involved in local politics . When not doing political work , William Howe was a carpenter and house builder . Clarence 's mother , the former Mary Emma Hastings , was a teacher and the daughter of a prosperous farmer on whose farm Clarence spent his childhood summers . 
 Clarence did well in school , and upon his graduation from Waltham High School in 1903 , he took the entrance examinations for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He passed , and after taking basic courses at the school , did advanced work in engineering . During the summers , he worked for J.B. Worcester & Co . , a firm which had constructed much of the Boston subway system . While at school , he became a favourite pupil of Professor George Swain ; after Howe graduated in 1907 , Swain offered Howe a job as his teaching assistant . Howe accepted , although the young engineer felt that he should leave the Boston area to begin his career . Soon afterwards , Howe was offered an opportunity to become an engineering professor at Dalhousie University in Halifax , Nova Scotia . A popular story about Howe was that Swain had Howe and fellow engineer James Barker toss a coin to see who would get the job . Barker denied the tale later in life , stating he had no interest in the position and no one who knew Howe would be foolish enough to gamble with him , as Howe had shown himself to be uncommonly lucky . In any event , Howe had no better prospects in sight ; unemployment among his classmates was high due to the Panic of 1907 . 
 At the time , Dalhousie was a small University , with only 400 students , and members of the teaching staff had a heavy workload . Howe , at age 23 , was little older than some of his students . He had little experience in the field , and on trips outside Halifax , he and his students would solve problems together . Howe 's view was that any problem could be solved through common sense and hard work . Howe took his students to the countryside , where they camped , surveying and planning imaginary railroads . His student Denis Stairs , who would go on to lead the Montreal Engineering Company , said of Howe that by the time the camp ended , his students had great respect for him . Student C. J. Mackenzie , who Howe would later appoint to the National Research Council presidency , stated that Howe was not a brilliant lecturer , but that his presentations were always extremely clear . Howe later said of university education , " The worker at college continues to work , and becomes a successful engineer . The shirker continues to shirk , and gets nowhere . " In addition to his own work , Howe found time for an active social life in Halifax , and considered marrying the sister of one of his students , but she had another husband in mind . 
 After Howe 's first year in Halifax , engineering instruction of upperclassmen was taken away from Dalhousie and other universities in the province , and placed in a separate technical institute in which Howe had no role . Howe later stated that he liked Dalhousie , and had this change not occurred , he might have remained there as a professor . In 1913 , however , a former colleague at Dalhousie , Robert Magill , who had recently been appointed chairman of the Board of Grain Commissioners , offered Howe the post of chief engineer , with responsibility for supervising the construction of grain elevators . Howe stated , " I 've never seen one of those things in my life , but I 'll take the job . " The same year , he applied to become a British subject , as Canadians then were . 
 = = Engineer and businessman = = 
 In mid @-@ 1913 , Howe journeyed to Northwestern Ontario to take up his new post . The Board was headquartered in Fort William , Ontario , where Canadian wheat was transferred from rail to ship . The Board sought to build a series of large terminal grain elevators , which could process as well as store grain . The project would increase both capacity and competition — grain elevator companies had been accused by farmers ' interests of charging excessive prices . The first such elevator for the Board was raised in nearby Port Arthur , Ontario , and was acclaimed as one of the best grain elevators ever built in Canada , and one of the cheapest . Over the next two years , Howe traveled the West , supervising the construction of terminal elevators near major cities and ports . The capacity would be needed , as Canadian farmers increased production during the First World War . 
 In late 1915 , Howe traveled back to Massachusetts to court Alice Worcester , daughter of the head of the company he had worked for in the summer at MIT . After some surprise at the attention from a man she barely knew , Worcester eventually accepted him , and the two were married in mid @-@ 1916 . The same year , he resigned from government service to go into business with partners as C. D. Howe and Company , whose major business was initially the construction of grain elevators . Both the company headquarters and the marital home were in Port Arthur . Howe 's first contract was to build a grain elevator in Port Arthur . In December 1916 , a massive storm destroyed the half @-@ built elevator , wiping out Howe 's assets . Had his bank not come to his assistance with additional funds , he would have been ruined . When Howe turned over the completed elevator to the owner , the Saskatchewan Grain Growers Association , he was asked how badly he had done on the contract , and stated , " I lost my shirt . " The Association voted him a bonus to make up his loss . 
 Over the next several years , Howe 's business expanded into engineering consulting and , much more profitably , general contracting . His firm came to dominate the construction of grain elevators in the West , as the Saskatchewan and Alberta wheat pools gave him much of their construction business . This made him unpopular among private wheat companies : his firm did not receive any contracts to build terminal elevators for private corporations in the 1920s , but exceeded the number built by all other contractors combined , thanks to business from those cooperatives . Howe 's elevators were built more quickly , were better designed , and were cheaper to construct than those of his competitors . He worked to add to their efficiency ; the Dominion @-@ Howe <unk> he helped design emptied a grain car in eight minutes , needing only two operators ; the same operation had previously taken an hour for a crew of 20 men . 
 In the early 1920s , Howe turned down several requests that he stand for alderman in Port Arthur . He did agree to seek election to the school board in 1921 , and headed the polls at his first attempt . He served two 2 @-@ year terms on the board , spending the final year as its chairman . Early in their marriage , Clarence and Alice Howe had decided to separate their roles , with Alice Howe having full responsibility for their domestic lives . Howe took no interest in his home life ; as an often @-@ absent father he had only a small role in the upbringing of his five children . In the same manner he did not involve his wife in his business ( or , later public ) life . During his ministerial career , he replied in response to an opposition question hinting at nepotism , " I don 't like to discuss my family in public . Members may have noticed that my wife never appears on political platforms . " 
 In October 1929 , the firm completed a huge grain elevator , with capacity of 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 bushels ( 246 @,@ 670 cubic meters ) , at Port Arthur . The Depression , however , devastated the grain industry , with falling prices and little demand for exported grain . There was no demand for more grain elevators , as the existing elevators contained unsold grain , further driving prices down . Howe 's company managed to survive on pre @-@ existing government contracts , but these eventually expired and the staff of 175 had decreased to five by 1933 . On the first business day of 1934 , Howe 's sole remaining partner resigned from the firm . Although Howe remained a wealthy man , his business prospects were few , and he decided to seek another line of work . 
 = = Politics = = 
 = = = Election and prewar = = = 
 As early as 1933 , the Liberal Party had considered Howe as a potential candidate for the House of Commons . The Liberals were then in opposition . The public was angry over the inability of Prime Minister R. B. Bennett and his Conservative ( or Tory ) government to deal with the Depression , and the Liberals were considered likely to return to office at the next election , due by 1935 . Howe , feeling political activism was bad for business , had not publicly expressed political views . Norman Platt Lambert , a Liberal Party official and friend of Howe , brought him to a meeting with Liberal Party leader and former Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King on 20 January 1934 . The two men were impressed with each other , but each felt the other should make the next move . According to Lambert in his diary , Howe wanted a guaranteed Cabinet position were he to run in the new riding of Port Arthur . 
 Howe was also interested in an offer to build a huge new grain shipment complex in Argentina . While considering this proposition , and still waiting to hear from Mackenzie King , in late 1934 Howe agreed to be the Liberal candidate in Port Arthur . He finally received a promise of a Cabinet position , should he and the Liberals be elected ; Howe would not have stood without such an undertaking . On 14 October 1935 , Howe was comfortably elected to the Commons from Port Arthur , amassing a majority of 3 @,@ 784 . Across the country the Liberals won a landslide victory , with 173 seats in the House of Commons to the Conservatives 's 40 . 
 Mackenzie King appointed Howe to two portfolios , as Minister of Railways and Canals and the first Minister of Marine . Howe was the only engineer in Cabinet , which was dominated by lawyers , and was the first engineer to serve in a Liberal government . As there was at that moment no governor general , on 23 October 1935 , Howe and his Cabinet colleagues were sworn in by Sir Lyman Duff , Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , serving as Administrator . 
 After Parliament assembled in early 1936 , Howe sought to have it pass legislation to reform local port authorities . Individual ports were run by Boards of Harbour Commissioners , appointments to which were often politically influenced . A Royal Commission in 1932 had recommended the positions be abolished , and Howe 's bill was to establish a National Harbours Board . The debate in the House went smoothly until Howe angered the opposition by declaring that , during Bennett 's government , the Conservatives had been corrupt . Despite what became a much more bitter debate , Howe 's bill carried . According to Leslie Roberts in his biography of Howe , " This was the Howe the country would soon come to know much better , the Howe on the rampage , the Howe who is impatient of criticism and deplores the debates and delays inherent in the parliamentary system . " 
 Howe worked to place the government @-@ dominated Canadian National Railways ( CNR ) on a sound financial basis . He introduced legislation to form the CNR into a crown corporation . Although the opposition complained that Howe was becoming power mad , they had little quarrel with the proposed reorganization itself , and it was passed into law . In June 1936 , Howe brought in legislation to establish another crown corporation , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation , which passed into law with little debate or opposition . 
 In 1936 , Canada had almost no airline coverage ; many Canadians wishing to fly long distances by air would journey through the United States . The Liberals proposed legislation to establish a government @-@ financed corporation , with half the stock to be owned by the CNR and half by the privately owned Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) . The CPR balked at the deal , and the remaining stock was taken up by the CNR . In May 1937 , Trans @-@ Canada Air Lines was founded with its inaugural flight , a perilous transcontinental proving flight on 30 July 1937 . Howe , along with other dignitaries , was on board , urging the pilots on , even through dangerous weather conditions . For the rest of his political career , Howe kept Trans @-@ Canada Air Lines in his ministerial portfolio , considering it his " progeny and generally promoted its interests . " 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 With almost four years gone in his government 's five @-@ year term , in mid @-@ 1939 Mackenzie King considered an election and asked British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in early August if he thought anything was likely to happen on the international scene . Chamberlain warned of unsettled conditions on the German — Polish border ; Britain had promised to assist Polish independence in the event of war . Mackenzie King decided to wait to hold an election . On 1 September , Germany invaded Poland . Mackenzie King recalled Parliament into session beginning 7 September , and Canada declared war on Germany . Before adjourning on 13 September , Parliament passed legislation creating a Department of Munitions and Supply . 
 It was some months before the department was established ; in the meantime Howe supervised the War Purchasing Board . Howe worked to persuade many of his business contacts to work for him , or for other government departments . Roberts suggests that no " political minister " could have done that , as many of Howe 's recruits were Conservatives . According to historian and author Michael Bliss , " [ f ] or Howe and other entrepreneurial spirits interested in the creative uses of government power , the war was a kind of ultimate megaproject , a great development job . Money didn 't matter , production did . " 
 Mackenzie King had promised the Leader of the Opposition Robert Manion , that he would not call an election without reconvening Parliament . On 25 January 1940 , Mackenzie King convened Parliament and promptly announced that it would immediately be prorogued , much to Manion 's anger . In the ensuing election , Howe had little trouble being re @-@ elected , and 184 Liberals were returned to Ottawa , the greatest total by any party to that point . Manion , however , lost his seat . Two weeks after the election , Germany invaded Norway and Denmark . Mackenzie King , in his diaries , noted his relief that the invasion had not taken place during the campaign , and appointed Howe as Minister of Munitions and Supply . Liking his job at Transport , Howe was reluctant to move , but the Prime Minister persuaded him . The function of the new department was the complete mobilization of all Canadian resources to support the war effort . Howe initially retained the Transport portfolio as well ; on 8 July 1940 , he turned over responsibility for that portfolio to Arthur Cardin , although Howe retained control of the CBC and Trans @-@ Canada Air Lines . 
 Howe 's department , in which he was assisted by his " dollar @-@ a @-@ year men " , top managers in Canadian business , loaned to the government by their companies for a token payment of one dollar a year — their firms maintained them on their payrolls . Even before the department was formally established , Howe 's representatives were surveying the country for essential war needs , with the department soon accumulating huge reserves of strategic materials . During the Second World War , Howe established 28 Crown Corporations , which did everything from managing secret projects to manufacturing the machine tools the rest of Canadian industry needed to keep going . These corporations were not responsible to Parliament , but to Howe himself . Parliament received no word of their activities unless Howe mentioned them . 
 With Canadian industry reorganized to supply the British war effort , Howe decided he needed to journey to Britain to discuss matters with the customers . He embarked on the S.S. Western Prince in December 1940 . This was an intensely dangerous trip ; Germany was attempting to blockade Britain and there were many German submarines in the North Atlantic . One of those submarines sank the Western Prince on 14 December . Howe survived the sinking and eight hours in a lifeboat . Gordon Scott , his aide , was killed trying to climb from the lifeboat to the rescuing ship . Howe professed coolness in the incident , but later told the Manchester Guardian that he considered every hour that he lived from that day onwards to be borrowed time . 
 While on tour of British industrial plants , Howe was shown the Avro Lancaster four @-@ engined heavy bomber , which he subsequently championed for Canadian production . On his return , Howe expropriated the troubled National Steel Car Ltd. plant which was beset with management problems , setting up Victory Aircraft Limited as a Crown Corporation , removing the executives and installing J.P. Bickell , one of Howe 's " dollar @-@ a @-@ year club " as the new president and chairman of the board . Victory Aircraft recovered its momentum and went on to become one of Howe 's greatest industrial successes , producing Avro aircraft under licence , including the Lancaster , and developing the passenger variant , the Avro Lancastrian . After the war the company was sold and became the nucleus of Avro Canada . 
 In mid @-@ 1943 the District Engineer of the Manhattan Engineer District , Lt @-@ Col Kenneth Nichols had several queries from Canada relating to contracts Canadian firms Eldorado Gold Mines and Consolidated Mining and Smelting ( CMS of Cominco ) had for the secret atomic bomb project ; CMS was building a heavy water plant and Eldorado was mining and processing uranium ore . He phoned a C. D. Howe in Ottawa and arranged to travel on the overnight train to Ottawa and see Howe the next day ( June 14 ) . On arriving at the address given Nichols was surprised to find that Howe was the minister of munitions and supply , and found him most friendly . Howe was told about the Manhattan Project , and Nichols was told that Eldorado was now a Crown company . 
 According to Roberts , " What Howe started in 1940 was an Industrial Revolution , so widespread that most Canadians were unaware of its extent or of its penetration into the country 's economy . " Although there had been increases in production throughout the first three years of the war , the minister 's efforts truly bore fruit in 1943 , in which Canada had the fourth @-@ highest industrial production among the Allies , trailing only the US , USSR , and Britain . By 1944 , Canada had produced over 600 ships for the war effort , 1 @,@ 100 aircraft , and over half a million cars and trucks , of which 31 @,@ 000 were armoured . According to Roberts , Howe 's actions swung Canada 's economy from agriculture @-@ based to industrial , a change which would prove permanent . Howe stated in 1943 , " Never again will there be any doubt that Canada can manufacture anything that can be manufactured elsewhere . " 
 = = = = " What 's a million ? " = = = = 
 During the debate on Howe 's war spending estimates in 1945 ( which totalled $ 1 @.@ 365 billion ) , Howe answered an Opposition question on whether such a large sum could be reduced : " I dare say my honourable friend could cut a million dollars from that amount , but a million dollars from the War Appropriations Bill would not be a very important matter . " Saskatchewan Tory MP John Diefenbaker spoke the following day , and alleged that Howe had said , " We may save a million dollars , but what of it ? " Howe angrily denied the quote , accusing Diefenbaker of being " a past master of distortion " — language he was forced to withdraw as unparliamentary . Diefenbaker sharpened the anecdote over time , and it emerged in its final form as Howe saying , " What 's a million ? " Even Liberals who knew that Howe had made no such statement agreed that it was just the sort of thing he could have said . In the years to come , " What 's a million ? " would be a mocking Tory attack on the Liberals , most often directed at Howe . 
 In 1942 Canada requested and was given a place on the Combined Production and Resources Board alongside the U.S. and Britain . Howe served as the Chief Executive Officer for Canada . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 = = = = Mackenzie King years = = = = 
 In October 1944 , Mackenzie King appointed Howe Minister of Reconstruction . Howe had an excellent reputation , even in the Soviet Union , for his successful overhaul of the Canadian economy , and Mackenzie King feared he would return to the private sector to make another fortune in business . Among those who urged Howe to remain was the Minister of Justice , Louis St. Laurent , with whom Howe forged a strong relationship . The Prime Minister obtained a dissolution of Parliament in April 1945 . In the ensuing election , the Liberals obtained a bare majority over the Conservatives ( renamed the Progressive Conservatives ) and the other parties . Howe was intensively involved in Liberal fundraising , and campaigned nationally for its candidates . He was easily returned in Port Arthur , taking just over half of all votes cast , with the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation ( the predecessor of today 's New Democratic Party ) a distant second . Mackenzie King himself was defeated in his Saskatchewan riding but was returned in an Ontario by @-@ election within months . The Prime Minister was now past 70 years of age and tired . 
 Howe favoured as quick a transition to a peacetime economy as possible . Most industries in which there were not shortages were released from government controls in late 1945 . Labour leaders , fearing unemployment , wanted to keep wartime government plants in production ; Howe opposed such proposals . When union members who were laid off from the Research Enterprises Limited ( <unk> ) confronted Howe on a golf course , the minister stated , " <unk> was a war @-@ time plant . The war is through , the plant is through , and your union ... what happens to your union is up to you . Get the hell off of the course . " In disposing of redundant government property , Howe found that saddles and harnesses had been stored since the end of the Boer War and men had been employed to safeguard and polish them for over 40 years . He strove to eliminate such anachronisms . However , Howe was slower to release economic controls . According to Roberts , " although he worked to return the country 's economic power to private hands , he often seemed as loath to surrender his own dictatorial powers over it as he was to submit to Parliament " . In November 1945 , Howe 's wartime portfolio was merged into his new responsibility to form the Department of Reconstruction and Supply . 
 Howe was determined to support technologically advanced industries , and saw no reason why Canada should not continue to produce aircraft after the war . His Director @-@ General for Aircraft Production , Ralph Bell , disagreed with him , noting that Canada had no aircraft engine manufacturer , and that despite the presence of manufacturing plants and skilled workers , there was no guarantee that they could sell their products . Nevertheless , Howe took steps to keep aircraft manufacturers in business , allowing the British Hawker Siddeley Group to take over Victory Aircraft as A.V. Roe Canada ( Avro Canada ) , while Canadair was sold to the US @-@ based Electric Boat Company ( later General Dynamics ) . 
 After the war , Mackenzie King was asked by the British Government which prominent Canadians should be appointed to the Imperial Privy Council , entitling them to proceed their names with " The Right Honourable " . Mackenzie King recommended two Cabinet members , but not Howe . After the honours were announced on New Year 's Day 1946 , Howe demanded a meeting with Mackenzie King , told the Prime Minister that he felt his war service was being slighted and threatened his resignation . Mackenzie King calmed Howe down , and arranged for Howe to receive the honour in June . This created additional ill feeling among other members of the Cabinet ; two more were elevated in the 1947 New Year 's Honours , after which the Prime Minister refused to consider any more . 
 In February 1947 , Mackenzie King fell ill with pneumonia and , after recovering , spent a month on vacation in the United States , with St. Laurent ( by then Secretary of State for External Affairs ) as Acting Prime Minister . In July , Minister of National Defence Brooke Claxton warned Mackenzie King that the issue of the Prime Minister 's age and the uncertainty of the succession was causing political difficulties for the Liberals . Mackenzie King consulted Howe , who bluntly stated that it was best that Mackenzie King go out while still retaining his full faculties and before a crisis erupted . After the talk , the Prime Minister decided that he should retire within a year , and that St. Laurent , who had recently threatened to leave Cabinet and return home to Quebec , should be the successor . Howe was among those who persuaded St. Laurent not to resign . He also helped persuade St. Laurent to stand for the leadership , offering to remain in Cabinet to assist the Quebecer . 
 = = = = St. Laurent government = = = = 
 On 20 January 1948 , Mackenzie King announced his intent to resign . He also announced a Cabinet reshuffle ; both St. Laurent and Howe had urged the Prime Minister to move Howe , who had not enjoyed his work at the Ministry of Reconstruction and Supply . Mackenzie King finally yielded , moving James Angus MacKinnon , the Minister of Trade and Commerce to open his place for Howe ( the Albertan became Minister of Fisheries ) . Howe publicly announced that he was " not available " to stand for the leadership , and that he was supporting St. Laurent . The Quebecer was elected Leader of the Liberal Party in August , and Mackenzie King finally resigned on 15 November . At age 66 , St. Laurent was only seven years younger than Mackenzie King , but was nevertheless seen as a breath of fresh air — except at Cabinet meetings , where he reversed Mackenzie King 's smoking ban . 
 In October 1948 , the Progressive Conservatives also elected a new leader , Ontario Premier George A. Drew . Drew had won three consecutive provincial elections , taking even francophone ridings , and the Tories , perennially weak in Quebec , hoped that Drew could repeat his success on a national scale . Drew defeated Diefenbaker for the leadership . St. Laurent called an election for June 1949 , and Howe again was successful in fundraising from corporate backers . Major corporations from the CPR to Eaton 's contributed to the well financed Liberal campaign . The Liberals won a huge victory , taking 190 seats to 40 for the Tories , and Howe again won Port Arthur easily . Drew had used Howe 's record as an election issue , accusing him of being power mad and of selling off Crown Corporations for bargain prices , but the allegations got little traction . According to Howe , the only result of Drew 's attacks " was to give me a record majority in Port Arthur ! " 
 In early 1950 , St. Laurent considered recommending the appointment of Howe as governor general . The governor general had always been a British peer ; many nationalists wanted a Canadian to hold the post , and St. Laurent agreed with them . The governor general , The Viscount Alexander , was due to retire by 1953 , by which time Howe would be 68 . St. Laurent saw this as a way of allowing his friend and colleague to step away from politics for a quieter life . The minister was willing to take the post , but the position unexpectedly opened early when Alexander was appointed to the British Cabinet . Howe decided he still had work to do as a minister . He was also reluctant to exchange real power for the nominal power of the governor generalship . St. Laurent recommended the appointment of Canadian @-@ born Vincent Massey , who was duly appointed by King George VI . 
 Mackenzie King died in 1950 , by which time Canada was again going to war , this time in Korea ; on the train returning from the former prime minister 's funeral , St. Laurent and his External Relations minister , Lester Pearson , began planning troop movements . Howe saw it as the wrong war in the wrong place , and thought that Canadian troops should not be sent . Nevertheless , he spent the summer of 1950 at his desk , making plans to implement government controls on the booming economy . In September 1950 , Howe tabled a bill allowing him to reallocate scarce materials such as steel from the civilian sector to military use . The bill passed , but not before the Opposition had charged that Howe had " an enormous appetite for power " . Late in the year , the Government decided on a massive rearmament program . As the Canadian Commercial Corporation , the Crown Corporation which handled government purchases , was felt to be inadequate for the task , the Cabinet decided on a new department to handle procurement . St. Laurent introduced a bill in February 1951 creating a Department of Defence Production , and announced that on passage , Howe would add that responsibility to his portfolio . The opposition parties objected to the Defence Production Act , stating that there was no emergency justifying the powers Howe wanted . According to Roberts , Howe sought to implement rearmament by getting " full power for himself and running rights over everyone and everything to get an urgent job done " . Backed by the overwhelming Liberal majority , the bill passed and the Department was established on 1 April 1951 . 
 The early 1950s saw an era of prosperity in Canada ; in most years there was a government surplus . In 1951 , the Government introduced an old age pension for Canadians to receive from the age of 70 . With little unemployment and thus a surplus in the unemployment insurance fund , coverage was extended to seasonal workers , such as fishermen . St. Laurent 's supervision of his ministers was minimal at the start of his tenure , and decreased as the years passed . With the Opposition few in numbers , ministers did as they wanted , and when Howe was accused by British Columbia Tory MP Howard Green in 1951 of being willing to end tariffs if the people would let him , Howe replied , " Who would stop us ? Don 't take yourself too seriously . If we wanted to get away with it , who would stop us ? " 
 Despite Avro Canada 's success in producing the CF @-@ 100 , Canada 's first jet fighter for the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) , aircraft development had proven to be a time @-@ consuming and expensive process . The projected next generation aircraft , Canada 's first supersonic jet interceptor , the CF @-@ 105 Arrow , was a more daunting project in terms of financial commitment and a leap in technological prowess . Howe wrote in a letter to Defence Minister Claxton in 1952 that " I am frightened for the first time in my defence production experience . " 
 The government spent much of early 1953 in enacting the remainder of its legislative program . St. Laurent did not wish to call an election until after Queen Elizabeth 's Coronation on 2 June and eventually scheduled it for 10 August . Drew made large numbers of promises to the voters , and attempted to exploit a Defence Ministry scandal which had broken earlier in the year ( at the Petawawa , Ontario army base , an investigation had found frauds which included placing horses on the payroll ) , but the Liberals were not seriously challenged . The Liberals lost 20 seats from their 1949 high @-@ water mark , but still constituted almost two @-@ thirds of the House of Commons , and no minister was defeated . Howe was again easily elected for Port Arthur . 
 = = = = Pipeline debate = = = = 
 Beginning in 1954 , Howe planned for pipelines to take Alberta 's natural gas to market . There were US @-@ backed proposals to build pipelines directly to the United States ; Howe wanted a route passing north of the Great Lakes which could supply Toronto and Montreal . Two rival groups contended for the approval which Howe had the power to grant ; Howe forced the groups to work together on the route he wanted . 
 In March 1955 , St. Laurent tabled legislation to make the Department of Defence Production permanent . This would also extend the extraordinary powers of the Minister . Fearful of another damaging confrontation between Howe and the Opposition , the Cabinet agreed that St. Laurent would guide the bill through , but after the first day of debate St. Laurent , who was prone to depression , absented himself . Tory frontbencher Donald Fleming contended that the extension could make the minister " the virtual dictator of the economy " . With St. Laurent absent ( or when present , silent ) , Howe took charge of the bill , and according to his biographers , Robert Bothwell and William Kilbourn , " utterly failed to perceive that the bill and his manner of defending it were a godsend to the opposition " . When Howe alluded to the Avro Arrow project and that he " was out on a limb for $ 30 million " , which gave him " the shudders " , the Opposition met the statement with jeers and cries of " What 's a million ? " The Tories were supported by the Social Credit MPs , while the Government gained the support of the CCF on this issue . Interrupted by a lengthy governmental trip by Howe to Australia and New Zealand , the debate stretched on until midyear . In early July , Howe left town for a long weekend , after asking St. Laurent and Minister of Finance Walter Harris to maintain his stand while he was gone , although he gave Harris the authority to do as he saw fit . Without informing Howe , St. Laurent contacted Drew , and the two men agreed that the minister 's powers would expire in 1959 unless sooner renewed . The amended bill passed the Commons in Howe 's absence , and when he returned , he furiously accused Harris of making a deal behind his back . However , when Howe was told that it had been the Prime Minister 's decision , he accepted it . Howe had earlier turned down an Opposition offer to agree to a three @-@ year extension of his ministerial powers , saying " That would mean coming back to Parliament in three years , and I 've more to do with my time than amusing Parliament . " The extension was allowed to expire in 1959 , although by then , Howe had left office . 
 The pipeline project was wracked with financing difficulties . The pipeline company wanted the Government to guarantee the loans needed to build what would become known as the Trans @-@ Canada Pipeline , but Cabinet refused , fearful of the political implications of giving a large sum of government money to a US @-@ dominated corporation . Howe was embittered by this decision , and grumbled that he was now part of " a government which has fallen into the hands of children " . A solution was proposed by Howe 's deputy minister , Mitchell Sharp : the Government and the province of Ontario would themselves build the most expensive part of the route , in Northern Ontario , to be reimbursed by Trans @-@ Canada once the pipeline was open for business . This was approved by both governments . By 1956 , however , further difficulties had arisen : until the US government granted formal approval for a part of the route which connected to US pipelines , Trans @-@ Canada could not raise enough money to build its portion . The approval was a matter of routine , but the delay would mean that construction on the pipeline could not begin until the spring of 1957 . 
 Howe was determined that the pipeline not be delayed , and proposed that the government advance money to the pipeline company to ensure construction in 1956 . He emotionally pleaded with his Cabinet colleagues , who agreed both to the proposal and to the use of rarely used closure to limit the debate . Closure had not been applied in the House since 1932 . The issue was attractive to the Tories and CCF with an election due within two years ; it would allow them to portray Howe as an arrogant dictator , and play to those citizens who disliked the American involvement in the pipeline project . If the bill did not receive Royal Assent by 7 June 1956 , options that Trans @-@ Canada held for steel pipe would expire . 
 Bothwell and Kilbourn describe Howe 's speech opening the Pipeline Debate as " probably the best of his career " . He told the Commons that waiting a year would be imprudent , given the worldwide shortage of steel pipe , and unfair to those who owned natural gas wells in western Canada , which were presently capped . Howe told the House he believed this to be a great project , " of truly national scope , which we must either launch now or see languish for years to come . " He completed his address by giving notice that the following day , the Government intended to invoke closure . Social Credit , with many members from Alberta , supported the bill , while the Tories and CCF engaged in weeks of bitter debate and parliamentary wrangling . This culminated on 1 June , dubbed by the Tories " Black Friday " , when Speaker René Beaudoin reversed a ruling he had made the previous evening which would have allowed the Opposition to continue the debate past the deadline . The Opposition accused the Speaker of yielding to Government pressure . The bill passed within the deadline , and construction on the pipeline began immediately . Howe wrote , " I should not like to face a general election at this moment . Fortunately we do not have to . " 
 In mid @-@ 1956 , Drew fell ill and soon resigned as Tory party leader . The leadership convention 's choice of Diefenbaker as Drew 's replacement prompted delight in some Liberal circles . Diefenbaker had long been a maverick even within his party , was little known in eastern Canada , and many deemed him unelectable . Although Defence Minister Claxton and the RCAF remained firm supporters of the Arrow program as costs continued to rise , in 1957 the Cabinet 's defence committee proposed elimination of the Arrow , a decision that was to be reviewed after the forthcoming election and which was supported by Howe . 
 = = = = 1957 election = = = = 
 After the election was called in April 1957 for 10 June , Howe raised sufficient money to enable the Liberals to heavily outspend their opponents . As there were few Liberal ministers from western Canada , Howe was called upon to make appearances throughout the region . He found that the Manitoba Farmers Union was organizing opposition to the Liberals ; at some meetings Howe had difficulty getting heard at all . At other meetings , Howe engaged in well publicised conflicts with audience members . On 19 May in Morris , Manitoba , Howe told one man demanding to speak that when his own party held a meeting , he could ask all the questions he wanted . The man , Bruce Mackenzie , proved to be the head of a local Liberal association . As Howe left , another man asked why he had not answered his question , posed earlier . Howe replied , " Look here , my good man , when the election comes , why don 't you go away and vote for the party you support ? In fact , why don 't you just go away ? " At another meeting a few days later , Howe was asked why he did not care about the farmers 's economic plight . " Looks like you 've been eating pretty well under a Liberal government " , Howe replied , poking the questioner in the midsection . 
 Diefenbaker used the Pipeline Debate as a major theme in the campaign , one which he mentioned more than any other issue . In Vancouver , he told the largest political crowd in the province since 1935 , " I give this assurance to Canadians — that the government shall be the servant and not the master of the people ... The road of the Liberal party , unless it is stopped — and Howe has said , ' Who 's going to stop us ? ' — will lead to the virtual extinction of parliamentary government . You will have the form , but the substance will be gone . " 
 Howe was opposed in his riding by CCF candidate Doug Fisher , a local high school teacher . Fisher 's campaign was well financed , with support from his party , the unions , and a number of corporate enemies Howe had made over the years . Fisher was able to buy up the key time on the local television station — Howe initially scheduled no television appearances . The voters of Port Arthur saw Fisher on television every night , explaining why the Liberals had gone wrong in his view , and what his party proposed to do to correct matters . Called back to his riding after the remainder of his disastrous Prairie tour was canceled , Howe found that Fisher 's appeals had caused defections among Liberals . Howe managed to get TV time just before the election and according to Bothwell and Kilbourn " treated his viewers to the sight of a tired , harsh old man , telling them that the nice young fellow that they had been seeing on television for the last couple of months was , if not a communist himself , then associated with the communists . No one believed him . " Fisher defeated Howe by over a thousand votes . Howe was gracious in defeat , shaking Fisher 's hand at the television station , and assuring the member @-@ elect 's mother , long a Howe admirer , that there were many things for him to do . Howe 's defeat came as the Liberals still led narrowly in the reported returns . The Tories forged ahead , and took the greater number of seats , 112 to 105 . St. Laurent could have remained in office until Diefenbaker and the Tories defeated him in the House , but chose not to — a course with which Howe agreed . The Liberals left office on 21 June 1957 , with Howe the only remaining minister of those sworn in with Mackenzie King in 1935 . 
 = = Later life , death , and legacy = = 
 Howe returned to Ottawa after his defeat , cleared his office , and soon sold his house there , moving to Montreal . He said of the new Diefenbaker government , " I don 't trust this new bunch very much . " Howe determined to leave politics entirely , but St. Laurent asked for his continued help , and Howe replied that he would help the party any way he could . After St. Laurent announced his retirement in September , Howe wrote to the former Prime Minister , " The young men of the party must take on the job of reorganising and rebuilding , and perhaps the sooner they get at it the better . " 
 While publicly taking no position , Howe privately supported former External Affairs Minister Pearson for the Liberal leadership , and Pearson won the contest in January 1958 . Howe advised Pearson not to take any action that might provoke an election . Pearson did not heed Howe and challenged Diefenbaker as soon as Parliament met . The election on 31 March returned the Progressive Conservatives in a record landslide , which left the Liberals with 48 seats . Howe , who took no part in the campaign , had already left for Europe with his wife , Alice , on an extended holiday . On his return , he did what he could to help rebuild the Liberal Party after the disaster , assisting with fundraising and seeking to unite factions within the party . 
 After some hesitancy that was likely caused by fears the newly empowered Tories would resent any approach to their longtime enemy , major corporations began to approach Howe and ask for him to serve on their boards of directors . Although outspoken against the Tory Government , Howe refused to join the criticism when Diefenbaker 's Cabinet cancelled the Avro Arrow in February 1959 . 
 In 1958 , Howe was made chancellor of Dalhousie University . On investigating the university 's finances , he found that a professor 's salary in 1958 had less buying power than when he had worked there . Howe urged increased salaries and building improvements to attract first @-@ rate scholars to the university . He also accepted a number of honorary degrees from other universities . 
 Howe had a longtime heart condition , and friends urged him to give up all boards that did not meet in Montreal . Before he could act on this suggestion , Howe suffered a heart attack and died at his home on 31 December 1960 . 
 Prime Minister Diefenbaker said after Howe died , " We often had strong differences but our personal relations remained most friendly at all times .... He gave his great ability , indomitable courage and energy to his country in a manner that has earned for him and will assure him of a large place in the history of Canada 's war effort . " 
 Opposition Leader Pearson stated , " He was a man who shirked no duty , faltered in no task , was daunted by no obstacle . He got things done , and they were good things for the country he served so well and so long . " 
 At his memorial service , enemies and friend alike gathered . Among the eulogies delivered by friends and colleagues at Christ Church Cathedral in Montreal , it was remarked that Howe often stated proudly that he was " an American by birth but Canadian by choice " . 
 After Howe 's death , the C. D. Howe Memorial Foundation was created in his memory ; the C. D. Howe Institute , a Canadian economic policy think tank was at one time associated with the Memorial Foundation . The Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute ( <unk> ) introduced the C. D. Howe Award for achievements in the fields of planning and policy making , and overall leadership in the field . In 1976 , Howe was inducted into Canada 's Aviation Hall of Fame , in honour of his contribution to creating a national airline and efforts to create and sustain a viable aviation industry . The C. D. Howe Building , located at Bank and Sparks Street in Ottawa , is the home of Industry Canada and is named for the former minister . 
 = Sexual Healing ( South Park ) = 
 " Sexual Healing " is the fourteenth season premiere of the American animated television series South Park , and the 196th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 17 , 2010 , and on Comedy Central UK on March 19 , 2010 . The title of the episode is derived from the song of the same name by soul singer Marvin Gaye . In the episode , the sex scandal of golf pro Tiger Woods has the media and public frantic to determine why rich and successful men would suddenly crave sex with multiple partners . Meanwhile , schools are screened for the condition and Kyle , Kenny and Butters are diagnosed with sexual addiction . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . " Sexual Healing " parodies several elements of the Woods scandal , including alleged fights with his wife Elin Nordegren , which are portrayed as part of a new Tiger Woods PGA Tour video game played by Cartman , Stan , and Kenny . In addition to mocking Woods himself , the script parodied the large amount of media attention surrounding the scandal , and suggested because it is natural for men to crave sex , Woods 's actions can be understood , although not condoned . 
 Cartoon parodies of several celebrities who have experienced real @-@ life sexual scandals were featured in the episode , including Bill Clinton , David Letterman , Charlie Sheen , David Duchovny and Ben Roethlisberger . The treatment these celebrities received is portrayed as ineffective and ridiculous , suggesting celebrities should not have to undergo insincere acts of public apology for their sexual transgressions . " Sexual Healing " received generally mixed reviews from critics . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Sexual Healing " was seen by 3 @.@ 7 million households , making it the most watched South Park premiere since " Rainforest <unk> " in 1999 , and helping make March 17 the most @-@ watched night of the year for Comedy Central to that point . Shortly after the episode aired , Internet rumors spread that EA Sports planned to sue South Park creators Parker and Matt Stone over their portrayal in the episode . EA Sports specifically denied the claims . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The new edition of the Tiger Woods PGA Tour series of video games incorporates elements of the alleged physical altercations Woods had with his wife regarding his extramarital affairs , and resembles a fighting game more than a golf simulation . Cartman , Stan , Kyle and Kenny become big fans of the game . Meanwhile , scientists at the Center for Disease Control determine that sex addiction is a disease reaching epidemic proportions . They decide to screen schoolchildren for the disease , and Kenny , Kyle , and Butters are diagnosed as sex addicts . Kenny is killed after attempting autoerotic asphyxiation while in a Batman suit , while Kyle and Butters are sent to attend a therapy session for sex addicts consisting of Michael Douglas , Michael Jordan , Ben Roethlisberger , David Duchovny , Charlie Sheen , David Letterman , Bill Clinton , Billy Bob Thornton , Kobe Bryant , Eliot Spitzer , and Tiger Woods . 
 When performing an experiment on chimpanzees , the CDC determines that money is somehow responsible for infecting males with sexual addiction . Because an image of Independence Hall appears on the back of a $ 100 bill , they believe the origins of the disorder can somehow be traced there . They submit their findings to President Barack Obama , who believes that a virus for sex addiction had previously been brought to Earth by extraterrestrials . He accompanies a SWAT team on their raid on Independence Hall in search of the " wizard alien " that is responsible for the sex addiction epidemic . When one member of the team suggests that the mission is irrational and that sex addiction is simply an inherent part of the male ego , he is ordered by Obama to be hauled away . 
 Because Kyle also feels sex addiction is not a disease , but rather a natural male desire that can be kept under control with the proper discipline , others suggest he is somehow immune from the " spell " of the wizard alien . He is brought to Independence Hall along with Butters and both are given rifles by the SWAT team . The hauled @-@ off SWAT member , gagged and bound in an alien wizard costume , stumbles into the room . On orders from the SWAT team , Kyle and Butters shoot the costumed officer dead and the " spell " is suddenly lifted . Woods announces he is cured of his sex addiction , and the next incarnation of his video game once again focuses on golf . Cartman and Stan reject the new game , with Stan proclaiming that " golf is stupid again . " 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 " Sexual Healing " , the South Park fourteenth season premiere , was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 17 , 2010 , and in the United Kingdom on March 19 . A teaser clip of the episode called " All the Temptations " featuring a parody of Woods 's February 2010 televised public apology was featured on the official South Park website , South Park Studios , and drew 62 @,@ 000 viewers on the first day . Before the episode aired , several news outlets incorrectly reported the episode 's title was " All the Temptations " due to the clip . 
 The episode satirized the sex scandal surrounding golf pro Tiger Woods , who had admitted to cheating on his wife Elin Nordegren with multiple partners . The Woods scandal had been one of the biggest media stories in the months since South Park 's thirteenth season ended in November 2009 . Series co @-@ creator Matt Stone said the scandal provided so much material for satire that an entire season could have been dedicated to it , and the media storm surrounding Woods meant they had even less to worry about the delicacy of their parody . Stone said he was simultaneously fascinated and disgusted by Woods 's public apology , so the writers were sure to include it in the episode . The script to " Sexual Healing " was not finished until after March 12 , five days before the episode aired . This was in keeping with a continued practice from previous South Park seasons , in which Parker and Stone write and produce their episodes within the week before their broadcast dates in order to harness energy for the final product and keep the material fresh . In an early image of the episode released to the press , Woods is seen at his apology press conference , with Cartman standing beside him . During the production of the episode , the writers decided to incorporate the Tiger Woods scenes as part of the video game that the boys , including Cartman , are playing . 
 " Sexual Healing " parodied several real @-@ life elements of the scandal , including Nordegren 's discovery of Woods 's infidelity by reading text messages on his cellular phone , and Woods 's loss of commercial endorsements as a result of his infidelity . The episode also parodies the alleged fight that was reported between Woods and Nordegren on Thanksgiving in which Nordegren attacked Woods 's car with a golf club and caused him to crash into a fire hydrant . " Sexual Healing " also included a version of the public apology Woods delivered on February 2010 , which was closely covered and examined by the mainstream media . The episode aired only a few days after Woods publicly announced he would return to golf at the 2010 Masters Tournament in April . 
 The shock and confusion with which the male characters in " Sexual Healing " react to the Woods scandal , and the extreme measures they undertake to learn why rich and successful men crave sex , served as a parody to the wide media attention and analysis the scandal received . The episode puts forward a pragmatic explanation that it is natural for men to crave sex , so although Woods 's actions cannot be condoned , they can at least be understood for what they are . This point of view particularly conveyed in the speech of one SWAT team member near the end of the episode , who is ostracized , imprisoned and unknowingly shot to death by Kyle and Butters after expressing his common sense views . The episode suggests men of normal financial means would likely be tempted by infidelity and sexual affairs if they had enough fame and money to obtain them easily . 
 " Sexual Healing " suggests celebrities involved in sexual scandals should not be forced to undergo rehabilitation and public acts of contrition . The scene in which the celebrities start shaking and dancing , proclaiming " Look , the sex addiction is leaving my body ! " , demonstrates the insincerity and ridiculousness of these public steps . The episode also mocked the measures used to diagnose and treat sexual addiction in the United States . This is particularly prevalent when Kenny , Kyle and Butters are misdiagnosed with sexual addiction based on an inaccurate test of simply presenting an image of a naked woman to them and testing whether they could identify a handkerchief in the woman 's hand and specify its color . The rehabilitation courses themselves are also mocked as ineffective and unnecessary , particularly because the most important lesson taught in them is how to avoid getting caught . 
 = = Current affairs references = = 
 Several celebrities who had experienced well publicized sexual scandals or affairs were featured in a sexual addiction rehabilitation class " Sexual Healing " . Among them were former U.S. President Bill Clinton , night talk show host David Letterman , NFL quarterback Ben Roethlisberger , former New York governor Eliot Spitzer , basketball players Michael Jordan and Kobe Bryant , and actors Charlie Sheen , David Duchovny , Michael Douglas and Billy Bob Thornton . While discussing how to avoid getting caught , Roethlisberger says , " Don 't screw girls in the public bathrooms " , a reference to his March 2010 sex scandal in Milledgeville , Georgia . Clinton suggests not putting cigars into any woman 's vagina , a reference to his alleged sexual act with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky during the Lewinsky scandal . David Letterman says , " When they ask you for money , pay them " , a reference to the October 2009 scandal in which CBS producer Joe <unk> attempted to blackmail Letterman with information about his sexual affairs . 
 When a doctor explains auto @-@ erotic asphyxiation to Kenny , Kyle and Butters , he refers to the deaths of actor David Carradine and INXS singer Michael Hutchence . Michael Hutchence is referred to a second time later in the episode at Kenny 's funeral where Butters exclaims " There ! It was like that " , a reference to serial pest Peter Hore 's interrupting of Hutchence 's funeral . After it is explained to Kenny that auto @-@ erotic asphyxiation often involves wearing a costume of some type , he dons a costume of Batman , the DC Comics fictional superhero , and subsequently dies in the outfit . The title of the episode is derived from the song of the same name by soul singer Marvin Gaye . A version of the song , sung by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , is featured at the end of the episode , when the celebrities claim the sexual addiction has left their bodies . The angry and violent confrontations between Woods and Nordegren are portrayed not as reality within the episode , but as simulated elements of the newest Tiger Woods PGA Tour video game installment by EA Sports . Scientists from the Center for Disease Control , a federal agency under the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services , conduct experiments on chimpanzees in " Sexual Healing " to discover why celebrities crave sex with multiple women . The ending where President Obama is addressing a crowd at the United States Capitol is a reference to the ending of Deep Impact . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 17 , 2010 , " Sexual Healing " was watched by 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , according to the Nielsen Media Research , making it the most watched South Park debut since the third season premiere " Rainforest <unk> " in 1999 . The day it aired , " Sexual Healing " was the highest @-@ rated show in all of television among men between ages 18 and 34 , and was the highest rated cable show among adults between ages 18 and 49 . March 17 ranked as the most @-@ watched night of the year for Comedy Central . " Sexual Healing " drew a 2 @.@ 6 overall rating , a 2 @.@ 4 rating among adults between ages 18 and 49 , a 5 @.@ 2 rating among men between ages 18 and 34 , and a 6 @.@ 9 rating among men between ages 18 and 24 . " Sexual Healing " aired before the series premiere of the animated comedy series Ugly Americans , which drew 2 @.@ 1 million viewers . The network was also the highest @-@ rated and most @-@ watched overall television network among men between ages 18 and 24 , and the highest @-@ rated and most @-@ watched cable network among adults between ages 18 and 49 and men between ages 18 and 34 . 
 " Sexual Healing " received generally mixed reviews . Bill Harris of the Toronto Sun praised the timeliness of the episode , which he said has kept South Park relevant throughout its 14 seasons . Harris complimented the episode for addressing the larger issue of how sexual acts among celebrities are dissected and analyzed by the media and public . MTV News praised the Woods parody , which they said was particularly timely because of the golf pro 's recent announcement to return to golf . It said , " It was on @-@ the @-@ nose while still being clever , which is a balance that the makers of " South Park " have mastered brilliantly . " Bill Brownstein , from the Canwest News Service , called it " an absolutely blistering and timely satire " on Woods and sexual addiction . A CNN review called the Woods satire " brilliant " and a strong improvement over the previous season 's " Dead Celebrities " , which also included several cameos of celebrity parodies . The review also found the ending of the episode , with Stan and Cartman growing bored with their video game once it focused on golf rather than sex scandals and fighting , to be a " pretty hilarious gag " . Ryan <unk> , of The Cowl , said " Sexual Healing " stood out from other Woods jokes and proved Parker and Stone " can do satire like nobody else " . He particularly praised the Woods video game and the subplot with Butters trying to learn about women 's pubic hair , claiming , " Butters ’ low intelligence and complete innocence make for some the greatest moments that the show has to offer . " 
 Entertainment Weekly television reviewer Ken Tucker said the episode was " rather short on laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funniness " , but included several clever ideas , including the Tiger Woods video game , the satire of the media attention to the Woods scandal , and " one of the best Kenny death scenes ever " . Newsweek writer Joshua Alston said the Woods parody " didn 't manage to be terribly funny or insightful " , and suggested the speed at which South Park writers can produce a topical episode just days before its broadcast is actually a detriment to the show . Alston said , " Whereas once the show 's creators swiftly turned around topical episodes because they could , now the South Park team is expected to seize on the news . " Ramsey Isler of IGN found much of the episode 's humor mediocre , in particular the rehabilitation of the celebrities and the CDC studies of the chimpanzees . Isler said he enjoyed Kenny 's death and Butters ' obsession with " bush " , but felt the theme of the episode was too obvious and less clever than previous South Park episodes . The A.V. Club writer Zack Handlen appreciated the timeliness and relevancy of the subject matter , but felt " the satirical target here wasn 't meaty enough to warrant a full episode , and the developing plot just felt too half @-@ assed " . Handlen said some individual jokes were funny , but the episode as a whole was too one @-@ note and redundant . Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine said the Woods scandal was several months old , so the episode felt stale and old news . Delgado felt the alien infection theory was too random and lazy , and the idea that men would cheat on their wives if they had more money and opportunity was offensive , but not entirely untrue . 
 Within days of the episode 's original broadcast , rumors began to spread throughout the Internet that EA Sports planned to sue Parker and Stone over their portrayal of the Tiger Woods PGA Tour video game in " Sexual Healing " . The rumor began with a March 21 post on the blog Daily Informer , which quoted an unnamed EA Sports source who said the episode had " a few copyright infringements in there that I ’ m sure will be dealt with accordingly " . The claims quickly spread to other blogs and websites , but EA Sports specifically denied the rumor , claiming , " The reports that EA Sports is planning to sue the creators of ' South Park ' are completely false . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Sexual Healing " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's fourteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on April 26 , 2011 . 
 = Siege of Vicksburg = 
 The Siege of Vicksburg ( May 18 – July 4 , 1863 ) was the final major military action in the Vicksburg Campaign of the American Civil War . In a series of maneuvers , Union Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant and his Army of the Tennessee crossed the Mississippi River and drove the Confederate Army of Mississippi led by Lt. Gen. John C. Pemberton into the defensive lines surrounding the fortress city of Vicksburg , Mississippi . 
 Vicksburg was the last major Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi River ; therefore , capturing it completed the second part of the Northern strategy , the Anaconda Plan . When two major assaults ( May 19 and 22 , 1863 ) against the Confederate fortifications were repulsed with heavy casualties , Grant decided to besiege the city beginning on May 25 . With no reinforcement , supplies nearly gone , and after holding out for more than forty days , the garrison finally surrendered on July 4 . 
 The successful ending of the Vicksburg Campaign significantly degraded the ability of the Confederacy to maintain its war effort , as described in the Aftermath section of the campaign article . Some historians — e.g. , Ballard , p . 308 — suggest that the decisive battle in the campaign was actually the Battle of Champion Hill , which , once won by Grant , made victory in the subsequent siege a foregone conclusion . This action ( combined with the surrender of Port Hudson to Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks on July 9 ) yielded command of the Mississippi River to the Union forces , who would hold it for the rest of the conflict . 
 The Confederate surrender on July 4 , 1863 , following the siege at Vicksburg , is sometimes considered , when combined with Gen. Robert E. Lee 's defeat at Gettysburg by Maj. Gen. George G. Meade and retreat beginning the same day , the turning point of the war . It cut off the states of Arkansas , Louisiana , and Texas from the rest of the Confederacy , as well as communication with Confederate forces in the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department for the remainder of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 After crossing the Mississippi River south of Vicksburg at Bruinsburg and driving northeast , Grant won battles at Port Gibson and Raymond and captured Jackson , the Mississippi state capital on May 14 , 1863 , forcing Pemberton to withdraw westward . Attempts to stop the Union advance at Champion Hill and Big Black River Bridge were unsuccessful . Pemberton knew that the corps under Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman was preparing to flank him from the north ; he had no choice but to withdraw or be outflanked . Pemberton burned the bridges over the Big Black River and took everything edible in his path , both animal and plant , as he retreated to the well @-@ fortified city of Vicksburg . 
 The Confederates evacuated Hayne 's Bluff , which was occupied by Sherman 's cavalry on May 19 , and Union steamboats no longer had to run the guns of Vicksburg , now being able to dock by the dozens up the Yazoo River . Grant could now receive supplies more directly than by the previous route , which ran through Louisiana , over the river crossing at Grand Gulf and Bruinsburg , then back up north . 
 Over three quarters of Pemberton 's army had been lost in the two preceding battles and many in Vicksburg expected General Joseph E. Johnston , in command of the Confederate Department of the West , to relieve the city — which he never did . Large masses of Union troops were on the march to invest the city , repairing the burnt bridges over the Big Black River ; which Grant 's forces crossed on May 18 . Johnston sent a note to his general , Pemberton , asking him to sacrifice the city and save his troops , something Pemberton would not do . ( Pemberton , a Northerner by birth , was probably influenced by his fear of public condemnation if he abandoned Vicksburg . ) 
 Pemberton , trying to please Jefferson Davis , who insisted that Vicksburg and Port Hudson must be held , and to please Johnston , who thought both places worthless militarily , had been caught in the middle , a victim of a convoluted command system and his own indecisiveness . Too dispirited to think clearly , he chose to back his bedraggled army into Vicksburg rather than evacuate the city and head north where he might have escaped to campaign again . When he chose to take his army into Vicksburg , Pemberton sealed the fate of his troops and the city he had been determined to defend . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Union = = = 
 Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant 's Union Army of the Tennessee brought five corps to the siege : 
 IX Corps , under Maj. Gen. John Parke ; 
 XIII Corps , under Maj. Gen. John A. McClernand ; 
 XV Corps , under Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman ; 
 XVI Corps ( detachment ) , under Maj. Gen. Cadwallader C. Washburn ; 
 XVII Corps , under Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson . 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 Lt. Gen. John C. Pemberton 's Confederate Army of Mississippi inside the Vicksburg line consisted of four divisions , under Maj. Gens . : 
 Carter L. Stevenson ; 
 John H. Forney ; 
 Martin L. Smith ; 
 John S. Bowen ; 
 = = The defenses of Vicksburg = = 
 As the Confederate forces approached Vicksburg , Pemberton could put only 18 @,@ 500 troops in his lines . Grant had over 35 @,@ 000 , with more on the way . However , Pemberton had the advantage of terrain and fortifications that made his defense nearly impregnable . The defensive line around Vicksburg ran approximately 6 @.@ 5 miles , based on terrain of varying elevations that included hills and knobs with steep angles for an attacker to ascend under fire . The perimeter included many gun pits , forts , trenches , redoubts , and lunettes . The major fortifications of the line included Fort Hill , on a high bluff north of the city ; the Stockade Redan , dominating the approach to the city on Graveyard Road from the northeast ; the 3rd Louisiana Redan ; the Great Redoubt ; the Railroad Redoubt , protecting the gap for the railroad line entering the city ; the Square Fort ( Fort <unk> ) ; a salient along the Hall 's Ferry Road ; and the South Fort . 
 = = Assaults = = 
 Grant wanted to overwhelm the Confederates before they could fully organize their defenses and ordered an immediate assault against Stockade Redan for May 19 . Troops from Sherman 's corps had a difficult time approaching the position under rifle and artillery fire from the 36th Mississippi Infantry , Brig. Gen. Louis Hébert 's brigade — they had to negotiate a steep ravine protected by abatis and cross a 6 @-@ foot @-@ deep ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , 8 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) ditch before attacking the 17 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) walls of the redan . This first attempt was easily repulsed . Grant ordered an artillery bombardment to soften the defenses and at about 2 p.m. , Sherman 's division under Maj. Gen. Francis P. Blair tried again , but only a small number of men were able to advance even as far as the ditch below the redan . The assault collapsed in a melee of rifle fire and hand grenades lobbing back and forth . 
 The failed Federal assaults of May 19 damaged Union morale , deflating the confidence the soldiers felt after their string of victories across Mississippi . They were also costly , with casualties of 157 killed , 777 wounded , and 8 missing , versus Confederate casualties of 8 killed and 62 wounded . The Confederates , assumed to be demoralized , had regained their fighting edge . 
 Grant planned another assault for May 22 , but this time with greater care ; they would first reconnoiter thoroughly and soften up the defenses with artillery and naval gunfire . The lead units were supplied with ladders to ascend the fortification walls . Grant did not want a long siege , and this attack was to be by the entire army across a wide front . 
 Despite their bloody repulse on May 19 , Union troops were in high spirits , now well @-@ fed with provisions they had foraged . On seeing Grant pass by , a soldier commented , " Hardtack " . Soon all Union troops in the vicinity were yelling , " Hardtack ! Hardtack ! " The Union served hardtack , beans , and coffee the night of May 21 . Everyone expected that Vicksburg would fall the next day . 
 Union forces bombarded the city all night , from 220 artillery pieces and naval gunfire from Rear Adm. David D. Porter 's fleet in the river , and while causing little property damage , they damaged Confederate civilian morale . On the morning of May 22 , the defenders were bombarded again for four hours before the Union attacked once more along a three @-@ mile front at 10 a.m. 
 Sherman attacked once again down the Graveyard Road , with 150 volunteers ( nicknamed the Forlorn Hope detachment ) leading the way with ladders and planks , followed by the divisions of Blair and Brig. Gen. James M. Tuttle , arranged in a long column of regiments , hoping to achieve a breakthrough by concentrating their mass on a narrow front . They were driven back in the face of heavy rifle fire . Blair 's brigades under Cols . Giles A. Smith and T. Kilby Smith made it as far as a ridge 100 yards from Green 's Redan , the southern edge of the Stockade Redan , from where they poured heavy fire into the Confederate position , but to no avail . Tuttle 's division , waiting its turn to advance , did not have an opportunity to move forward . On Sherman 's far right , the division of Brig. Gen. Frederick Steele spent the morning attempting to get into position through a ravine of the Mint Spring Bayou . 
 McPherson 's corps was assigned to attack the center along the Jackson Road . On their right flank , the brigade of Brig. Gen. Thomas E. G. Ransom advanced to within 100 yards of the Confederate line , but halted to avoid dangerous flanking fire from Green 's Redan . On McPherson 's left flank , the division of Maj. Gen. John A. Logan was assigned to assault the 3rd Louisiana Redan and the Great Redoubt . The brigade of Brig. Gen. John E. Smith made it as far as the slope of the redan , but huddled there , dodging grenades until dark before they were recalled . Brig. Gen. John D. Stevenson 's brigade advanced well in two columns against the redoubt , but their attack also failed when they found their ladders were too short to scale the fortification . Brig. Gen. Isaac F. Quinby 's division advanced a few hundred yards , but halted for hours while its generals engaged in confused discussions . 
 On the Union left , McClernand 's corps moved along the Baldwin Ferry Road and astride the Southern Railroad of Mississippi . The division of Brig. Gen. Eugene A. Carr was assigned to capture the Railroad Redoubt and the 2nd Texas Lunette ; the division of Brig. Gen. Peter J. Osterhaus was assigned the Square Fort . Carr 's men achieved a small breakthrough at the 2nd Texas Lunette and requested reinforcements . 
 By 11 a.m. , it was clear that a breakthrough was not forthcoming and the advances by Sherman and McPherson were failures . Just then , Grant received a message from McClernand , which stated that he was heavily engaged , the Confederates were being reinforced , and he requested a diversion on his right from McPherson 's corps . Grant initially refused the request , telling McClernand to use his own reserve forces for assistance ; Grant was mistakenly under the impression that McClernand had been lightly engaged and McPherson heavily , although the reverse was true . McClernand followed up with a message that was partially misleading , implying that he had captured two forts — " The Stars and Stripes are flying over them . " — and that another push along the line would achieve victory for the Union Army . Although Grant once again demurred , he showed the dispatch to Sherman , who ordered his own corps to advance again . Grant , reconsidering , then ordered McPherson to send Quinby 's division to aid McClernand . 
 Sherman ordered two more assaults . At 2 : 15 p.m. , Giles Smith and Ransom moved out and were repulsed immediately . At 3 p.m. , Tuttle 's division suffered so many casualties in their aborted advance that Sherman told Tuttle , " This is murder ; order those troops back . " By this time , Steele 's division had finally maneuvered into position on Sherman 's right , and at 4 p.m. , Steele gave the order to charge against the 26th Louisiana Redoubt . They had no more success than any of Sherman 's other assaults . 
 In McPherson 's sector , Logan 's division made another thrust down the Jackson Road at about 2 p.m. , but met with heavy losses and the attack was called off . McClernand attacked again , reinforced by Quinby 's division , but with no success . Union casualties were 502 killed , 2 @,@ 550 wounded , and 147 missing , about evenly divided across the three corps . Confederate casualties were not reported directly , but are estimated to be under 500 . Grant blamed McClernand 's misleading dispatches for part of the poor results of the day , storing up another grievance against the political general who had caused him so many <unk> during the campaign . 
 = = Siege = = 
 Historian Shelby Foote wrote that Grant " did not regret having made the assaults ; he only regretted that they had failed . " Grant reluctantly settled into a siege . On May 25 , Lt. Col. John A. Rawlins issued Special Orders No. 140 for Grant : " Corps Commanders will immediately commence the work of reducing the enemy by regular approaches . It is desirable that no more loss of life shall be sustained in the reduction of Vicksburg , and the capture of the Garrison . Every advantage will be taken of the natural inequalities of the ground to gain positions from which to start mines , trenches , or advance batteries . ... " Grant wrote in his memoirs , " I now determined upon a regular siege — to ' out @-@ camp the enemy , ' as it were , and to incur no more losses . " 
 Federal troops began to dig in , constructing elaborate entrenchments ( the soldiers of the time referred to them as " ditches " ) that surrounded the city and moved closer and closer to the Confederate fortifications . With their backs against the Mississippi and Union gunboats firing from the river , Confederate soldiers and citizens alike were trapped . Pemberton was determined to hold his few miles of the Mississippi as long as possible , hoping for relief from Johnston or elsewhere . 
 A new problem confronted the Confederates . The dead and wounded of Grant 's army lay in the heat of Mississippi summer , the odor of the deceased men and horses fouling the air , the wounded crying for medical help and water . Grant first refused a request of truce , thinking it a show of weakness . Finally he relented , and the Confederates held their fire while the Union recovered the wounded and dead , soldiers from both sides mingling and trading as if no hostilities existed for the moment . 
 After this truce , Grant 's army began to fill the 12 @-@ mile ring around Vicksburg . In short time it became clear that even 50 @,@ 000 Union soldiers would not be able to effect a complete encirclement of the Confederate defenses . Pemberton 's outlook on escape was pessimistic , but there were still roads leading south out of Vicksburg unguarded by Federal troops . Grant found help from Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck , the Union general @-@ in @-@ chief . Halleck quickly began to shift Union troops in the West to meet Grant 's needs . The first of these reinforcements to arrive along the siege lines was a 5 @,@ 000 man division from the Department of the Missouri under Maj. Gen. Francis J. Herron on June 11 . Herron 's troops , remnants of the Army of the Frontier , were attached to McPherson 's corps and took up position on the far south . Next came a three division detachment from the XVI Corps led by Brig. Gen. Cadwallader C. Washburn on June 12 , assembled from troops at nearby posts of Corinth , Memphis , and LaGrange . The final significant group of reinforcements to join was the 8 @,@ 000 man strong IX Corps from the Department of the Ohio , led by Maj. Gen. John G. Parke , arriving on June 14 . With the arrival of Parke , Grant had 77 @,@ 000 men around Vicksburg . 
 In an effort to cut Grant 's supply line , Confederates in Louisiana under Major General John G. Walker attacked Milliken 's Bend up the Mississippi on June 7 . This was mainly defended by untrained colored troops , who fought bravely with inferior weaponry and finally fought off the rebels with help from gunboats , although at horrible cost ; the defenders lost 652 to the Confederate 185 . The loss at Milliken 's Bend left the Confederates with no hope for relief but from the cautious Johnston . 
 Pemberton was boxed in with lots of inedible munitions and little food . The poor diet was showing on the Confederate soldiers . By the end of June , half were out sick or hospitalized . Scurvy , malaria , dysentery , diarrhea , and other diseases cut their ranks . At least one city resident had to stay up at night to keep starving soldiers out of his vegetable garden . The constant shelling did not bother him as much as the loss of his food . As the siege wore on , fewer and fewer horses , mules , and dogs were seen wandering about Vicksburg . Shoe leather became a last resort of sustenance for many adults . 
 During the siege , Union gunboats lobbed over 22 @,@ 000 shells into the town and army artillery fire was even heavier . As the barrages continued , suitable housing in Vicksburg was reduced to a minimum . A ridge , located between the main town and the rebel defense line , provided a diverse citizenry with lodging for the duration . Over 500 caves , known locally as " <unk> , " were dug into the yellow clay hills of Vicksburg . Whether houses were structurally sound or not , it was deemed safer to occupy these dugouts . People did their best to make them comfortable , with rugs , furniture , and pictures . They tried to time their movements and foraging with the rhythm of the cannonade , sometimes unsuccessfully . Because of the citizens ' burrowing , the Union soldiers gave the town the nickname of " Prairie Dog Village . " Despite the ferocity of the Union fire against the town , fewer than a dozen civilians were known to have been killed during the entire siege . 
 = = = Command changes = = = 
 One of Grant 's actions during the siege was to settle a lingering rivalry . On May 30 , General McClernand wrote a self @-@ adulatory note to his troops , claiming much of the credit for the soon @-@ to @-@ be victory . Grant had been waiting six months for him to slip , ever since they clashed early in the campaign , around the Battle of Arkansas Post . He had received permission to relieve McClernand in January 1863 but waited for an unequivocal provocation . Grant finally relieved McClernand on June 18 . He so diligently prepared his action that McClernand was left without recourse . McClernand 's XIII Corps was turned over to Maj. Gen. Edward Ord , recovered from a wound sustained at Hatchie 's Bridge . In May 1864 , McClernand was restored to a command in remote Texas . 
 Another command change occurred on June 22 . In addition to Pemberton at his front , Grant had to be concerned with Confederate forces in his rear under the command of Joseph E. Johnston . He stationed one division in the vicinity of the Big Black River Bridge and another reconnoitered as far north as Mechanicsburg , both to act as a covering force . By June 10 , the IX Corps , under Maj. Gen. John G. Parke , was transferred to Grant 's command . This corps became the nucleus of a special task force whose mission was to prevent Johnston , gathering his forces at Canton , from interfering with the siege . Sherman was given command of this task force and Brig. Gen. Frederick Steele replaced him at the XV Corps . Johnston eventually began moving to relieve Pemberton and reached the Big Black River on July 1 , but he delayed a potentially difficult encounter with Sherman until it was too late for the Vicksburg garrison , and then fell back to Jackson . Sherman would eventually pursue Johnston and ( re ) capture Jackson on July 17 . 
 = = = Louisiana operations = = = 
 Throughout the siege Union and Confederate forces kept busy in a supporting role on the Louisiana side of the Mississippi River . Lt. Gen. Edmund Kirby Smith , commander of the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department , received a telegraph from Pemberton on May 9 requesting a movement against Grant 's communication lines along the Mississippi River . Grant had established important supply depots at Milliken 's Bend , Young 's Point , and Lake Providence within Smith 's jurisdiction , but Smith failed to recognize the importance of Pemberton 's situation . It was not until June when Smith finally decided to take action on Pemberton 's request , directing Maj. Gen. Richard Taylor to " do something " in favor of the Vicksburg garrison . Taylor commanded the District of Western Louisiana and developed a three @-@ pronged campaign against Grant 's three supply depots . All three of Taylor 's assaults were defeated ( see Battle of Milliken 's Bend , Battle of Young 's Point and Battle of Lake Providence ) . 
 In response to the growing Confederate activity in the area , Grant decided to dispatch troops from the Vicksburg trenches across the river . The presence of Maj. Gen. John G. Walker 's Confederate division on the Louisiana side was of particular concern ; its presence could possibly aid a Confederate escape from Vicksburg . Therefore , Brig. Gen. Alfred W. Ellet 's Mississippi Marine Brigade and Joseph A. Mower 's brigade from Sherman 's corps were ordered to the vicinity of Milliken 's Bend . Mower and Ellet were to cooperate against Walker 's division , which was stationed in the vicinity of Richmond , Louisiana . Richmond also happened to be an important supply line providing Vicksburg with food from Louisiana . On June 15 , Ellet and Mower defeated Walker and destroyed Richmond , Louisiana . 
 Ellet 's men returned to De Soto Point and constructed an artillery battery targeting an iron foundry recasting spent Union artillery shells . Construction was begun on June 19 , which placed a 10 @-@ pounder Parrott rifle in a casemate of railroad iron . The targeted foundry was destroyed on June 25 and the next day a second Parrott gun was added to the battery , which continued to harass the defenders until the garrison 's surrender . 
 Additional Confederate activity in Louisiana occurred on June 29 at Goodrich 's Landing . Confederates attacked a plantation and army training center run by former slaves . The Confederates destroyed the plantations and captured over a hundred former slaves before disengaging in the face of Ellet 's Marines . Confederate raids such as these were disruptive and caused damage , but they were only minor setbacks and showed the Confederates could cause only momentary disturbances in the area . 
 = = = Crater at the 3rd Louisiana Redan = = = 
 Late in the siege , Union troops tunneled under the 3rd Louisiana Redan and packed the mine with 2 @,@ 200 pounds of gunpowder . The explosion blew apart the Confederate lines on June 25 , while an infantry attack made by troops from Logan 's XVII Corps division , followed the blast . The 45th Illinois Regiment ( known as the " Lead Mine Regiment " ) , under Col. Jasper A. Maltby , charged into the 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) diameter , 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep crater with ease , but were stopped by recovering Confederate infantry . The Union soldiers became pinned down while the defenders also rolled artillery shells with short fuses into the pit with deadly results . Union engineers worked to set up a casemate in the crater in order to extricate the infantry , and soon the soldiers fell back to a new defensive line . From the crater left by the explosion on June 25 , Union miners worked to dig a new mine to the south . On July 1 , this mine was detonated but no infantry attack followed . Pioneers worked throughout July 2 and 3 to widen the initial crater large enough for an infantry column of four to pass through for future anticipated assaults . However , events the following day negated the need for any further assaults . 
 = = Surrender and aftermath = = 
 On July 3 , Pemberton sent a note to Grant , who , as at Fort Donelson , first demanded unconditional surrender . But Grant reconsidered , not wanting to feed 30 @,@ 000 hungry Confederates in Union prison camps , and offered to parole all prisoners . Considering their destitute state , dejected and starving , he never expected them to fight again ; he hoped they would carry home the stigma of defeat to the rest of the Confederacy . In any event , it would have occupied his army and taken months to ship that many prisoners north . Most of the men who were paroled on July 6 were exchanged and received back into the Confederate Army on August 4 , 1863 , at Mobile Harbor , Alabama . They were back in Chattanooga , Tennessee , by September and some fought in the Battles for Chattanooga in November and against Sherman 's invasion of Georgia in May 1864 . The Confederate government protested the validity of the paroles on technical grounds and the issue was referred to Grant who , in April 1864 , was general in chief of the Army . The dispute effectively ended all further prisoner exchanges during the war except for hardship cases . 
 Surrender was formalized by an old oak tree , " made historical by the event . " In his Personal Memoirs , Grant described the fate of this luckless tree : 
 It was but a short time before the last vestige of its body , root and limb had disappeared , the fragments taken as trophies . Since then the same tree has furnished as many cords of wood , in the shape of trophies , as the ' True Cross ' . 
 The surrender was finalized on July 4 , Independence Day , a day Pemberton had hoped would bring more sympathetic terms from the United States . Although the Vicksburg Campaign continued with some minor actions , the fortress city had fallen and , with the surrender of Port Hudson on July 9 , the Mississippi River was firmly in Union hands and the Confederacy split in two . President Lincoln famously announced , " The Father of Waters again goes <unk> to the sea . " 
 Union casualties for the battle and siege of Vicksburg were 4 @,@ 835 ; Confederate were 32 @,@ 697 ( 29 @,@ 495 surrendered ) . The full campaign , since March 29 , claimed 10 @,@ 142 Union and 9 @,@ 091 Confederate killed and wounded . In addition to his surrendered men , Pemberton turned over to Grant 172 cannons and 50 @,@ 000 rifles . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Folk tradition holds that the Fourth of July ( Independence Day ) holiday was not celebrated by Vicksburg until World War II . This claim is false , for large Independence Day celebrations were held as early as 1907 . 
 = = Battlefield preservation = = 
 The works around Vicksburg are now maintained by the National Park Service as part of Vicksburg National Military Park . The park , located in Vicksburg , Mississippi , and Delta , Louisiana ( flanking the Mississippi River ) , also commemorates the greater Vicksburg Campaign which led up to the battle . Reconstructed forts and trenches evoke memories of the 47 @-@ day siege that ended in the surrender of the city . Victory here and at Port Hudson , farther south in Louisiana , gave the Union control of the Mississippi River . The park includes 1 @,@ 325 historic monuments and markers , 20 miles ( 32 km ) of historic trenches and earthworks , a 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) tour road , a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) walking trail , two antebellum homes , 144 emplaced cannons , the restored gunboat USS Cairo ( sunk on December 12 , 1862 , on the Yazoo River ) , and the Grant 's Canal site , where the Union Army attempted to build a canal to let their ships bypass Confederate artillery fire . 
 = = = Memoirs and primary sources = = = 
 Grant , Ulysses S. Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant . 2 vols . Charles L. Webster & Company , 1885 – 86 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 67 @-@ 9 . 
 U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1880 – 1901 . 
 Various resources from the University Libraries Division of Special Collections , The University of Alabama . 
 = Unusual You = 
 " Unusual You " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , from her sixth studio album Circus . It was written and produced by Christian Karlsson and Pontus Winnberg from Bloodshy & Avant , with additional writing by Kasia Livingston and Henrik Jonback . " Unusual You " is an electropop love song reminiscent of the music of Janet Jackson and Gwen Stefani , with sung lyrics that address an experienced woman finding unexpected love . " Unusual You " received mostly positive reviews from critics , who commended it for being a departure of the rest of the album . Following the release of Circus , the song charted at number eighty on the U.S. Billboard Pop 100 due to strong digital sales . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Unusual You " was written and produced by Christian Karlsson and Pontus Winnberg from Bloodshy & Avant , with additional writing by Kasia Livingston and Henrik Jonback . Main instrumentation was recorded by Bloodshy & Avant at Robotberget in Stockholm , Sweden . Spears recorded her vocals at Conway Studios in Los Angeles , California , while audio mixing was done by Anders Hvenare and Bloodshy & Avant at Robotberget . Background vocals were provided by Livingston . " Unusual You " appeared on a six @-@ song mix of Circus that was released on November 13 , 2008 . In August 2009 , it was reported by NRJ Radio that " Unusual You " was going to be released as the fifth single from the album in France and the United States . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Unusual You " is a midtempo electropop song , that has been described by Nekesa Mumbi Moody of the Associated Press as " synth @-@ centric " . The song has been noted by John Murphy of musicOMH to be reminiscent of " Gwen Stefani 's quieter moments . " Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times commented that " Unusual You " " goes for that shimmering waterfall mood first popularized by Janet Jackson rather than strict Madonna @-@ style workouts . " According to Chris Richards of The Washington Post , Spears 's vocals in the song are transformed into " a spectral coo . " Lyrically , " Unusual You " talks about an experienced woman finding unexpected love , with Spears voicing the lines , " Didn 't anyone tell you you 're supposed to break my heart ? / I expect you to / So why haven 't you ? . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Unusual You " received positive reviews from critics . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times noted that the song stood out on Circus because it did not paint " Britney as mannequin , sex object , paparazzi victim and leather @-@ clad mistress " like the other tracks on the album . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone deemed it as " melodic [ and ] glowing " . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly named " Unusual You " as a standout track from Circus and added , " Spears still presents herself as fantasy object , but here might be her own fantasy — of real acceptance . Next time , Britney , flash us more of that . " Chris Richards of The Washington Post selected it as one of the " gems " of the album , along with " Womanizer " . John Murphy of musicOMH said that the lyrics make Spears " sound extraordinarily world @-@ weary for a 27 year old " and added that it " gives a pointer to an interesting new direction . " Jim Farber of the Daily News called the song " perhaps the first truly pretty melody Spears has ever sung . " Brad Wheeler of The Globe and Mail said " Unusual You " was entertaining , but not as remarkable as other tracks on Circus and dismissed the song as merely a " strobe @-@ lit , heart @-@ shaped testimonial . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that " Unusual You " and the two other ballads in the album , were Circus 's " only attempts at warmth . " 
 Poppy Cosyns of The Sun criticized the backing track of " Unusual You " as leaving " it sounding like the discovered dregs of a would @-@ be late Nineties hit . " Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun called " Unusual You " " a surprisingly subtle and effective moment " and speculated that it was " surely a future single . " Steve Jones of USA Today described " Unusual You " as " saccharin " , adding that " she sounds much better in the dance tracks . " Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star called it the album 's one " moment of pathos " . Jim DeRogatis of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times criticized " Unusual You " as " shamelessly Madonna @-@ aping . " Nekesa Mumbi Moody of the Associated Press commented that Spears 's most personal and emotional moments of Circus are in the slower tracks , most notably in " Unusual You " . Moody continued , " Though she didn 't write the song , it 's hard not to wince in empathy when you think about the string of users who have filtered in and out of her life . " Pete Paphides of The Times said " Unusual You " would " find a home with anyone whose love of melancholy Europop is fatal enough to take in Limahl 's ' Never Ending Story . ' " In 2015 , Gregory Hicks of MTV named " Unusual You " Spears 's best song that was not released as a single . 
 Following the release of Circus in December 2008 , " Unusual You " managed to peak at number eighty on the US Billboard Pop 100 due to strong digital sales . In 2008 when Circus album came out , popstar Lady Gaga was asked about which songs she was listening and Unusual You was on her playlist , she said : " It is really a good song . I listened to the Circus on the plane , and when I came to this song , I stopped and listened to it again and again . It is so beautiful and so sad , and I love the way it has a mysterious quality . As if the music was put into a mirror from a funhouse . Go girl . Good pop . " 
 = = Credits and Personnel = = 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals and background vocals 
 Christian Karlsson - songwriting 
 Bloodshy & Avant – songwriting , mixing , programming , keyboards , bass and guitar 
 Henrik Jonback – songwriting and guitar 
 Pontus Winnberg - songwriting 
 Kasia Livingston – songwriting and background vocals 
 Credits adapted from Circus liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = HMS Speedy ( 1782 ) = 
 HMS Speedy was a 14 @-@ gun Speedy @-@ class brig of the British Royal Navy . Built during the last years of the American War of Independence , she served with distinction during the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 Built at Dover , Kent , Speedy spent most of the interwar years serving off the British coast . Transferred to the Mediterranean after the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , she spent the rest of her career there under a number of notable commanders , winning fame for herself in various engagements and often against heavy odds . Her first commander in the Mediterranean , Charles Cunningham , served with distinction with several squadrons , assisting in the capture of several war prizes , such as the French frigates Modeste and Impérieuse . His successor , George Cockburn , impressed his superiors with his dogged devotion to duty . Speedy 's next commander , George Eyre , had the misfortune to lose her to a superior French force on 9 June 1794 . 
 She was soon retaken , and re @-@ entered service under Hugh Downman , who captured a number of privateers between 1795 and 1799 and fought off an attack by the large French privateer Papillon on 3 February 1798 . His successor , Jahleel Brenton , fought a number of actions against Spanish forces off Gibraltar . Her last captain , Lord Cochrane , forced the surrender of a much larger Spanish warship , the Gamo . Speedy was finally captured by a powerful French squadron in 1801 and donated to the Papal Navy by Napoleon the following year . She spent five years with them under the name San Paulo , but was struck around 1806 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Speedy was one of two brig @-@ sloops built to the same design by Thomas King of Dover , Kent . She and her sister ship HMS Flirt were constructed to provide small , fast escort vessels with hulls shaped like a cutter , rather than the more seaworthy but slower ship @-@ sloop . King had for some time specialised in these types of vessels , and the design capitalised on that experience . Speedy was so named to symbolise this new approach , and measured 207 21 ⁄ 94 tons bm with a total length of 78 feet 3 inches ( 23 @.@ 85 m ) . She was armed with fourteen four @-@ pounder and twelve half @-@ pounder swivel guns , and carried a complement of 90 men . Ordered on 23 March 1781 , she was laid down at King 's yard in June that year and launched on 29 June 1782 . She moved to Deptford , Kent , to be fitted @-@ out and have her hull covered with copper plates between 16 July and 25 October 1782 ; at her completion she had cost £ 4 @,@ 200 7s 3d to build . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Speedy was commissioned under Commander Josias Rogers in May 1783 and was assigned to serve in the North Sea , operating out of the Humber estuary . After four years on this station she was paid off ( placed in reserve ) in January 1787 and began a refit at Woolwich in April that year . This work was completed by July at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 801 , and she was recommissioned in May that year under Commander John Maude , still on the Humber station . 
 From November 1790 she was under Commander Richard Lane , who was her captain until she was paid off in October 1791 . Speedy then underwent another refit , this time at Deptford between June and December 1792 , at a cost of £ 3 @,@ 000 , and was recommissioned in November 1792 under Commander Charles Cunningham . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 Cunningham had previously been serving in the East Indies in command of the 16 @-@ gun sloop HMS Ariel . By the time he returned to take up his new command the French Revolutionary Wars had broken out and he was sent to join Lord Hood 's fleet in the Mediterranean , arriving there in April 1793 . He was largely employed in carrying despatches and maintaining communications with other ships scattered throughout the Mediterranean ports . On 5 October 1793 Speedy accompanied HMS Bedford and HMS Captain into Genoa , where they captured a French frigate , Modeste , and two armed tartanes in the Raid on Genoa . In this action , Speedy sent two boats to board the tartanes while Bedford bombarded Modeste . The French crews of the tartanes attempted to resist and two of their crewmembers were wounded , but the British did not suffer any casualties . Captain and Speedy then sailed to the Gulf of Spezia where they caught another French frigate , Imperieuse , at anchor . Imperieuse was scuttled by her crew , but was subsequently salvaged and recommissioned as HMS Imperieuse . Cunningham was promoted to captain and given command of the prize , with his commission backdated to the day of the capture , 12 October 1793 . 
 Cunningham was replaced by Commander George Cockburn in the command of Speedy , which remained in the Mediterranean . His first duties were limited to carrying despatches and passengers between Toulon and Genoa , after which he was ordered to join Captain Sutherland of HMS Diadem , who was commanding a squadron blockading Genoa . The small fleet was caught in winter storms and several ships were badly damaged , forcing Sutherland and his squadron to seek shelter in nearby ports and to make repairs , with the exception of Speedy , which remained on station . Sutherland put into Hyères Bay and reported the dispersal of his squadron to Lord Hood , also noting that nothing had been heard of Speedy since the gales . Once Diadem had been repaired Sutherland returned to Genoa , and was surprised to discover Speedy still there patrolling the port , not once having left her task . While single @-@ handedly maintaining the blockade , she had managed to capture several vessels . Sutherland ordered Speedy , which was by now running desperately short of water , to Hyères to refit . At the same time , Sutherland sent a complimentary report of Cockburn to Lord Hood . On 20 January 1794 , Cockburn was rewarded with an acting commission as post @-@ captain of the frigate HMS Inconstant , followed a month later by a permanent command of the frigate HMS Meleager . 
 Commander George Eyre took over command of Speedy in February 1794 . Speedy supported the siege and capture of Bastia , after which Eyre was ordered to join Diadem off Nice . While making his way there on 9 June , he ran into a French fleet under Rear @-@ Admiral Pierre Martin , which had sailed from Toulon several days earlier . Eyre attempted to escape , but the wind and sea favoured the larger vessels , and Speedy was chased down and captured . Eyre was brought aboard Admiral Martin 's flagship and was told that the National Convention had recently ordered that no quarter should be given to the English or Hanoverians , and that had Martin 's ship been first alongside , he would have sunk Speedy . The sudden appearance of a British fleet curtailed the interview , and the French hurried back to <unk> roadstead outside Toulon , taking Speedy and the captured British crew with them . 
 = = Recapture = = 
 Speedy spent only a brief time sailing under the French flag . On 25 March 1795 her captain mistook Captain Thomas Fremantle 's Inconstant for a French ship and she was recaptured and taken back into British service . 
 In early March the following year , Speedy , under the command of Thomas Elphinstone , joined a squadron cruising off Oneglia , Italy , under Commodore Horatio Nelson , consisting of the 64 @-@ gun ships HMS Agamemnon and HMS Diadem , the 32 @-@ gun frigates HMS Meleager and HMS Blanche and the ship @-@ sloop HMS Peterel . On 25 April the squadron steered for <unk> bay , the commodore having received intelligence that a large convoy , laden with stores for the French army , had anchored off the town of Finale . When the squadron arrived , however , they found only four vessels moored under the guns of some batteries . The shore batteries opened fire on Peterel as led the boats of the squadron to the attack . Despite the fire , the British were able to capture the four vessels and suffered only three men wounded . 
 In an action on 31 May the squadron chased the French ketch Genie , a gunboat of one gun , and five merchant ships , which took refuge near the guns of a shore battery . At 3 p.m. Agamemnon , Blanche , Peterel and Speedy approached them and anchored in 4 fathoms ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) of water . The four British ships fired their cannons , which disabled the shore battery , and then sent in several boats under heavy fire from the guns of Genie and the gunboat ; the British successfully boarded and captured both ships . In the meantime , the merchant ships had beached themselves to avoid capture . Under heavy musket fire from the beach , the British captured and re @-@ floated the four merchant vessels , and destroyed one . Among the British , one man was killed and three were wounded in the operation . 
 = = Downman and Brenton = = 
 Elphinstone was succeeded in August 1797 by Commander Hugh Downman , who made several cruises with Speedy . On 3 February 1798 she encountered the large privateer Papillon , mounting 18 guns and carrying 160 men , while sailing off Vigo . The Papillon attacked Speedy , which had a reduced crew ; her master Mr Marshall and 12 men were aboard a Spanish prize Speedy had taken earlier . The two ships fought each other for two days ; by the second day Downman had exhausted his supply of shot , and resorted to firing nails and pieces of iron hoop at his opponent . Having observed his captain 's predicament , Marshall secured the Spanish crew below deck and took the prize crew off in a small boat to go to Downman 's assistance . After a fierce fight the Papillon was driven off ; Speedy suffered losses of five killed and four wounded . Downman then recaptured his prize and returned to Lisbon to carry out repairs . During his time in command of Speedy , Downman captured five privateers , altogether mounting 17 guns and 28 swivels , and carrying 162 men . For his efforts in protecting British trade out of Oporto , the merchants presented him with a letter of thanks , and a piece of plate valued at £ 50 . As a reward for his good service , Downman was advanced to post @-@ captain on 26 December 1798 and appointed commander of the 32 @-@ gun HMS Santa Dorothea , a frigate that had recently been captured from the Spanish in the Action of 15 July 1798 . 
 Downman was succeeded in January of the following year by Commander Jahleel Brenton , who was based at Gibraltar . While sailing off Gibraltar in company with the British privateer Defender on 9 August 1799 , Brenton came across three small Spanish warships , mounting twenty 6 @-@ pounders in total . The Spanish ran into a small sandy bay and anchored in a line so as to bring their guns to bear simultaneously on the British ships . Speedy and Defender sailed up and down for two hours firing broadsides , but without much effect . Defender only had 22 men on board and decided to sail further out to sea to meet one of her boats . Brenton thought the effort of keeping under sail was aiding the enemy , and anchored Speedy within 30 yards ( 27 m ) of the middle ship . The two exchanged a fierce cannonade for three quarters of an hour , after which the Spanish abandoned their ships and made for the shore . Two of the ships ran ashore and the third was immediately captured . Speedy launched her boats to recover the other two , coming under musket fire from the Spanish on the hillside as they did so . The British got both vessels off and took them into Gibraltar , along with two men wounded during the operation . 
 On 3 October Speedy , while sailing once again off Gibraltar , spotted ten small ships coming out of Algeciras , gunboats apparently attempting to attack a British convoy that was then passing . Brenton identified the ships as merchantmen , attempting to evade the British at Gibraltar in the bad weather . On Speedy 's approach , they scattered , four sheltering under a fort . Speedy approached and fired on them , causing their crews to abandon their ships . They were driven ashore by the wind , and despite sending boats out , it was impossible to get them off , so they were left to be reduced to wrecks . Three days later , Speedy was standing off Europa Point when twelve gunboats were sighted coming out of Algeciras to attack two merchant ships making their way past Gibraltar . One , the Unity , was carrying wine and spirits for the fleet . Their combined firepower far outweighed that of Speedy , but Brenton turned his ship towards them , covering the escape of one of the merchantmen with his fire . The gunboats were attempting to catch the Unity when Brenton took his ship through the flotilla , close enough to break many of their oars , maintaining a constant fire from his guns and with every spare member of the crew firing muskets . The Spanish flotilla broke and fled . Speedy suffered two men killed and one wounded , and sustained considerable damage to her rigging and below her waterline . She was unable to return to Gibraltar in the rising wind , and was forced to run along the coast to Tétouan Bay , where her shot @-@ holes were plugged to allow her to make her way back . During the engagement with the gunboats , the guns in the fortress of Gibraltar had not fired in support of Speedy . When Brenton asked why , the Governor of Gibraltar , General Charles O 'Hara , replied that he had arranged with the Governor of Algeciras for the guns never to be fired at the gunboats so as not to annoy the inhabitants of the town . 
 = = Cochrane = = 
 Brenton was promoted to post @-@ captain , and in March 1800 Commander Lord Cochrane took over . Cochrane was less than impressed with his new command , declaring that Speedy was " little more than a burlesque of a vessel of war " . His cabin had only 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of headroom ; when Cochrane wished to shave he had to open a skylight and set his shaving equipment out on the quarterdeck . On another occasion he walked the quarterdeck with Speedy 's entire broadside , seven pieces of four @-@ pounder shot , in his pockets . In an attempt to increase the firepower of his new command he asked for and was given two 12 @-@ pounder long guns to use as bow and stern chasers , but the scantlings could not support them and they had to be removed . He then requested his 4 @-@ pounders be upgraded to 6 @-@ pounders , but his gunports were not big enough . He had better luck with his mast , taking a spar from HMS Genereux that was considered too large for Speedy , but which Cochrane felt improved her speed . 
 In early May Cochrane was escorting a convoy from Cagliari to Leghorn . On 11 May a ship which turned out to be the 6 @-@ gun privateer Intrépide was spotted capturing one of the merchant ships in the convoy , at which point Cochrane chased the Intrépide and forced her to surrender . Three days later , as the convoy passed the island of Montecristo , five rowing boats emerged from one of the island 's coves and captured two of the rearmost merchant ships . Cochrane immediately gave chase , and recaptured them early the next morning . He was then given a free hand to raid enemy shipping in the area , and captured seven or eight vessels that June and July , including the 10 @-@ gun privateer Asuncion off Bastia on 25 June and the privateer Constitution off <unk> on 19 July . On 22 September he captured a large Neapolitan vessel and , on bringing her into Port Mahon , discovered that the Spanish had taken notice of his depredations and were preparing a frigate to capture Speedy . 
 Cochrane prepared for an encounter with this Spanish vessel by painting Speedy to resemble a Danish brig then in the Mediterranean , the <unk> . He also appointed a Dane as quartermaster and found him a Danish naval officer 's uniform . While cruising off Alicante on 21 December , Speedy encountered an enemy frigate , but tricked her into thinking she was a neutral vessel . Cochrane again used this false flag technique to his advantage ; on 22 January he was sailing with a convoy of Danish merchantmen under a Danish flag , pretending to escort them . When a 10 @-@ gun French ship and 8 @-@ gun Spanish brig approached , Cochrane hoisted British colours and attacked , capturing both of them . 
 Then on 24 February Cochrane captured the French naval brig Caroline , of four guns , which had been carrying ordnance stores from Genoa to Alexandria . 
 = = = Speedy and Gamo = = = 
 Speedy was cruising off Barcelona at dawn on 6 May 1801 when she sighted a large enemy frigate . The frigate , a xebec @-@ rigged vessel named Gamo , carrying 319 men , was armed with 8- and 12 @-@ pounder guns and 24 @-@ pounder carronades . This amounted to a total broadside of 190 pounds , more than seven times that of Speedy . Furthermore , Cochrane had only 54 men on board ; the rest were serving as prize crews . Instead of evading the frigate , Cochrane closed on her , and at 9 : 30 a.m. Gamo fired a gun and hoisted Spanish colours . In return Cochrane hoisted American colours . The Spanish hesitated , allowing Cochrane to get closer , hoist British colours , and evade the first broadside . Gamo fired another , which Cochrane again evaded , holding fire until Speedy ran alongside and locked her yards in Gamo 's rigging . Gamo attempted to fire upon her smaller opponent , but her guns were mounted too high and could not be depressed sufficiently , causing their shot to pass through Speedy 's sails and rigging . Cochrane then opened fire with his 4 @-@ pounders double- and treble @-@ shotted , their shots passing up through the sides and decks , killing the Spanish captain and boatswain with the first broadside . 
 Seeing their disadvantage the Spanish second @-@ in @-@ command assembled a boarding party , at which Cochrane drew off and pounded their massed ranks with shot and musket fire before drawing in close again . After having their attempts to board frustrated three times , the Spanish returned to their guns . Cochrane then decided to board the Gamo , and assembled his entire crew into two parties , leaving only the ship 's doctor aboard . The British rushed the Gamo , some boarding from the bow with faces blackened to look like pirates , the rest boarding from the waist . There was a hard @-@ fought battle between the two crews , until Cochrane called down to the doctor , at the time the only person on Speedy , ordering him to send another 50 men over . At the same time he ordered the Spanish colours to be torn down . Thinking that their officers had surrendered the ship , the remaining Spanish seamen stopped fighting . The British had lost three men killed and nine wounded , while the Spanish had lost 14 killed and 41 wounded , a casualty list exceeding Speedy 's entire complement . The British then secured the Spanish prisoners below deck and made their way back to Port Mahon . Stung that he had been beaten by such an inferior foe , the Spanish second @-@ in @-@ command asked Cochrane for a certificate assuring him that he had done all he could to defend his ship . Cochrane obliged , with the equivocal wording that he had " conducted himself like a true Spaniard " . Cochrane was amused to learn that this certificate had later secured the Spanish officer further advancement . In 1847 the Admiralty awarded the Naval General Service Medal with clasp " Speedy 6 May 1801 " to all surviving claimants from the action . 
 = = = Later actions and capture = = = 
 Cochrane returned to the coast off Barcelona in June 1801 , and joined the 16 @-@ gun HMS Kangaroo in attacking a Spanish convoy of 12 merchant ships and 5 armed vessels anchored under the guns of a large tower . After a sharp action fought between the afternoon of 9 June and the morning of 10 June , the two ships sank or drove ashore all of the ships with the exception of three brigs , which they captured . Three weeks later he was cruising off Alicante when he encountered several merchant vessels , which ran ashore . Rather than wasting time trying to get them off , he burnt them , but in doing so attracted the attention of a foe vastly more powerful than the Gamo . 
 A formidable French squadron under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Léon Durand Linois had left Toulon bound for Cadiz to collect reinforcements for Napoleon 's army in Egypt . On 3 July they sighted and chased Speedy , and Cochrane ordered the guns , boats , and provisions thrown overboard to lighten the ship . The French caught up nonetheless , and after narrowly avoiding the broadside of Desaix , Cochrane struck his colours . He was taken aboard Desaix , where her captain , Christy @-@ Pallière , recognised Cochrane 's accomplishments by refusing to accept his sword . Cochrane was taken along with the fleet and watched the Battle of Algeciras Bay from Desaix . He and the crew of Speedy were later exchanged after the battle . On returning to Gibraltar he was court @-@ martialled for the loss of his ship , and honourably acquitted . 
 = = French and Papal career = = 
 The French took Speedy to Toulon with the fleet , where she became a pawn in Napoleon 's efforts at diplomacy with Pope Pius VII , whose presence he wanted at his coronation as emperor . Speedy , by now named Saint Paul and inscribed with the words " <unk> par le premier consul Bonaparte au Pape Pie VII " ( " Given by the First Consul Bonaparte to Pope Pius VII " ) in gilt letters on her poop cabin , sailed with an escort from Toulon on 14 December 1802 bound for Civitavecchia as a present to the Pope . She arrived there on 16 December where the Papal Navy took her into service under the name San Paulo . She remained there until being struck <unk> 
 = = HMS Sophie = = 
 Some of Speedy 's later exploits under Cochrane were used in the plot of the novel Master and Commander , part of Patrick O 'Brian 's Aubrey – Maturin series , though the ship described by O 'Brian matches only Speedy 's spar dimensions and armament , and is named HMS Sophie . Cochrane is replaced in the book by the fictional Jack Aubrey , who repeats many of Cochrane 's real @-@ life exploits including the defence of a convoy and the recapture of one of its merchants from a privateer , and the capture of a large Spanish frigate , based on the Gamo , but renamed <unk> for the novel . 
 = Senedd = 
 The Senedd ( Senate or Parliament ; Welsh pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , also known as the National Assembly building , houses the debating chamber and three committee rooms for the National Assembly for Wales in Cardiff . The 5 @,@ 308 square metres ( 57 @,@ 100 sq ft ) Senedd building was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 1 March 2006 and the total cost was £ 69 @.@ 6 million , which included £ <unk> in construction costs . The Senedd is part of the National Assembly estate that includes Tŷ Hywel and the Pierhead Building . 
 After two selection processes , the decision was taken that the debating chamber would be on a new site , called Site 1E , at Capital Waterside in Cardiff Bay . The Pritzker Prize @-@ winning architect Richard Rogers won an international architectural design competition , managed by RIBA Competitions , to design the building . It was designed to be sustainable with use of renewable technologies and be energy efficient . The building was awarded an " Excellent " certification by the Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method ( BREEAM ) , the highest ever awarded in Wales , and was nominated for the 2006 Stirling Prize . 
 The Senedd was constructed in two phases , the first in 2001 and the second from August 2003 until it was handed over to the National Assembly in February 2006 . Between phases , the National Assembly changed contractors and the project 's management structure , but retained Rogers as the scheme architect . The building was nearly six times over budget and four years and 10 months late , compared to the original estimates of the project in 1997 . Total costs rose due to unforeseen security measures after the 11 September attacks , and because the National Assembly did not have an independent cost appraisal of the project until December 2000 , three years after the original estimate . Phase 2 costs rose by less than 6 % over budget , and that phase was six months late , due to information and communication technology ( ICT ) problems . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Senedd building is in the former Cardiff Docks , about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Cardiff Castle . Cardiff Docks had been the largest coal @-@ exporting port in the world , but by the 1980s with the decline of the south Wales coalfield , the area had gradually become derelict . By the 1990s the area was being transformed with the construction of the Cardiff Bay Barrage and had been renamed Cardiff Bay . 
 The building faces south west over Cardiff Bay , it has a glass façade around the entire building and is dominated by a steel roof and wood ceiling . It has three floors , the first and second floors are accessible to the public and the ground floor is a private area for officials . The building was designed to be as open and accessible as possible , the architects , the Richard Rogers Partnership ( RRP ) said " The building was not to be an insular , closed edifice . Rather it would be a transparent envelope , looking outwards to Cardiff Bay and beyond , making visible the inner workings of the Assembly and encouraging public participation in the democratic process . " The main area in the building is the debating chamber , called the Siambr , including a public viewing gallery . Other areas of the building are the Neuadd , which is the main reception area on the first floor and the Oriel on the second floor . The three committee rooms and the Cwrt are on the ground floor . 
 = = = Environmental features = = = 
 The design criteria required sustainability , including a design life of 100 years , the use of local Welsh materials , minimal energy consumption and waste , the use of renewable technologies and for it to be an exemplar in terms of sustainability . 
 In total , 36 % of all materials and labour costs were spent in Wales , with approximately 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 157 @,@ 500 stone ) of Welsh slate used . The environmental features of the building have allowed energy savings of between 30 % and 50 % compared to buildings without these features . The features include 27 pipes that were drilled 100m below ground , so that during cold spells , water is pumped through the pipes and heated to 14 ° C by geothermal energy . The hot water is then pumped back up to the slate floor to warm the building to a constant temperature . In warm spells , the same system helps to keep the building cool . A biomass boiler was installed to use wood chips from recycled waste wood to heat the building , and rainwater is collected from the roof to flush the toilets in the building . 
 = = = Interior and contents = = = 
 Y Siambr ( Chamber ; Welsh pronunciation : [ / <unk> / ] ) is a 610 m2 ( 6 @,@ 600 sq ft ) debating chamber , which holds all 60 Assembly Members ( AMs ) in a circular configuration under the cowl . The Siambr can be increased to accommodate 80 AMs in the future , by removing temporary walls . On the level above , is the public viewing gallery , which looks down on the debating chamber and is separated by security glass . The public gallery holds 128 people on two rows of seats . The AM 's desks and public gallery seating are made of Welsh oak in a circular configuration so that all AMs can see each other , which , it is claimed , makes debating less confrontational . 
 In front of the Presiding Officer 's desk is the 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) ceremonial mace . Melbourne goldsmith Fortunato Rocca was commissioned by the Parliament of New South Wales in 2002 to design it . The mace took 300 hours to craft and is made from gold , silver and brass . In 2006 , it was worth around £ 10 @,@ 500 ( A $ 25 @,@ 000 ) and was handed over to the National Assembly during the opening ceremony . 
 All committee meetings are held in three committee rooms . Each can accommodate 24 people although committee rooms 1 and 2 can both hold 34 when fully opened . Members of the public can access the committee room viewing galleries from the Neuadd , which holds 31 people . 
 Members of the public enter the building through Y Neuadd ( Hall ; Welsh pronunciation : [ / <unk> / ] ) . This first floor level houses the public reception and information area . The reception desk features a large slate and glass desk and a canopy . Stairs to the left of the desk lead to the Oriel on the second floor . 
 Yr Oriel ( Gallery from Old French : Oriol ; Welsh pronunciation : [ / <unk> / ] ) is a public sitting and exhibition area with views down to y Siambr and committee rooms . The glass flooring , which surrounds a large funnel feature , enables visitors to look down into the Siambr two floors below . The Swan chairs selected for the Neuadd and Oriel areas were from Fritz Hansen , a Danish company , and originally designed by Arne Jacobsen in 1958 . Y Cwrt ( Courtyard ; Welsh pronunciation : [ / <unk> / ] ) is an area on the ground floor with a members ' tea room , a media briefing room , and access to the Siambr and committee rooms . It is accessible only to AMs , officials of the National Assembly and members of the press . 
 An undulating ceiling made of Canadian @-@ sourced Western <unk> timber spans across the various sections of the building . It was manufactured and installed by BCL Timber Projects ( sub @-@ contracted by Taylor Woodrow ) . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Four pieces of art were commissioned by the National Assembly to be both decorative and functional ; they cost £ 300 @,@ 000 in total . The Swansea based artist Alexander <unk> designed and created the circular and domed Heart of Wales for the centre of the Siambr . It is 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , made out of blue and gold glass , and lit from beneath . Martin Richman designed and created 270 fabric @-@ covered acoustic absorption panels , which were dyed and painted . American sculptor Danny Lane designed and created the wind hedge , Assembly Field . It has five parallel rows of 32 glass plates and was designed to have the practical use of protecting the public from high winds coming off Cardiff Bay . Devon born sculptor Richard Harris created The Meeting Place on the Plinth , which is 45 tonnes of slate machine @-@ cut into 39 slate slabs ; the slate was from Cwt y Bugail Quarry in north Wales . It is an informal seating area south of the building . Harris said of the work , " I wanted to create a space that was to the side of the building , that related closely to the building but was very inviting for people to use – somewhere quieter that people could sit and spend some time . " 
 = = Background and construction = = 
 = = = First site selection process = = = 
 Under the Laws in Wales Act 1536 Wales was fully incorporated into England and administered as a single sovereign state ( the Kingdom of England ) and legal system ( English law ) . It was not until 1964 that a Cabinet post of the Secretary of State for Wales was created , which gave some powers to Wales . After the general election of 1997 , the Labour Government published a white paper in July 1997 , called A Voice for Wales ; in it , the UK Government proposed that , " ( the Welsh Assembly ) headquarters will be in Cardiff ... ( the ) setting up ( of ) the Assembly is likely to cost between £ 12M and £ 17M . Additional running costs should be between £ 15M and £ 20M a year . " On 18 September 1997 , Wales voted in favour of a National Assembly for Wales in the Welsh devolution referendum . The Government of Wales Act 1998 was passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom , and was granted Royal Assent on 31 July 1998 . 
 Before the referendum took place , the Welsh Office asked Symonds Facilities Management ( later known as Capita Symonds ) to investigate possible sites for a new Welsh Assembly . The study was carried out in June 1997 , and it considered 20 sites . By August 1997 , the Welsh Office and the Property Advisors to the Civil Estate ( now part of the Office of Government Commerce ) , produced a shortlist of five sites for selection ; the Cathays Park Building ( the existing Welsh Office buildings ) , the Coal Exchange in Cardiff Bay , a site next to County Hall in Cardiff Bay , the former Glamorgan County Hall , Cathays Park and Cardiff City Hall , Cathays Park , owned by Cardiff Council . In making their decision they considered the need for a space of 80 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 400 m2 ) that would be ready to use by May 1999 . The building was to be of appropriate stature , location and quality , and provide good access for the disabled and good staff accommodation that would avoid disruption to existing staff . 
 From the five on the shortlist , two sites were considered , the Cathays Park Building and Cardiff City Hall . Cardiff City Hall was favoured because the executive and legislative functions would be separated , Cardiff City Hall was more widely recognised by the Welsh public and was a more prestigious building compared with the Cathays Park Building . The move to Cardiff City Hall would have also avoided a disruptive move for Welsh Office staff at the Cathays Park Building . The Welsh Office concluded that Cardiff City Hall would only remain an option if the initial costs were £ 17M or less , which was the top end of the estimate figure given in the white paper . This would only be possible if essential works were carried out immediately and the remainder of the work carried out later . Cardiff Council would need to agree a selling price of £ 5M or less for this to be possible . 
 Discussions took place between the leader of Cardiff Council , Russell Goodway , and the Secretary of State for Wales , Ron Davies , Member of Parliament ( MP ) . The two disagreed on the valuation of the site , Davies offered what was believed to be the market price of GB £ 3.5M , Goodway demanded £ <unk> for the relocation of Council staff . In October 1997 , both the Welsh Office and Cardiff Council agreed to the District Valuer providing an independent assessment of the market value of Cardiff City Hall and the cost of staff relocating to an equivalent standard of accommodation . The District Valuer advised that the open market value of Cardiff City Hall was £ <unk> There was not enough information available for the District Valuer to make a decision . A bid of £ 2.5M was made by the Welsh Office on 14 November 1997 , which was rejected on 21 November 1997 . A final offer of £ 3.5M was made on 24 November and this too was rejected by Cardiff County Council . Davies later announced his decision not to go ahead with the Cardiff City Hall site for the National Assembly . 
 = = = Second site selection process = = = 
 In December 1997 , the Welsh Office invited proposals from Wales for the National Assembly building . 24 proposals were received , 14 came from the private sector and government @-@ owned corporations including HTV Group , Grosvenor Waterside ( owned by Associated British Ports ) , Tarmac Developments , Cardiff Bay Development Corporation and Cardiff Airport . Nine local authorities in Wales made proposals including the Guildhall proposed by Swansea Council , Cardiff City Hall by Cardiff Council , Margam Castle by Neath Port Talbot Council , Cyfarthfa Castle by Merthyr Tydfil Council , proposals also came from Wrexham Council , Flintshire County Council who proposed two sites at <unk> and Mold , Rhondda Cynon Taf Council , Powys County Council and five sites from Bridgend Council The Grosvenor Waterside proposal , known as Capital Waterside , included the Pierhead Building , Crickhowell House and Site 1E , which would become the site of the new debating chamber . 
 All the proposals were reviewed by the Welsh Office , who rejected sites due to poor location , accommodation or cost . A shortlist of ten sites were further reviewed , they were ; Capital Waterside ( now known as Cardiff Waterside ) , Cardiff City Hall , a site next to County Hall , Bute Square ( now known as Callaghan Square ) , Prospect Place , Cardiff Gate Business Park , Kingsway and the Coal Exchange all in Cardiff , with the HTV site at Culverhouse Cross , and the Guildhall in Swansea . 
 Davies announced on 13 March 1998 that the new National Assembly building would be in Cardiff . He said that the Cardiff proposals were " too compelling to resist " , because " in making this decision , I am mindful that Wales has invested 40 years in promoting Cardiff as our capital city . " The National Assembly building would be either in Bute Square or Capital Waterside . The Welsh Office decided that the Capital Waterside proposal carried less risk and would cost less than the Bute Square proposal . Capital Waterside would cost £ <unk> , while Bute Square would cost £ <unk> On 28 April 1998 , Davies announced that the site of the National Assembly building would be Capital Waterside . The site was acquired by the National Assembly from Grosvenor Waterside Investments Ltd , which was owned by Associated British Ports . The agreement covered extending the lease of Crickhowell House , later known as Tŷ Hywel , until 2023 , renting the Pierhead Building for 15 years and purchasing Site 1E for £ 1 , which would be where the Senedd was built . 
 = = = Design selection process = = = 
 Before deciding on Capital Waterside as the site of the National Assembly , Davies announced on 13 March 1998 , that an international competition would be held to select the design of the building for the debating chamber . Royal Institute of British Architects ( RIBA ) Competitions would oversee the competition and a design panel would recommend a design to the Secretary of State for Wales . The Design Competition Advisory Panel was made up of seven members and was chaired by Lord Callaghan of Cardiff , the former MP for Cardiff South and Penarth and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . The chair and four members were appointed by Davies and the remaining two members were appointed by the RIBA . The competition was advertised in the Official Journal of the European Communities on 13 June 1998 . 
 Davies wanted a building " to capture the imagination of the Welsh people . " The criteria of the competition was that the building should have a functional specification and a price tag of no more than £ 12M including fees . In total , 55 architects had shown interest in the project , nine came from Wales , 38 coming from the rest of the UK and the remaining eight from the rest of the world . The Design Competition Advisory Panel selected 12 architects for interview in August 1998 , from those a shortlist of six architects were chosen to submit concept designs , they were : Benson & Forsyth , Eric Parry Associates , Niels Torp and Stride Treglown Davies , Richard Rogers Partnership ( now known as Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners ) , <unk> Hasegawa Atelier and Kajima Design Europe , and <unk> Jamieson Prichard . 
 Each architect submitted designs by 5 October 1998 , 10 days later the Design Competition Advisory Panel met and unanimously recommended that the Richard Rogers Partnership ( RRP ) design should be selected . Davies announced RRP as the scheme architects on 16 October 1998 . Richard Rogers said " The idea was that steps rise out of the water and there is a whole public domain where people meet each other and look down on the Assembly Members . " Richard Rogers had previously designed the Lloyd 's building in London and the Pompidou Centre in Paris with Renzo Piano . 11 days later , Davies resigned as Secretary of State for Wales . 
 It was planned that the outline design would be completed by June 1999 , and have a detailed design completed by February 2000 . Construction of the building was due to begin in November 2000 and be completed in April 2001 . On 1 July 1999 , The National Assembly for Wales ( Transfer of Functions ) Order 1999 came into effect , this transferred all powers from the Secretary of State for Wales to the National Assembly for Wales , responsibility for the construction of the debating chamber transferred at the same time . Cardiff Council granted planning permission for the building on 8 November 1999 and by 26 January 2000 the National Assembly voted in favour of progressing the project onto the next stage . 
 = = = First phase of construction = = = 
 Rhodri Morgan , Assembly Member ( AM ) replaced Alun Michael AM , to become the First Secretary ( now known as the First Minister ) of the National Assembly on 15 February 2000 . On 22 March , Morgan stopped all work on the project to carry out a complete review . The decision to stop the project was supported by a vote in the National Assembly on 6 April 2000 . The review included the costs and construction risks of the new building , the timetable for the completion of the project and consideration of possible alternatives to the new building . 
 The review was carried out by the Assembly 's Management Services Division , the Property Advisors to the Civil Estate and Symonds Group Ltd . They considered the following options , cancel the project , continue with the existing design , design a building on Site 1E , improve the existing debating chamber , construct a small one in the courtyard of Crickhowell House , and relocate to Cardiff City Hall . On 21 June 2000 it was agreed that the original proposal using the RRP design should proceed . 
 An international competition was held to select the main contractor . It was advertised in the Official Journal of the European Community , and in December 2000 Skanska Ltd was selected as the main contractor . Edwina Hart AM , the Minister for Finance , Local Government and Communities , approved the final project design on 18 January 2001 and by 1 March 2001 , the groundbreaking ceremony took place to mark the beginning of construction . 
 Six months after construction had begun and with only the piling and a temporary road around the site having been completed , Hart announced on 17 July 2001 that the National Assembly had terminated the contract of RRP . She said that despite the termination of the contract , the debating chamber should still be built to RRP 's design . RRP said of the project that " From the outset , RRP has advised that the project could not be built within a construction budget of £ <unk> due to client changes , the political requirement to use indigenous materials at any cost and exceptional contractor changes . RRP 's advice was consistently ignored . It is plainly untrue for the Finance Minister to assert that RRP underestimated the costs . " Hart said she stopped the project because of the " significant underestimates in the cost plan prepared by RRP " , and that RRP " had hidden costs from the Assembly " . 
 A legal dispute then arose between RRP claiming £ 529 @,@ 000 in fees , and the National Assembly claiming £ <unk> in damages . On 10 December 2001 RRP requested an appointment of an adjudicator from the Construction Industry Council to resolve the issue . The adjudication took place in February 2002 , and ruled that RRP was entitled to £ 448 @,@ 000 of its claim , while the National Assembly was not entitled to any of the damages they had claimed . 
 = = = Second phase of construction = = = 
 In August 2001 , the National Assembly appointed Francis Graves Ltd as the project managers , to review the whole project up until the termination of the RRP contract and to propose how the project should progress in the future . They reported that the " lines of accountability were complex and insufficiently clear " , that no project costs were obtained by the National Assembly , independent of RRP , until December 2000 , and that the project " was highly susceptible to cost over runs " . The report recommended that the National Assembly appoint project managers , which they did when they appointed Schal International Management Ltd ( part of Carillion ) in May 2002 . <unk> Group Ltd were appointed as a subcontractor , responsible for cost management and they reported directly to Schal . Schal had full responsibility to manage the main contractor and subcontractors . Schal reported to a Project Board , who reported to the Minister for Finance , Local Government and Communities . The Project Board was made up of National Assembly and Welsh Government officials and a representative from Schal . 
 The Welsh Government decided that a design and build fixed @-@ price contract would be used for the second phase of construction , while phase one of construction made time the important factor over cost certainty . The overall aim was to " deliver a landmark building … to time , to an appropriate quality and within budget " . On 23 October 2002 an invitation to tender was issued through the Official Journal of the European Community . Eight companies submitted an interest in the tender process , including Taylor Woodrow , David McLean , Laing and Skanska , of these only David McLean and the Taylor Woodrow Strategic Alliance Partnership with RRP as a subcontractor , submitted tenders . David McLean 's tender did not comply with the tender requirements , so the Assembly Government negotiated a fixed @-@ price contract with Taylor Woodrow for £ <unk> The contract was signed between Taylor Woodrow and the First Minister on 1 July 2003 and construction began for a second time on 4 August 2003 . 
 The topping out ceremony took place on 25 November 2004 by the Presiding Officer , Dafydd Elis @-@ Thomas , Privy Counsellor ( PC ) , AM , which included the lifting into place of the world 's largest free rotating wind driven cowl , which was the tallest point of the building . The cowl sits 6 metres ( 20 ft ) above the roof line and rotates when the wind changes direction to ventilate the debating chamber . Construction of the Senedd ended on 7 February 2006 when the National Assembly took control of the building . The project was six months late , due to the National Assembly not producing a detailed specification on time . The 10 @-@ year ICT contract , known as Merlin , was between the National Assembly and Siemens Business Services Ltd , now known as Siemens IT Solutions and Services . Other subcontractors on the project included Arup ( structural engineers ) , <unk> Partnership and <unk> Colston ( services engineers ) , and BCL Timber Projects ( timber ceiling ) . 
 The 5 @,@ 308 m2 ( 57 @,@ 130 sq ft ) Senedd building was opened by Queen Elizabeth II , the Duke of Edinburgh , the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall on 1 March 2006 ( St. David 's Day ) . After an address by the Queen , the Parliament of New South Wales presented a ceremonial mace to the National Assembly to recognise the links between Wales and New South Wales . Addresses were later given by John Price MP , the Deputy Speaker of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly , Morgan and Elis @-@ Thomas . A set of commemorative envelopes and postmarks were issued by the Royal Mail to mark the opening of the Senedd , in the form of a souvenir sheet . 
 Two years after the opening ceremony in 2008 , Taylor Woodrow Construction were fined £ 200 @,@ 000 and ordered to pay costs of £ 71 @,@ 400 , after being prosecuted by the Health and Safety Executive for breaching the Health and Safety at Work etc . Act 1974 at Cardiff Crown Court . The breach contributed to the death of John Walsh , a foreman working for <unk> Construction Services Ltd , a subcontractor of Taylor Woodrow . The accident occurred on 14 March 2004 and was due to a cavity wall that Mr Walsh was filling , collapsing on him , even though Taylor Woodrow Construction had recognised the risks before the contract had begun . Judge Neil Bidder QC said " No @-@ one seriously disputes it was an unsafe construction and <unk> ( Construction Services ) must share blame for that construction . " 
 = = Timeline of cost increases and time delays = = 
 The cost of the Senedd increased from £ 12M in 1997 to £ <unk> in 2006 , an increase of 580 % . In a report published in March 2008 by the Wales Audit Office , the reason for the difference between the two costs were that the original estimate of £ 12M was not based on any detailed design of the final requirements of the building . Extra costs of the building were due to unforeseen security measures after the 11 September attacks in the United States . 
 After the project was stopped in 2001 , the contract for the construction of the second phase of the building used a fixed @-@ price design and build contract , which meant that the National Assembly had a much tighter control of costs than they had in the first phase . 
 In 2008 , two years after the Senedd was opened , the cost of repairs to the building had reached £ 97 @,@ 709 . Repairs have been for windows , doors , plumbing and electrics . A spokesman for the National Assembly said , " The repair figures are not excessive for a public building that has hundreds of thousands of visitors each year . The costs are within estimated levels and covered by existing budgets . " 
 = = National Assembly estate in Cardiff Bay = = 
 The Senedd is part of the National Assembly estate in Cardiff Bay , along with Tŷ Hywel ( Howell House ) and the Grade 1 listed Pierhead Building in Cardiff Bay . Tŷ Hywel houses staff of the Assembly Commission , AMs , the First Minister and other ministers . Tŷ Hywel is named after Hywel Dda ( Howell the Good ) , King of Deheubarth in South West Wales . On 26 June 2008 , the Prince of Wales officially opened Siambr Hywel , the National Assembly 's youth debating chamber and education centre . It is based in the debating chamber that was used by the National Assembly between 1999 and 2006 , while the Senedd was being constructed . Two covered link bridges connect the Senedd to Tŷ Hywel . Construction of the link bridges began in September 2004 and they were completed by December 2005 . 
 The Pierhead Building was opened in 1897 and designed by William Frame . It was originally the headquarters of the Bute Dock Company and by 1947 it was the administrative office for the Port of Cardiff . The building was reopened in May 2001 as ' The Assembly at the Pierhead ' , which was a visitor and education centre for the National Assembly . The exhibition provided visitors with information on the National Assembly . On 1 March 2010 , the building was again reopened to the public as a Welsh history museum and exhibition . In 2008 , Elis @-@ Thomas announced that the Pierhead Building would display the history of the black community in Butetown , Cardiff Docks and Welsh devolution . 
 = = Nominations and awards = = 
 Nominated for the 2006 Stirling Prize awarded by the Royal Institute of British Architects . The award was won by Terminal 4 , Barajas Airport , Madrid , also an RRP design . 
 Nominated for the 2006 Prime Minister 's Better Public Building Award . 
 Listed as Architects ' Journal 's top 50 favourite buildings . 
 Awarded " Excellent " certification by BREEAM , the highest ever awarded in Wales . 
 Awarded Major Project of the Year in the 2006 Building Services Awards , organised by Building Sustainable Design and Electrical and Mechanical Contractor magazines . 
 Awarded the 2006 Gold Medal winner from the National Eisteddfod of Wales . 
 Awarded the Slate Award in the 2006 Natural Stone Awards . 
 Awarded the 2006 Structural Steel Design Award . 
 Awarded the 2006 Excellence on the Waterfront from the Waterfront Center , in the category Commercial and Mixed Use . 
 Civic Trust Award winner in 2008 . 
 Awarded a Chicago Athenaeum 2007 International Architecture Awards . 
 = Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich DIS = 
 The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich DIS ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> Istrebitel ' <unk> - " long @-@ range escort fighter " ) was a prototype Soviet fighter aircraft of World War II . The service designation MiG @-@ 5 was reserved for the production version of the aircraft . It was also intended to develop reconnaissance and bomber versions , but these plans were disrupted by the German invasion in June 1941 . The project was stymied by the failure of its intended inline engine , the Mikulin AM @-@ 37 , and its performance was disappointing when a second prototype was built later with M @-@ 82 radial engines . It was cancelled in 1943 after at least two prototypes were built . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The NKAP ( Narodnyy komissariat <unk> <unk> — People 's Ministry of the Aircraft Industry ) requested on 7 October 1940 that the OKO ( <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> — Experimental Design Department ) of Factory ( Zavod ) No. 1 , which would later become the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich design bureau ( OKB ) begin work on a twin @-@ engined long @-@ range , single @-@ seat escort fighter intended to use the AM @-@ 37 engine , then under development by Mikulin . It also requested that specifications , along with a model , be ready to be discussed on 12 November of that year . Three days later Mikoyan and Gurevich were ordered to produce three prototypes to undergo State acceptance trials on 1 August , 1 September and 1 November 1941 . After the meeting the NKAP broadened its roles to include bombing , torpedo attack , reconnaissance and interdiction . 
 The DIS was a low @-@ wing , twin @-@ engined , twin @-@ tailed monoplane of mixed construction . The front section was built from duralumin , the middle section was a wooden monocoque and the rear section was steel tubes covered with a duralumin skin . The twin tails were wooden and had an electrically operated variable @-@ incidence horizontal stabilizer . The elevators had duralumin frames , but were covered by fabric . The two @-@ spar wing was made in a three pieces . The center section was metal , but the outer panels were wooden with fabric @-@ covered ailerons and veneer @-@ covered Schrenk flaps . The wing had leading edge slats along two @-@ thirds of its length . The main undercarriage retracted rearwards into the rear of the engine nacelles and the tailwheel retracted into the rear fuselage . The Mikulin AM @-@ 37 inline engines were slung underneath the wings with the engine oil coolers mounted in the outer wing panels . The air intakes for the engine superchargers was located in the wing leading edge . The pilot was provided with a glass panel on the underside of the nose to improve his downward visibility , and he was protected by armor up to 9 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 35 in ) thick at the front , rear , sides and underside of his seat . The fuel capacity was 1 @,@ 920 litres ( 422 imp gal ; 507 US gal ) in two protected tanks behind the pilot and another four in the wings . 
 The DIS was intended to be armed with a 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) VYa cannon with 200 rounds in a pod beneath the nose , but the VVS preferred the Taubin MP @-@ 6 . The DIS was to carry two of them with 120 rounds per gun , but they proved to be a failure and the aircraft reverted to the original VYa cannon . Each wing root was to have a synchronized 12 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) Berezin UBS machine gun with 300 rounds mounted below a pair of 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) ShKAS machine guns with 1000 rounds per gun . The gun pod could be removed and bombs up to 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) or a torpedo could be carried instead . 
 = = = Flight testing = = = 
 The first prototype , with the internal designation of T , made its first flight on 11 June 1941 . Its initial flight tests , conducted by the manufacturer between 1 July and 5 October , were a disappointment as it could only reach a speed of 560 km / h ( 348 mph ) at 7 @,@ 500 metres ( 24 @,@ 606 ft ) , 104 km / h ( 65 mph ) slower than estimated . The three @-@ bladed 3 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) AV @-@ 5L @-@ 114 propellers were exchanged for four @-@ bladed 3 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) AV @-@ 9B @-@ L @-@ 149 propellers and the engine installation was redesigned after wind tunnel tests by TsAGI ( Central Aero and Hydrodynamics Institute ) revealed that the poorly designed engine accessories were the major cause of the excess drag . After modifications the aircraft reached 610 km / h ( 380 mph ) at an altitude of 6 @,@ 800 metres ( 22 @,@ 310 ft ) . Its time to 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) was 5 @.@ 5 minutes . Even with the improvements the LII ( <unk> @-@ Issledovatel 'skiy Institoot — Flight Research Institute ) did not recommend production , but recommended that development and testing should continue . The German advance on Moscow in October 1941 forced the Institute and the DIS to evacuate to Kazan while the OKO and its factory went to Kuibyshev . The failure of the AM @-@ 37 to enter production doomed the project , albeit temporarily . 
 The OKO , along with all other aircraft designers , had been directed to use the Shvetsov ASh @-@ 82 radial engine as a backup engine for their products in May 1941 , but the evacuation disrupted the production of this version , known internally as the IT and it was not built until the autumn of 1942 . Aside from the engines it differed from the T in small respects . Its tailcone was split vertically to use as an air brake and the armament was revised to consist of two VYa cannon in the <unk> pod with 150 rounds each and four Berezin UBK machine guns mounted in the wing roots . It made its first flight on 28 January 1943 and demonstrated a top speed of 604 km / h ( 375 mph ) and a time to 5 @,@ 000 meters of 6 @.@ 3 minutes . Flight testing was stopped on 10 February when the <unk> <unk> had to be sent to TsIAM ( <unk> 'nyy Institoot <unk> <unk> — Central Institute of Aviation Motors ) for adjustment . There were continuous problems with these and they delayed the entire project until it was cancelled in October 1943 . 
 The service designation MiG @-@ 5 was reserved for the production version of this aircraft , as demonstrated in the NKAP order of 2 October 1941 that instructed Zavod No. 1 to begin manufacture of the MiG @-@ 5 after the completion of its State acceptance tests . Other known designations for the aircraft include the DIS @-@ 200 and <unk> 71 , its factory designation . The bomber version , if it had entered production , might have been known as the MiG @-@ 2 . 
 Two prototypes are known to have been built , but some records suggest that others were built as well . The original order called for three aircraft and was amended later for two additional aircraft with M @-@ 82 engines . Some sources quote dates for the latter version 's first flight of January 1942 and 15 October 1941 , which could be an indication that two of the latter version were completed , or they could simply be clerical errors . 
 = = Specifications ( T ) = = 
 Data from Gordon and Komissarov , OKB Mikoyan : A History of the Design Bureau and its Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 11 @.@ 2 m ( 36 ft 9 in ) 
 Wingspan : 15 @.@ 3 m ( 50 ft 2 in ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft 2 in ) 
 Wing area : 38 @.@ 9 m2 ( 419 sq ft ) 
 Airfoil : Clark YH 
 Gross weight : 8 @,@ 060 kg ( 17 @,@ 769 lb ) 
 Fuel capacity : 1 @,@ 920 kg ( 4 @,@ 230 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Mikulin AM @-@ 37 supercharged , liquid @-@ cooled , V12 engines , 1 @,@ 044 kW ( 1 @,@ 400 hp ) each 
 Propellers : 4 @-@ bladed AV @-@ 9B @-@ L @-@ 149 , 3 m ( 9 ft 10 in ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 610 km / h ( 379 mph ; 329 kn ) at 6 @,@ 800 m ( 22 @,@ 310 ft ) 
 Range : 2 @,@ 280 km ( 1 @,@ 417 mi ; 1 @,@ 231 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 10 @,@ 900 m ( 35 @,@ 761 ft ) 
 Time to altitude : 5 @.@ 5 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 207 @.@ 2 kg / m2 ( 42 @.@ 4 lb / sq ft ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 23 mm VYa cannon 
 2 × 12 @.@ 7 mm BS machine guns 
 4 × 7 @.@ 62 mm ShKAS machine guns 
 = = Comparable aircraft = = 
 de Havilland Mosquito 
 Tupolev Tu @-@ 2 
 Petlyakov Pe @-@ 2 
 Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 187 
 Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning 
 Messerschmitt Bf 110 
 Nakajima <unk> 
 Westland Whirlwind 
 = History of the Constitution of the Roman Republic = 
 The history of the Constitution of the Roman Republic is a study of the ancient Roman Republic that traces the progression of Roman political development from the founding of the Roman Republic in 509 BC until the founding of the Roman Empire in 27 BC . The constitutional history of the Roman Republic can be divided into five phases . The first phase began with the revolution which overthrew the Roman Kingdom in 510 BC , and the final phase ended with the revolution which overthrew the Roman Republic , and thus created the Roman Empire , in 27 BC . Throughout the history of the republic , the constitutional evolution was driven by the struggle between the aristocracy and the ordinary citizens . 
 The Roman aristocracy was composed of a class of citizens called Patricians ( Latin : <unk> ) , while all other citizens were called Plebeians ( Latin : plebs ) . During the first phase of political development , the Patrician aristocracy dominated the state , and the Plebeians began seeking political rights . During the second phase , the Plebeians completely overthrew the Patrician aristocracy , and since the aristocracy was overthrown simply through alterations to the Roman law , this revolution was not violent . The third phase saw the emergence of a joint Patricio @-@ Plebeian aristocracy , along with a dangerous military situation that helped to maintain internal stability within the republic . The fourth phase began shortly after Rome 's wars of expansion had ended , because without these wars , the factor that had ensured internal stability was removed . While the Plebeians sought to address their economic misfortune through the enactment of laws , the underlying problems were ultimately caused by the organization of society . The final phase began when Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon river , and ended with the complete overthrow of the republic . This final revolution triggered a wholesale reorganization of the constitution , and with it , the emergence of the Roman Empire . 
 = = The Patrician era ( 509 – 367 BC ) = = 
 According to legend , the Roman Kingdom was founded in 753 BC , and was ruled by a succession of seven kings . The last king , Lucius Tarquinius Superbus , ruled in a tyrannical manner and , in 510 BC , his son Sextus Tarquinius raped a noblewoman named Lucretia . Lucretia , the wife of a senator named Lucius Tarquinius <unk> , committed suicide because of the rape , and this led to a conspiracy which drove Tarquin from the city . With Tarquin 's expulsion , the Roman Republic was founded , and the chief conspirators , <unk> and the senator Lucius Junius Brutus , were elected as the first Roman Consul ( chief @-@ executive ) . While this story may be nothing more than a legend which later Romans created in order to explain their past , it is likely that Rome had been ruled by a series of kings , who probably were , as the legends suggest , overthrown quickly . 
 = = = The executive magistrates = = = 
 The constitutional changes which occurred immediately after the revolution were probably not as extensive as the legends suggest , as the most important constitutional change probably concerned the chief executive . Before the revolution , a king ( rex ) was elected by the senators ( patres or " fathers " ) for a life term , but now two <unk> ( " leaders " ) were elected by the citizens for an annual term . These magistrates were eventually called " Consuls " ( Latin for those who walk together ) , and each Consul checked his colleague , while their limited term in office opened them up to prosecution if they abused the powers of their office . The chief executive was still vested with the same grade of imperium ( " command " ) powers as was the old king , and the powers of each of the two Consuls , when exercised together , were no different than were those of the old king . In the immediate aftermath of the revolution , the Roman Senate and the Roman assemblies were nearly as powerless as they had been under the monarchy . 
 During the years of the monarchy , only Patricians ( patres or " fathers " ) were admitted to the Roman Senate . The revolution of 510 BC so depleted the ranks of the senate , however , that a group of Plebeians were drafted ( <unk> ) to fill the vacancies . The old senate of Patricians ( patres ) transitioned into a senate of patres et <unk> ( " fathers and conscripted men " ) . These new Plebeian senators , however , could neither vote on an auctoritas patrum ( " authority of the fathers " or " authority of the Patrician senators " ) , nor be elected interrex . In the year 494 BC , the city was at war , but the Plebeian soldiers refused to march against the enemy , and instead seceded to the Aventine Hill . The Patricians quickly became desperate to end what was , in effect , a labor strike , and thus they quickly agreed to the demands of the Plebeians , that they be given the right to elect their own officials . The Plebeians named these new officials Plebeian Tribunes ( <unk> <unk> ) , and gave them two assistants , the Plebeian Aediles ( aediles <unk> ) . 
 During the early years of the republic , the Plebeians were not allowed to hold ordinary political office . In 445 BC , the Plebeians demanded the right to stand for election to the Consulship , but the senate refused to grant them this right . After a long resistance to the new demands , the Senate ( 454 ) sent a commission of three patricians to Greece to study and report on the legislation of Solon and other lawmakers . When they returned , the Assembly ( 451 ) chose ten men <unk> formulate a new code , and gave them supreme governmental power in Rome for two years . This commission , under the presidency of a resolute reactionary , Appius Claudius , transformed the old customary law of Rome into the famous Twelve Tables , submitted them to the Assembly ( which passed them with some changes ) , and displayed them in the Forum for all who would and could to read . The Twelve Tables recognised certain rights and gave the plebs their own representatives , the tribunes . However the Consulship remained closed to the Plebeians , Consular command authority ( imperium ) was granted to a select number of Military Tribunes . These individuals , the so @-@ called Consular Tribunes were elected by the Centuriate Assembly , and the senate had the power to veto any such election . This was the first of many attempts by the Plebeians to achieve political equality with the Patricians . Starting around the year 400 BC , a series of wars were fought , and while the Patrician aristocracy enjoyed the fruits of the resulting conquests , the Plebeians in the army became exhausted and bitter . They demanded real concessions , and so in 367 BC a law was passed ( the " Licinio @-@ <unk> law " ) which dealt with the economic plight of the Plebeians . However , the law also required the election of at least one Plebeian Consul each year . The opening of the Consulship to the Plebeians was probably the cause behind the concession of 366 BC , in which the <unk> and Curule Aedileship were both created , but opened only to Patricians . 
 = = = The senate and legislative assemblies = = = 
 Shortly after the founding of the republic , the Centuriate Assembly became the principle Roman assembly in which magistrates were elected , laws were passed , and trials occurred . During his Consulship in 509 BC , Publius Valerius Publicola enacted a law ( the lex Valeria ) which guaranteed due process rights to every Roman citizen . Any condemned citizen could evoke his right of Provocatio , which appealed any condemnation to the Centuriate Assembly , and which was a precursor to habeas corpus . Also around this time , the Plebeians assembled into an informal Plebeian Curiate Assembly , which was the original Plebeian Council . Since they were organized on the basis of the Curia ( and thus by clan ) , they remained dependent on their Patrician patrons . In 471 BC , a law was passed due to the efforts of the Tribune <unk> <unk> , which allowed the Plebeians to organize by Tribe , rather than by Curia . Thus , the Plebeian Curiate Assembly became the Plebeian Tribal Assembly , and the Plebeians became politically independent . 
 During the regal period , the king nominated two Quaestors to serve as his assistants , and after the overthrow of the monarchy , the Consuls retained this authority . However , in 447 BC , Cicero recorded that the Quaestors began to be elected by a tribal assembly that was presided over by a magistrate . It seems as though this was the first instance of a joint Patricio @-@ Plebeian Tribal Assembly , and thus was probably an enormous gain for the Plebeians . While Patricians were able to vote in a joint assembly , there were never very many Patricians in Rome . Thus , most of the electors were Plebeians , and yet any magistrate elected by a joint assembly had jurisdiction over both Plebeians and Patricians . Therefore , for the first time , the Plebeians seemed to have indirectly acquired authority over Patricians . During the 4th century BC , a series of reforms were passed ( the leges <unk> <unk> ) , which ultimately required that any law passed by the Plebeian Council have the full force of law over both Plebeians and Patricians . This gave the Plebeian Tribunes , who presided over the Plebeian Council , a positive character for the first time . Before these laws were passed , Tribunes could only interpose the sacrosanctity of their person ( intercessio ) to veto acts of the senate , assemblies , or magistrates . It was a modification to the Valerian law in 449 BC which first allowed acts of the Plebeian Council to have the full force of law , but eventually the final law in the series was passed ( the " Hortensian Law " ) , which removed the last check that the Patricians in the senate had over this power . 
 = = The Conflict of the Orders ( 367 – 287 BC ) = = 
 In the decades following the passage of the Licinio @-@ <unk> law of 367 BC , which required the election of at least one Plebeian Consul each year , a series of laws were passed which ultimately granted Plebeians political equality with Patricians . The Patrician era came to a complete end in 287 BC , with the passage of the Hortensian law . This era was also marked with significant external developments . Up until 295 BC , the Samnites and the Kelts had been Rome 's chief rivals , but that year , at the Battle of <unk> , the Romans defeated the combined armies of the Samnites and the Kelts . This battle was followed by the complete submission of both the Samnites and the Kelts to the Romans , and the emergence of Rome as the unchallenged mistress of Italy . 
 = = = The Plebeians and the magistrates = = = 
 When the Curule Aedileship had been created , it had only been opened to Patricians . Eventually , however , Plebeians won full admission to the Curule Aedileship . In addition , after the Consulship had been opened to the Plebeians , the Plebeians acquired a de facto right to hold both the Roman Dictatorship and the Roman Censorship ( which had been created in 443 BC ) since only former Consuls could hold either office . 356 BC saw the appointment of the first Plebeian Dictator , and in 339 BC the Plebeians facilitated the passage of a law ( the lex Publilia ) , which required the election of at least one Plebeian Censor for each five @-@ year term . In 337 BC , the first Plebeian Praetor was elected . 
 In 342 BC , two significant laws were passed . One of these two laws made it illegal to hold more than one office at any given point in time , and the other law required an interval of ten years to pass before any magistrate could seek reelection to any office . As a result of these two laws , the military situation quickly became unmanageable . During this time period , Rome was expanding within Italy and beginning to take steps beyond Italy , and thus it became necessary for military commanders to hold office for several years at a time . This problem was resolved with the creation of the pro @-@ magisterial offices , so that when an individual 's term in office ended , his command might be prorogued ( <unk> imperii ) . In effect , when a magistrate 's term ended , his imperium was extended , and he usually held the title of either <unk> or <unk> . This constitutional device was not in harmony with the underlying genius of the Roman constitution , and its frequent usage eventually paved the way for the empire . In addition , during these years , the Plebeian Tribunes and the senators grew increasingly close . The senate realized the need to use Plebeian officials to accomplish desired goals , and so to win over the Tribunes , the senators gave the Tribunes a great deal of power , and unsurprisingly , the Tribunes began to feel obligated to the senate . As the Tribunes and the senators grew closer , Plebeian senators were often able to secure the Tribunate for members of their own families . In time , the Tribunate became a stepping stone to higher office . 
 = = = The Ovinian law and the new aristocracy = = = 
 During the era of the kingdom , the Roman King appointed new senators , but after the overthrow of the kingdom , the Consuls acquired this power . Around the middle of the 4th century BC , however , the Plebeian Council enacted the " Ovinian Plebiscite " ( <unk> Ovinium ) , which gave the power to appoint new senators to the Roman Censors . It also codified a commonplace practice , which all but required the Censor to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the senate . By this point , Plebeians were already holding a significant number of magisterial offices , and so the number of Plebeian senators probably increased quickly . It was , in all likelihood , simply a matter of time before the Plebeians came to dominate the senate . 
 Under the new system , newly elected magistrates were awarded with automatic membership in the senate , although it remained difficult for a Plebeian from an unknown family to enter the senate . Several factors made it difficult for individuals from unknown families to be elected to high office , in particular the very presence of a long @-@ standing nobility , as this appealed to the deeply rooted Roman respect for the past . Ultimately , a new Patricio @-@ Plebeian aristocracy emerged , which replaced the old Patrician nobility . It was the dominance of the long @-@ standing Patrician nobility which ultimately forced the Plebeians to wage their long struggle for political power . The new nobility , however , was fundamentally different from the old nobility . The old nobility existed through the force of law , because only Patricians were allowed to stand for high office , and it was ultimately overthrown after those laws were changed . Now , however , the new nobility existed due to the organization of society , and as such , it could only be overthrown through a revolution . 
 = = = The failure of the Conflict of the Orders = = = 
 The Conflict of the Orders was finally coming to an end , since the Plebeians had achieved political equality with the Patricians . A small number of Plebeian families had achieved the same standing that the old aristocratic Patrician families had always had , but these new Plebeian aristocrats were as uninterested in the plight of the average Plebeian as the old Patrician aristocrats had always been . During this time period , the Plebeian plight had been mitigated due to the constant state of war that Rome was in . These wars provided employment , income , and glory for the average Plebeian , and the sense of patriotism that resulted from these wars also eliminated any real threat of Plebeian unrest . The lex Publilia , which had required the election of at least one Plebeian Censor every five years , contained another provision . Before this time , any bill passed by an assembly ( either by the Plebeian Council , the Tribal Assembly , or the Centuriate Assembly ) could only become a law after the Patrician senators gave their approval . This approval came in the form of an auctoritas patrum ( " authority of the fathers " or " authority of the Patrician senators " ) . The lex Publilia modified this process , requiring the auctoritas patrum to be passed before a law could be voted on by one of the assemblies , rather than after the law had already been voted on . It is not known why , but this modification seems to have made the auctoritas patrum irrelevant . 
 By 287 BC , the economic condition of the average Plebeian had become poor , and the result was the final Plebeian secession . The Plebeians seceded to the Janiculum hill , and to end the secession , a Dictator named Quintus Hortensius was appointed . Hortensius , a Plebeian , passed a law called the " Hortensian Law " ( Lex Hortensia ) , which ended the requirement that an auctoritas patrum be passed before any bill could be considered by either the Plebeian Council or the Tribal Assembly . The requirement was not changed for the Centuriate Assembly . The importance of the Hortensian Law was in that it removed from the senate its final check over the Plebeian Council ( the principal popular assembly ) . It should therefore not be viewed as the final triumph of democracy over aristocracy , since , through the Tribunes , the senate could still control the Plebeian Council . Thus , the ultimate significance of this law was in the fact that it robbed the Patricians of their final weapon over the Plebeians . The result was that the ultimate control over the state fell , not onto the shoulders of democracy , but onto the shoulders of the new Patricio @-@ Plebeian aristocracy . 
 = = The supremacy of the new nobility ( 287 – 133 BC ) = = 
 The great accomplishment of the Hortensian Law was in that it deprived the Patricians of their final weapon over the Plebeians . Therefore , the new Patricio @-@ Plebeian aristocracy replaced the old Patrician aristocracy , and the last great political question of the earlier era had been resolved . As such , no important political changes occurred between 287 BC and 133 BC . This entire era was dominated by foreign wars , which eliminated the need to address the flaws in the current political system , since the patriotism of the Plebeians suppressed their desire for further reforms . However , this era created new problems , which began to be realized near the end of the 2nd century BC . For example , the nature of Rome 's military commanders changed . Roman soldiers of earlier eras fought short wars , and then returned to their farms . Since their generals did the same thing , the soldiers came to view their generals as being nothing more than fellow citizen @-@ soldiers . Now , however , wars were becoming longer and of a larger scale . Thus , this period saw a growing affinity between the average citizen and his general , while the generals acquired more power than they had ever held before . 
 = = = The Senate = = = 
 When the lex Hortensia was enacted into law , Rome theoretically became a democracy ( insofar as the landowners were concerned , anyway ) . In reality , however , Rome remained an oligarchy , since the critical laws were still enacted by the Roman Senate . In effect , democracy was satisfied with the possession of power , but did not care to actually use it . The senate was supreme during this era because the era was dominated by foreign policy . While upwards of 300 @,@ 000 citizens were eligible to vote , many of these individuals lived a great distance from Rome , and so calling them all together in a short period of time was impossible . The foreign affairs questions often required quick answers , and three @-@ hundred senators were more capable of quick action than were thousands of electors . The questions were also more complex than were the questions of the earlier era , and the average citizen was not adequately informed as to these issues . The senators , in contrast , were usually quite experienced , and the fact that they had income sources that were independent of their political roles made it easier for them to involve themselves in policy questions over extended periods of time . 
 Since most senators were former magistrates , the senate became bound together by a strong sense of collegiality . At any given point in time , many of the senate 's most senior members were ex @-@ Consuls , which facilitated the creation of a bond between the presiding Consul and those senior members . In addition , the Consul was always chosen from senate , and as such he usually held similar ideals as did his fellow senators . When his annual term ended , he returned to their ranks , and so he was unlikely to stand against his fellow senators . Before the enactment of the Ovinian Law , Consuls appointed new senators , but after the enactment of this law , Censors appointed new senators , which caused the senate to become even more independent of the presiding Consul . In addition , the Ovinian Law all but required that ex @-@ magistrates be appointed to the senate , and as such , the process by which Censors appointed new members to the senate became quite objective . This further enhanced the competence , and thus the prestige , of the senate . 
