 = = = The Plebeians and the aristocracy = = = 
 The final decades of this era saw a worsening economic situation for many Plebeians . The long military campaigns had forced citizens to leave their farms , which often caused those farms to fall into a state of disrepair . This situation was made worse during the Second Punic War , when Hannibal fought the Romans throughout Italy , and the Romans adopted a strategy of attrition and guerrilla warfare in response . When the soldiers returned from the battlefield , they often had to sell their farms to pay their debts , and the landed aristocracy quickly bought these farms at discounted prices . The wars had also brought to Rome a great surplus of inexpensive slave labor , which the landed aristocrats used to staff their new farms . Soon the masses of unemployed Plebeians began to flood into Rome , and into the ranks of the legislative assemblies . 
 At the same time , the aristocracy was becoming extremely rich . Several Italian towns had sided with Hannibal during the Second Punic War , and these towns were ultimately punished for their disloyalty , which opened up even more cheap farmland for the aristocrats . With the destruction of Rome 's great commercial rival of Carthage , even more opportunities for profit became available . With so many new territories , tax collection ( which had always been outsourced to private individuals ) also became extremely profitable . While the aristocrats spent their time exploiting new opportunities for profit , Rome was conquering new civilizations in the east . These civilizations were often highly developed , and as such they opened up a world of luxury to the Romans . Up until this point , most Romans had only known a simple life , but as both wealth and eastern luxuries became available at the same time , an era of ruinous decadence followed . The sums that were spent on these luxuries had no precedent in prior Roman history . Several laws were enacted to stem this tide of decadence , but these laws had no effect , and attempts by the Censors to mitigate this decadence were equally futile . 
 By the end of this era , Rome had become full of unemployed Plebeians . They then began filling the ranks of the assemblies , and the fact that they were no longer away from Rome made it easier for them to vote . In the principle legislative assembly , the Plebeian Council , any individual voted in the Tribe that his ancestors had belonged to . Thus , most of these newly unemployed Plebeians belonged to one of the thirty @-@ one rural Tribes , rather than one of the four urban Tribes , and the unemployed Plebeians soon acquired so much political power that the Plebeian Council became highly populist . These Plebeians were often angry with the aristocracy , which further exacerbated the class tensions . Their economic state usually led them to vote for the candidate who offered the most for them , or at least for the candidate whose games or whose bribes were the most magnificent . The fact that they were usually uninformed as to the issues before them didn 't matter , because they usually sold their votes to the highest bidder anyway . Bribery became such a problem that major reforms were ultimately passed , in particular the requirement that all votes be by secret ballot . A new culture of dependency was emerging , which would look to any populist leader for relief . 
 = = From the Gracchi to Caesar ( 133 – 49 BC ) = = 
 The prior era saw great military successes , and great economic failures , while the patriotism of the Plebeians had kept them from seeking any new reforms . Now , however , the military situation had stabilized , and fewer soldiers were needed . This , in conjunction with the new slaves that were being imported from abroad , inflamed the unemployment situation further . The flood of unemployed citizens to Rome had made the assemblies quite populist , and thus had created an increasingly aggressive democracy . This new era began with the Tribunate of Gaius Gracchus , and ended when Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon river . 
 = = = Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus = = = 
 Tiberius Gracchus was elected Plebeian Tribune in 133 BC , and as Tribune , he attempted to enact a law that would have distributed land amongst Rome 's landless citizens . The aristocrats , who stood to lose an enormous amount of money , were bitterly opposed to this proposal . Tiberius submitted this law to the Plebeian Council , but the law was vetoed by a Tribune named Marcus Octavius , and so Tiberius used the Plebeian Council to impeach Octavius . The theory , that a representative of the people ceases to be one when he acts against the wishes of the people , was repugnant to the genius of Roman constitutional theory . If carried to its logical end , this theory removed all constitutional restraints on the popular will , and put the state under the absolute control of a temporary popular majority . This theory ultimately found its logical end under the future democratic empire of the military populist Julius Caesar . The law was enacted , but Tiberius was murdered when he stood for reelection to the Tribunate . The ten years that followed his death were politically inactive . The only important development was in the growing strength of the democratic opposition to the aristocracy . 
 Tiberius ' brother Gaius was elected Plebeian Tribune in 123 BC . Gaius Gracchus ' ultimate goal was to weaken the senate and to strengthen the democratic forces , so he first enacted a law which put the knights ( equites , or upper @-@ middle class citizens ) on the jury courts instead of the senators . He then passed a grain law which greatly disadvantaged the provincial governors , most of whom were senators . The knights , on the other hand , stood to profit greatly from these grain reforms , and so the result was that Gaius managed to turn the most powerful class of non @-@ senators against the senate . In the past , the senate eliminated political rivals either by establishing special judicial commissions or by passing a senatus consultum ultimum ( " ultimate decree of the senate ) . Both devices allowed the senate to bypass the ordinary due process rights that all citizens had . Gaius outlawed the judicial commissions , and declared the senatus consultum ultimum to be unconstitutional . Gaius then proposed a law which granted citizenship rights to Rome 's Italian allies , but the selfish democracy in Rome , which jealously guarded its privileged status , deserted him over this proposal . He stood for reelection to a third term in 121 BC , but was defeated and then murdered . The democracy , however , had finally realized how weak the senate had become . 
 = = = Sulla 's Constitutional Reforms = = = 
 Several years later , a new power had emerged in Asia . In 88 BC , a Roman army was sent to put down that power , king Mithridates VI of Pontus , but was defeated . Over the objections of the former Consul Gaius Marius , the Consul for the year , Lucius Cornelius Sulla was ordered by the senate to assume command of the war against Mithridates . Marius , a member of the democratic ( " populare " ) party , had a Tribune revoke Sulla 's command of the war against Mithridates , so Sulla , a member of the aristocratic ( " <unk> " ) party , brought his army back to Italy and marched on Rome . Marius fled , and his supporters either fled or were murdered by Sulla . Sulla had become so angry at Marius ' Tribune that he passed a law that was intended to permanently weaken the Tribunate . He then returned to his war against Mithridates , and with Sulla gone , the populares under Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna soon took control of the city . The populare record was not one to be proud of , as they had reelected Marius Consul several times without observing the required ten @-@ year interval . They also transgressed democracy by advancing un @-@ elected individuals to magisterial office , and by substituting magisterial edicts for popular legislation . Sulla soon made peace with Mithridates , and in 83 BC , he returned to Rome , overcame all resistance , and captured the city again . Sulla and his supporters then slaughtered most of Marius ' supporters , although one such supporter , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old populare ( and the son @-@ in @-@ law of Cinna ) named Julius Caesar , was ultimately spared . 
 Sulla , who had observed the violent results of radical populare reforms ( in particular those under Marius and Cinna ) , was naturally conservative , and so his conservatism was more reactionary than it was visionary . As such , he sought to strengthen the aristocracy , and thus the senate . After being appointed Roman Dictator in 82 BC , he enacted a series of constitutional reforms . He resigned the Dictatorship in 80 BC , retired in 79 BC , and died a year later . While he thought that he had firmly established aristocratic rule , his own career had illustrated the fatal weaknesses in the constitution . Ultimately , it was the army , and not the senate , which dictated the fortunes of the state . 
 In 77 BC , the senate sent one of Sulla 's former lieutenants , Gnaeus Pompey Magnus , to put down an uprising in Spain . By 71 BC , Pompey returned to Rome after having completed his mission , and around the same time , another of Sulla 's former lieutenants , Marcus Licinius Crassus , had just put down a slave revolt in Italy . Upon their return , Pompey and Crassus found the populare party fiercely attacking Sulla 's constitution , and so they attempted to forge an agreement with the populare party . If both Pompey and Crassus were elected Consul in 70 BC , they would dismantle the more obnoxious components of Sulla 's constitution . The promise of both Pompey and Crassus , aided by the presence of both of their armies outside of the gates of Rome , helped to ' persuade ' the populares to elect the two to the Consulship . As soon as they were elected , they dismantled most of Sulla 's constitution . 
 = = = The First Triumvirate = = = 
 In 62 BC , Pompey returned victorious from Asia , but the senate refused to ratify the arrangements that he had made with his soldiers . Pompey , in effect , became powerless , and thus when Julius Caesar returned from his governorship in Spain in 61 BC , he found it easy to make an arrangement with Pompey . Caesar and Pompey , along with Crassus , established a private agreement , known as the First Triumvirate . Under the agreement , Pompey 's arrangements in Asia were to be ratified , and his soldiers were to be given land . Caesar was to be elected Consul in 59 BC , and then serve as governor of Gaul for five years . Crassus was to be promised a future Consulship . 
 Caesar became Consul in 59 BC , but his colleague , Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus , was an extreme aristocrat . Caesar submitted the laws that he had promised Pompey to the Roman Senate , but the senate rejected these laws , and so he then submitted them to the assemblies . Bibulus attempted to obstruct the enactment of these laws , and so Caesar used violent ( and thus illegal ) means to ensure their passage . Caesar was then given command of four legions , and promised the governorship of three provinces ( Cisalpine Gaul , Transalpine Gaul , and Illyricum ) . This appointment was to begin on March 1 , 59 BC , while he was still Consul . Caesar did not wish to leave the senate in the hands of such unskillful politicians as Pompey and Crassus before he had crushed the spirit of the senate and deprived it of its two most dangerous leaders , Cato and Cicero . Therefore , he sent Cato on a mission to Cyprus , which was likely to ruin his reputation , and then facilitated the election of the former Patrician Clodius to the Tribunate for 58 BC . Clodius , a dangerous demagogue , secured the passage of several laws for his coming attack on Cicero . One law banned the use of omens ( auspices ) as an obstructive device in the Plebeian Council , while the second law made certain " clubs " of a " semi @-@ political nature " ( i.e. armed gangs ) lawful . Clodius then passed two laws which banished Cicero , on the grounds that he had deprived several of Catiline 's conspirators of their due process ( provocatio ) rights when he had them executed upon a mere decree of the senate . 
 Pompey and Crassus proved themselves to be as incompetent as Caesar had hoped . Clodius terrorized the city with his armed gangs , and agitated Pompey to such a degree that Pompey was able to secure the passage of a law in 57 BC which recalled Cicero from his exile . This was more of a triumph for the senate than it was for Pompey , however , since Pompey was allied with Caesar . Pompey was so inept that the senate decided to override him , and rescind the land laws that Caesar had passed in 59 BC for Pompey 's veterans . This forced a renewal of the triumvirate : Pompey and Crassus were promised the Consulship in 55 BC and Caesar 's term as governor was extended for five years . Caesar 's daughter , and Pompey 's wife , Julia , soon died in childbirth , and a year later , Crassus was killed during his invasion of the Parthian Empire . These two events severed the last remaining bond between Pompey and Caesar . 
 Beginning in the summer of 54 BC , a wave of political corruption and violence swept Rome . This chaos reached a climax in January 52 BC , when Clodius was murdered in a gang war . In addition , the civil unrest had caused the calendar to become neglected . The calendar required annual adjustments to prevent its drift relative to any Spring Equinox , and so to correct the misalignment of the calendar , an intercalary month was inserted at the end of February 52 BC , and Pompey was elected sole Consul for that month . This elevation to extraordinary power was the last straw for Caesar , and with Crassus dead , Pompey was looking for any excuse with which to crush Caesar , and establish himself as the master of the state . On January 1 of 49 BC , an agent of Caesar named Gaius Scribonius Curio presented an ultimatum to the senate , but the ultimatum was rejected , and the senate then passed a resolution which declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year , that he would be acting <unk> rem <unk> ( in effect , declaring him to be an enemy of the republic ) . On January 7 of 49 BC ) , the senate passed a senatus consultum ultimum , which suspended civil government and declared something analogous to martial law . Pompey , in effect , was vested with <unk> powers , but his army was composed largely of untested conscripts . Caesar then crossed the Rubicon river with his veteran army , and marched towards Rome . Caesar 's rapid advance forced Pompey , the Consuls and the senate to abandon Rome for Greece , and Caesar entered the city unopposed . 
 = = The period of transition ( 49 – 27 BC ) = = 
 The era that began when Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 49 BC , and ended when Octavian returned to Rome after the Battle of Actium in 29 BC , can be divided into two distinct units . The dividing line between these two units is the assassination of Caesar in March 44 BC , although from a constitutional standpoint , there was no clear dividing line between these two periods . The forces which had supported Pompey during the early part of the first period were allied against Mark Antony and Octavian in 43 BC and 42 BC , and the constitutional means through which Caesar had held power before his assassination were used by Antony and Octavian to hold power after Caesar 's assassination . From a constitutional standpoint , it makes no difference whether an autocrat holds the title of Roman Dictator , as Caesar had done , or of Triumvir , as Antony and Octavian had done . From a constitutional perspective , these twenty years formed a single unit , through which the constitutional evolution of the prior century accelerated at a rapid pace . By 27 BC , Rome had completed its transition from being a city @-@ state with a network of dependencies , to being the capital of a world empire . 
 = = = Julius Caesar 's constitutional reforms = = = 
 During his early career , Caesar had seen how chaotic and dysfunctional the Roman Republic had become . The republican machinery had broken down under the weight of imperialism , the central government had become powerless , the provinces had been transformed into independent principalities under the absolute control of their governors , and the army had replaced the constitution as the means of accomplishing political goals . Between his crossing of the Rubicon river in 49 BC , and his assassination in 44 BC , Caesar established a new constitution , which was intended to accomplish three separate goals . First , he wanted to suppress all armed resistance out in the provinces , and thus bring order back to the empire . Second , he wanted to create a strong central government in Rome . And finally , he wanted to knit together the entire empire into a single cohesive unit . 
 Caesar held both the Dictatorship and the Plebeian Tribunate , but alternated between the Consulship and the <unk> . His powers within the state seem to have rested upon these <unk> . The Dictatorship of Caesar was fundamentally different from the Dictatorship of the early and middle republic , as he held the office for life , rather than for six months , and he also held certain judicial powers which the ordinary Dictators had not held . In 48 BC , Caesar was given permanent tribunician powers , which made his person sacrosanct , allowed him to veto the Roman Senate , and allowed him to dominate the Plebeian Council . Since Tribunes were always elected by the Plebeian Council , Caesar had hoped to prevent the election of Tribunes who might oppose him . In 46 BC , Caesar gave himself the title of " Prefect of the Morals " ( <unk> morum ) , which was an office that was new only in name , as its powers were identical to those of the Censors . Thus , he could hold Censorial powers , while technically not subjecting himself to the same checks that the ordinary Censors were subject to , and he used these powers to fill the senate with his own partisans . He also set the precedent , which his imperial successors followed , of requiring the senate to bestow various titles and honors upon him . Coins bore his likeness , and he was given the right to speak first during senate meetings . 
 Caesar then increased the number of magistrates who were elected each year , which created a large pool of experienced magistrates , and allowed Caesar to reward his supporters . Caesar even took steps to transform Italy into a province , and to more tightly link the other provinces of the empire into a single , cohesive unit . This process , of <unk> the entire Roman Empire into a single unit , rather than maintaining it as a network of unequal principalities , would ultimately be completed by Caesar 's successor , the emperor Augustus . When Caesar returned to Rome in 47 BC , he raised the senate 's membership to 900 . While the Roman assemblies continued to meet , Caesar submitted all candidates to the assemblies for election , and all bills to the assemblies for enactment , which caused the assemblies to become powerless and unable to oppose him . To minimize the risk that another general might attempt to challenge him , Caesar passed a law which subjected governors to term limits . Near the end of his life , Caesar began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire . Since his absence from Rome might limit his ability to install his own Consuls , he passed a law which allowed him to appoint all magistrates in 43 BC , and all Consuls and Tribunes in 42 BC . This , in effect , transformed the magistrates from being representatives of the people to being representatives of the Dictator , and robbed the popular assemblies of much of their remaining influence . 
 = = = Caesar 's assassination and the Second Triumvirate = = = 
 Caesar was assassinated in March 44 BC . The motives of the conspirators were both personal , as well as political . Many of Caesar 's ultimate assassins were envious of him , and dissatisfied with the recognition that they had received from him . Most of the conspirators were senators , and many of them were angry about the fact that he had deprived the senate of much of its power and prestige . They were also angry that , while they had received few honors , Caesar had been given many honors . There were also rumors that he was going to make himself king , and transfer the seat of government to Alexandria . The grievances that they held against him were vague , and as such , their plan against him was vague . The fact that their motives were vague , and that they had no idea of what to do after his assassination , both were plainly obvious by the subsequent course of events . 
 After Caesar 's assassination , Mark Antony , who had been Caesar 's Master of the Horse , formed an alliance with Caesar 's adopted son and great @-@ nephew , Gaius Octavian . Along with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus , they formed an alliance known as the Second Triumvirate . They held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution , and as such , the senate and assemblies remained powerless . The conspirators were defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC . Lepidus became powerless , and Antony went to Egypt to seek glory in the east , while Octavian remained in Rome . Eventually , however , Antony and Octavian fought against each other in one last battle . Antony was defeated in the naval Battle of Actium in 31 BC , and committed suicide in 30 BC . In 29 BC , Octavian returned to Rome , as the unchallenged master of the state . In 27 BC , Octavian offered to give up the <unk> powers which he had held since 42 BC , but the senate refused , and thus ratified his status as master of the state . He became the first Roman Emperor , Augustus , and the transition from Roman Republic to Roman Empire was complete . 
 = Claudia Cardinale = 
 Claudia Cardinale ( born 15 April 1938 ) is a Tunisian @-@ born Italian film actress . She appeared in some of the most acclaimed European films of the 1960s and 1970s , mainly Italian or French , but also in several English films . 
 Born and raised in La Goulette , Tunis , Tunisia , Cardinale won the " Most Beautiful Italian Girl in Tunisia " competition in 1957 , the prize being a trip to Italy which quickly led to film contracts , thanks above all to the involvement of Franco Cristaldi , who acted as her mentor for a number of years and later married her . After making her debut in a minor role with Omar Sharif in <unk> ( 1958 ) , Cardinale became one of the best known actresses in Italy after roles in films such as Rocco and His Brothers ( 1960 ) , Girl with a Suitcase ( 1961 ) , The Leopard ( 1963 ) , <unk> ( 1963 ) and Federico Fellini 's 8 ½ ( 1963 ) . From 1963 , Cardinale became known in the United States and Britain following her role in The Pink Panther opposite David Niven . For several years she appeared in Hollywood films such as Blindfold ( 1965 ) opposite Rock Hudson , Lost Command ( 1966 ) , The Professionals ( 1966 ) , The Hell with Heroes ( 1968 ) and the Sergio Leone epic western Once Upon a Time in the West ( 1968 ) , a joint US @-@ Italian production , in which she was praised for her role as a former prostitute opposite Jason Robards , Charles Bronson and Henry Fonda . 
 Jaded with the Hollywood film industry and not wanting to become a cliché , Cardinale returned to Italian and French cinema , and garnered the David di Donatello for Best Actress award for her roles in Il giorno della civetta ( 1968 ) and as a prostitute alongside Alberto Sordi in A Girl in Australia ( 1971 ) . In 1974 , Cardinale met director Pasquale Squitieri , who would become her husband , and she frequently featured in his films , including I <unk> ( 1974 ) , Corleone ( 1978 ) and Claretta ( 1984 ) , the latter of which won her the Nastro d 'Argento Award for Best Actress . In 1982 she played the love interest of Klaus Kinski in Werner Herzog 's Fitzcarraldo , who raises the funds to buy a steamship in South America . In 2010 , Cardinale received the Actress Award at the 47th Antalya " Golden Orange " International Film Festival for her performance as an elderly Italian woman who takes in a young Turkish exchange student in Signora <unk> . 
 Outspoken on women 's rights causes over the years , Cardinale has been a UNESCO goodwill ambassador for the Defense of Women 's Rights since March 2000 . In February 2011 the Los Angeles Times Magazine named Cardinale among the 50 most beautiful women in film history . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Claudia Cardinale was born Claude Joséphine Rose Cardinale in La Goulette , a neighborhood of Tunis , French protectorate of Tunisia on 15 April 1938 . Her mother , Yolande Greco , was born in Tunisia to Sicilian emigrants from Trapani . Her maternal grandparents had a small shipbuilding firm in Trapani but later settled in La Goulette , where there was a large Italian community . Her father , Francesco Cardinale , was a railway worker , born in Gela . Her native languages were French , Tunisian Arabic , and the Sicilian language of her parents . She did not learn to speak Italian until she had already begun to be cast for Italian films . 
 Cardinale was educated at the Saint @-@ Joseph @-@ de @-@ l <unk> school of Carthage which she attended along with her younger sister Blanche . She then studied at the Paul Cambon School , where she graduated with the intention of becoming a teacher . As a teenager she was described as " silent , weird , and wild " , and like other girls of her generation was fascinated by Brigitte Bardot who came to prominence in the 1956 film And God Created Woman , directed by Roger Vadim . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 Cardinale 's first film work was participating , along with classmates , in a short film by French director René <unk> , <unk> d 'or , successfully presented at the Berlin Film Festival . The film made her a minor local celebrity , and led to her being spotted by Jacques Baratier who offered her a minor role in <unk> . She accepted it reluctantly after Baratier explained he wanted a Tunisian actress rather than an Italian to star in the main role opposite the Egyptian actor Omar Sharif . The appearance nonetheless marked her feature film debut . The turning point came in 1957 during the Italian Cinema Week in Tunis when she won a competition for the " Most Beautiful Italian Girl in Tunisia " , with a trip to the Venice Film Festival as first prize . After being spotted by several film producers at the event , she was invited to study at the Experimental Cinematography Center in Rome under Tina <unk> . She attended briefly as , despite her extremely photogenic looks , she had trouble with her acting assignments ( partly owing to her difficulties with the Italian language ) . She left at the end of her first term and decided to return home , earning herself a cover story in the popular weekly Epoca triggered by her unexpected decision to turn her back on a career as a film star . 
 Back in Tunis , however , Cardinale discovered unexpectedly that she was pregnant , the result of what she later described as a " terrible " relationship with a Frenchman , some ten years her senior , which began when she was only 17 and lasted for about a year . On this discovery , he wanted her to have an abortion but she decided to keep the child . She solved her problems by signing a seven @-@ year exclusive contract with Franco Cristaldi 's production company <unk> . Cristaldi largely managed her early career , and she was married to him from 1966 until 1975 . 
 Under the new contract , in 1958 Cardinale was given a minor role with leading Italian actors Vittorio Gassman , Totò , Marcello Mastroianni and Renato Salvatori in Mario <unk> 's internationally successful criminal comedy Big Deal on Madonna Street ( I <unk> <unk> ) . She portrayed Carmelita , a Sicilian girl virtually imprisoned in her home by her overpowering brother . The comedy was a huge success , making Cardinale instantly recognizable . Some newspapers were already referring to her as " la <unk> d 'Italia " ( Italy 's sweetheart ) . Later that year she had a leading role opposite Yvonne <unk> in Claudio Gora 's romantic comedy Three Strangers in Rome . 
 Although she worked well into her seventh month , Cardinale 's pregnancy was kept a tight secret . Tormented by thoughts of suicide , she fell into a state of depression . When she thought she could no longer hide her condition , she asked Cristaldi to terminate her contract . Understanding her predicament , he sent her to London for the birth , far away from the press . He simply explained that she had gone to England to learn English for a film . Cristaldi told Cardinale not to reveal her condition as she would be betraying the public and it would put an end to her career . So as to maintain the secret , he drew up a detailed American @-@ style contract covering every little detail of her life , depriving her of any possibility of acting on her own behalf . Cardinale explained : " I was no longer master of my own body or thoughts . Even talking with a friend about anything that could make me look different from my public image was risky , as if it had been publicized , I would have been in trouble . Everything was in the hands of <unk> " . For seven years Cardinale kept her secret , not only from the public but also from her own son , Patrick , who grew up in the family with her parents and sister more or less as a brother until the day Enzo Biagi , a journalist , discovered the truth . After Cardinale decided to tell him everything , he published her story in Oggi and L <unk> . 
 In 1959 she appeared opposite Salvatori in the mafia film Vento del sud , and played the wife of Maurizio Arena in Luigi Zampa 's Il <unk> . Cardinale also starred opposite Pietro <unk> in his crime film Un <unk> imbroglio , an important assignment for her in mastering the craft of acting while learning to feel at ease in front of the camera . Cardinale considered it to have been her first real test as an actress . She then played the role of Maria in Ralph Thomas 's British film Upstairs and Downstairs , which starred Michael Craig and Anne Heywood . In her early roles she was usually dubbed , as producers considered her voice too hoarse . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1960 Cardinale starred opposite Marcello Mastroianni in Mauro Bolognini 's Golden Leopard @-@ winning drama film Il bell 'Antonio . The film marked the start of a fruitful partnership between the two . Cardinale stated that her films with Bolognini were among the most joyful of her career , considering him to be " a great director , a man of rare professional capability , great taste and culture . Beyond that , for me personally , a sensitive and sincere friend . " In Bolognini 's films , thanks to her aesthetic femininity , Cardinale took roles of manipulative women who lead men to perdition . During the filming of Il bell 'Antonio , her co @-@ star Marcello Mastroianni fell in love with her , but she rejected him as she did not take his love seriously , considering him to be one of those actors who cannot help but fall in love with their co @-@ stars . Mastroianni insisted that his feelings were genuine , even after many years . The genuine empathy between the two actors proved to be ideal for reproducing the tension between the characters in the film . Cardinale next portrayed Pauline Bonaparte in Abel Gance 's French film Napoleone ad Austerlitz , and after appearing opposite Gassman and Salvatori in the sequel to Big Deal on Madonna Street , Audace colpo dei <unk> <unk> , she portrayed Ginetta , the fiancée of Spiros <unk> , alongside Salvatori and Alain Delon in Luchino Visconti 's critically acclaimed Rocco and His Brothers . However , it was her leading performance in Francesco Maselli 's Silver Spoon Set which gained her most attention during this period . Francesco Freda felt the film paved her way " to great success " , noting the " sweetness of her smile " which struck a chord with the public . 
 In 1961 , Cardinale portrayed a sultry nightclub singer and young mother in Valerio Zurlini 's Girl with a Suitcase . As a result of her own experience of early motherhood , Cardinale naturally conveyed the concerns of a teenage mother , identifying fully with the character of Aida . Such was her psychological involvement that she needed several months to overcome her apprehensions and prepare for the part . Zurlini chose her for such a difficult role against everyone 's advice , as she was not yet considered a " real " actress , nor was she ( yet ) one of the most celebrated Italian beauties . However , he was very close and supportive of Cardinale during the production , and a true friendship developed between the two , based on a deep mutual understanding . Cardinale remarked : " Zurlini was one of those who really love women : he had an almost feminine sensitivity . He could understand me at a glance . He taught me everything , without ever making demands on me . ... He was really very fond of me . " Cardinale was warmly praised by the critics for her performance in Girl with a Suitcase , Dennis Schwartz considering her to have been at her " charming best " . Later in 1961 , Cardinale starred as a brothel owner opposite Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo in Bolognini 's La <unk> . Both Girl with a Suitcase and La <unk> were presented at the 1961 Cannes Film Festival . At the time , Cardinale was not considered comparable to the two divas of Italian cinema , Sophia Loren and Gina Lollobrigida , but several newspapers and magazines including Paris Match began to consider her to be a credible young rival to Brigitte Bardot . Cardinale 's 1961 appearances also included Henri Verneuil 's French comedy Les Lions sont <unk> , and Auguste in which she had a cameo role . 
 The following year , Cardinale starred opposite Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo as Vénus in the 18th @-@ century set adventure <unk> , which made her a major star in France . She also played <unk> , the romantic interest of Anthony Franciosa in Bolognini 's <unk> , a character which film writer Jacek <unk> describes as " a spirited and strikingly beautiful twenty @-@ year @-@ old " . In 1962 , Cardinale was interviewed by the writer Alberto Moravia , who focused exclusively on her sexuality and body image in film , treating her as an object . Cardinale remarked to him : " I used my body as a mask , as a representation of myself " . The interview was published in Esquire under the title The Next Goddess of Love . Cardinale was amused to discover that the interview had inspired the writer to publish La dea dell 'amore ( Goddess of Love ) the following year , in which one of the characters , with her fine physical appearance and natural curves , closely resembled Cardinale . Just a few years later she would play a similar character in a film based on another novel by Moravia , Time of Indifference . 
 The finest and most prolific year of her career was 1963 , when she appeared in a number of leading productions . She starred alongside Burt Lancaster in Visconti 's The Leopard ( Il <unk> ) , portraying a village girl who married a progressive young aristocrat ( Alain Delon ) , and played a film actress cast by a director ( Marcello Mastroianni ) in Federico Fellini 's 8 ½ . Both films were critically acclaimed and are often cited by critics and scholars as among the greatest films ever made . She participated in the two films during exactly the same period , frequently moving from one to the other and experiencing the strictly planned approach of Visconti which contrasted strongly with Fellini 's much more relaxed style and his almost total reliance on improvisation . Cardinale remembered Visconti 's set as having an almost religious atmosphere , everything focused on the film , far removed the outside world . Visconti needed silence for his work while Fellini preferred noise and confusion . 
 Until now , Cardinale 's own voice had not been used in her Italian films as it was considered too hoarse and , owing to her French accent , insufficiently Italian . Not until 8 ½ was she allowed to use her own voice . Cardinale explained : " When I arrived for my first movie , I couldn 't speak a word . I thought I was on the moon . I couldn 't understand what they were talking about . And I was speaking in French ; in fact I was dubbed . And Federico Fellini was the first one who used my voice . I think I had a very strange voice . " With her portrayal of Angelica in The Leopard and her brief appearance as herself in 8 ½ , Cardinale achieved the definitive status of a top @-@ ranking star . 
 The same year , Cardinale portrayed a prostitute in La <unk> di <unk> or Bebo 's Girl , in which she also used her own voice . For her performance in the film , she received her first Nastro d 'Argento for Best Actress in 1965 . Cardinale acted in her first American film ( although it was produced in Italy ) when she played Princess <unk> , a wealthy aristocratic woman who is the love and jewellery interest of David Niven in the Cortina d 'Ampezzo @-@ set The Pink Panther . Cardinale 's voice in the film was dubbed by Gale Garnett who went uncredited . Niven raved about working with the actress , telling her , " After spaghetti , you 're Italy 's happiest invention . " 
 In 1964 , Cardinale starred alongside Rod Steiger and Shelley Winters in Francesco Maselli 's Italian @-@ made Gli <unk> . Thereafter , she spent three years in the United States where starred in several Hollywood films . She told of how she benefited from the arrangement , explaining it was an American initiative at a time when they invited all the successful European actresses to perform in their pictures , hoping to create a monopoly . Many suffered from the experience but she was able to hold her own : " I took care of my own interests , blankly refusing to sign an exclusive contract with Universal Studios . I only signed for individual films . In the end , everything worked out fine for me . 
 She first starred in the Henry Hathaway 's Hollywood picture Circus World ( 1964 ) opposite John Wayne and Rita Hayworth , playing the daughter of Hayworth who performs with her as a mother @-@ daughter circus act . By the end of the decade , she had returned to making films primarily in Italy , accepting a pay cut , turning her back on Hollywood stardom . Cardinale has further said , " I don 't like the star system . I 'm a normal person . I like to live in Europe . I mean , I 've been going to Hollywood many , many times , but I didn 't want to sign a contract . " Film writer David Simpson notes that as a result " Cardinale never achieved the same level of fame as Loren and Gina Lollobrigida " , although she appeared in a higher number of decent films . 
 In 1964 , she also played the lead role in The Magnificent <unk> , based on the Belgian play Le <unk> <unk> . She was at the height of her sensuality at the time but later the film only brought back unpleasant memories for her as she experienced little empathy with the producer Antonio Pietrangeli while the male star Ugo <unk> tried to seduce her . In 1965 Cardinale appeared in Visconti 's <unk> stelle dell <unk> , known as Sandra ( Of a Thousand Delights ) in the USA and Of These Thousand Pleasures in the UK , playing a Holocaust survivor who may have had an incestuous relationship with her brother . Later that year she starred opposite Rock Hudson in Universal Pictures 's Blindfold , the last film to be directed by Philip Dunne . Filming began on 22 February 1965 on location in Ocala , Florida . Diane Bond doubled for Cardinale in the film . Cardinale became good friends with Hudson , who proved to be very protective of her , knowing her discomfort outside of Italy . While in Hollywood , Cardinale also became friends with Barbra Streisand , Elliott Gould and Steve McQueen but she never managed to feel at home there . 
 By 1966 , Cardinale was being cited as the most popular film star in Italy , even more than Mastroianni and Loren . Life stated that " the Cardinale appeal is a blend of solid simplicity and radiant sensuality . It moves men all over the world to imagine her both as an exciting mistress and wife . " However , following her success in Hollywood , she began to express concerns about the direction of her career . In a July 1966 interview with Life , she confessed her fear of being over @-@ <unk> and exploited , like Sophia Loren , and although she had several further U.S. films lined up , stated : " If I have to give up the money , I give it up . I do not want to become a cliché . " 
 In 1966 a photograph of Cardinale was featured in the original gatefold artwork to Bob Dylan 's album Blonde on Blonde ( 1966 ) , but it was used without Cardinale 's permission and removed from later pressings . That year she starred in Mark Robson 's war picture Lost Command for Columbia Pictures opposite Anthony Quinn , Alain Delon and George Segal . Quinn expressed his love of working with Cardinale , stating that although he adored Cardinale and Loren equally , " I relate easier to Claudia , Sophia creates an impression of something larger than life , something unobtainable . But Claudia – she 's not easy , still she 's within reach " . She also played a Mexican <unk> in Richard Brooks ' western The Professionals , uniting her on screen once again with Burt Lancaster in what she considered to be her best American film . The following year she appeared in Una rosa per tutti ( A Rose for Everyone ) and in Alexander Mackendrick 's sex farce Don 't Make Waves opposite Tony Curtis . Although occasional funny moments were noted , Don 't Make Waves was generally panned by the critics and the lack of chemistry with co @-@ star Curtis was highlighted . Leonard Maltin , on the other hand , described the film as " a gem " . 
 At the beginning of 1967 , Cristaldi joined her in the United States . While the two were staying in Atlanta , he surprised her by taking her to their wedding ceremony which he had arranged without her knowledge . She went ahead with the ceremony but was concerned about sacrificing the rights she had to her child Patrick . She also realized she was increasingly unable to make decisions about her own life . The marriage was never officialized in Italy . 
 In 1968 , Cardinale featured opposite Franco Nero in Il giorno della civetta , in a David di Donatello for Best Actress @-@ winning performance . She reunited with Rock Hudson in the Italian @-@ made criminal comedy <unk> al <unk> tuo under director Francesco Maselli . She also appeared alongside Rod Taylor in The Hell with Heroes and starred in one of her best known roles as former prostitute Jill McBain in Sergio Leone 's epic western Once Upon a Time in the West . Such was the power of her performance as the whore that Leone 's biographer Robert C. <unk> described her as " permanently engraved in cinematic history " and noted how suited to the role she was : " Her sex @-@ goddess appearance combines with her more mystical iconographic associations to ease the progress of Jill from tart to town builder , from harlot to earth mother , from sinner to symbol of America — the apotheosis of the harlot with a heart of gold " . In 1969 Cardinale starred opposite Nino Manfredi in Luigi Magni 's Nell <unk> del Signore , based on the actual story of the capital execution of two Carbonari in papal Rome . This was followed by a role as a telephone operator in <unk> <unk> ... <unk> <unk> , and as a nurse opposite Sean Connery and Peter Finch in Mikhail Kalatozov 's The Red Tent , based on the story of the mission to rescue Umberto Nobile and the other survivors of the crash of the Airship Italia . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1970 , Cardinale starred opposite Peter McEnery and Eli Wallach in Jerzy Skolimowski 's comedy film The Adventures of Gerard , based on The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard by Arthur Conan Doyle . In 1971 , she formed a duo with Brigitte Bardot in the French western @-@ comedy The Legend of <unk> King , and appeared as a prostitute opposite Alberto Sordi in Luigi Zampa 's comedy A Girl in Australia . The film , shot on location in February and March 1971 , earned Cardinale a Best Actress award at the David di Donatello Awards the following year . In 1972 , Cardinale appeared in Marco <unk> 's L <unk> , which was screened at the 22nd Berlin International Film Festival . She also featured in La <unk> with Jean @-@ Paul Belmondo and Michel Constantin . After a role as a Russian aristocrat opposite Oliver Reed in One Russian Summer ( 1973 ) , set in pre revolutionary Russia , Cardinale starred opposite Franco Nero in I <unk> ( 1974 ) , a historical drama film with " <unk> " and " noir " elements . Cardinale and the director Pasquale Squitieri met for the first time on set , and he would soon become her husband . 
 In 1975 , Cardinale played the daughter of a political exile ( Adolfo Celi ) in Mauro Bolognini Libera , My Love , a character who becomes " increasingly incensed by the fascist government of Italy and makes a number of bold and very personal gestures against it " . Later that year she appeared in the comedies The Immortal Bachelor with Vittorio Gassman and Qui <unk> l <unk> with Monica Vitti . Vitti 's biographer noted how Cardinale and Vitti stood out as the female duo in a predominantly masculine cast . 
 In 1976 , Cardinale appeared in the sex comedy Il comune <unk> del <unk> , which was directed and written by Alberto Sordi , who also co @-@ starred . The following year , she had a biblical role as the Adulteress in the Jesus of Nazareth miniseries , which featured Robert Powell as Jesus , Anne Bancroft as Mary Magdalene , and Ernest Borgnine as Cornelius the Centurion . Cardinale starred in her husband 's Il <unk> di ferro , which tells the story of Cesare Mori ( Giuliano Gemma ) , an Italian prefect that before and during the Fascist period was best known as " the Iron Prefect " . The film shared the 1978 David di Donatello for Best Film with In nome del Papa Re . In 1978 , Cardinale appeared in Damiano Damiani 's political thriller , Goodbye & Amen – L <unk> della CIA , and again featured alongside Gemma in her husband 's gangster picture , Corleone , set in 1950s Sicily . After a role in another Squitieri film in 1978 , L <unk> , Cardinale portrayed <unk> , a Greek " gutsy brothel madame " and the girlfriend of Telly Savalas in George P. <unk> 's adventure war film , Escape to Athena ( 1979 ) . The film , shot on location in Rhodes , was poorly received ; it holds a 32 % " rotten " rating on Rotten Tomatoes as of July 2015 . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 After a role in Si <unk> chi <unk> ( 1980 ) , and a smaller part in Peter Zinner 's The Salamander opposite Franco Nero , Anthony Quinn and Christopher Lee , Cardinale played the love interest of Marcello Mastroianni in Liliana Cavani 's war picture The Skin , a film which also reunited her with Burt Lancaster . The Skin was entered into the 1981 Cannes Film Festival . In 1982 , Cardinale appeared in Werner Herzog 's Fitzcarraldo , playing a successful brothel owner who funds Klaus Kinski 's purchase of an old steamship in South America . The film , inspired by the story of Peruvian rubber baron Carlos Fermín <unk> was shot on location in Brazil and Peru . The film was critically acclaimed , with Vincent Canby of The New York Times calling it " a fine , quirky , fascinating movie " and a " stunning spectacle " , comparing the dynamic between Kinski and Cardinale to Katharine Hepburn and Humphrey Bogart in John Huston 's The African Queen . He pointed out that although Cardinale 's screen time in the film was unfortunately not substantial , she set its comic tone ; he praised the way she managed to turn Kinski , renowned for his volatile temperament and portrayals of megalomaniacs and criminals into a " genuinely charming screen presence " , adding a new dimension to his acting career . Later that year , Cardinale played opposite Pierre <unk> in the sex farce Le <unk> , a role which biographers Lancia and Minelli claim was played with a " mature charm and expressiveness " . 
 In 1983 , Cardinale had a role in the Waris Hussein miniseries Princess Daisy , and featured alongside Lino Ventura and Bernard <unk> in the French @-@ Canadian film Le Ruffian . In 1984 , she played the love interest of Marcello Mastroianni in a Marco <unk> production of Henry IV , based on the Luigi Pirandello play of the same name . It was entered into the 1984 Cannes Film Festival . Squitieri 's Claretta ( 1984 ) , featuring Cardinale and Gemma , was entered into the competition at the 41st Venice International Film Festival . Cardinale 's powerful performance as Claretta Petacci garnered her the Nastro d 'Argento for Best Actress . In 1985 , Cardinale starred opposite Ben Gazzara and Lina Sastri in Alberto Bevilacqua 's La donna delle <unk> . It entered the competition at the 1985 Venice International Film Festival . 
 In 1986 , Cardinale was involved in the making of two films for television . In <unk> 's La <unk> ( from Elsa Morante 's novel ) , Cardinale portrayed a widow raising a son during World War II . In her husband 's <unk> di Cane , a miniseries , Enrico Lancia and Roberto <unk> praised her for her " light comic touch " . In 1987 , Cardinale starred opposite Peter Coyote , Greta Scacchi and Jamie Lee Curtis in Diane <unk> 's film A Man in Love ( Un homme <unk> ) , <unk> 's first English language feature . It was entered into the 1987 Cannes Film Festival . Cardinale 's performance as Scacchi 's cancer @-@ stricken mother was praised by critics , with Desson Howe of The Washington Post highlighting the " warm and radiant " elements that she brought to the role , and Hal Hinson , also of The Post , comparing Scacchi to having " the same kind of sensuality that Cardinale brought to her earlier roles " . After a role in the comedy , Blu <unk> ( 1988 ) , in 1989 Cardinale portrayed Yolande de <unk> , a favourite of Marie Antionette 's , in the two @-@ part film La Révolution française . Made to celebrate the bicentennial anniversary of the French Revolution , the 360 @-@ minute Robert Enrico and Richard T. Heffron film was an international production boasting a cast which included Klaus Maria Brandauer , Jane Seymour and Peter Ustinov . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1990 , Cardinale starred opposite Bruno Cremer in her husband 's <unk> di <unk> , and appeared in the Morocco @-@ set Soviet @-@ Italian production , La battaglia dei tre tamburi di fuoco . In 1991 , Cardinale featured alongside Richard Berry and Omar Sharif in Henri Verneuil 's <unk> ( meaning " mother " ) , a film about the struggles of an Armenian family that emigrates to Marseilles in France from Turkey after the Armenian Genocide of 1915 . Such was the success of the film that Verneuil made a sequel the following year , 588 , rue Paradis , also featuring the cast . Cardinale was praised by critics for her role as the mother ; the Armenian General Benevolent Union of America noted the " flawless performance of these intrepid actors , especially of Claudia Cardinale " . In 1993 , Cardinale won the Leone d 'oro alla <unk> award at the Venice Film Festival , in which she was honoured along with Roman Polanski , Robert De Niro , and Steven Spielberg . Cardinale agreed to reunite with Blake Edwards , Herbert Lom and Burt Kwouk to celebrate the 30th anniversary of The Pink Panther by making Son of the Pink Panther . It was Edward 's last film , but was a critical and commercial failure , with critics despairing at the " painfully unfunny script " and the performance of Roberto Benigni as Clouseau , which earned him the Razzie Award for Worst New Star . As of July 2015 it has a rating of just 6 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 34 reviews . In 1994 , Cardinale had a role in Charlotte Dubreuil 's Elles ne <unk> qu 'à <unk> ... , and the following year appeared in the French TV serial 10 @-@ 07 : L 'affaire Zeus . 
 In 1997 , Cardinale featured in the British @-@ Italian television drama miniseries Nostromo , directed by Alastair Reid and produced by Fernando Ghia of <unk> Productions , a co @-@ production with Radiotelevisione Italiana , Televisión Española , and WGBH Boston . It is described as " an adaptation of Joseph Conrad 's epic story Nostromo of political upheaval , greed and romance in turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ 20th @-@ century South America . " Cardinale and the cast were nominated for an ALMA Award for Outstanding Latino / a Cast in a Made @-@ for @-@ Television Movie or Mini @-@ Series . Later in 1997 , Cardinale appeared in the films Sous les pieds des femmes and her husband 's <unk> Mundi , in which she portrayed Constance of Aragon . In 1998 , Cardinale portrayed the mother of Lola <unk> in the French picture Riches , belles , etc . , a wealthy baroness who leaves her hotel to her daughter to care for during her absence . The following year , Cardinale played the peasant mother of two children who are members of Carmine Crocco 's ( Enrico Lo Verso 's ) army during the Garibaldi era , in her husband 's historical film Li <unk> ... <unk> ! . Poorly received , the film was boycotted , and the producers have since refused to assign the broadcasting rights . 
 = = = 2000 – present = = = 
 In 2000 , Cardinale embarked on her stage career , starring in Maurizio <unk> 's stage production of La <unk> , adapted by René de <unk> , at the Théâtre du Rond @-@ Point in Paris . She also appeared in her husband 's television film , Élisabeth - <unk> sont tous nos enfants . Two years later , Cardinale went on a theatrical tour of Italy , performing in Luigi Pirandello 's Come tu mi vuoi , which Squitieri directed . She appeared as what Roger Ebert described as a " faded countess " opposite Jeremy Irons in Claude <unk> 's thriller film And Now ... Ladies and Gentlemen , portraying a character who spends her time in Fez , Morocco with handsome <unk> . The film was screened out of competition at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival . And Now ... Ladies and Gentlemen received mixed reviews ; A. O. Scott of The New York Times dismissed it as " sublimely silly " , but praised the " impeccable CinemaScope compositions " and the " lush , suave score " by Michel Legrand . 
 In 2005 , Cardinale appeared in a Philippe Adrien stage production of Tennessee Williams 's Sweet Bird of Youth , and in the 2006 / 2007 season also featured in another Williams play , The Glass Menagerie , directed by Andrea <unk> , in which she played the character of Amanda . In 2007 , Cardinale appeared in the Aline <unk> comedy film <unk> fiancé tous <unk> <unk> , opposite Alexandra Lamy and Bruno <unk> , in a role which Patrick Besson described as " atrocious " . After a role in the TV movie Hold @-@ up à l <unk> ( 2008 ) , the following year Cardinale starred in the critically acclaimed The String , playing a Tunisian mother who has a tempestuous relationship with her French @-@ educated gay son . Michael D. Klemm of <unk> reflected on how the film broke many of the taboos with interracial sexuality and homosexuality . He praised Cardinale 's " terrific " acting and portrayal of the " overbearing " mother , likening one scene , where she " brings home a nice girl for Malik ( Antonin <unk> ) to meet " , to Harold and Maude ( 1971 ) . In 2010 , Cardinale received the Golden Orange Best Actress Award at the 47th Antalya " Golden Orange " International Film Festival for her performance as an elderly Italian woman who takes in a young Turkish exchange student in Signora <unk> . The Turkish @-@ Italian co @-@ production was shot in location in Istanbul and Rimini . 
 In 2012 , Cardinale featured opposite Jeanne Moreau and Michael Lonsdale in the final feature film to be directed by Portuguese director Manoel de Oliveira , <unk> and the Shadow . Critically acclaimed , it has a rare 100 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , and was shown at the 69th Venice International Film Festival . The Hollywood Reporter described it as the " ensemble of superb older performers who comprise the remainder of the dramatis personae " . In 2013 , Cardinale starred alongside supporting actresses Patricia Black and Chloé Cunha in Nadia <unk> 's Joy de V. , and had a role in Ernst Gossner 's war drama The Silent Mountain , a love story set in the Dolomite Mountains at the outbreak of World War I between Italy and Austria @-@ Hungary in 1915 . Gossner described her as " a terrific spirit on the set " , and noted that Cardinale told the production team " legendary stories " about Marcello Mastroianni . In 2014 , Cardinale portrayed a " sympathetic Italian chaperone " <unk> in the British period drama film Effie Gray , which was penned by Emma Thompson and featured Dakota Fanning in the lead role . While promoting Effie Gray , in an interview Cardinale said : " I still continue to work , it 's 142 movies now . Usually when you are old you don 't work any more , but I still work , which is good .... I 've been very lucky because I 've had many fantastic directors with me , Fellini , Visconti , Blake Edwards , lots and lots ... " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Claudia Cardinale met Italian film producer Franco Cristaldi in 1958 . She married him in Atlanta in 1966 but they divorced in 1975 . The couple had become increasingly detached and he wanted to remarry without any ties . Although Cardinale did not believe the Atlanta marriage had any status in Italy , she consented to his request . As a result , Cristaldi married <unk> Araya and had no further contractual relationships with Cardinale . 
 Cardinale has lived with Pasquale Squitieri , an Italian film director , since 1975 . She has two children : Patrick , who was born illegitimately when she was 19 and later adopted by Cristaldi , and Claudia , whom she had with Squitieri . She is fluent in Sicilian , Arabic , French , Italian , English , and Spanish . Her niece Francesca is also an actress . 
 Cardinale is a political liberal who has supported feminist causes over the years . She has frequently stated her pride in her Tunisian background and has great roots in Arabic culture – as evidenced by her book Ma <unk> and her appearance as herself in the Tunisian film Un été à La Goulette ( " A Summer in La Goulette " ) . She has been a UNESCO goodwill ambassador for the Defense of Women 's Rights since March 2000 , and was a goodwill ambassador for the UNESCO World Water Day for 2006 . 
 Cardinale published an autobiography , with Anne Mori , Io Claudia , Tu Claudia in 1995 . She has been a regular attendee of the Academy Awards . Her awards have included an honorary Golden Lion at the 1993 Venice Film Festival , and an honorary Golden Bear at the 2002 Berlin Film Festival . The Los Angeles Times Magazine , in a February 2011 online feature , named Cardinale among the 50 most beautiful women in film history . Cardinale said of her acting , " I never felt scandal and confession were necessary to be an actress . I 've never revealed my self or even my body in films . Mystery is very important . " In a 2014 interview , she revealed her secret of success : " If you want to practise this craft , you have to have inner strength . Otherwise , you ’ ll lose your idea of who you are . Every film I make entails becoming a different woman . And in front of a camera , no less ! But when I ’ m finished , I ’ m me again . " 
 = Typhoon Angela ( 1989 ) = 
 Super Typhoon Angela , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Rubing , was an intense tropical cyclone that formed in late September 1989 . The storm developed from a tropical disturbance in the monsoon trough and moved generally westward throughout its duration . The storm ultimately peaked in intensity as a super typhoon and struck northern Luzon in the Philippines . After weakening and traversing the South China Sea , Angela bypassed Hainan to the south and struck Vietnam before dissipating . The storm caused severe damage and 119 fatalities in the Philippines . Thousands of houses were damaged , and hundreds of thousands of residents were impacted by the typhoon . Monetary damage is placed at $ 8 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Angela trace back to a tropical disturbance in the monsoon trough that became very active after a lull in convection . The disturbance developed over the western Caroline Islands , and persisted for two days until it was noted in a Significant Tropical Weather Advisory issued by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . It rapidly matured , and prompted a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert shortly thereafter . Enhanced upper @-@ level outflow assisted the storm 's intensification . At 0600 UTC on September 28 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) recognized the storm as a tropical depression . The JTWC issued their first advisory on the depression , designated <unk> , at 0600 UTC on September 29 . However , at the same time , the JMA upgraded it to a tropical storm . 
 At 1800 UTC on September 29 , the JTWC classified the depression as Tropical Storm Angela . The system initially tracking northwestward , Angela turned westward along the southern periphery of a subtropical ridge to the north . The tropical storm began to rapidly intensify , and the JMA upgraded it to a severe tropical storm at 1800 UTC on September 30 , while the JTWC estimated that it had attained typhoon intensity . The JMA then upgraded Angela to a typhoon shortly thereafter , and assessed it as having reached peak intensity on October 2 , with 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 925 millibars . Continuing westward , the typhoon attained super typhoon status four days later , and the <unk> reported that Angela peaked in strength on October 5 . Between October 5 and October 6 , Angela crossed the northern coast of Luzon in the Philippines . 
 The storm weakened after interacting with land , and the JTWC downgraded it to a typhoon on October 6 as it emerged into the South China Sea . An area of high pressure built over China , pushing Angela towards the southwest . Wind shear over the area weakened somewhat , and the typhoon re @-@ intensified . However , as it passed south of Hainan , the cyclone again weakened due to the interaction with land . At 0600 UTC on October 10 , Angela struck the coast of Vietnam and moved ashore . The JTWC issued their final advisory on the system at 1200 UTC , at which time the JMA downgraded it to a severe tropical storm , to a tropical storm six hours later , and to a tropical depression early on October 11 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On October 6 , Angela prompted the issuance of the Stand By Signal No. 1 in Hong Kong . It was replaced by a Strong Wind Signal No. 3 the next day , and after the typhoon 's closest approach to the region on October 8 , a Strong Monsoon Signal was hoisted . One @-@ hour sustained winds reached 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , out of the east , at Waglan Island . Gusts at Tate 's Cairn peaked at 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) from the north @-@ northeast . 
 Angela caused severe damage in the Philippines . It is estimated that 119 people perished , and 192 more were injured . Additionally , 28 remained missing following the storm . In total , 219 @,@ 178 people , or 39 @,@ 095 families , were affected by the cyclone . About 33 @,@ 309 homes sustained some degree of damage . The typhoon 's intense winds and heavy rainfall triggered flooding and damaged crops . The hardest @-@ hit areas were in the Cagayan province . Overall , the storm left approximately $ 8 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage across the region . The same area was impacted by Typhoon Sarah in September . Angela forced thousands of residents to seek shelter in evacuation centers . 
 The JTWC issued 46 warnings on the storm over the course of 12 days , the longest of any storm during the season . Angela was among the five storms to attain super typhoon status in 1989 , and was deemed the most severe typhoon of the year , at the time , in the Philippines . 
 = The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay = 
 The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay is a first @-@ person action and stealth video game developed by Starbreeze Studios and published by Vivendi Games . Released for the Xbox and Windows in 2004 , the game is a tie @-@ in prequel to the futuristic science fiction film The Chronicles of Riddick . Actor Vin Diesel — who was involved in the game 's development — reprises his role as that film 's protagonist , Richard B. Riddick . 
 The game follows Riddick , the anti @-@ hero of the two films Pitch Black and The Chronicles of Riddick , as he attempts to escape from a maximum @-@ security prison called Butcher Bay . Escape from Butcher Bay 's designers focused on exploring Riddick 's character in a prison break setting to differentiate the game from the film . The game 's influences include the film Escape from Alcatraz , and video games such as Half @-@ Life and Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell . 
 Escape from Butcher Bay was praised by critics , who lauded its graphics and its implementation of stealth , action and adventure elements . However , they commonly lamented its brevity and lack of multiplayer components . The game went on to win several accolades , including the Golden Joystick Award for Unsung Hero Game of the Year and the Spike Video Game Award for Best Game Based on a Movie . An enhanced remake of the game , included in The Chronicles of Riddick : Assault on Dark Athena , was released in 2009 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Escape from Butcher Bay , the player takes the role of Richard B. Riddick and attempts to break out of Butcher Bay prison . The game incorporates elements from video game genres such as first @-@ person shooter , adventure and stealth , and is played primarily from a first @-@ person perspective , though the camera switches to a third @-@ person perspective during certain scenes . Unlike many first @-@ person shooters , the game contains no head @-@ up display ; on @-@ screen cues are limited to flashes when a new weapon is selected , and small , white boxes that display the player character 's health when damage is taken . Health can be replenished in designated areas throughout the game . By finding cigarette packs hidden in levels , the player can unlock concept art and video files . 
 The player may interact with and receive quests from the prison 's residents , and earns information , tools and other rewards by completing quests . Violent conflict often occurs between the player , inmates and prison guards . The player attacks with Riddick 's bare hands , or with improvised weapons such as <unk> and clubs . Combos are created by stringing together punches . A DNA @-@ scanning security system initially prevents Riddick from using firearms , but a limited arsenal later becomes available . 
 A " stealth mode " is activated when the player character crouches , allowing the player to move silently and tinting the edges of the screen blue when the player is hidden . While in stealth mode , the player can drag bodies out of sight and hide from enemies . The mode grants attacks that quickly kill enemies ; the player may drop on enemies from above , or execute them from behind . During the game , Riddick acquires eyeshine , allowing him to see in the dark but temporarily blinding him if used in brightly lit areas . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Escape from Butcher Bay is set in the futuristic science fiction universe of the Chronicles of Riddick franchise , and is a prequel to the film Pitch Black . The game takes place inside Butcher Bay , a maximum @-@ security prison from which no prisoner has escaped . The facility — constructed on a barren planet — contains three increasingly secure holding areas , and a subterranean mining operation . 
 The game 's protagonist is Richard B. Riddick ( reprised by Vin Diesel ) , a murderer recently confined in Butcher Bay . Riddick is resourceful , and seeks to break out of the prison by any means necessary . His <unk> is the bounty hunter William J. Johns ( Cole Hauser ) ; the two have had previous encounters . Butcher Bay 's warden is a man named Hoxie ( Dwight Schultz ) , while Abbott ( Xzibit ) is a prison guard disliked by the inmates . The inmate Pope Joe ( Willis Burks II ) is an insane old man , who lives in the sewer tunnels beneath the prison . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The opening cinematic shows Riddick in hiding , having grown out his hair and beard , before the opening scene of the Chronicles of Riddick movie . He hunts an animal and after killing it , a disembodied voice starts talking to him asking him where he got his eyes . He states that he received them from a " slam preacher " and this causes him to remember his time at Butcher Bay . The game takes place in a flashback . 
 Another opening cinematic takes place in which Riddick is being transported for collection on the bounty . He and Johns have a brief conversation in which Riddick tells Johns that there is no way he is going to get the price he wants . Riddick wakes up as they land and stands out front of Butcher Bay waiting for the warden . He sneaks up behind Johns and breaks his neck and proceeds to escape . After getting his hands on a gun , he goes through the ventilation ducts and seemingly escapes into the desert . Everything fades to white as Riddick hears Johns saying " Rise and shine , Riddick . " It turns out this escape was simply a dream . 
 Riddick wakes up and Johns escorts him off the ship . Johns meets with Hoxie to negotiate his pay , while Abbott escorts Riddick to his cell in the " single @-@ max " security area . After making enemies with and killing a gang leader named Rust , Riddick <unk> himself with the facility , and soon instigates a riot ; during the confusion , he escapes into the prison 's sewer system . Armed with a shotgun and a dying flashlight , Riddick discovers he is not alone in the sewers . Fighting through the sewers against mutant " dwellers " , Riddick eventually meets Pope Joe , for whom he retrieves a lost radio , which Joe calls a blessed voicebox . A woman named <unk> ( Kristin Lehman ) tells Riddick that he " has been blind too long " , and he gains his trademark " eyeshine " night vision . Afterwards , he accuses Pope Joe of tampering with his eyes ; Joe says that he merely treated Riddick 's injured arm . Riddick then continues his escape , while using the eyeshine to his advantage . 
 After emerging from a manhole in the showers of the guard living quarters , Riddick uses a guard uniform to blend in as he makes his way to the space port and his chance at escape . Realizing he requires a guard to get through the retinal scanner that locks the doors to the space port , Riddick decides to go after Abbott and take his eyes . He gains access to Abbott 's apartment by telling him there is a delivery for him . A fire fight ensues and after that , as Abbott bleeds out on the floor , Riddick moves in for the kill but is stopped by Johns . 
 Riddick is captured and transferred to the " double @-@ max " security area . Gaining the trust of the inmates by participating in fighting matches , Riddick eventually kills the champion of the fighting matches , a guard named Bam . This leads him to be taken to a room where no surveillance is seen and several guards await to kill Riddick . Abbott walks into the room , fully healed , holding a baseball bat . <unk> returns to him and tells him that the fury of all of his kind is within him , and he can release it if he chooses . A blast of energy called the ' Rage of <unk> ' kills all the guards around him except Abbott , who hides and then panics and attacks Riddick . Riddick kills Abbott and proceeds to find another way to escape . Using a secret entrance to an elevator , he infiltrates a mining facility . He meets an inmate of great influence in the area named Jagger Valance ( Ron Perlman ) , who wishes to escape with him . He makes a bomb and plants it in a mining site with a massive gas leak . However , Riddick is discovered and caught by the guards . During his transfer to another section , the prison is disrupted by an outbreak of creatures called " Xeno " , due to the bomb Riddick planted , in order to create the confusion necessary for his escape , and Riddick attempts to escape with Valance . His plans are foiled again by Johns . After a fist fight , Riddick and Johns are both shot by Valance ( who only meant to hit Johns ) and Valance is killed by the guards . After meeting again with the warden , and telling him that he is just getting started , Riddick is placed in the " triple @-@ max " area , where inmates are kept in cryonic sleep . They are awakened daily for two minutes of exercise ; during this time , Riddick discovers a flaw in the system and escapes . He then hijacks a large robot and fights his way through Butcher Bay to reach Hoxie . 
 Tired of dealing with the prison officials , Johns helps Riddick to elude the guards . Riddick knocks Johns out and flies the ship into the warden 's office . The warden calls in two robot guards with cloaking abilities and Riddick defeats them . After Hoxie surrenders , Riddick receives the codes to Hoxie 's ship and Riddick and Johns escape disguised as a guard and prisoner . Two guards enter Hoxie 's room , where Hoxie is bound and covered in Riddick 's former attire . They mistake him for Riddick and kill him . Riddick and Johns take off in Hoxie 's ship , ending the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Escape from Butcher Bay was developed by Swedish company Starbreeze Studios , and published by Vivendi Games and the Vin Diesel @-@ founded Tigon Studios . Universal Studios Consumer Products Group granted the The Chronicles of Riddick license to Vivendi Games ; both companies were owned by Vivendi Universal . The game was announced in March 2004 as an Xbox title . Tigon Studios ' Cos <unk> said , " [ The game ] features an original storyline that provides insight into how Riddick evolved into such a complex character " . 
 In contrast to other film tie @-@ in games , which often closely follow the events of their source material , the development team of Escape from Butcher Bay focused on differentiating the game from The Chronicles of Riddick . They sought to explore Riddick 's character in a prison break setting , and took inspiration from films such as Escape from Alcatraz . Starbreeze was also inspired by video games such as GoldenEye 007 and the Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell series . The opening sequence , in which Riddick is escorted into Butcher Bay , is a tribute to Half @-@ Life , and the game 's hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat was inspired by Punch @-@ Out ! ! . Starbreeze focused solely on developing the game 's single @-@ player mode , and did not include multiplayer ; the company believed that such a mode would require a design team twice as large and another year of development . 
 Vin Diesel , the lead actor of The Chronicles of Riddick , provided his voice and likeness for Riddick . He and director David Twohy also contributed to the game 's plot and character design ; the game 's story was developed in conjunction with the film 's . Per the filmmakers ' instructions , the designers made the origin of Riddick 's " eyeshine " vague . Diesel offered guidance to the game 's lead writer during voice recording sessions ; this included dialogue rewrites to reduce Riddick 's lines , as Diesel believed the character spoke too often . 
 Starbreeze intended for Escape from Butcher Bay to feature more complex role @-@ playing game systems , but feedback from Diesel and game testers dissuaded them . Starbreeze senior producer Peter Wanat said , " We tried to limit the number of really hard or really intricate RPG elements , and that was a choice because we wanted the game to be playable . " Other removed features include an electric bullwhip for the guard Abbott , and a 25 @-@ minute final boss fight . A PlayStation 2 version that was in development was cancelled so the company could focus on the Xbox version . 
 The game uses normal mapping , which allows detailed textures to be drawn on models with lower polygon counts ; this increases visual fidelity , without sacrificing higher frame rates . It also featured dynamic lighting with per @-@ pixel stencil shadowing and self @-@ shadowing 
 Escape from Butcher Bay was completed in 18 months . Vin Diesel promoted the game and the accompanying movie at the May 2004 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) video game convention . The game was released in North America on June 1 , 2004 , shortly before The Chronicles of Riddick . North American pre @-@ orders of the game included a DVD of promotional content , such as a partial interactive walkthrough and footage from the film . The game 's soundtrack , composed by Gustaf <unk> , was released by Vivendi as a free download on June 24 , 2004 . 
 Following rumors , Vivendi confirmed in July 2004 that a Windows port of Escape from Butcher Bay was in development , entitled " The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay Director 's Cut " . The game features a higher display resolution , additional cigarette packs , and new scenes where Riddick steals mechanized riot armor . It includes developer commentary which details the game 's creation and design decisions . The game was released on December 8 in North America . 
 = = = Expanded remake = = = 
 In May 2007 , Vivendi announced that Escape From Butcher Bay was being remade by Starbreeze Studios for PC , Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . Entitled The Chronicles of Riddick : Assault on Dark Athena , the game was referred to by Vivendi as a " reinvention " of Escape from Butcher Bay ; it would include a multiplayer mode and new single @-@ player content . It was planned that Vivendi @-@ subsidiary Sierra Entertainment would publish the game in late 2007 . 
 In December 2007 , Activision and Vivendi Games merged to become Activision Blizzard ; the new company announced the dismissal of Assault on Dark Athena , Brütal Legend , Ghostbusters : The Video Game and others from its roster in July 2008 . The titles were put up for sale to other publishers . In September 2008 , Starbreeze Studios confirmed that the game was still in development , and that it was nearing completion . The following month , Atari reportedly paid a flat fee for the publishing rights to Assault on Dark Athena and Ghostbusters : The Video Game ; Atari later confirmed that it had picked up both titles . The company also stated that it had struck a deal with Universal Studios to develop more Chronicles of Riddick games . Assault on Dark Athena was released in April 2009 in North America , Europe , and Australia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Escape From Butcher Bay received critical acclaim . Certain reviewers preferred the game over its film counterpart , and considered it an exception to the general mediocrity of film tie @-@ in games . The Xbox version of the game sold 159 @,@ 000 copies in August 2004 , and was among the best @-@ selling games on any platform during June 2004 ; it was later re @-@ released as a Platinum Hits title . Conversely , the PC version sold 32 @,@ 500 after six months on shelves . 
 Escape from Butcher Bay 's gameplay was compared to first @-@ person shooters like Far Cry and Half @-@ Life , and to stealth game series like Splinter Cell , Metal Gear , and Thief . Reviewers enjoyed the variety of gameplay elements : Game Informer 's Jeremy Zoss noted that " every aspect of play is expertly implemented " , and GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin believed that the game " effectively and innovatively combines excellent shooting , hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , stealth , and adventure elements " . While the game 's stealth mechanics were praised , certain critics received its first @-@ person shooter elements with less enthusiasm . Reviewers applauded the control scheme , such as the Xbox version 's analog stick @-@ based hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . The implementation of Riddick 's eyeshine ability was also generally praised , but Computer and Video Games believed that it was no different from night vision goggles in other first @-@ person shooters , and said that it " could 've been developed into so much more . " 
 The game 's visuals — particularly the Xbox version 's — were acclaimed , and compared to those of Doom 3 and Half @-@ Life 2 . GameZone 's Michael Lafferty said that the game 's graphics " [ take ] the genre to the next level " . The textures and lighting were cited as high points , particularly because of the gameplay role of shadows . Character models and facial animations were considered highly realistic ; much praise was given to those of Riddick . GameSpot appreciated the developers ' attention to graphical detail ; they noted that recent bullet @-@ holes glow red and smoke , but gradually cool and darken . Certain reviewers complained about graphical glitches , such as " seams " and " clipping " , and gave as an example the visibility of bullet tracers through walls . The portrayal of Butcher Bay was considered convincing , and 1UP 's Shawn Elliott compared it to the settings of the Alien franchise . 
 " You can almost smell the thick stink of Butcher Bay and its inhabitants from the grime on the walls , dirty clothes of the inmates , and environmental textures . This place oozes with style and creates sense of reality in which it 's easy to become immersed . " 
 The audio of Escape from Butcher Bay was generally well received , and critics praised its voice acting ; the performances of Vin Diesel and Cole Hauser were given special commendation . In regard to the music , FiringSquad 's Jakub Wojnarowicz stated , " It 's not good enough to sweep you away [ , ] but it 's also not bad enough to stick out like a sore thumb " . IGN said , " The music isn 't memorable , but it 's not bad " . The Sunday Herald Sun called the voice acting " Surprisingly good " . The game 's length was commonly criticized . Reviewers noted that it could be completed in eight to fifteen hours , and IGN said , " If you consider around 12 hours of gameplay short , then Riddick is just that . " Several reviewers were displeased by the game 's lack of multiplayer components ; Computer and Video Games referred to it as a " missed opportunity " . Game Informer said , " Since the main quest is short [ ... ] and there is no multiplayer , it ’ s not a ton of game for your money . " 
 Professor James Paul Gee , a researcher of video games , has used Escape from Butcher Bay in his studies . He discussed the relation of Garrett from Thief and the nameless soldier from Full Spectrum Warrior with the character of Riddick , saying that the games " allow players to take a projective stance to the ( virtual ) world , but a stance that is rooted in the knowledge , values , and ways of seeing and being in the world of an authentic professional , an ' expert ' . " 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Both versions of the game were given editor ’ s choice awards from IGN , GameSpot , and GameSpy . The PC version was IGN 's PC Game of the Month for December 2004 . IGN later ranked it 12th on its list of the 25 greatest Xbox games of all time . Game Informer placed Escape from Butcher Bay as the 8th best on their list of 25 greatest Xbox games of all time . Escape from Butcher Bay was nominated for GameSpot 's Game of the Year award for 2004 , but it lost to World of Warcraft . Computer and Video Games called the PC version the 98th best PC game of all time . Billboard 's Digital Entertainment Conference nominated Riddick as its Best Character in a Game and a Golden Joystick Award for " Unsung Hero Game of the Year " . GamesRadar placed Escape from Butcher Bay in their " Top 7 movie games that don 't suck " list , and said that " Escape from Butcher Bay was a triumph on almost every level . " In 2013 , IGN ranked Escape from Butcher Bay as the 27th greatest first @-@ person shooter of all time . 
 = At Fillmore East = 
 At Fillmore East is the first live album by American rock band the Allman Brothers Band , and their third release overall . Produced by Tom Dowd , the album was released in July 1971 in the United States by Capricorn Records . As the title indicates , the recording took place at the New York City music venue Fillmore East , which was run by concert promoter Bill Graham . It was recorded over the course of three nights in March 1971 and features the band performing extended jam versions of songs such as " Whipping Post " and " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed . " When first commercially released , it was issued as a double LP with just seven songs comprising four vinyl sides . 
 At Fillmore East was the band 's artistic and commercial breakthrough , and has been considered by some critics to be one of the greatest live albums in rock music . It has also been ranked among the best overall albums by artists and continues to be a top seller in the band 's catalog , becoming their first album to go platinum . In 2004 , the album was selected for preservation in the Library of Congress , deemed to be " culturally , historically , or aesthetically important " by the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shortly after completing recording of their second album , Idlewild South ( 1970 ) , band leader Duane Allman was contacted by guitarist Eric Clapton to contribute to his new project , Derek and the Dominos . Allman was a huge fan of his work with Cream , and Clapton had been blown away by Allman 's session work on Wilson Pickett 's " Hey Jude " some years prior . They met after a show one night in Miami and jammed together until the next afternoon , with the two guitarists regarding one another as " instant soulmates . " Clapton invited Duane to join Derek and the Dominos , and according to band biographer Alan Paul he considered it ; in the end , he declined and rejoined the Allman Brothers Band , returning after missing a string of several shows . The sessions were collected on Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs , issued that November . 
 In the interim , Idlewild South had yet to achieve strong commercial success , but the band 's popularity and reputation began to increase due to their live performances . The band played continuously in 1970 , performing over 300 dates on the road traveling in a Ford Econoline van and later , a Winnebago , nicknamed the Wind Bag . During this time , the group began struggling with drug addictions . All in the group , with the exception of the brothers , were struggling also to make a living ( Gregg received more money from royalty payments and Duane more from session work ) . In one incident , tour manager Twiggs Lyndon stabbed and killed a promoter for not paying the band ; he later claimed temporary insanity . Their fortunes began to change over the course of 1971 , where the band 's average earnings doubled . Duane eventually died in the fall of 1971 due to injuries from a motorcycle accident . 
 The Allman Brothers Band had first played Fillmore East in December 1969 , opening for Blood , Sweat & Tears for three nights . Promoter Bill Graham enjoyed the band and promised to have them back soon . In January 1970 , the band opened for Buddy Guy and B.B. King at San Francisco 's Fillmore West , and one month later at Fillmore East supporting the Grateful Dead . According to biographer Alan Paul , " these shows were crucial in establishing the band and exposing them to a wider , sympathetic audience on both coasts . " Drummer Butch Trucks considered their performances at the Fillmore East to be the launching pad for their success . In 1970 , Duane Allman told disc jockey Ed Shane , " You know , we get kind of frustrated doing the [ studio ] records , and I think , consequently , our next album will be ... a live recording , to get some of that natural fire on it . " " We were not intentionally trying to buck the system , but keeping each song down to 3 : 14 just didn 't work for us , " remembered vocalist Gregg Allman . " And we realized that the audience was a big part of what we did , which couldn 't be duplicated in a studio . A lightbulb finally went off ; we needed to make a live album . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 At Fillmore East was recorded over two nights — March 12 and 13 , 1971 — for which the band was paid $ 1250 each show . The shows were typical performances for the band , and regarded as slightly above average by drummer Jai Johanny Johanson . Ads for the shows read : " Bill Graham Presents in New York — Johnny Winter And , Elvin Bishop Group , Extra Added Attraction : Allman Brothers . " While Winter was billed as headliner , by the third night the Allman Brothers were closing the show . 
 Tom Dowd produced At Fillmore East ; he had previously worked on their second studio album , Idlewild South . He had recently returned from Africa from working on Soul to Soul , and stayed in New York several days to oversee the live recording . " It was a good truck , with a 16 @-@ track machine and a great , tough @-@ as @-@ nails staff who took care of business , " recalled Dowd . He gave the staff suggestions and noted the band had two lead guitarists and two drummers , " which was unusual , and it took some foresight to properly capture the dynamics . " Things went smoothly until the band unexpectedly brought out saxophonist Rudolph " Juicy " Carter , an unknown horn player , and Thom Doucette on harmonica . " I was just hoping we could isolate them , so we could wipe them and use the songs , but they started playing and the horns were leaking all over everything , rendering the songs unusable , " said Dowd . He rushed to Duane during the break to tell him to cut the horn players ; while Duane loved the players , he put up no fight with Dowd . The final show was delayed because of a bomb scare , and did not end until 6 am . 
 Each night following the shows , the musicians and Dowd would " grab some beers and sandwiches " and head to Manhattan 's Atlantic Studios to go over the performances . Set lists for following shows were crafted by listening to the recordings and going over what they could keep and what they would need to capture once more . " We wanted to give ourselves plenty of times to do it because we didn 't want to go back and overdub anything , because then it wouldn 't have been a real live album , " said Gregg Allman , and in the end , the band only edited out Doucette 's harmonica when it didn 't fit . " That was our pinnacle , " said Dickey Betts later . " The Fillmore days are definitely the most cherished memories that I have . If you asked everybody in the band , they would probably say that . " 
 On June 27 , the Fillmore East closed , and the band were invited to play a final , invitation @-@ only concert , along with Edgar Winter , the Beach Boys and Country Joe McDonald . The Beach Boys initially refused to perform unless they headlined the event , but Graham refused , telling them that the Allman Brothers would be closing the show , and they were free to leave if they disagreed . The Allman Brothers ' performance was used for additional tracks when an expanded version of At Fillmore East , The Fillmore Concerts , was reissued on CD . 
 = = Composition = = 
 At Fillmore East showcases the band 's eclectic mixture of blues , Rock , country , and jazz . " Fusion is a term that came later , but if you wanted to look at a fusion album , it would be Fillmore East . Here was a rock ' n ' roll band playing blues in the jazz vernacular . And they tore the place up , " said Dowd . 
 Announcer Michael Ahern opens At Fillmore East with a simple introduction : " Okay , the Allman Brothers Band . " Duane Allman biographer Randy Poe describes it as " the only low @-@ key moment over the course of the [ show ] . " The cover of Blind Willie McTell 's " Statesboro Blues " which opens the set showcases Duane Allman 's slide guitar work in open E tuning . " Statesboro Blues " bears close resemblance to Taj Mahal 's 1968 rendition , which had inspired Duane to pick up slide guitar playing . " Done Somebody Wrong " follows , and is introduced by Duane as " an old Elmore James song ... This is an old true story ... " Thom Doucette takes a solo on blues harp , and by the end of the song , the band breaks out of the shuffle and " builds up to a dual @-@ lead guitar , triplet @-@ based crescendo . " 
 " Stormy Monday " echoes the band 's blues roots , and many guitar parts come from the version cut by Bobby " Blue " Bland in the early 1960s . Allman and Betts trade solos , as does Gregg Allman on the organ as the tempo shifts into a " swinging " beat . " You Don 't Love Me " kicks off the first of the jazz @-@ inspired jams and features a solo from Duane Allman in which the entire group stops , leaving it just him and his guitar . The song 's conclusion also contains elements of " Joy to the World . " " Hot ' Lanta " is an instrumental , which has elements in common with jazz rock and progressive rock , and is a showcase for Berry Oakley 's bass @-@ playing . " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " , with its harmonized melody , Latin feel , and burning drive invited comparisons with jazz saxophonist John Coltrane ( especially Duane 's solo @-@ ending pull @-@ offs , a direct nod to the musician ) . The performance begins with a " long , laconic intro " by Betts employing volume swells , reminiscent of the " dreamy trumpet " used to open songs on Miles Davis ' Kind of Blue ( 1959 ) . 
 " Whipping Post " ( opening in 11 / 4 time , unusual territory for a rock band ) by this point had become one of the longest jams in the band 's set ; the original album version runs five minutes , while the At Fillmore East version exceeds 23 . Aside from the opening bassline and lyrics , the two versions are completely unalike . Again , Betts and Allman trade long guitar solos , with one of Betts ' solos quoting what would later become the main theme for the song " Les Brers in A Minor , " as featured on the band 's 1972 album Eat a Peach . The song closes with " long , sustained notes " from Allman opposite Trucks ' <unk> . Applause concludes the album and the song fades out . During the fadeout , Trucks begins playing the tympani intro to " Mountain Jam " which would not be released in its entirety until its inclusion on Eat a Peach . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The band devised the cover idea for At Fillmore East rather than leaving it in the hands of Atlantic executives ( Allman was particularly disgusted with the artwork for Sam & Dave 's Hold On , I 'm Comin ' album ) . Initially , the album cover was to be shots of the band taken in front of the Fillmore East with their names on the marquee above them , but no one was satisfied with the results . The band 's main purpose for the cover was that it be as " meat and potatoes " as the band 's ethos and performing , and someone suggested the band make it a photograph of the band in an alley waiting with their gear to go onstage . 
 The image was shot by photographer Jim Marshall one morning in the band 's home of Macon , Georgia . The group were not very happy about being woken up early to shoot ( " we figured it didn 't make a damn bit of difference what the cover was or what time we took it , " said guitarist Dickey Betts ) . Normally the band hated being photographed ; the cover of later retrospective release The Fillmore Concerts shows them displaying terminal boredom . However , during the session , Duane spotted a dealer friend , raced over and grabbed a bag of contraband , then returned to his seat , discreetly clutching the stash in his lap . This made the whole band laugh , resulting in a memorable image . Marshall stenciled the album title on one of the road cases , which were stacked in front of the wall . 
 The back cover shows their road crew gathered in the same spot with 16 oz cans of Pabst Blue Ribbon beer provided by the photographer as a reward to the roadies for <unk> out and stacking the band 's heavy equipment for the shoot . Among the crew on the back cover are Joseph " Red Dog " Campbell , Kim Payne , Mike Callahan , Joe Dan Petty and Willie Perkins ( the last two the newest additions to the crew at the time ) . The idea to have the crew on the back cover was Duane Allman 's idea , as all involved viewed them the " unsung heroes " in the operation . A photo of Lyndon , then in jail awaiting his trial , was superimposed to the wall behind the crew . 
 = = Release and critical reception = = 
 At Fillmore East was released in July 1971 by Capricorn Records as a double album , but reduced to the cost of a single LP . Atlantic and Atco initially rejected the idea of issuing a double album , with Jerry Wexler feeling it " ridiculous to preserve all these jams . " Manager Phil Walden explained to executives that the band were less of a studio band and that live performances were most important to them . In all , the album featured seven songs spread over four vinyl sides . The album received strong initial sales . While previous albums by the band had taken months to hit the charts ( often near the bottom of the top 200 ) , the record started to climb the charts after a matter of days . At Fillmore East peaked at number thirteen on Billboard 's Top Pop Albums chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America that October . The album was later certified platinum on August 25 , 1992 . 
 In a contemporary review , George Kimball of Rolling Stone magazine said that " The Allman Brothers had many fine moments at the <unk> , and this live double album ( recorded March 12th and 13th of this year ) must surely epitomize all of them . " Kimball cited the band as " the best damn rock and roll band this country has produced in the past five years " and said of comparisons to the Grateful Dead at the time , " The range of their material and the more tenuous fact that they also use two drummers have led to what I suppose are inevitable comparisons to the Dead in its better days . " In a less enthusiastic review for The Village Voice , Robert Christgau gave At Fillmore East a " B – " grade and said the songs " sure do boogie " , but ultimately found it musically aimless : " even if Duane Allman plus Dickey Betts does equal Jerry Garcia , the Dead know roads are for getting somewhere . That is , Garcia ( not to bring in John Coltrane ) always takes you someplace unexpected on a long solo . I guess the appeal here is the inevitability of it all . " 
 In a retrospective review , AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album five out of five stars and stated , " [ it ] remains the pinnacle of the Allmans and Southern rock at its most elastic , bluesy , and jazzy " . Mark Kemp of Rolling Stone gave it five stars in a 2002 review and commented that " these shows [ ... ] remain the finest live rock performance ever committed to vinyl " , and the album " captures America 's best blues @-@ rock band at its peak " . 
 At Fillmore East was one of 50 recordings chosen in 2004 by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry . Rolling Stone included at number 49 in their 2003 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , describing it as " rock 's greatest live double LP . " The album was also included in the books 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die ( 2005 ) and 1 @,@ 000 Recordings To Hear Before You Die ( 2008 ) . In the latter , author Tom Moon noted that , nearly forty years after its release , " [ the album ] remains one of the best live albums in rock history . <unk> and loud , it 's perfect driving music for the road that goes on forever . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Expanded editions = = 
 Over the years several expanded editions of At Fillmore East have been released . 
 = = = The Fillmore Concerts = = = 
 On October 10 , 1992 , The Fillmore Concerts , an expanded version of At Fillmore East , was released as a two @-@ disc CD . It includes all the songs from the original album , plus the live songs from Eat a Peach — " One Way Out " , " Trouble No More " , and " Mountain Jam " — which were recorded at the same concerts , and two additional tracks , " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " and " Drunken Hearted Boy " . All the music was remixed from the concert recordings , and a few of the songs are alternate takes , so the same songs sound somewhat different than on the original album . 
 Disc one 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Willie McTell ) ( March 13 First show ) – 4 : 15 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) ( March 12 second show ) – 3 : 46 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) ( March 13 first show ) – 3 : 20 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) ( March 13 first show ) – 12 : 59 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson ) ( June 27 ) – 4 : 55 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) ( March 12 second show ) – 4 : 11 
 " Stormy Monday " ( T @-@ Bone Walker ) ( March 13 second show ) – 10 : 19 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) ( March 13 first show / March 12 second show ) – 19 : 24 
 Disc two 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) ( March 12 second show ) – 5 : 11 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) ( March 13 second show ) – 22 : 37 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Donovan Leitch , Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johnny Johanson ) ( March 13 second show ) – 33 : 41 
 " Drunken Hearted Boy " ( with Elvin Bishop ) ( Elvin Bishop ) ( March 13 second show ) – 7 : 33 
 = = = At Fillmore East Deluxe Edition = = = 
 The Deluxe Edition was released as a two @-@ disc CD on September 23 , 2003 . It contains the same songs , in a slightly different order , as The Fillmore Concerts , and one additional track , " Midnight Rider " . The Deluxe Edition is based on the master recordings for At Fillmore East and Eat a Peach , and so it sounds more similar to those albums than The Fillmore Concerts does . 
 Disc one 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 4 : 17 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 43 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 27 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) – 4 : 33 
 " Stormy Monday " ( T @-@ Bone Walker ) – 8 : 48 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) ( June 27 ) – 4 : 56 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) – 13 : 04 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) – 19 : 24 
 " Midnight Rider " ( Gregg Allman , Robert Payne ) ( June 27 ) – 2 : 55 
 Disc two 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) – 5 : 20 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) – 22 : 53 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Donovan Leitch , Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johnny Johnson ) - 33 : 41 
 " Drunken Hearted Boy " ( with Elvin Bishop ) ( Elvin Bishop ) - 6 : 54 
 = = = The 1971 Fillmore East Recordings = = = 
 The 1971 Fillmore East Recordings was released on July 29 , 2014 . This six @-@ CD boxed set contains the four complete concerts — the early and late shows from March 12 and March 13 , 1971 — from which the songs included on At Fillmore East were selected , plus the Allman Brothers ' performance at the Fillmore East closing show on June 27 , 1971 . A three Blu @-@ ray edition was also released which contains a multi @-@ channel mix . 
 Disc one 
 March 12 , 1971 - first show 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 4 : 08 * 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 48 * 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 19 * 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) – 4 : 01 * 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) – 17 : 05 * 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) - 14 : 58 * 
 Disc two 
 March 12 , 1971 – second show 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 4 : 12 * 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 50 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 28 * 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) – 4 : 30 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) – 19 : 50 * 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) – 19 : 10 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) – 20 : 00 * 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johanny Johanson ) – 5 : 09 
 Disc three 
 March 13 , 1971 – first show 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 4 : 20 
 " Trouble No More " ( McKinley Morganfield aka Muddy Waters ) – 3 : 48 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 47 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) – 3 : 55 * 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) – 13 : 00 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) – 19 : 10 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) – 17 : 15 * 
 Disc four 
 March 13 , 1971 – second show - part 1 
 " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 4 : 19 * 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) – 4 : 30 * 
 " Stormy Monday " ( T @-@ Bone Walker ) – 10 : 14 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johnny Johanson ) – 5 : 00 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) – 22 : 00 
 Disc five 
 March 13 , 1971 – second show - part 2 
 " Mountain Jam " ( Donovan Leitch , Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johnny Johanson ) – 33 : 00 
 " Drunken Hearted Boy " ( with Elvin Bishop ) ( Elvin Bishop ) – 7 : 30 
 Disc six 
 June 27 , 1971 – Fillmore East closing show 
 Introduction by Bill Graham * / " Statesboro Blues " ( Blind Willie McTell ) – 5 : 52 
 " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " ( Gregg Allman ) – 3 : 34 
 " Done Somebody Wrong " ( Elmore James , Clarence Lewis , Bobby Robinson ) – 3 : 37 
 " One Way Out " ( Elmore James , Marshall Sehorn , Sonny Boy Williamson II ) – 5 : 01 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " ( Dickey Betts ) – 12 : 44 
 " Midnight Rider " ( Gregg Allman , Robert Payne ) – 3 : 01 
 " Hot ' Lanta " ( Duane Allman , Gregg Allman , Dickey Betts , Berry Oakley , Butch Trucks , Jai Johnny Johanson ) – 5 : 41 
 " Whipping Post " ( Gregg Allman ) – 19 : 17 
 " You Don 't Love Me " ( Willie Cobbs ) – 17 : 56 
 * Previously unreleased track 
 = = Other Fillmore East recordings = = 
 Eat a Peach – contains " Trouble No More " from March 13 , 1971 ( Show 1 ) and " Mountain Jam " from March 13 , 1971 ( Show 2 ) and " One Way Out " from June 27 , 1971 
 Duane Allman : An Anthology contains " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " from March 13 , 1971 ( Show 1 ) 
 Duane Allman Anthology , Vol . 2 contains " Midnight Rider " from June 27 , 1971 
 Dreams contains " Drunken Hearted Boy " from March 13 , 1971 ( Show 2 ) 
 Eat a Peach , Deluxe Edition – second CD ( the final Fillmore East concert ) also contains " Statesboro Blues " , " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " , " Done Somebody Wrong " , " One Way Out " , " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " , " Midnight Rider " , " Hot ' Lanta " , " Whipping Post " , and " You Don 't Love Me " from June 27 , 1971 
 The Road Goes On Forever contains " Statesboro Blues " from March 12 , 1971 ( Disc 1 ) . 
 = = Credits = = 
 The Allman Brothers Band 
 Duane Allman – lead guitar , slide guitar 
 Gregg Allman – organ , piano , vocals 
 Dickey Betts – lead guitar 
 Berry Oakley – bass guitar 
 Jai Johanny Johanson – drums , congas , timbales 
 Butch Trucks – drums , tympani 
 Guest musicians 
 Thom Doucette – Harmonica on " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " , " Done Somebody Wrong " , " Stormy Monday " and " You Don 't Love Me " 
 Jim Santi – Tambourine 
 Guest musicians ( The Fillmore Concerts and The 1971 Fillmore East Recordings ) 
 Bobby Caldwell – Percussion on " Drunken Hearted Boy " and on March 12 shows starting with " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " 
 Rudolph ( Juicy ) Carter – Soprano saxophone on ( only ) both March 12 shows , starting with " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " 
 Elvin Bishop – Vocals on " Drunken Hearted Boy " 
 Steve Miller – Piano on " Drunken Hearted Boy " 
 Production ( At Fillmore East ) 
 Tom Dowd – Producer , Liner Notes 
 Bruce <unk> – Assistant Producer 
 Aaron Baron – Engineer 
 Larry <unk> – Assistant Engineer 
 Dennis M. Drake – Mastering 
 Jim Marshall – Photography 
 Production ( The Fillmore Concerts ) 
 Tom Dowd – Producer 
 Jay Mark – Mixer 
 Dan Kincaid – Digital Mastering 
 Bill Levenson – Executive Producer 
 Kirk West – Associate Producer 
 Terri Tierney – Project Coordination 
 Richard Bauer – Art Direction 
 Jim Marshall – Graphic Concept 
 Jimmy Guterman – Liner Notes 
 John Perkins – Best Boy 
 = Hurricane Flora = 
 Hurricane Flora is among the deadliest Atlantic hurricanes in recorded history , with a death total of over 7 @,@ 000 . The seventh tropical storm and sixth hurricane of the 1963 Atlantic hurricane season , Flora developed from a disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone on September 26 while located 755 miles ( 1 @,@ 215 km ) southwest of the Cape Verde islands . After remaining a weak depression for several days , it rapidly organized on September 29 to attain tropical storm status . Flora continued to quickly strengthen to reach Category 3 hurricane status before moving through the Windward Islands and passing over Tobago , and it reached maximum sustained winds of 145 miles per hour ( 233 km / h ) in the Caribbean . 
 The storm struck southwestern Haiti near peak intensity , turned to the west , and drifted over Cuba for four days before turning to the northeast . Flora passed over the Bahamas and accelerated northeastward , becoming an extratropical cyclone on October 12 . Due to its slow movement across Cuba , Flora is the wettest known tropical cyclone for Cuba , Haiti , and the Dominican Republic . The significant casualties caused by Flora were the most for a tropical cyclone in the Atlantic Basin since the 1900 Galveston Hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone organized into a tropical depression on September 26 while located about 755 miles ( 1 @,@ 215 km ) southwest of the island of Fogo in the Cape Verde Islands . Upon forming , the depression had a poorly organized circulation with banding features to its north and east . The depression moved west @-@ northwestward , and the system failed to organize significantly by a day after developing . On September 27 , the banding features dissipated , though the area of convection around the center increased . Satellite imagery was unavailable until September 30 , during which there were not sufficient ship reports to indicate the presence of a low @-@ level circulation . The depression continued west @-@ northwestward , and it is estimated it intensified into Tropical Storm Flora on September 29 while located about 560 miles ( 900 km ) east @-@ southeast of Trinidad , or about 350 miles ( 560 km ) north of Cayenne , French Guiana . Operationally , advisories were not initiated until a day later . 
 Flora quickly intensified after it became a tropical storm , and early on September 30 it attained hurricane status . Later that day , Reconnaissance Aircraft confirmed the existence of the hurricane , with the flight reporting a well @-@ defined , circular 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) wide eye . One observer noted Flora to be the best organized tropical cyclone over the previous two years . After attaining major hurricane status , Flora passed directly over the island of Tobago late on the 30th with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . The hurricane continued west @-@ northwestward as it entered the Caribbean , and early on October 2 its winds reached 140 miles per hour ( 230 km / h ) . Thirty hours later , Flora intensified slightly further and attained peak winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) while located about 105 miles ( 169 km ) south of the border of Haiti and the Dominican Republic . 
 After turning to the northwest , Hurricane Flora maintained its peak strength , and made landfall in the Sud Department of Haiti late on October 3 as a 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Scale with gusts from 180 to 200 miles per hour ( 290 to 320 km / h ) . The calm of the eye lasted for up to 70 minutes in one location . After quickly weakening to a 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) hurricane , Flora turned more to the west in the Windward Passage , and restrengthened slightly to strike southeastern Cuba about 30 miles ( 48 km ) east of Guantanamo Bay with winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . A high pressure system to its north turned the motion of the hurricane to a westward drift , causing it to weaken quickly over land . Flora neared the north coast of Cuba on October 4 before turning to the south . It executed a cyclonic loop and entered the coastal waters off Granma Province . An anticyclone to the west of Flora turned the hurricane to the north , bringing it ashore near Santa Cruz del Sur on October 7 with winds of around 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Flora initially turned southeastward over central Cuba , and late on October 8 a short @-@ wave trough turned the hurricane northeastward , bringing it into the coastal waters of the Holguín Province . Flora remained a hurricane while drifting over land due to abundant moisture and a favorable upper level environment . 
 After passing over the southeastern Bahamas early on October 9 , Flora began to restrengthen , and on October 10 it again reached major hurricane status while located 290 miles ( 470 km ) south of Bermuda . The hurricane gradually weakened as it continued northeastward , and weakened to a Category 1 hurricane on October 11 . Flora gradually lost its convection over the north Atlantic Ocean , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 12 while located 270 miles ( 430 km ) east @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The extratropical remnant dissipated the next day . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Weather Bureau in San Juan , Puerto Rico issued a hurricane warning for Trinidad , Tobago , and the Grenadines south of Saint Vincent in the cyclone 's first advisory on Hurricane Flora . Gale warnings were later issued for islands off northern Venezuela and from Saint Vincent northward to Martinique . Advisories on Flora emphasized the danger of the hurricane and advised preparations to be rushed to completion . The advisories also recommended small craft throughout the Windward Islands to remain at harbor and for shipping in the path of the hurricane to advise extreme caution . People in low @-@ lying areas and near beaches were advised to evacuate to higher grounds , as well . Lead time was short , especially in Tobago which received news of the approaching hurricane just two hours before it struck . 
 On October 2 , two days before it made landfall on southwestern Hispaniola , the San Juan Weather Bureau issued a gale warning from Barahona in the Dominican Republic to the Sud @-@ Est Department of Haiti . Advisories recommended small craft in the southern portions of the countries to remain at port . Later that day , the gale warning was upgraded to a hurricane warning in southwestern Haiti . On the day of when Flora made landfall , advisories recommended all citizens on beaches and in low @-@ lying areas west of Santo Domingo to evacuate . Carmelo Di Franco , the provisional Director of Civic Defense for the Dominican Republic , organized safety procedures and the dissemination of tropical cyclone bulletins from the San Juan Weather Bureau . Di Franco also organized for the transmission of hurricane emergency information to citizens , believed to reduce the loss of life . On the afternoon before the hurricane struck , the head of the Haitian Red Cross prohibited radio broadcasts of tropical cyclone advisories for fear of panic among citizens . As a result , many thought the hurricane would miss the country . 
 Officials at the Cuban National Observatory issued radio bulletins on the hurricane , which included the position of Flora , its intensity , direction of motion , and necessary warnings . By the time the hurricane left the island , more than 40 @,@ 000 had been evacuated to safer areas . 
 The Weather Bureau predicted Flora to turn to the northwest after entering the Windward Passage and affect the Bahamas . Forecasters advised those in The Bahamas to quickly complete preparations , though the eye of the hurricane did not pass over the archipelago until four days later . When Flora turned to the northeast out to sea , forecasters again advised Bahamian citizens to prepare for the hurricane , and on October 9 , weather advisories advised the southeastern Bahamas to prepare for gale @-@ force winds and strong tides . One advisory considered there to be less than a 50 % chance of the hurricane reaching southeastern Florida , though weather bulletins advised Florida citizens to monitor the hurricane . At its closest approach to Florida , the hurricane remained 330 miles ( 530 km ) away , though gale warnings were issued from Stuart to Key West due to the hurricane 's large size . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout its path , Hurricane Flora resulted in more than 7 @,@ 000 deaths and over $ 525 million in damage ( 1963 USD , $ 4 @.@ 06 billion 2016 USD ) . It is estimated that , if a hurricane like Flora had struck in 1998 , it would have caused over 12 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 = = = East Caribbean = = = 
 Hurricane Flora passed Barbados a few days after Hurricane Edith moved through the area . The two hurricanes resulted in about $ 65 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1963 USD ) , primarily to fishing interests . 
 About four hours before the eye of Hurricane Flora moved over Tobago , the large hurricane began producing heavy rainfall throughout the island . Two hours later , strong winds began affecting the island , and while moving across the island Flora produced winds of up to 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . While moving past Tobago , the hurricane produced rough surf and tides 5 to 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 1 m ) above normal . The hurricane sunk six ships between 4 and 9 tons in Scarborough harbour . One crew member drowned while attempting to save his vessel . Heavy rainfall caused a large mudslide from Mount Dillon onto a road leading to Castara . This was considered the most well @-@ known mudslide on the island . The strong winds caused severe damage to coconut , banana , and cocoa plantations , with 50 % of the coconut trees being destroyed and another 11 % being severely damaged . 75 % of forest trees fell , and most of the remaining were greatly damaged . The passage of Hurricane Flora destroyed 2 @,@ 750 of Tobago 's 7 @,@ 500 houses , and damaged 3 @,@ 500 others . The hurricane killed 18 on the island and resulted in $ 30 million in crop and property damage ( 1963 USD ) . 
 Winds on Trinidad reached 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) with much higher gusts of over 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Heavy rainfall and strong winds in the northern mountainous region lowered the visibility to zero . Due to the mountain range on its northern coast , damage on the island was minimal , totaling to $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ) . Two people on the island died due to drowning . When Flora passed the island and the winds turned to the southwest , many small boats in the westward facing harbor were sunk . Near Chaguaramas , nine boats were destroyed and eight were damaged . Additionally , several large vessels sustained damage and resulted in them being intentionally sunk . Damage in Grenada was minor , around $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ) , though six people died due to drowning . Rough seas and higher than normal tides were reported along the south coast of Puerto Rico , though no damage or deaths were reported there . 
 = = = Dominican Republic and Haiti = = = 
 Flora produced heavy rainfall and moderately strong winds in the Dominican Republic . The highest rainfall amount reported was 39 @.@ 43 inches ( 1 @,@ 002 mm ) at Polo Barahona . Flooding from the hurricane , considered to be the most extensive on record , greatly damaged bridges and roads , with many roads left unpassable for several months after the hurricane struck . Over 3 @,@ 800 sq. miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km ² ) in the western portion of the country were flooded . The hurricane caused about $ 60 million in damage ( 1963 USD ) and over 400 deaths . 
 While moving across southwestern Haiti , Hurricane Flora produced winds of up to 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) near <unk> , while the capital city of Port @-@ au @-@ Prince reported peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Intense rainbands dropped torrential precipitation estimated at over 75 inches ( 1 @,@ 900 mm ) in Miragoâne , with one location recording over 57 inches ( 1 @,@ 400 mm ) in three days . One location in the southwestern peninsula recorded 16 inches ( 410 mm ) of precipitation in 12 hours . The storm surge on the southern coast is unknown , but estimated to exceed 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . Flash floods from the hurricane washed out large sections of several towns , while mudslides buried some entire towns , resulting in many deaths . Heavy rainfall led to river flooding along the <unk> River , which crested at 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) above normal . The flood waters created new channels and washed away entire banana plantations . 
 In most areas , crops were entirely destroyed . The coffee crop was harvested prior to the arrival of the hurricane , though heavy rainfall and severe flooding ruined the crop for later years . Additionally , strong winds downed shading trees for the coffee crop on the southern peninsula . One official estimated it would require three years for the coffee crop to be replanted and regrown . 
 Strong winds in southwestern Haiti from the hurricane damaged or destroyed hundreds of trees . The path of Flora over the area was best determined by the trajectory of fallen trees across the peninsula . The strong winds left entire villages roofless , with many buildings entirely destroyed . The combination of rough waves and strong winds destroyed three entire communities . Many of those who died in southwestern Haiti suffered from intense burns from strong winds . 
 About 3 @,@ 500 people were confirmed dead , with several thousands missing at one report five months after the hurricane . It is estimated the passage of Hurricane Flora killed around 5 @,@ 000 people and caused between $ 125 million and $ 180 million in damage in Haiti ( 1963 USD ) . 
 = = = Cuba , Jamaica , the Bahamas , and Florida = = = 
 Strong northerly winds from Flora eroded the northern beaches in the Cuban province of Camagüey by up to 1 kilometre ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . Santa Cruz del Sur reported strong southerly winds and rough seas . Winds in Cuba reached 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) . Nearly all crops in southeastern Cuba were affected by strong winds and flooding . Many citizens were left stranded at the tops of their houses . Several entire houses were swept away by the flooding , and many roads and bridges were destroyed , resulting in major disruptions to communications . Isolated locations in Cuba received over 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) of rain , with Santiago de Cuba recording 100 @.@ 39 inches ( 2 @,@ 550 mm ) , which is the highest rainfall total measured on Cuba from any rainfall event on record . 
 Heavy rainfall fell across the island of Jamaica due to southwest flow into the mountains on Flora 's southern periphery over several days . The maximum amount recorded was 60 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 mm ) at Spring Hill persistent , which led to numerous landslides across the eastern portion of the island . Damage to the island totaled $ 11 @.@ 9 million ( 1963 dollars ) . Rough seas from Flora affected the Bahamas and the southeastern Florida coast on October 5 as the hurricane stalled over Cuba , keeping small craft in port , and hurricane @-@ force winds affected Ragged Island later that day . Rainfall amounts peaked at 17 @.@ 19 inches ( 437 mm ) at Duncan Town , in the Bahamas . Damage to the island archipelago reached $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1963 dollars ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Tobago , the great agricultural damage from Flora caused the crop plantations to be abandoned . As a result , the economy of the island changed towards tourism . The destruction of the <unk> rainforests resulted in a continual decline of agriculture on the island due to animals previously in the forest eating the crops for food . The passage of the hurricane reduced the height of the rainforest canopy above 800 feet ( 240 m ) by half . Twenty @-@ five years passed before the canopy reached its previous height . 
 In the Dominican Republic , damage reports were largely unknown by a month after the hurricane passed the island , primarily in the western provinces . There , roads were still impassable , large areas remained without electricity , and helicopters could not land in remote areas due to mud , silt , and up to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water in all landing fields . One official estimated several months would pass before survey teams could obtain information on loss of life and overall damages . 
 Due to its impact on the Caribbean nations , the name Flora was retired after this year and was replaced by Fern . 
 = Quneitra = 
 Quneitra ( also Al <unk> , <unk> , or Kuneitra ; Arabic : <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) is the largely destroyed and abandoned capital of the Quneitra Governorate in south @-@ western Syria . It is situated in a high valley in the Golan Heights at an elevation of 1 @,@ 010 metres ( 3 @,@ 313 feet ) above sea level . Its name is Arabic for " the little bridge " . 
 Quneitra was founded in the Ottoman era as a way station on the caravan route to Damascus and subsequently became a garrison town of some 20 @,@ 000 people . In 1946 , it became part of the independent Syrian Republic within the Riff Dimashq Governorate and in 1964 became the capital of the split Quneitra Governorate . On 10 June 1967 , the last day of the Six @-@ Day War , Quneitra came under Israeli control . It was briefly recaptured by Syria during the 1973 Yom Kippur War , but Israel regained control in its subsequent counter @-@ offensive . The city was almost completely destroyed before the Israeli withdrawal in June 1974 . Syria had refused to rebuild the city and actively discouraged resettlement in the area . Israel was heavily criticized by the United Nations for the city 's destruction , while Israel has also criticized Syria for not rebuilding Quneitra . During the Syrian civil war , Quneitra became a clash point between rebel forces and Syrian Arab Army . As of 2014 , it became controlled by the Syrian opposition . 
 In 2004 , its population was estimated at 153 persons , with some 4 @,@ 000 more living in the surrounding areas of the former city . Quneitra now lies in the formerly demilitarized United Nations Disengagement Observer Force Zone ( between Syrian territory and the Israeli @-@ occupied Golan Heights ) , de @-@ facto controlled by the Syrian opposition , a short distance from the Quneitra border crossing , and is populated by only a handful of families . 
 = = Political status = = 
 Quneitra is the capital of the Quneitra Governorate , a district of southwestern Syria that incorporates the whole of the Golan Heights . The city of Quneitra is within the portion of the Golan Heights controlled by Syria . Madinat al @-@ Baath ( Baath City ) , also known as New Quneitra , replaced Quneitra as the administrative centre of Quneitra Governorate . 
 = = Geography and demographics = = 
 Quneitra is situated in a high valley in the Golan Heights at an altitude of 942 m ( 3 @,@ 091 ft ) above sea level . It is overshadowed to the west by the Israeli @-@ held portion of the Golan Heights and the peak of Har <unk> . The surrounding area is dominated by ancient volcanic lava flows interspersed by a number of dormant volcanic cones which rise some 150 – 200 m ( 500 – 700 ft ) above the surrounding plain . The volcanic hills of the region have played a key role as observation points and natural firing positions in the conflicts over the region , most notably in the Yom Kippur War . In more peaceful times , the fertile volcanic soil has supported agricultural activities such as wheat growing and pastoralism . 
 Writing during the inter @-@ war period , the American traveller Harriet @-@ Louise H. Patterson recorded that Quneitra was 
 charmingly set in a grove of eucalyptus trees . Its chief claim to charm or the few moments of a traveller 's time beyond passport formalities is the beautiful vista which it offers of Jordan as it flows down from Hermon through banks of tangled bush and flowering pink and white <unk> . Kuneitra is pleasant as a stopping @-@ place for lunch . It is cool under the spreading trees , usually quiet and restful . 
 The city 's position on an important trade route gave it a varied population for much of its history . By the start of the 20th century it was dominated by Muslim Circassians from the Caucasus , accompanied by Turkmen and Arabs . Its population grew to some 21 @,@ 000 people , mostly Arabs , following Syrian independence from France in 1946 . After its abandonment in 1967 and subsequent destruction , its population was dispersed to other parts of Syria . The city remains abandoned apart from a residual Syrian security presence . Due to frequent and large population movements within Syria and across borders caused by war , there are no reliable population estimates available post @-@ 2011 . The impact of the crisis has led to massive displacements and a gradual deterioration of access to basic services . Quneitra has also been the destination for many internally displaced persons ( IDPs ) from neighbouring Daraa and Rif Dimashq governorates . In August 2013 , many of the estimated 75 @,@ 000 IDPs from Nawa and Al @-@ <unk> in Daraa Governorate reportedly fled to Quneitra . There are also people resident in Quneitra being displaced by conflict . Approximately 21 @,@ 000 Israelis also live in dozens of state @-@ subsidised settlements dotted throughout the mountainous terrain . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The surrounding area has been inhabited for millennia . Palaeolithic hunter @-@ gatherers are thought to have lived there , as evidenced by the discovery of Levallois and Mousterian flint tools in the vicinity . A settlement was established at least as early as the late Hellenistic period , and continued through the Roman and Byzantine times ; it was known by the name " <unk> " . The settlement served as a stop on the road from Damascus to western Palestine . Saint Paul is said to have passed through the settlement on his way from Jerusalem to Damascus . The site of the Conversion of Paul was traditionally identified with the small village of <unk> , north @-@ east of Quneitra , on the road to Damascus . 
 For much of the 18th and 19th centuries Quneitra was abandoned . In 1868 a travel handbook reported that the site was a " ruined village of about 80 or 100 houses " and that a large caravanserai also stood in ruins . Semi @-@ nomadic pastoral groups such as the Arab Al Fadl and Banu Nu 'aym tribes and several Turkmen tribes grazed their flocks in Quneitra 's rocky lands . 
 In 1873 , a group of Circassians from Sivas in Anatolia settled in Quneitra . This initial group did not cultivate the area for a number of years . A second wave of Circassians , numbering about 2 @,@ 000 , arrived in the Golan in 1878 via Acre after fleeing Bulgaria due to the Russo @-@ Turkish War . Along with Quneitra , they settled or built number of other villages in the vicinity . The Circassians began farming the area and each family was given title to 70 to 130 dunams of land by the government depending on the family 's size . The Ottomans encouraged Circassian settlement in the Golan as a means to drive a wedge between the frequently rebellious Druze villages of Mount Hermon and those in Jabal Hauran . The Circassians of Quneitra engaged in sustained conflicts with the Druze and the Al Fadl through the remainder of the 19th century . 
 Modern Quneitra grew around the nucleus of the old Ottoman caravanserai , which had been built using the stones of a ruined ancient settlement . By the mid @-@ 1880s , Quneitra had become the main city and seat of government of the Golan . Gottlieb Schumacher wrote in 1888 that it " consists of 260 buildings , which are mostly well and carefully constructed of basalt stones , and contains , excluding the soldiers and officials , 1 @,@ 300 inhabitants , principally Circassians . " 
 During World War I , the Australian Mounted Division and 5th Cavalry Division defeated the Ottoman Turks at Quneitra on 29 September 1918 , before they took Damascus ( see also Battle of Megiddo ( 1918 ) ) . Quneitra saw several battles during the Syria @-@ Lebanon Campaign of the Second World War , including the Battle of Damascus and Battle of <unk> . 
 = = = Arab @-@ Israeli conflict = = = 
 When the modern states of Syria and Israel gained their independence from France and Britain respectively after the Second World War , Quneitra gained a new strategic significance as a key road junction some 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) from the border . It became a prosperous market town and military garrison , with its population tripling to over 20 @,@ 000 people , predominately Arabs . 
 = = = = Six @-@ Day War = = = = 
 Quneitra was the Syrian headquarters for the Golan Heights . The Israeli capture of the city occurred in chaotic circumstances on 10 June 1967 , the last day of the Six @-@ Day War . Israeli forces advancing towards Quneitra from the north @-@ west prompted Syrian troops to deploy north of the city , under heavy bombardment , to defend the road to Damascus . At 8 : 45 a.m. , Syrian radio broadcast an announcement that the city had fallen , though it actually had not . Alarmed , the Syrian Army 's redeployment turned into a chaotic retreat along the Damascus road . 
 According to 8th Brigade Commander Ibrahim Isma 'il <unk> : 
 We received orders to block the roads leading to Quneitra . But then the fall of the city was announced and that caused many of my soldiers to leave the front and run back to Syria while the roads were still open . They piled onto vehicles . It further crushed our morale . I retreated before I ever saw an enemy soldier . 
 Although a correction was broadcast two hours later , the Israelis took advantage of the confusion to seize Quneitra . An armoured brigade under Colonel Albert Mandler entered Quneitra at 2 : 30 p.m. and found the city deserted and strewn with abandoned military equipment . One of the Israeli commanders later commented : 
 We arrived almost without hindrance to the gates of Quneitra ... All around us there were huge quantities of booty . Everything was in working order . Tanks with their engines still running , communication equipment still in operation had been abandoned . We captured Quneitra without a fight . 
 Time magazine reported : " In an effort to pressure the United Nations into enforcing a ceasefire , Damascus Radio undercut its own army by broadcasting the fall of the city of El Quneitra three hours before it actually capitulated . That premature report of the surrender of their headquarters destroyed the morale of the Syrian troops left in the Golan area . " 
 A ceasefire was agreed later in the afternoon , leaving Quneitra under Israeli control . In June 1967 , Time magazine wrote that : " The city of El Quneitra was a ghost town , its shops shuttered , its deserted streets patrolled by Israelis on house @-@ to @-@ house searches for caches of arms and ammunition . The hills echoed with explosions as Israeli sappers systematically destroyed the miniature Maginot line from which the Syrians had shelled kibbutzim across the Sea of Galilee . " 
 The United Nations Special Representative , Nils @-@ Göran <unk> , visited it in July and reported that " nearly every shop and every house seemed to have been broken into and looted " and that some buildings had been set on fire after they had been stripped . Although Israeli spokesmen told <unk> that Quneitra had actually been looted by the withdrawing Syrians , the UN representative viewed this as unlikely given the extremely short space of time between the erroneous radio announcement and the fall of the city a few hours later . He concluded that " responsibility for this extensive looting of the town of Quneitra lay to a great extent with the Israeli forces . " 
 = = = = Israeli occupation = = = = 
 The deserted city remained in Israeli hands for the next six years . However , Israel and Syria remained in a state of war throughout this period ( and , indeed , to the present day ) . The town gained a fresh symbolic value ; it was seen by the Syrians as " the badge of Syria 's defeat , an emblem of hatred between Syria and Israel and a cross [ Syrian President Hafez al @-@ Assad ] had to bear . " Syria shelled the city several times during the early 1970s ; in June 1970 a Syrian armored unit launched an attack , and in November 1972 , Damascus radio announced that Syrian artillery had again shelled Quneitra . 
 = = = = Yom Kippur War = = = = 
 During the first few days of the Yom Kippur War in 1973 , Quneitra was briefly recaptured by the Syrian Army before it was repulsed in an Israeli counter @-@ offensive . In the middle of October 1973 the Israeli counter @-@ offensive started . The Syrians had massed nearly 1 @,@ 000 tanks along a 100 km ( 60 mi ) front . With a massive concentration of tanks , the Israelis lashed into the Syrian forces . The Syrians at first fell back , but then managed to counterattack and drive back into occupied territory . Quneitra changed hands several times . Finally , Israeli armored units , closely supported by Phantoms and Skyhawks performing close air support with napalm strikes against the forward Syrian units , halted the Syrian drive and turned the Syrian Army back . 
 = = = = Destruction of Quneitra and return to Syrian control = = = = 
 Israel continued to control the city until early June 1974 , when it was returned to Syrian civilian control following the signature of a United States @-@ brokered disengagement agreement signed on 31 May 1974 . The surrender of Quneitra was controversial , with Israeli settlers and the Likud and National Religious Party opposing it . According to Michael Mandelbaum , the agreement provided that the city was to be repopulated to serve as evidence of peaceful Syrian intentions , by doing so it would encourage the Israelis to pull back further . 
 In an attempt to block the withdrawal , a group of settlers from Merom Golan – a settlement established in 1967 – took over an abandoned bunker in Quneitra and declared it to be a new settlement called <unk> ( Quneitra in Hebrew ) . The settlers also set about razing the existing town to the ground . The leader of Merom Golan , Yehuda Harel , and another Merom Golan member , <unk> <unk> , initiated the destruction of Quneitra , which was carried out by the Land Development Administration of the Jewish National Fund . Harel later described what happened : 
 <unk> and I walked around Quneitra all day and tried decide what to do . And then these two strange ideas came up . One was to establish a settlement in Quneitra and the second was to destroy Quneitra . 
 <unk> and Harel asked the Jewish National Fund to carry out the work , ostensibly to prepare an area for agricultural cultivation , but were refused as they did not have permission from the Israeli army . They then approached the Assistant to the Head of Northern Command and asked him to mark on a map which buildings the army needed . According to Harel , 
 So he took a felt pen and marked the hospital and a few other places – he wrote " not for destruction " and on other places he wrote " for destruction " and he signed . He thought he was signing about what not to destroy but he was actually writing to destroy . . . The tractors of the Jewish National Fund did the destroying . They weren 't our tractors . . . I can tell you that even the tractor drivers were Arabs . 
 The buildings were systematically stripped , with anything movable being removed and sold to Israeli contractors , before they were pulled apart with tractors and bulldozers . 
 The disengagement went into force on 6 June . On 26 June , the Syrian president Hafez al @-@ Assad travelled to Quneitra where he pledged to return the rest of the occupied territories to Syrian control . Western reporters accompanied Syrian refugees returning to the city in early July 1974 and described what they saw on the ground . Time magazine 's correspondent reported that " Most of its buildings are knocked flat , as though by dynamite , or pockmarked by shellfire . " Le Monde 's Syria correspondent , in a report for The Times , gave a detailed eyewitness description of the destruction : 
 Today the city is unrecognisable . The houses with their roofs lying on the ground look like gravestones . Parts of the rubble are covered with fresh earth furrowed by bulldozer tracks . Everywhere there are fragments of furniture , discarded kitchen utensils , Hebrew newspapers dating from the first week of June ; here a ripped @-@ up mattress , there the springs of an old sofa . On the few sections of wall still standing , Hebrew inscriptions proclaim : " There 'll be another round " ; " You want Quneitra , you 'll have it destroyed . " 
 Israel asserted that most of the damage had been caused in the two wars and during the artillery duels in between . Several reports from before the withdrawal did refer to the city as " ruined " and " shell @-@ scarred " . The Times ' correspondent saw the city for himself on 6 May , a month before the Israeli withdrawal , and described it as being " in ruins and deserted after seven years of war and dereliction . It looks like a wild west city struck by an earthquake and if the Syrians get it back they will face a major feat of reconstruction . Nearly every building is heavily damaged and scores have collapsed . " 
 Direct evidence of the city 's condition was provided when it was filmed on 12 May 1974 by a British television news team which included the veteran journalist Peter Snow , who was reporting for Independent Television News on the disengagement negotiations . His report was broadcast on ITN 's News at Ten programme . According to The Times ' correspondent Edward Mortimer , " viewers were thus afforded a panoramic view of the city , which had stood almost completely empty since the Syrian army evacuated it in 1967 . It could be seen that many of the buildings were damaged , but most of them were still standing . " After it was handed over , " very few buildings were left standing . Most of those destroyed did not present the jagged outline and random heaps of rubble usually produced by artillery or aerial bombardment . The roofs lay flat on the ground , ' pancaked ' in a manner which I am told can only be achieved by systematic dynamiting of the support walls inside . " Mortimer concluded that the footage " establishes beyond reasonable doubt that much of the destruction took place after 12 May — at a time when there was no fighting anywhere near Kuneitra . " 
 The United Nations established a Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories , which concluded that Israeli forces had deliberately destroyed the city prior to their withdrawal . The report 's conclusions were subsequently adopted by the United Nations General Assembly . It passed a resolution on 29 November 1974 describing the destruction of Quneitra as " a grave breach of the [ Fourth ] Geneva Convention " and " condemn [ ing ] Israel for such acts , " by a margin of 93 votes to 8 , with 74 abstentions . The United Nations Commission on Human Rights also voted to condemn the " deliberate destruction and devastation " of Quneitra in a resolution of 22 February 1975 , by a margin of 22 votes to one ( the United States ) with nine abstentions . 
 The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants , a non @-@ governmental organization , has reported that : " Before leaving , however , the Israelis leveled the city with bulldozers and dynamite . " 
 = = = = As a city ruin = = = = 
 The city remains in a destroyed condition . Syria has left the ruins in place and built a museum to memorialize its destruction . It maintains billboards at the ruins of many buildings and effectively preserves it in the condition that the Israeli army left it in . The former residents of the town have not returned and Syria discourages the re @-@ population of the area . However , in the 2004 census by the Central Bureau of Statistics , a small population of 153 people living in 28 households was recorded , all living in the neighborhood of <unk> al @-@ <unk> . The Rough Guide to Syria describes the current appearance of the city : " The first sight of the flattened houses on Quneitra 's outskirts is the most dramatic ; many of the unscathed roofs simply lie on top of a mass of rubble , leaving the impression of a building that has imploded . " 
 The city has often been used as a stop for foreign VIPs , ranging from the Soviet foreign minister Alexei Kosygin in June 1976 to Pope John Paul II in May 2001 . Only a handful of families now live in the town , making a living by providing services for the United Nations troops patrolling the demilitarized zone . According to The Times , " the carefully preserved ruined city has become a pilgrimage site for a generation of Syrians . " 
 The city can be visited by tourists , but a permit from the Syrian Ministry of the Interior is required , and sight @-@ seeing is supervised by a military guide . The principal sights on the standard tour are the remains of Quneitra 's hospital , mosque and Greek Orthodox church . A " Liberated Quneitra Museum " , displaying artifacts from the city 's ancient and medieval past , is housed in the former Ottoman caravanserai in the city centre . The western edge of the city marks the start of " no @-@ man 's land " beyond which lies Israeli @-@ controlled territory . Because the border is closed , it is not possible to visit Quneitra from Israel . 
 = = = Syrian Civil War = = = 
 On 13 November 2012 , during the ongoing Syrian Civil War that began in March 2011 , President Bashar al @-@ Assad issued a decree to establish a branch of the University of Damascus in Quneitra . On 6 June 2013 , the nearby Quneitra border crossing was attacked by Opposition forces and temporarily occupied , with Syrian army later retaking the crossing ; Opposition forces again captured the crossing in August 2014 . A Filipino peacekeeper of the <unk> was wounded during the fighting . As a result the Austrian government announced the withdrawal of its troops from the UN mission . In July 2013 , Opposition forces attacked a military checkpoint in Quneitra , and by the next day were attacking several Syrian Arab Army positions in Quneitra . 
 = Cockatoo = 
 A cockatoo is a parrot that is any of the 21 species belonging to the bird family Cacatuidae , the only family in the superfamily <unk> . Along with the <unk> ( true parrots ) and the Strigopoidea ( large New Zealand parrots ) , they make up the order <unk> ( parrots ) . The family has a mainly Australasian distribution , ranging from the Philippines and the eastern Indonesian islands of Wallacea to New Guinea , the Solomon Islands and Australia . 
 Cockatoos are recognisable by the showy crests and curved bills . Their plumage is generally less colourful than that of other parrots , being mainly white , grey or black and often with coloured features in the crest , cheeks or tail . On average they are larger than other parrots ; however , the cockatiel , the smallest cockatoo species , is a small bird . The phylogenetic position of the cockatiel remains unresolved , other than that it is one of the earliest offshoots of the cockatoo lineage . The remaining species are in two main clades . The five large black coloured cockatoos of the genus Calyptorhynchus form one branch . The second and larger branch is formed by the genus Cacatua , comprising 11 species of white @-@ plumaged cockatoos and four monotypic genera that branched off earlier ; namely the pink and white Major Mitchell 's cockatoo , the pink and grey galah , the mainly grey gang @-@ gang cockatoo and the large black @-@ plumaged palm cockatoo . 
 Cockatoos prefer to eat seeds , tubers , corms , fruit , flowers and insects . They often feed in large flocks , particularly when ground @-@ feeding . Cockatoos are monogamous and nest in tree hollows . Some cockatoo species have been adversely affected by habitat loss , particularly from a shortage of suitable nesting hollows after large mature trees are cleared ; conversely , some species have adapted well to human changes and are considered agricultural pests . 
 Cockatoos are popular birds in aviculture , but their needs are difficult to meet . The cockatiel is the easiest cockatoo species to maintain and is by far the most frequently kept in captivity . White cockatoos are more commonly found in captivity than black cockatoos . Illegal trade in wild @-@ caught birds contributes to the decline of some cockatoo species in the wild . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word cockatoo dates from the 17th century and is a derivation from the Indonesian name for these birds , " <unk> tua " ( meaning " older sibling " ) or from the call of the white cockatoo itself . Seventeenth @-@ century variants include <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , and <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were used in the eighteenth century . The derivation has also been used for the family and generic names Cacatuidae and Cacatua respectively . 
 In Australian slang or vernacular speech , a person who is assigned to keep watch while others undertake clandestine or illegal activities , particularly gambling , may be referred to as a " cockatoo " . Proprietors of small agricultural undertakings are often jocularly or slightly disparagingly referred to as " cocky farmers . " 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The cockatoos were first defined as a subfamily <unk> within the parrot family <unk> by the English naturalist George Robert Gray in 1840 , with Cacatua the first listed and type genus . This group has alternately been considered as either a full or subfamily by different authorities . The American ornithologist James Lee Peters in his 1937 Check @-@ list of Birds of the World , Sibley and Monroe in 1990 maintained it as a subfamily , while parrot expert Joseph <unk> classified it as a family in 1973 . Subsequent molecular studies indicate that the earliest offshoot from the original parrot ancestors were the New Zealand parrots of the superfamily Strigopoidea , and following this the cockatoos , now a well @-@ defined group or clade , split off from the remaining parrots , which then radiated across the Southern Hemisphere and diversified into the many species of parrots , parakeets , macaws , <unk> , lorikeets , lovebirds and other true parrots of the superfamily <unk> . 
 The relationships among various cockatoo genera are largely resolved , although the placement of the cockatiel ( Nymphicus hollandicus ) at the base of the cockatoos remains uncertain . The cockatiel is alternatively placed basal to all other cockatoo species , as the sister taxon to the black cockatoo species of the genus Calyptorhynchus or as the sister taxon to a clade consisting of the white and pink cockatoo genera as well as the palm cockatoo . The remaining species are within two main clades , one consisting of the black species of the genus Calyptorhynchus while the other contains the remaining species . According to most authorities , the second clade includes the black palm cockatoo ( Probosciger ) , the gray and reddish galah ( Eolophus ) , the gang @-@ gang cockatoo ( Callocephalon ) and the pinkish Major Mitchell 's cockatoo ( Lophochroa ) , although Probosciger is sometimes placed basal to all other species . The remaining species are mainly white or slightly pinkish and all belong to the genus Cacatua . The genera Eolophus , Lophochroa and Cacatua are <unk> . The genus Cacatua is further subdivided into the subgenera Licmetis , commonly known as corellas , and Cacatua , referred to as white cockatoos . Confusingly , the term " white cockatoo " has also been applied to the whole genus . The five cockatoo species of the genus Calyptorhynchus are commonly known as black cockatoos , and are divided into two subgenera — Calyptorhynchus and Zanda . The former group are sexually dichromatic , with the females having prominently barred plumage . The two are also distinguished by differences in the food begging calls of juveniles . 
 The fossil record of cockatoos is even more limited than that of parrots in general , with only one truly ancient cockatoo fossil known : a species of Cacatua , most probably subgenus Licmetis , found in Early Miocene ( 16 – 23 million years ago ) deposits of Riversleigh , Australia . Although fragmentary , the remains are similar to the western corella and the galah . In Melanesia , subfossil bones of Cacatua species which apparently did not survive early human settlement have been found on New Caledonia and New Ireland . The bearing of these fossils on cockatoo evolution and phylogeny is fairly limited , although the Riversleigh fossil does allow tentative dating of the divergence of subfamilies . 
 = = = Genera and species = = = 
 There are about 44 different birds in the cockatoo family Cacatuidae including recognized subspecies . The current subdivision of this family is as follows : 
 Subfamily <unk> 
 Genus Nymphicus 
 <unk> , Nymphicus hollandicus ( Kerr , 1792 ) 
 Subfamily <unk> : The black cockatoos 
 Genus Calyptorhynchus ( 5 species ) 
 Subgenus Calyptorhynchus – black @-@ and @-@ red cockatoos 
 Red @-@ tailed black cockatoo , Calyptorhynchus banksii ( Latham , 1790 ) ( 5 subspecies ) 
 Glossy black cockatoo , Calyptorhynchus <unk> ( Temminck , 1807 ) ( 3 subspecies ) 
 Subgenus Zanda – black @-@ and @-@ yellow / white cockatoos 
 Yellow @-@ tailed black cockatoo , Calyptorhynchus funereus ( Shaw , 1794 ) ( 2 – 3 subspecies ) 
 Carnaby 's black cockatoo , Calyptorhynchus latirostris Carnaby , 1948 
 Baudin 's black cockatoo , Calyptorhynchus baudinii Lear , 1832 
 Subfamily <unk> 
 Tribe <unk> : One genus with one species , the black palm cockatoo . 
 Genus Probosciger 
 Palm cockatoo , Probosciger aterrimus ( Gmelin , 1788 ) ( 4 subspecies ) 
 Tribe <unk> : Four genera of white , pink and grey species . 
 Genus Callocephalon 
 Gang @-@ gang cockatoo , Callocephalon fimbriatum ( Grant , 1803 ) 
 Genus Eolophus 
 <unk> , Eolophus <unk> ( Vieillot , 1817 ) ( 3 subspecies ) 
 Genus Lophochroa 
 Major Mitchell 's cockatoo ( also Leadbeater 's cockatoo ) , Lophochroa <unk> ( Vigors , 1831 ) ( 2 subspecies ) 
 Genus Cacatua ( 11 species ) 
 Subgenus Cacatua – true white cockatoos 
 Yellow @-@ crested cockatoo ( also lesser sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo ) , Cacatua sulphurea ( Gmelin , 1788 ) ( 4 subspecies ) 
 Sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo , Cacatua <unk> ( Latham , 1790 ) ( 4 subspecies ) 
 Blue @-@ eyed cockatoo , Cacatua <unk> Sclater , 1864 
 White cockatoo , Cacatua alba ( Müller , 1776 ) 
 Salmon @-@ crested cockatoo , Cacatua <unk> ( Gmelin , 1788 ) 
 Subgenus Licmetis – corellas 
 Long @-@ billed corella , Cacatua tenuirostris ( Kuhl , 1820 ) 
 Western corella , Cacatua <unk> ( Gould , 1841 ) ( 2 subspecies ) 
 Little corella ( also bare @-@ eyed cockatoo ) , Cacatua sanguinea Gould , 1843 ( 4 subspecies ) 
 Tanimbar corella ( also Goffin 's cockatoo ) , Cacatua <unk> <unk> and Michels , 2004 
 Solomons cockatoo , Cacatua <unk> <unk> , 1853 
 Red @-@ vented cockatoo , Cacatua <unk> ( Müller , 1776 ) 
 = = Morphology = = 
 The cockatoos are generally medium to large parrots of stocky build , which range from 30 – 60 cm ( 12 – 24 in ) in length and 300 – 1 @,@ 200 g ( 0 @.@ 66 – 2 @.@ 65 lb ) in weight ; however , one species , the cockatiel , is considerably smaller and slimmer than the other species , being 32 cm ( 13 in ) long ( including its long pointed tail feathers ) and 80 – 100 g ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 oz ) in weight . The movable <unk> , which is present in all cockatoos , is spectacular in many species ; it is raised when the bird lands from flying or when it is aroused . Cockatoos share many features with other parrots , including the characteristic curved beak shape and a zygodactyl foot , with the two middle toes forward and the two outer toes backward . They differ in the presence of an erectile crest and their lack of the Dyck texture feather composition which causes the bright blues and greens seen in true parrots . 
 Like other parrots , cockatoos have short legs , strong claws , a waddling gait and often use their strong bill as a third limb when climbing through branches . They generally have long broad wings used in rapid flight , with speeds up to 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) being recorded for galahs . The members of the genus Calyptorhynchus and larger white cockatoos , such as the sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo and Major Mitchell 's cockatoo , have shorter , rounder wings and a more leisurely flight . 
 Cockatoos have a large bill , which is kept sharp by rasping the two mandibles together when resting . The bill is complemented by a large muscular tongue which helps manipulate seeds inside the bill so that they can be de @-@ husked before eating . During the de @-@ <unk> , the lower mandible applies the pressure , the tongue holds the seed in place and the upper mandible acts as an anvil . The eye region of the skull is reinforced to support muscles which move the mandibles sideways . The bills of male cockatoos are generally slightly larger than those of their female counterparts , but this size difference is quite marked in the palm cockatoo . 
 The plumage of the cockatoos is less brightly coloured than that of the other parrots , with species generally being either black , grey or white . Many species have smaller areas of colour on their plumage , often yellow , pink and red , usually on the crest or tail . The galah and Major Mitchell 's cockatoo are more broadly coloured in pink tones . Several species have a brightly coloured bare area around the eye and face known as a <unk> ring ; the large red patch of bare skin of the palm cockatoo is the most extensive and covers some of the face , while it is more restricted in some other species of white cockatoo , notably the corellas and blue @-@ eyed cockatoo . The plumage of males and females is similar in most species . The plumage of the female cockatiel is duller than the male , but the most marked sexual dimorphism occurs in the gang @-@ gang cockatoo and the two species of black cockatoos in the subgenus Calyptorhynchus , namely the red @-@ tailed and glossy black cockatoos . The iris colour differs in a few species , being pink or red in the female galah and Major Mitchell 's cockatoo and red @-@ brown in some other female white cockatoo species . The males all have dark brown irises . 
 Cockatoos maintain their plumage with frequent preening throughout the day . They remove dirt and oil and realign feather barbs by nibbling their feathers . They also preen other birds ' feathers that are otherwise hard to get at . Cockatoos produce preen @-@ oil from a gland on their lower back and apply it by wiping their plumage with their heads or already oiled feathers . Powder @-@ down is produced by specialised feathers in the lumbar region and distributed by the preening cockatoo all over the plumage . 
 Moulting is very slow and complex . Black cockatoos appear to replace their flight feathers one at a time , their moult taking two years to complete . This process is much shorter in other species , such as the galah and long @-@ billed corella , which each take around six months to replace all their flight feathers . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The vocalisations of cockatoos are loud and harsh . They serve a number of functions , including allowing individuals to recognize one another , alerting others of predators , indicating individual moods , maintaining the cohesion of a flock and as warnings when defending nests . The use of calls and number of specific calls varies by species ; the Carnaby 's black cockatoo has as many as 15 different calls , whereas others , such as Major Mitchell 's cockatoo , have fewer . Some , like the gang @-@ gang cockatoo , are comparatively quiet but do have softer growling calls when feeding . In addition to vocalisations , palm cockatoos communicate over large distances by drumming on a dead branch with a stick . Cockatoo species also make a characteristic hissing sound when threatened . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Cockatoos have a much more restricted range than the true parrots , occurring naturally only in Australasia , Indonesia and the <unk> . Eleven of the 21 species exist in the wild only in Australia , while seven species occur only in the islands of the Philippines , Indonesia , Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands . Interestingly , no cockatoo species are found in Borneo ( despite their presence on nearby Palawan and Sulawesi ) or many Pacific islands , although fossil remains have been recorded from New Caledonia . 
 Three species occur in both New Guinea and Australia . Some species have widespread distributions , with the galah , for example , occurring over most of Australia , whereas other species have tiny distributions , confined to a small part of the continent , such as the Baudin 's black cockatoo of Western Australia or to a small island group , such as the Tanimbar corella , which is restricted to the Tanimbar Islands of Indonesia . Some cockatoos have been introduced accidentally to areas outside their natural range such as New Zealand , Singapore , and Palau , while two Australian corella species have been introduced to parts of the continent where they are not native . 
 Cockatoos occupy a wide range of habitats from forests in subalpine regions to mangroves . However , no species is found in all types of habitat . The most widespread species , such as the galah and cockatiel , are open @-@ country specialists that feed on grass seeds . They are often highly mobile fast flyers and are nomadic . Flocks of birds move across large areas of the inland , locating and feeding on seed and other food sources . Drought may force flocks from more arid areas to move further into farming areas . Other cockatoo species , such as the glossy black cockatoo , inhabit woodlands , rainforests , shrublands and even alpine forests . The red @-@ vented cockatoo inhabits mangroves and its absence from northern Luzon may be related to the lack of mangrove forests there . Forest @-@ dwelling cockatoos are generally sedentary , as the food supply is more stable and predictable . Several species have adapted well to human modified habitats and are found in agricultural areas and even busy cities . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Cockatoos are diurnal and require daylight to find their food . They are not early risers , instead waiting until the sun has warmed their roosting sites before feeding . All species are generally highly social and roost , forage and travel in colourful and noisy flocks . These vary in size depending on availability of food ; in times of plenty , flocks are small and number a hundred birds or less , while in droughts or other times of adversity , they may swell up to contain thousands or even tens of thousands of birds ; one record from the Kimberley noted a flock of 32 @,@ 000 little corellas . Species that inhabit open country form larger flocks than those of forested areas . 
 Some species require roosting sites that are located near drinking sites ; other species travel great distances between the roosting and feeding sites . Cockatoos have several characteristic methods of bathing ; they may hang upside down or fly about in the rain or flutter in wet leaves in the canopy . Cockatoos have a preferred " footedness " analogous to human handedness . Most species are left @-@ footed with 87 @-@ 100 % of individuals using their left feet to eat , but a few species favor their right foot . 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 Cockatoos are versatile feeders and consume a range of mainly vegetable food items . Seeds form a large part of the diet of all species ; these are opened with their large and powerful bills . The galahs , corellas and some of the black cockatoos feed primarily on the ground ; others feed mostly in trees . The ground @-@ feeding species tend to forage in flocks , which form tight , squabbling groups where seeds are concentrated and dispersed lines where food is more sparsely distributed ; they also prefer open areas where visibility is good . The western and long @-@ billed corellas have elongated bills to excavate tubers and roots and the Major Mitchell 's cockatoo walks in a circle around the <unk> ( <unk> australis ) to twist out and remove the underground parts . 
 Many species forage for food in the canopy of trees , taking advantage of serotiny ( the storage of a large supply of seed in cones or <unk> by plant genera such as Eucalyptus , Banksia and Hakea ) , a natural feature of the Australian landscape in dryer regions . These woody fruiting bodies are inaccessible to many species and harvested in the main by parrots , cockatoos and rodents in more tropical regions . The larger cones can be opened by the large bills of cockatoos but are too strong for smaller animals . Many nuts and fruits lie on the end of small branches which are unable to support the weight of the foraging cockatoo , which instead bends the branch towards itself and holds it with its foot . 
 While some cockatoos are generalists taking a wide range of foods , others are specialists . The glossy black cockatoo specialises in the cones of trees of the genus Allocasuarina , preferring a single species , A. verticillata . It holds the cones in its foot and shreds them with its powerful bill before removing the seeds with its tongue . Some species take large numbers of insects , particularly when breeding ; in fact the bulk of the yellow @-@ tailed black cockatoo 's diet is made up of insects . The large bill is used in order to extract grubs and larvae from rotting wood . The amount of time cockatoos have to spend foraging varies with the season . During times of plenty they may need to feed for only a few hours in the day , in the morning and evening , then spend the rest of the day roosting or preening in trees , but during the winter most of the day may be spent foraging . The birds have increased nutritional requirements during the breeding season , so they spend more time foraging for food during this time . Cockatoos have large crops , which allow them to store and digest food for some time after retiring to a tree . During hard times , the cockatoos also display versatility in their diet , travelling widely in order to find food , feeding on more green plant material and in some species using their large bills to dig up corms . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Cockatoos are monogamous breeders , with pair bonds that can last many years . Many birds pair up in flocks before they reach sexual maturity and delay breeding for a year at least . Females breed for the first time anywhere from three to seven years of age and males are often older . Sexual maturity is delayed so birds can develop the skills for raising and parenting young , which is prolonged compared with other birds ; the young of some species remain with their parents for up to a year . Cockatoos may also display site fidelity , returning to the same nesting sites in consecutive years . Courtship is generally simple , particularly for established pairs , with the black cockatoos alone engaging in courtship feeding . Established pairs do engage in preening each other , but all forms of courtship drop off after incubation begins , possibly due to the strength of the pair @-@ bond . 
 Like most parrots , the cockatoos are cavity nesters , nesting in holes in trees , which they are unable to excavate themselves . These hollows are formed from decay or destruction of wood by branches breaking off , fungi or insects such as termites or even woodpeckers where their ranges overlap . In many places these holes are scarce and the source of competition , both with other members of the same species and with other species and types of animal . In general , cockatoos choose hollows only a little larger than themselves , hence different @-@ sized species nest in holes of corresponding ( and different ) sizes . If given the opportunity , cockatoos prefer nesting over 7 or 8 metres ( 20 – 25 ft ) above the ground and close to water and food . 
 The nesting hollows are lined with sticks , wood chips and branches with leaves . The eggs of cockatoos are oval and initially white , as their location makes camouflage unnecessary . However , they do become discoloured over the course of incubation . They range in size from 55 mm × 37 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 5 in ) in the palm and red @-@ tailed black cockatoos , to 26 mm × 19 mm ( 1 @.@ 02 in × 0 @.@ 75 in ) in the cockatiel . Clutch size varies within the family , with the palm cockatoo and some other larger cockatoos laying only a single egg and the smaller species laying anywhere between two and eight eggs . Food supply also plays a role in clutch size . Some species can lay a second clutch if the first fails . Around 20 % of eggs laid are infertile . The cockatoos ' incubation and brooding responsibilities may either be undertaken by the female alone in the case of the black cockatoos or shared amongst the sexes as happens in the other species . In the case of the black cockatoos , the female is provisioned by the male several times a day . The young of all species are born covered in yellowish down , bar the palm cockatoo , whose young are born naked . Cockatoo incubation times are dependent on species size , with the smaller cockatiels having a period of around 20 days and the larger Carnaby 's black cockatoo incubating its eggs for up to 29 days . 
 The nestling period also varies by species size , with larger species having longer nestling periods . It is also affected by season and environmental factors and by competition with siblings in species with clutch sizes greater than one . Much of what is known about the nestling period of some species is dependent on aviary studies – aviary cockatiels can fledge after 5 weeks and the large palm cockatoos after 11 weeks . During this period , the young become covered in juvenile plumage while remaining in the hollow . Wings and tail feathers are slow to grow initially but more rapid as the primary feathers appear . Nestlings quickly reach about 80 – 90 % of adult weight about two thirds of the time through this period , <unk> before they leave the hollow ; they fledge at this weight with wing and tail feathers still to grow a little before reaching adult dimensions . Growth rate of the young , as well as numbers fledged , are adversely impacted by reduced food supply and poor weather conditions . 
 = = = Predators and threats = = = 
 The peregrine falcon and little eagle have been reported taking galahs and the wedge @-@ tailed eagle has been observed killing a sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo . Eggs and nestlings are vulnerable to many hazards . Various species of monitor lizard ( Varanus ) are able to climb trees and enter hollows . Other predators recorded include the spotted wood owl on Rasa Island in the Philippines ; the <unk> python , black butcherbird and rodents including the giant white @-@ tailed rat in Cape York ; and brushtail possum on Kangaroo Island . Furthermore , galahs and little corellas competing for nesting space with the glossy black cockatoo on Kangaroo Island have been recorded killing nestlings of the latter species there . Severe storms may also flood hollows drowning the young and termite or borer activity may lead to the internal collapse of nests . 
 Like other parrots , cockatoos can be afflicted by <unk> beak and feather disease ( <unk> ) . The viral infection causes feather loss and beak malformation and reduces the bird 's overall immunity . Particularly prevalent in sulphur @-@ crested cockatoos , little corellas and galahs , it has been recorded in 14 species of cockatoo to date . Although unlikely to significantly impact on large , healthy populations of birds in the wild , <unk> may pose a high risk to smaller stressed populations . 
 A white cockatoo and a sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo were found to be infected with the <unk> Haemoproteus and another sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo had the malaria parasite Plasmodium on analysis of faecal samples at <unk> ornithological garden in Granada in Spain . Like amazon parrots and macaws , cockatoos frequently develop cloacal <unk> . The relationship with malignancy is unknown , as is the cause , although a parrot papilloma virus has been isolated from an African grey parrot with the condition . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Human activities have had positive effects on some species of cockatoo and negative effects on others . Many species of open country have benefited greatly from anthropogenic changes to the landscape , with the great increase in reliable seed food sources , available water and have also adapted well to a diet including foreign foodstuffs . This benefit appears to be restricted to Australian species , as cockatoos favouring open country outside Australia have not become more abundant . Predominantly forest @-@ dwelling species have suffered greatly from habitat destruction ; in the main , they appear to have a more specialised diet and have not been able to incorporate exotic food into their diet . A notable exception is the yellow @-@ tailed black cockatoo in eastern Australia . 
 = = = Pests = = = 
 Several species of cockatoo can be serious agricultural pests . They are sometimes controlled by shooting , poisoning or capture followed by gassing . Non @-@ lethal damage mitigation methods used include scaring , habitat manipulation and the provision of decoy food dumps or sacrifice crops to distract them from the main crop . They can be a nuisance in urban areas due to destruction of property . They maintain their bills in the wild by chewing on wood but , in suburbia , they may chew outdoor furniture , door and window frames ; soft decorative timbers such as western red cedar are readily demolished . Birds may also target external wiring and fixtures such as solar water heaters , television antennae and satellite dishes . A business in central Melbourne suffered as sulphur @-@ crested cockatoos repeatedly stripped the silicone sealant from the plate glass windows . <unk> and red @-@ tailed black cockatoos have stripped electrical cabling in rural areas and tarpaulin is targeted elsewhere . Outside Australia , the Tanimbar corella is a pest on <unk> Island where it raids maize crops . 
 In 1995 the Government of the state of Victoria published a report on problems caused by long @-@ billed corellas , sulphur @-@ crested cockatoos and galahs , three species which , along with the little corella , have large and growing populations , having benefited from anthropogenic changes to the landscape . Subsequent to the findings and publication of the report , these three species were declared unprotected by a Governor in Council Order under certain conditions and are allowed to be destroyed where serious damage is being caused by them to trees , vineyards , orchards , recreational reserves and commercial crops . Damage covered by the report included not only that to cereal crops , fruit and nut orchards and some kinds of vegetable crops but also to houses and communications equipment . The little corella is a declared pest of agriculture in Western Australia , where it is an <unk> introduced species . The birds damage sorghum , maize , sunflower , chickpeas and other crops . They also defoliate amenity trees in parks and gardens , dig for edible roots and corms on sports grounds and race tracks , as well as chew wiring and household fittings . In South Australia , where flocks can number several thousand birds and the species is listed as unprotected , they are accused of defoliating red gums and other native or ornamental trees used for roosting , damaging tarpaulins on grain bunkers , wiring and flashing on buildings , taking grain from newly seeded paddocks and creating a noise nuisance . 
 Several rare species and subspecies , too , have been recorded as causing problems . The Carnaby 's black cockatoo , a threatened Western Australian endemic , has been considered a pest in pine plantations where the birds chew off the leading shoots of growing pine trees , resulting in bent trunks and reduced timber value . They are also known to damage nut and fruit crops , and have learnt to exploit canola crops . The Baudin 's black cockatoo , also endemic to the south @-@ west of Western Australia , can be a pest in apple and pear orchards where it destroys the fruit to extract the seeds . Muir 's corella , the nominate subspecies of the western corella , is also a declared pest of agriculture in Western Australia , as well as being nationally vulnerable and listed under state legislation as being " rare or likely to become extinct " . 
 = = = Status and conservation = = = 
 According to the IUCN and BirdLife International , seven species of cockatoo are considered to be vulnerable or worse and one is considered to be near threatened . Of these , two species — the red @-@ vented cockatoo and the yellow @-@ crested cockatoo — are considered to be critically endangered . 
 The principal threats to cockatoos are habitat loss and the wildlife trade . All cockatoos are dependent on trees for nesting and are vulnerable to their loss ; in addition many species have specialised habitat requirements or live on small islands and have naturally small ranges , making them vulnerable to the loss of these habitats . Cockatoos are popular as pets and the capture and trade has threatened some species ; between 1983 and 1990 , 66 @,@ 654 recorded salmon @-@ crested cockatoos were exported from Indonesia , a figure that does not include the number of birds caught for the domestic trade or that were exported illegally . The capture of many species has subsequently been banned but the trade continues illegally . Birds are put in crates or bamboo tubing and conveyed on boats out of Indonesia and the Philippines . Not only are the rare species smuggled out of Indonesia but also common and rare cockatoos alike are smuggled out of Australia ; birds are sedated , covered in nylon stockings and packed into PVC tubing which is then placed in unaccompanied luggage on international flights . Mortality is significant ( 30 % ) and eggs , more easily hidden on the bodies of smugglers on flights , are increasingly smuggled instead . Trafficking is thought to be run by organised gangs , who also trade Australian species for overseas species such as macaws coming the other way . 
 All species of cockatoo except the cockatiel are protected by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , which restricts import and export of wild @-@ caught parrots to special licensed purposes . Five cockatoo species ( including all subspecies ) — the Tanimbar corella ( Cacatua <unk> ) , red @-@ vented cockatoo ( Cacatua <unk> ) , Moluccan cockatoo ( Cacatua <unk> ) , yellow @-@ crested cockatoo ( Cacatua sulphurea ) and palm cockatoo ( Probosciger aterrimus ) — are protected on the CITES Appendix I list . With the exception of the cockatiel , all remaining cockatoo species are protected on the CITES Appendix II list . 
 = = = Aviculture = = = 
 Kept for their appearance , their intelligence and engaging personalities , cockatoos can nonetheless be problematic pets or companion parrots . Generally , they are not good at mimicking human speech , although the little corella is a renowned talker . As social animals , wild cockatoos have been known to learn human speech from ex @-@ captive birds that have integrated into a flock . Their care is best provided by those experienced in keeping parrots . Cockatoos are social animals and their social needs are difficult to cater for , and they can suffer if kept in a cage on their own for long periods of time . 
 The cockatiel is by far the cockatoo species most frequently kept in captivity . Among U.S. bird keepers that participated in a survey by <unk> in 2003 / 04 , 39 % had cockatiels , as opposed to only 3 % that had ( other ) cockatoo species . The white cockatoos are more often encountered in aviculture than the black cockatoos . Black cockatoos are rarely seen in European zoos due to export restrictions on Australian wildlife but birds seized by governments have been loaned . 
 Cockatoos are often very affectionate with their owner and at times other people but can demand a great deal of attention . Furthermore , their intense curiosity means they must be given a steady supply of objects to tinker with , chew , dismantle and destroy . Parrots in captivity may suffer from boredom , which can lead to stereotypic behaviour patterns , such as feather @-@ plucking . Feather plucking is likely to stem from psychological rather than physical causes . Other major drawbacks include their painful bites , and their piercing screeches . The salmon @-@ crested and white cockatoo species are particular offenders . All cockatoos have a fine powder on their feathers , which may induce allergies in certain people . In general , the smaller cockatoo species such as Goffin 's and quieter <unk> 's cockatoos are much easier to keep as pets . The cockatiel is one of the most popular and easiest parrots to keep as a pet , and many colour mutations are available in aviculture . 
 The larger cockatoos can live 30 – 70 years depending on the species or occasionally longer and cockatiels can live for about 20 years . As pets they require a long @-@ term commitment from their owners . Their longevity is considered a positive trait as it reduces instances of the loss of a pet . The oldest cockatoo in captivity is a Major Mitchell 's cockatoo named ' Cookie ' , residing at Brookfield Zoo in Chicago , which celebrated its 82nd birthday in June 2015 . A salmon @-@ crested cockatoo named ' King Tut ' who resided at San Diego Zoo was nearly 69 when he died in 1990 and a palm cockatoo reached 56 in London Zoo in 2000 . However , anecdotal reports describe birds of much greater ages . ' Cocky Bennett ' of Tom Ugly 's Point in Sydney was a celebrated sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo who was reported to have reached an age of 100 years or more . He had lost his feathers and was naked for much of his life . A palm cockatoo was reported to have reached 80 or 90 years of age in an Australian zoo , and a little corella that was removed from a nest in central Australia in 1904 was reported still alive in the late 1970s . In February 2010 , a white cockatoo named ' Arthur ' was claimed to be 90 years old ; he had lived with a family for generations in <unk> , Cebu , before being taken to Cebu City Zoo . 
 Trained cockatoos are sometimes seen in bird shows in zoos . They are generally less motivated by food than other birds ; some may more respond to petting or praise than food . Cockatoos can often be taught to wear a parrot harness , enabling their owners to take them outdoors . Cockatoos have been used in animal @-@ assisted therapy , generally in nursing homes . 
 Cockatoos often have pronounced responses to musical sounds and numerous videos exist showing the birds dancing to popular music . Research conducted in 2008 with an Eleonora cockatoo named Snowball had indicated that this particular individual is indeed capable of beat induction — perceiving human @-@ created music and synchronizing his body movements to the beat . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 An early European depiction of a cockatoo is present in the 1496 painting by Andrea Mantegna titled Madonna della Vittoria . Later examples were painted by Hungarian artist Jakob <unk> ( 1660 – 1724 ) , who resided in Amsterdam from 1683 and then England , and appeared with numerous other birds in the bird pieces of the Dutch painter Melchior d <unk> ( 1636 – 1695 ) . A cockatoo is the unlucky subject in An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump by English artist Joseph Wright of Derby , its fate unclear in the painting . Cockatoos were among the many Australian plants and animals which featured in decorative motifs in Federation architecture of the early 20th century . A visit to a Camden Town pet shop in 1958 inspired English painter William Roberts to paint The Cockatoos , in the collection of the Tate Gallery . American artist and sculptor Joseph Cornell was known for placing cutout paper cockatoos in his works . 
 The ACT Government adopted the gang @-@ gang cockatoo as its official faunal emblem on 27 February 1997 . The short @-@ lived budget airline Impulse Airlines featured a sulphur @-@ crested cockatoo on its corporate livery ( and aeroplanes ) . The palm cockatoo , which has a unique beak and face colouration , is used as a symbol by the World Parrot Trust . 
 Two 1970s police dramas featured protagonists with pet cockatoos . In the 1973 film Serpico , Al Pacino 's character had a pet white cockatoo and the television show Baretta saw Robert Blake 's character with Fred the Triton cockatoo . The popularity of the latter show saw a corresponding rise in popularity of cockatoos as pets in the late 1970s . Cockatoos have been used frequently in advertising ; a cockatoo appeared in a ' cheeky ' ( and later toned down ) 2008 advertising campaign for Cockatoo Ridge Wineries . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 A team of scientists from Oxford University , the University of Vienna and the Max Planck Institute conducted tests on ten untrained Tanimbar corellas ( Cacatua <unk> ) , and found that they were able to solve complex mechanical puzzles . 
 = Duke University = 
 Duke University is a private research university located in Durham , North Carolina , United States . Founded by Methodists and Quakers in the present @-@ day town of Trinity in 1838 , the school moved to Durham in 1892 . In 1924 , tobacco and electric power industrialist James Buchanan Duke established the Duke Endowment , at which time the institution changed its name to honor his deceased father , Washington Duke . 
 The university 's campus spans over 8 @,@ 600 acres ( 3 @,@ 500 hectares ) on three contiguous campuses in Durham as well as a marine lab in Beaufort . Duke 's main campus — designed largely by architect Julian Abele — incorporates Gothic architecture with the 210 @-@ foot ( 64 @-@ meter ) Duke Chapel at the campus ' center and highest point of elevation . The first @-@ year @-@ populated East Campus contains Georgian @-@ style architecture , while the main Gothic @-@ style West Campus 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 kilometers ) away is adjacent to the Medical Center . Duke is the 7th wealthiest private university in America with $ 11 @.@ 4 billion in cash and investments in fiscal year 2014 . 
 Duke 's research expenditures in the 2014 fiscal year were $ 1 @.@ 037 billion , the seventh largest in the nation . In 2014 , Thomson Reuters named 32 Duke professors to its list of Highly Cited Researchers , making it fourth globally in terms of primary affiliations . Duke also ranks 5th among national universities to have produced Rhodes , Marshall , Truman , Goldwater , and Udall Scholars . Ten Nobel laureates and three Turing Award winners are affiliated with the university . Duke 's sports teams compete in the Atlantic Coast Conference and the basketball team is renowned for having won five NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Championships , the most recent in 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Duke started in 1838 as Brown 's Schoolhouse , a private subscription school founded in Randolph County in the present @-@ day town of Trinity . Organized by the Union Institute Society , a group of Methodists and Quakers , Brown 's Schoolhouse became the Union Institute Academy in 1841 when North Carolina issued a charter . The academy was renamed Normal College in 1851 and then Trinity College in 1859 because of support from the Methodist Church . In 1892 , Trinity College moved to Durham , largely due to generosity from Julian S. Carr and Washington Duke , powerful and respected Methodists who had grown wealthy through the tobacco and electrical industries . Carr donated land in 1892 for the original Durham campus , which is now known as East Campus . At the same time , Washington Duke gave the school $ 85 @,@ 000 for an initial endowment and construction costs — later augmenting his generosity with three separate $ 100 @,@ 000 contributions in 1896 , 1899 , and 1900 — with the stipulation that the college " open its doors to women , placing them on an equal footing with men . " 
 In 1924 Washington Duke 's son , James B. Duke , established The Duke Endowment with a $ 40 million trust fund . Income from the fund was to be distributed to hospitals , orphanages , the Methodist Church , and four colleges ( including Trinity College ) . William Preston Few , the president of Trinity at the time , insisted that the institution be renamed Duke University to honor the family 's generosity and to distinguish it from the myriad other colleges and universities carrying the " Trinity " name . At first , James B. Duke thought the name change would come off as self @-@ serving , but eventually he accepted Few 's proposal as a memorial to his father . Money from the endowment allowed the University to grow quickly . Duke 's original campus , East Campus , was rebuilt from 1925 to 1927 with Georgian @-@ style buildings . By 1930 , the majority of the Collegiate Gothic @-@ style buildings on the campus one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west were completed , and construction on West Campus culminated with the completion of Duke Chapel in 1935 . 
 In 1878 , Trinity ( in Randolph County ) awarded A.B. degrees to three sisters — Mary , Persis , and Theresa Giles — who had studied both with private tutors and in classes with men . With the relocation of the college in 1892 , the Board of Trustees voted to again allow women to be formally admitted to classes as day students . At the time of Washington Duke 's donation in 1896 , which carried the requirement that women be placed " on an equal footing with men " at the college , four women were enrolled ; three of the four were faculty members ' children . In 1903 Washington Duke wrote to the Board of Trustees withdrawing the provision , noting that it had been the only limitation he had ever put on a donation to the college . A woman 's residential dormitory was built in 1897 and named the Mary Duke Building , after Washington Duke 's daughter . By 1904 , fifty @-@ four women were enrolled in the college . In 1930 , the Woman 's College was established as a coordinate to the men 's undergraduate college , which had been established and named Trinity College in 1924 . 
 = = = Expansion and growth = = = 
 Engineering , which had been taught since 1903 , became a separate school in 1939 . In athletics , Duke hosted and competed in the only Rose Bowl ever played outside California in Wallace Wade Stadium in 1942 . During World War II , Duke was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission . In 1963 the Board of Trustees officially desegregated the undergraduate college . Increased activism on campus during the 1960s prompted Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr. to speak at the University in November 1964 on the progress of the civil rights movement . Following Douglas Knight 's resignation from the office of university president , Terry Sanford , the former governor of North Carolina , was elected president of the university in 1969 , propelling the Fuqua School of Business 's opening , the William R. Perkins library completion , and the founding of the Institute of Policy Sciences and Public Affairs ( now the Sanford School of Public Policy ) . The separate Woman 's College merged back with Trinity as the liberal arts college for both men and women in 1972 . Beginning in the 1970s , Duke administrators began a long @-@ term effort to strengthen Duke 's reputation both nationally and internationally . Interdisciplinary work was emphasized , as was recruiting minority faculty and students . During this time it also became the birthplace of the first Physician Assistant degree program in the United States . Duke University Hospital was finished in 1980 and the student union building was fully constructed two years later . In 1986 the men 's soccer team captured Duke 's first National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) championship , and the men 's basketball team followed shortly thereafter with championships in 1991 and 1992 , then again in 2001 , 2010 , and 2015 . 
 The university 's campus spans 8 @,@ 547 acres ( 34 @.@ 59 km2 ) on three contiguous campuses in Durham as well as a marine lab in Beaufort . Duke 's main campus — designed largely by African American architect Julian Abele — incorporates Gothic architecture with the 210 @-@ foot ( 64 m ) Duke Chapel at the campus ' center and highest point of elevation . The forest environs surrounding parts of the campus belie the University 's proximity to downtown Durham . Construction projects have updated both the freshmen @-@ populated Georgian @-@ style East Campus and the main Gothic @-@ style West Campus , as well as the adjacent Medical Center over the past five years . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 Duke 's growth and academic focus have contributed to continuing the university 's reputation as an academic and research powerhouse . 
 In summer 2014 , Duke <unk> University ( DKU ) opened in <unk> , China . DKU blends liberal education with Chinese tradition in a new approach to elite higher education in China . The DKU will conduct research projects on climate change , health @-@ care policy and tuberculosis prevention and control . 
 In August 2005 , Duke established a partnership with the National University of Singapore to develop a joint medical program , which had its first entering class in 2007 . 
 The university is part way through Duke Forward , a seven @-@ year fundraising campaign that aims to raise $ 3 @.@ 25 billion by June 30 , 2017 , to enrich the student experience in and out of the classroom , invest in faculty and support research and initiatives . Every dollar donated to Duke 's ten schools and units , Duke Medicine or university programs and initiatives counts toward the campaign 's goal . 
 Among academic achievements at Duke , three students were named Rhodes Scholars in both 2002 and 2006 , a number surpassed only by Harvard in 2002 and the United States Military Academy in 2006 . Overall , Duke has produced 45 Rhodes Scholars through 2015 , including 24 between 1990 and 2015 . 
 Also , the first working demonstration of an invisibility cloak was unveiled by Duke researchers in October 2006 . In 2006 , three men 's lacrosse team members were falsely accused of rape , which garnered significant media attention . On April 11 , 2007 , North Carolina Attorney General Roy Cooper dropped all charges and declared the three players innocent . Cooper stated that the charged players were victims of a " tragic rush to accuse . " 
 The university has " historical , formal , on @-@ going , and symbolic ties " with the United Methodist Church , but is a nonsectarian and independent institution . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Duke University owns 254 buildings on 8 @,@ 547 acres ( 34 @.@ 59 km2 ) of land , which includes the 7 @,@ 044 acres ( 28 @.@ 51 km2 ) Duke Forest . The campus is divided into four main areas : West , East , and Central campuses and the Medical Center , which are all connected via a free bus service . On the Atlantic coast in Beaufort , Duke owns 15 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 m2 ) as part of its marine lab . One of the major public attractions on the main campus is the 54 @-@ acre ( 220 @,@ 000 m2 ) Sarah P. Duke Gardens , established in the 1930s . 
 Duke students often refer to the campus as " the Gothic Wonderland , " a nickname referring to the Collegiate Gothic architecture of West Campus . Much of the campus was designed by Julian Abele , one of the first prominent African @-@ American architects and the chief designer in the offices of architect Horace Trumbauer . The residential quadrangles are of an early and somewhat unadorned design , while the buildings in the academic quadrangles show influences of the more elaborate late French and Italian styles . The freshmen campus ( East Campus ) is composed of buildings in the Georgian architecture style . In 2011 , Travel + Leisure listed Duke among the most beautiful college campuses in the United States . 
 The stone used for West Campus has seven primary colors and seventeen shades of color . The university supervisor of planning and construction wrote that the stone has " an older , more attractive antique effect " and a " warmer and softer coloring than the Princeton stone " that gave the university an " artistic look . " James B. Duke initially suggested the use of stone from a quarry in Princeton , New Jersey , but later amended the plans to purchase a local quarry in Hillsborough to reduce costs . Duke Chapel stands at the center of West Campus on the highest ridge . Constructed from 1930 to 1935 , the chapel seats 1 @,@ 600 people and , at 210 feet ( 64 m ) is one of the tallest buildings in Durham County . 
 A number of construction projects were in progress during 2015 , including renovations to Duke Chapel , Wallace Wade Stadium ( football ) and Cameron Indoor Stadium ( basketball ) . 
 In early 2014 , the Nicholas School of the Environment opened a new home , Environmental Hall , a five @-@ story , glass @-@ and @-@ concrete building that incorporates the highest sustainable features and technologies , and meets or exceeds the criteria for LEED platinum certification . The School of Nursing in April 2014 opened a new 45 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot addition to the Christine Siegler Pearson Building . In summer 2014 , a number of construction projects were completed or else in full swing , including renovations to the David M. Rubenstein David M. Rubenstein Rare Book & Manuscript Library , housed in Duke 's original West Campus library building . The project is part of the final phase of renovations to Duke 's West Campus libraries that will transform one of the university 's oldest and most recognizable buildings into a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art research facility . Renovation work began in late 2012 ; opening is scheduled for 2015 . 
 In 2013 construction projects included transforming buildings like Gross Hall and Baldwin Auditorium , plus new construction such as the Events Pavilion . About 125 @,@ 000 square feet was updated at Gross Hall , including new lighting and windows and a skylight . Baldwin 's upgrades include a larger stage , more efficient air conditioning for performers and audience and enhanced acoustics that will allow for the space to be " tuned " to each individual performance . The 25 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot Events Pavilion opened to students in 2013 and serves as temporary dining space while the West Campus Union undergoes major renovations , expected to be completed in the spring of 2016 . From February 2001 to November 2005 , Duke spent $ 835 million on 34 major construction projects as part of a five @-@ year strategic plan , " Building on Excellence . " Completed projects since 2002 include major additions to the business , law , nursing , and divinity schools , a new library , the Nasher Museum of Art , a football training facility , two residential buildings , an engineering complex , a public policy building , an eye institute , two genetic research buildings , a student plaza , the French Family Science Center , and two new medical @-@ research buildings . 
 In early 2012 , the Duke Cancer Center opened next to Duke Hospital in Durham , N.C. The patient care facility consolidates nearly all of Duke 's outpatient clinical care services . 
 = = = West , East , and Central Campuses = = = 
 West Campus , considered the main campus of the University , houses the majority of the sophomores , along with some juniors and seniors . Most of the academic and administrative centers are located there . Main West Campus , with Duke Chapel at its center , contains the majority of residential quads to the south , while the main academic quad , library , and Medical Center are to the north . The campus , spanning 720 acres ( 2 @.@ 9 km2 ) , includes Science Drive , which is the location of science and engineering buildings . The residential quads on West Campus are Craven Quad , Crowell Quad , Edens Quad , Few Quad , Keohane Quad , Kilgo Quad , and <unk> Quad . Most of the campus eateries and sports facilities — including the historic basketball stadium , Cameron Indoor Stadium — are on West Campus . 
 East Campus , the original location of Duke after it moved to Durham , functions as a first @-@ year campus as well as the home of several academic departments . Since the 1995 – 96 academic year , all freshmen — and only freshmen , except for upperclassmen serving as Resident Assistants — have lived on East Campus , an effort to build class unity . The campus encompasses 97 acres ( 390 @,@ 000 m2 ) and is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from West Campus . The Art History , History , Cultural Anthropology , Literature , Music , Philosophy , and Women 's Studies Departments are housed on East . Programs such as dance , drama , education , film , and the University Writing Program reside on East . The self @-@ sufficient East Campus contains the freshman residence halls , a dining hall , coffee shop , post office , Lilly Library , Baldwin Auditorium , a theater , Brodie Gym , tennis courts , several disc golf baskets , and a walking track as well as several academic buildings . The East Campus dorms are Alspaugh , Basset , Bell Tower , Blackwell , Brown , East House ( formerly known as <unk> ) , Epworth , Gilbert @-@ <unk> , Giles , Jarvis , Pegram , Randolph , Southgate , and Wilson . Separated from downtown by a short walk , the area was the site of the Women 's College from 1930 to 1972 . 
 Central Campus , consisting of 122 acres ( 0 @.@ 49 km2 ) between East and West campuses , houses around 1 @,@ 000 sophomores , juniors , and seniors , as well as around 200 professional students in double or quadruple apartments . There are 26 specific houses , accommodating 22 selective living groups ( sororities and fraternities ) , 3 independent houses and 1 administrative house . Central Campus is home to the Nasher Museum of Art , the Freeman Center for Jewish Life , the Center for Muslim Life , the Duke Police Department , the Duke Office of Disability Management , a Ronald McDonald House , and administrative departments such as Duke Residence Life and Housing Services . Central Campus has several recreation and social facilities such as basketball courts , a sand volleyball court , a turf field , barbecue grills and picnic shelters , a general gathering building called " Devil 's Den " , a restaurant known as " Devil 's Bistro " , a convenience store called Uncle Harry 's , and the Mill Village . The Mill Village consists of a gym and group study rooms . 
 Since 2005 , there has been a long @-@ term plan in place to restructure Central Campus over the subsequent 20 to 50 years . The idea is to develop an " academic village " as a key center for the Duke community . This academic village will provide living arrangements for undergraduate , graduate , and professional students and some faculty , plus dining , recreation , and academic support spaces while serving as a living laboratory for sustainability . 
 = = = Key places = = = 
 Duke Forest , established in 1931 , consists of 7 @,@ 044 acres ( 28 @.@ 51 km2 ) in six divisions , just west of West Campus . The largest private research forest in North Carolina and one of the largest in the nation , the Duke Forest demonstrates a variety of forest stand types and silvicultural treatments . Duke Forest is used extensively for research and includes the Aquatic Research Facility , Forest Carbon Transfer and Storage ( <unk> @-@ I ) research facility , two permanent towers suitable for <unk> studies , and other areas designated for animal behavior and ecosystem study . More than 30 miles ( 48 km ) of trails are open to the public for hiking , cycling , and horseback riding . 
 The Duke Lemur Center , located inside the Duke Forest , is the world 's largest sanctuary for rare and endangered strepsirrhine primates . Founded in 1966 , the Duke Lemur Center spans 85 acres ( 34 ha ) and contains nearly 300 animals of 25 different species of lemurs , galagos and lorises . 
 The Sarah P. Duke Gardens , established in the early 1930s , is situated between West Campus and the apartments of Central Campus . The gardens occupy 55 acres ( 22 ha ) , divided into four major sections : the original Terraces and their surroundings ; the H.L. Blomquist Garden of Native Plants , devoted to flora of the Southeastern United States ; the W.L. Culberson Asiatic Arboretum , housing plants of Eastern Asia , as well as disjunct species found in Eastern Asia and Eastern North America ; and the Doris Duke Center Gardens . There are five miles ( 8 km ) of allées and paths throughout the gardens . 
 Duke University Medical Center , bordering Duke 's West Campus northern boundary , combines one of the top @-@ rated hospitals and one of the top @-@ ranked medical schools in the U.S. Founded in 1930 , the Medical Center occupies 8 million square feet ( 700 @,@ 000 m ² ) in 99 buildings on 210 acres ( 85 ha ) . 
 Duke University Marine Laboratory , located in the town of Beaufort , North Carolina , is also technically part of Duke 's campus . The marine lab is situated on <unk> Island on the Outer Banks of North Carolina , 150 yards ( 140 m ) across the channel from Beaufort . Duke 's interest in the area began in the early 1930s and the first buildings were erected in 1938 . The resident faculty represent the disciplines of oceanography , marine biology , marine biomedicine , marine biotechnology , and coastal marine policy and management . The Marine Laboratory is a member of the National Association of Marine Laboratories . In May 2014 , the newly built Orrin H. <unk> Marine Research Laboratory was dedicated . 
 = = Administration and organization = = 
 Duke University has 12 schools and institutes , two of which are for undergraduates : Trinity College of Arts and Sciences and Pratt School of Engineering . 
 Duke 's endowment had a market value of $ 7 @.@ 0 billion in the fiscal year that ended June 30 , 2014 . The University 's special academic facilities include an art museum , several language labs , the Duke Forest , the Duke Herbarium , a lemur center , a <unk> , a free electron laser , a nuclear magnetic resonance machine , a nuclear lab , and a marine lab . Duke is a leading participant in the National Lambda Rail Network and runs a program for gifted children known as the Talent Identification Program . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 Admission to Duke is defined by U.S. News & World Report as " most selective " ; Duke received over 28 @,@ 000 applications for the Class of 2020 , and admitted 10 @.@ 4 % of applicants . According to The Huffington Post , Duke was one of the ten toughest universities in the United States to get into based on admissions data from 2010 . The yield rate ( the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university ) is approximately 50 % . For the class of 2015 , 90 % of enrolled students ranked in the top 10 % of their high school classes ; 97 % ranked in the top quarter . The middle 50 % range of SAT scores for the prospective students accepted to Trinity College of Arts and Sciences in fall 2014 is 680 – 790 for verbal / critical reading , 700 – 800 for math , and 700 – 790 for writing , while the ACT Composite range is 31 – 35 . For those accepted to the Pratt School of Engineering , the middle 50 % range for the SAT is 700 – 780 for verbal / critical reading , 760 – 800 for math , and 720 – 800 for writing , while the ACT Composite range is 33 – 35 . The average SAT score is 2240 . 
 From 2001 to 2011 , Duke has had the sixth highest number of Fulbright , Rhodes , Truman , and Goldwater scholarships in the nation among private universities . The University practices need @-@ blind admissions and meets 100 % of admitted students ' demonstrated need . About 50 percent of all Duke students receive some form of financial aid , which includes need @-@ based aid , athletic aid , and merit aid . The average need @-@ based grant for the 2013 – 14 academic year was nearly $ 39 @,@ 275 . Roughly 60 merit @-@ based scholarships are also offered , including the Angier B. Duke Memorial Scholarship , awarded for academic excellence . Other scholarships are geared toward students in North Carolina , African @-@ American students , and high @-@ achieving students requiring financial aid . 
 = = = Graduate profile = = = 
 In 2009 , the School of Medicine received 5 @,@ 166 applications and accepted approximately 4 % of them , while the average GPA and MCAT scores for accepted students from 2002 through 2009 were 3 @.@ 74 and 34 , respectively . The School of Law accepted approximately 13 % of its applicants for the Class of 2014 , while enrolling students had a median GPA of 3 @.@ 75 and median LSAT of 170 . 
 The University 's graduate and professional schools include the Graduate School , the Pratt School of Engineering , the Nicholas School of the Environment , the School of Medicine , the Duke @-@ NUS Graduate Medical School , the School of Nursing , the Fuqua School of Business , the School of Law , the Divinity School , and the Sanford School of Public Policy . 
 = = = Undergraduate curriculum = = = 
 Duke offers 46 arts and sciences majors , four engineering majors , 52 Minors ( including two in engineering ) and Program II , which allows students to design their own interdisciplinary major in arts & sciences , and <unk> , which allows students to design their own engineering major . Twenty @-@ four certificate programs also are available . Students pursue a major , and can pursue a combination of a total of up to three including minors , certificates , and / or a second major . Eighty @-@ five percent of undergraduates enroll in the Trinity College of Arts and Sciences , while the rest are in the Pratt School of Engineering . 
 Trinity 's curriculum operates under the revised version of " Curriculum 2000 . " It ensures that students are exposed to a variety of " areas of knowledge " and " modes of inquiry . " The curriculum aims to help students develop critical faculties and judgment by learning how to access , synthesize , and communicate knowledge effectively . The intent is to assist students in acquiring perspective on current and historical events , conducting research and solving problems , and developing tenacity and a capacity for hard and sustained work . Freshmen can elect to participate in the FOCUS Program , which allows students to engage in an interdisciplinary exploration of a specific topic in a small group setting . 
 Pratt 's curriculum is narrower in scope , but still accommodates double majors in a variety of disciplines . The school emphasizes undergraduate research — opportunities for hands @-@ on experiences arise through internships , fellowship programs , and the structured curriculum . More than 27 percent of Pratt undergraduates study abroad , small compared to about half of Trinity undergraduates , but much larger than the recent national average for engineering students ( 3 @.@ 2 % ) . 
 = = = Libraries and museums = = = 
 Duke Libraries , one of the nation 's top 10 private research library systems , includes the Perkins , Bostock , and Rubenstein Libraries on West Campus , the Lilly and Music Libraries on East Campus , the Pearse Memorial Library at the Duke Marine Lab , and the separately administered libraries serving the schools of business , divinity , law and medicine . 
 Duke 's art collections are housed at the Nasher Museum of Art on Central Campus . The museum was designed by Rafael Viñoly and is named for Duke alumnus and art collector Raymond Nasher . The museum opened in 2005 at a cost of over $ 23 million and contains over 13 @,@ 000 works of art , including works by William Cordova , Marlene Dumas , Olafur Eliasson , David Hammons , Barkley L. Hendricks , Christian <unk> , Kerry James Marshall , D Alma Thomas , Hank Willis Thomas , Bob Thompson , Kara Walker , Andy Warhol , Carrie Mae Weems , Ai Weiwei , Fred Wilson and Lynette <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Duke 's research expenditures in the 2014 fiscal year were $ 1 @.@ 037 billion , the seventh largest in the nation . In the 2013 fiscal year , Duke University Medical Center received $ 270 million in funding from the National Institutes of Health ( exclusive of contracts and Economic Stimulus Program awards ) . 
 Duke 's faculty is among the most productive in the nation . Throughout the school 's history , Duke researchers have made breakthroughs , including the biomedical engineering department 's development of the world 's first real @-@ time , three @-@ dimensional ultrasound diagnostic system and the first engineered blood vessels and stents . In 2015 , Paul Modrich shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry . In 2012 , Robert Lefkowitz along with Brian <unk> , who is also a former affiliate , shared the Nobel Prize in chemistry for their work on cell surface receptors . In the mechanical engineering department , Adrian Bejan developed the <unk> theory , which explains the shapes that arise in nature . Duke has pioneered studies involving nonlinear dynamics , chaos , and complex systems in physics . In May 2006 Duke researchers mapped the final human chromosome , which made world news as the Human Genome Project was finally complete . Reports of Duke researchers ' involvement in new AIDS vaccine research surfaced in June 2006 . The biology department combines two historically strong programs in botany and zoology , while one of the divinity school 's leading theologians is Stanley <unk> , whom Time named " America 's Best Theologian " in 2001 . The graduate program in literature boasts several internationally renowned figures , including Fredric Jameson , Michael Hardt , and Rey Chow , while philosophers Robert Brandon and Lakatos Award @-@ winner Alexander Rosenberg contribute to Duke 's ranking as the nation 's best program in philosophy of biology , according to the Philosophical Gourmet Report . 
 The Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index ranked Duke 's faculty first in the nation in the fields of Oncology and Cancer Biology , Biomedical Engineering and , Applied Economics . The Public Policy , Statistics , Chemistry , Environmental Science , Medicine and Molecular Genetics departments ( among others ) all ranked in the top five . Several other departments including Electrical Engineering , Mechanical Engineering and Nursing ranked in the top ten . 
 = = = Reputation and rankings = = = 
 = = = = Undergraduate rankings = = = = 
 In the 2016 U.S. News & World Report ranking of undergraduate programs at doctoral granting institutions , Duke was ranked 8th . USA Today ranked Duke 3rd in the United States , while Business Insider ranked the university 7th . In the past twenty years , U.S. News & World Report has placed Duke as high as 3rd and as low as 10th . In 2014 , Duke was ranked 1st in the United States for majors in economics and psychology , and 10th overall for computer science and engineering . 
 In 2015 , Duke was ranked 29th in the world by the QS World University Rankings and 20th in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings . Duke was ranked the 14th @-@ best university in the world by Newsweek and 31st best globally by Shanghai Jiao Tong University 's Academic Ranking of World Universities ( ARWU ) in 2014 , focusing on quality of scientific research and the number of Nobel Prizes . The university also ranks 22nd in the world on the alternative Academic Ranking of World Universities which excludes Nobel Prize and Fields Medal indicators . The Wall Street Journal ranked Duke sixth ( fifth among universities ) in its " feeder " rankings in 2006 , analyzing the percentage of undergraduates that enroll in what it considers the top five medical , law , and business schools . The 2010 report by the Center for Measuring University Performance puts Duke at 6th in the nation . 
 The 2011 Global Employability Ranking as published by The New York Times surveyed hundreds of chief executives and chairmen from around the world and asked them to select the best universities from which they recruited . Duke placed 13th in the world and 9th in the country . 
 In 2013 , Duke enrolled 139 National Merit Scholars , the 6th university in rank by number . Duke ranks 5th among national universities to have produced Rhodes , Marshall , Truman , Goldwater , and Udall Scholars . As of 2012 , Duke graduates have received 25 Churchill Scholarships to the University of Cambridge . Only graduates of Princeton and Harvard have received more Churchill awards . Kiplinger 's 50 Best Values in Private Universities 2013 – 14 ranks Duke at 5th best overall after taking financial aid into consideration . 
 According to a study by Forbes , Duke ranks 11th among universities that have produced billionaires and 1st among universities in the South . A survey by the Journal of Blacks in Higher Education in 2002 ranked Duke as the # 1 university in the country in regard to the integration of African American students and faculty . According to a poll of recruiters conducted by The Wall Street Journal , Duke ranks 2nd in terms of producing the best graduates who have received either a marketing or liberal arts degree . In a corporate study carried out by The New York Times , Duke 's graduates were shown to be among the most valued in the world , and Forbes magazine ranked Duke 7th in the world on its list of ' power factories ' in 2012 . Duke was ranked 17th on Thomson Reuters ' list of the world 's most innovative universities in 2015 . The ranking graded universities based on patent volume and research output among other factors . In 2015 , NPR ranked Duke first on its list of " schools that make financial sense " <unk> Magazine ranked Duke third on its list of the " best 50 colleges for <unk> <unk> " . The ranking was based on representation , affordability and post @-@ graduate earnings . In 2016 , Forbes ranked Duke sixth on its list of " Expensive Schools Worth Every Penny " . 
 = = = = Graduate school rankings = = = = 
 In U.S. News & World Report 's " America 's Best Graduate Schools 2017 , " Duke 's medical school ranked tied for 8th in research and 8th in primary care . The School of Law was ranked 11th in the 2017 rankings by the same publication , with Duke 's nursing school ranked tied for 4th while the Sanford School of Public Policy ranked tied for 13th overall for 2017 . Among business schools in the United States , the Fuqua School of Business was ranked tied for 12th overall by U.S. News & World Report for 2017 , while BusinessWeek ranked its full @-@ time MBA program 1st in the nation in 2014 . The graduate program for the Pratt School of Engineering was ranked 30th in the U.S. by U.S. News & World Report in its 2017 rankings . 
 Times Higher Education ranked the mathematics department tenth in the world in 2011 . Duke 's graduate level specialties that are ranked among the top ten in the nation include areas in the following departments : biological sciences , medicine , nursing , engineering , law , business , English , history , physics , statistics , public affairs , physician assistant ( ranked # 1 ) , clinical psychology , political science , and sociology . In 2007 , Duke was ranked 22nd in the world by Wuhan University 's Research Center for Chinese Science Evaluation . The ranking was based on journal article publication counts and citation frequencies in over 11 @,@ 000 academic journals from around the world . A 2012 study conducted by academic analytics ranks Duke fourth in the nation ( behind only Harvard , Stanford , and MIT ) in terms of faculty productivity . In 2013 , Duke Law ranked 6th in Forbes magazine 's ranking of law schools whose graduates earn the highest starting salaries . T In 2013 , Duke 's Fuqua School of Business was ranked 6th in terms of graduate starting salaries by U.S. News & World Report . In the same year , a ranking compiled by the University of Texas at Dallas ranked Fuqua 5th in the world based on the research productivity of its faculty . The MEM ( Masters in Engineering Management ) program has been ranked 3rd in the world by Eduniversal In 2013 , Forbes ranked Duke 4th in the nation in terms of return on investment ( ROI ) . The ranking used alumni giving as a criteria to determine which private colleges offer the best returns . In the same year , Above the Law ranked Duke Law 6th in the nation in its ranking of law schools based on employment outcomes In 2013 , Business Insider ranked Duke 's Fuqua School of Business 5th in the world based on an extensive survey of hiring professionals . In the same year , Forbes magazine ranked Fuqua 8th in the country based on return on investment . In 2014 , <unk> named Duke the 3rd best undergraduate university in the U.S. for media professionals . Duke also ranked 4th for investment bankers , 7th for finance professional and 8th for software developers . The ranking was based on career outcomes . In 2014 , Duke was named the 20th best global research university according to rankings published by U.S. News & World Report and the University Ranking by Academic Performance published by Middle East Technical University . The U.S. News ranking was based on 10 indicators that measure academic research performance and global reputations . The University Ranking by Academic Performance uses citation data obtained from Thomson Reuters ' Web of Science to rank universities based on research output . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Student body = = = 
 Duke 's student body consists of 6 @,@ 485 undergraduates and 8 @,@ 465 graduate and professional students ( as of fall 2015 ) . 
 = = = Residential life = = = 
 Duke requires its students to live on campus for the first three years of undergraduate life , except for a small percentage of second semester juniors who are exempted by a lottery system . This requirement is justified by the administration as an effort to help students connect more closely with one another and sustain a sense of belonging within the Duke community . Thus , 85 % of undergraduates live on campus . All freshmen are housed in one of 14 residences on East Campus . These buildings range in occupancy size from 50 ( Epworth — the oldest residence hall , built in 1892 as " the Inn " ) to 190 residents ( Gilbert @-@ <unk> ) . Most of these are in the Georgian style typical of the East Campus architecture . Although the newer residence halls differ in style , they still relate to East 's Georgian heritage . Learning communities connect the residential component of East Campus with students of similar academic and social interests . Similarly , students in FOCUS , a first @-@ year program that features courses clustered around a specific theme , live together in the same residence hall as other students in their cluster . 
 Sophomores , juniors and seniors can choose to reside on either West or Central campuses , although the majority of undergraduate seniors choose to live off campus . West Campus contains six quadrangles — the four along " Main " West were built in 1930s , while two newer ones have since been added . Central Campus provides housing for over 1 @,@ 000 students in apartment buildings . All housing on West and Central is organized into about 80 " houses " — sections of residence halls or clusters of apartments — to which students can return each year . House residents create their house identities . There are houses of unaffiliated students , as well as wellness houses and living @-@ learning communities that adopt a theme such as the arts or foreign languages . There are also numerous " selective living groups " on campus for students wanting self @-@ selected living arrangements . SLGs are residential groups similar to fraternities or sororities , except they are generally co @-@ ed and unaffiliated with any national organization . Many of them also revolve around a particular interest such as entrepreneurship , civic engagement or African @-@ American or Asian culture . Fifteen fraternities and nine sororities also are housed on campus , primarily on Central . Most of the non @-@ fraternity selective living groups are coeducational . 
 = = = Greek and social life = = = 
 About 30 % of undergraduate men and about 40 % of undergraduate women at Duke are members of fraternities and sororities . Most of the 17 Interfraternity Council recognized fraternity chapters live in sections within the residence halls . Starting in 2012 , the nine Panhellenic Association sorority chapters decided to live in houses ( clusters of apartments ) on Central Campus . Not all sorority members live with their chapters , though , as membership exceeds house space . Eight National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council ( historically African American ) fraternities and sororities also hold chapters at Duke . In addition , there are seven other fraternities and sororities that are a part of the Inter @-@ Greek Council , the multicultural Greek umbrella organization . Duke also has Selective Living Groups , or SLGs , on campus for students seeking informal residential communities often built around themes . SLGs are residential groups similar to fraternities or sororities , except they are generally co @-@ ed and unaffiliated with any national organizations . Fraternity chapters and SLGs frequently host social events in their residential sections , which are often open to non @-@ members . 
 In the late 1990s , a new keg policy was put into effect that requires all student groups to purchase kegs through Duke Dining Services . According to administrators , the rule change was intended as a way to ensure compliance with alcohol consumption laws as well as to increase on @-@ campus safety . Some students saw the administration 's increasingly strict policies as an attempt to alter social life at Duke . As a result , off @-@ campus parties at rented houses became more frequent in subsequent years as a way to avoid Duke policies . Many of these houses were situated in the midst of family neighborhoods , prompting residents to complain about excessive noise and other violations . Police have responded by breaking up parties at several houses , handing out citations , and occasionally arresting party @-@ goers . In the mid @-@ to @-@ late 2000s ( decade ) , the administration made a concerted effort to help students re @-@ establish a robust , on @-@ campus social life and has worked with numerous student groups , especially the Duke University Union , to feature a wide array of events and activities . In March 2006 , the university purchased 15 houses in the Trinity Park area that Duke students had typically rented and subsequently sold them to individual families in an effort to encourage renovations to the properties and to reduce off @-@ campus partying in the midst of residential neighborhoods . 
 Duke athletics , particularly men 's basketball , traditionally serves as a significant component of student life . Duke 's students have been recognized as some of the most creative and original fans in all of collegiate athletics . Students , often referred to as Cameron <unk> , show their support of the men 's basketball team by " tenting " for home games against key Atlantic Coast Conference rivals , especially University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill ( UNC ) . Because tickets to all varsity sports are free to students , they line up for hours before each game , often spending the night on the sidewalk . For a mid @-@ February game against UNC , some of the most eager students might even begin tenting before spring classes begin . The total number of participating tents is capped at 100 ( each tent can have up to 12 occupants ) , though interest is such that it could exceed that number if space permitted . Tenting involves setting up and inhabiting a tent on the grass near Cameron Indoor Stadium , an area known as <unk> , or K @-@ ville for short . There are different categories of tenting based on the length of time and number of people who must be in the tent . At night , K @-@ ville often turns into the scene of a party or occasional concert . The men 's basketball coach , Mike Krzyzewski , occasionally buys pizza for the inhabitants of the tent village . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 = = = = Student organizations = = = = 
 More than 400 student clubs and organizations operate on Duke 's campus . These include numerous student government , special interest , and service organizations . Duke Student Government ( DSG ) charters and provides most of the funding for other student groups and represents students ' interests when dealing with the administration . The Duke University Union ( <unk> ) is the school 's primary programming organization , serving a center of social , cultural , intellectual and recreational life . Cultural groups are provided funding directly from the university via the Multicultural Center as well as other institutional funding sources . One of the most popular activities on campus is competing in sports . Duke has 37 sports clubs , and several intramural teams that are officially recognized . Performance groups such as Hoof ' n ' Horn , the country 's second oldest student @-@ run musical theater organization , a cappella groups , student bands , and theater organizations are also prominent on campus . The Duke University mock trial team won the national championship in 2012 . The Duke University Student Dining Advisory Committee provides guidance to the administration on issues regarding student dining , life , and restaurant <unk> 
 Cultural groups on campus include the Asian Students Association , Blue Devils United ( the student lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender group ) , Black Student Alliance , Diya ( South Asian Association ) , Jewish Life at Duke , Mi Gente ( Latino Student Association ) , International Association / International Council , Muslim Student Association , Native American Student Coalition , Newman Catholic Student Center , Languages <unk> , and Students of the Caribbean . 
 = = = = Civic engagement = = = = 
 More than 75 percent of Duke students pursue service @-@ learning opportunities in Durham and around the world through DukeEngage and other programs that advance the university 's mission of " knowledge in service to society . " Launched in 2007 , DukeEngage provides full funding for select Duke undergraduates who wish to pursue an immersive summer of service in partnership with a U.S. or international community . As of summer 2013 , more than 2 @,@ 400 Duke students had volunteered through DukeEngage in 75 nations on six continents . Duke students have created more than 30 service organizations in Durham and the surrounding area . Examples include a weeklong camp for children of cancer patients ( Camp <unk> ) and a group that promotes awareness about sexual health , rape prevention , alcohol and drug use , and eating disorders ( Healthy Devils ) . The Duke @-@ Durham Neighborhood Partnership , started by the Office of Community Affairs in 1996 , attempts to address major concerns of local residents and schools by leveraging university resources . Another community project , " Scholarship with a Civic Mission , " is a joint program between the Hart Leadership Program and the Kenan Institute for Ethics . Another program includes Project CHILD , a tutoring program involving 80 first @-@ year volunteers ; and an after @-@ school program for at @-@ risk students in Durham that was started with $ 2 @.@ 25 million grant from the Kellogg Foundation in 2002 . Two prominent civic engagement pre @-@ orientation programs also exist for incoming freshmen : Project <unk> and Project BUILD . Project <unk> is a free weeklong program co @-@ sponsored by the Kenan Institute for Ethics and the Duke Women 's Center with the focus on ethical leadership and social change in the Durham community ; students are challenged in a variety of ways and work closely with local non @-@ profits . Project BUILD is a freshman volunteering group that dedicates 3 @,@ 300 hours of service to a variety of projects such as schools , Habitat for Humanity , food banks , substance rehabilitation centers , homeless shelters . Some courses at Duke incorporate service as part of the curriculum to augment material learned in class such as in psychology or education courses ( known as service learning courses ) . 
 = = = = Student media = = = = 
 The Chronicle , Duke 's independent undergraduate daily newspaper , has been continually published since 1905 and now , along with its website , has a readership of about 70 @,@ 000 . Its editors are responsible for selecting the term " Blue Devil " . The newspaper won Best in Show in the tabloid division at the 2005 Associated Collegiate Press National College Media Convention . Cable 13 , established in 1976 , is Duke 's student @-@ run television station . It is a popular activity for students interested in film production and media . <unk> @-@ FM , licensed in 1983 , is the University 's nationally recognized , noncommercial FM radio station , operated by student and community volunteers . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Duke University teams are known as the Blue Devils . They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I level ( Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) sub @-@ level for football ) , primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) for all sports since the 1953 – 54 season . Men 's sports include baseball , basketball , cross country , fencing , football , golf , lacrosse , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field and wrestling ; while women 's sports include basketball , cross country , fencing , field hockey , golf , lacrosse , rowing , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field and volleyball . Duke plans to add softball as its 27th varsity sport in spring 2018 . 
 Duke 's teams have won 16 NCAA team national championships — the women 's golf team has won six ( 1999 , 2002 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 and 2014 ) , the men 's basketball team has won five ( 1991 , 1992 , 2001 , 2010 , and 2015 ) , the men 's lacrosse team has won three ( 2010 , 2013 , and 2014 ) , and the men 's soccer ( 1986 ) and women 's tennis ( 2009 ) teams have won one each . 
 Duke consistently ranks among the top in the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics ( NACDA ) Directors ' Cup , an overall measure of an institution 's athletic success . For Division I in 2013 , Duke finished ninth overall and fifth in the ACC . 
 Duke has won 126 ACC Championships since claiming football , men 's lacrosse and men 's golf in the league 's first year in 1953 – 54 , including the Blue Devils ACC Championships in football and volleyball in 2013 – 14 . 
 Since 1999 – 2000 , Duke has captured 52 league crowns , second most in the ACC , and has won at least one ACC Championship each season since 1979 – 80 and at least two every season since 1990 – 91 . Since hiring David <unk> as head football coach in 2007 , the Duke football program has become one of the strongest in the ACC . The Blue Devils won the ACC Coastal Division in 2013 , but lost to No. 1 @-@ ranked Florida State in the conference championship game . Duke then played Texas A & M in the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl , losing 52 – 48 to the Aggies , who were led by Heisman Trophy winner Johnny Manziel . 
 The Blue Devil mascot 's origins are rooted in an elite French alpine fighting unit that garnered accolades and much global attention during World War I and its aftermath for its flowing blue capes and blue berets . Duke 's mascot origin is considered to be military and patriotic rather than anti @-@ religious . Historically , Duke 's major rival has been the Tar Heels of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , especially in basketball . The rivalry has led the fanbases to identify the two differing shades of blue in relation to their respective university — calling the lighter powder blue " Carolina blue " and the darker blue " Duke blue " . 
 On the academic front , eight Duke varsity athletics programs registered a perfect 1 @,@ 000 score in the NCAA 's multi @-@ year Academic Progress Report ( APR ) released in May 2014 . APR scores for football and men 's basketball were the highest among ACC schools in conference @-@ sponsored sports . Overall Duke totaled the highest APR scores in 10 of the ACC 's 25 sports . 
 = = = Men 's basketball = = = 
 Duke 's men 's basketball team is one of the nation 's most successful basketball programs . The team has captured five National Championships ( tied for third place all time ) , while attending 15 Final Fours ( third place overall ) and 10 Championship games ( tied for second ) . Duke has the most Atlantic Coast Conference championships , with 19 , and has the most National Players of the Year in the nation , with 11 . Seventy @-@ two players have been selected in the NBA draft , while 32 players have been honored as All @-@ Americans . Duke 's program is one of only two to have been to at least one Final Four and one National Championship game in each of the past five decades . The program 's home facility is historic Cameron Indoor Stadium , considered one of the top venues in the nation . 
 The team 's success has been particularly outstanding over the past 30 years under coach Mike Krzyzewski ( often simply called " Coach K " ) , who also has coached the USA men 's national basketball team since 2006 and led the team to Olympic golds in 2008 and 2012 , as well as World Championship gold in 2010 and 2014 . Their successes include becoming the only team to win five national championships since the NCAA Tournament field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985 , 11 Final Fours in the past 25 years , and eight of nine ACC tournament championships from 1999 to 2006 . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 The Blue Devils have won seven ACC Football Championships , have had ten players honored as ACC Player of the Year ( the most in the ACC ) , and have had three Pro Football Hall of Famers come through the program ( second in the ACC to only Miami 's four ) . The Blue Devils have produced 11 College Football Hall of Famers , which is tied for the 2nd most in the ACC . Duke has also won 18 total conference championships ( 7 ACC , 9 Southern Conference , and 1 Big Five Conference ) . That total is tied with Clemson for the highest in the ACC . 
 The most famous Duke football season came in 1938 , when Wallace Wade coached the " Iron Dukes " that shut out all regular season opponents ; only three teams in history can claim such a feat . That same year , Duke made their first Rose Bowl appearance , where they lost 7 – 3 when USC scored a touchdown in the final minute of the game . Wade 's Blue Devils lost another Rose Bowl to Oregon State in 1942 , this one held at Duke 's home stadium due to the attack on Pearl Harbor , which resulted in the fear that a large gathering on the West Coast might be in range of Japanese aircraft carriers . The football program proved successful in the 1950s and 1960s , winning six of the first ten ACC football championships from 1953 to 1962 under coach Bill Murray ; the Blue Devils would not win the ACC championship again until 1989 under coach Steve Spurrier . 
 David <unk> was brought in prior to the 2008 season , and amassed more wins in his first season than the previous three years combined . The 2009 team won 5 of 12 games , and was eliminated from bowl contention in the next @-@ to @-@ last game of the season . Mike MacIntyre , the defensive coordinator , was named 2009 Assistant Coach of the Year by the American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) . 
 While the football team has struggled at times on the field , the graduation rate of its players is consistently among the highest among Division I FBS schools . Duke 's high graduation rates have earned it more AFCA Academic Achievement Awards than any other institution . 
 In 2012 , the football team became bowl @-@ eligible for the first time since the 1994 season . The Blue Devils were invited to play in the Belk Bowl in Charlotte , but lost to Big East Conference co @-@ champion the Cincinnati Bearcats 48 – 34 . 
 In 2013 , the team posted a school record 10 wins including wins over # 14 Virginia Tech and # 23 Miami . The season culminated in a Coastal Division Championship and a narrow loss to Texas A & M in the Chick @-@ Fil @-@ A Bowl . 
 For the 2014 season , Duke finished 9 – 3 , 5 – 3 ( ACC ) and earned a trip to the Sun Bowl , where the Blue Devils lost to the Pac 12 's Arizona State 36 – 31 . In spring 2015 , the Detroit Lions drafted Duke offensive guard <unk> Tomlinson in the first round of the NFL draft . The Washington Redskins drafted wide receiver Jamison Crowder in the fourth round of the draft . 
 = = = Track and Field = = = 
 In 2003 Norm Ogilvie was promoted to Director of Track and Field , and has led athletes to over 60 individual ACC championships , and 81 All @-@ America selections , along with most of the track and field records being broken during his tenure . A new facility , the Morris Williams Track and Field Stadium , opened in 2015 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Duke 's active alumni base of more than 145 @,@ 000 devote themselves to the university through organizations and events such as the annual Reunion Weekend and Homecoming . There are 75 Duke clubs in the U.S. and 38 such international clubs . For the 2008 – 09 fiscal year , Duke tied for third in alumni giving rate among U.S. colleges and universities according to U.S. News & World Report . Based on statistics compiled by PayScale in 2011 , Duke alumni rank seventh in mid @-@ career median salary among all U.S. colleges and universities . A number of alumni have made significant contributions in the fields of government , law , science , academia , business , arts , journalism , and athletics , among others . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 Richard Nixon , 37th President of the United States graduated with a law degree in 1937 . Former U.S. Senator and Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole , 33rd President of Chile Ricardo Lagos , former U.S. Secretary of Commerce Juanita M. Kreps , congressman and three @-@ time presidential candidate Ron Paul , U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs and former Chief of Staff of the United States Army Eric Shinseki , and the first United States Chief Performance Officer Jeffrey <unk> and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Martin Dempsey are among the most notable alumni with involvement in politics and government . 
 = = = Academia and research = = = 
 Duke graduates who have won the Nobel Prize in Physics include Hans <unk> for his development of the ion trap technique , Robert Richardson for his discovery of superfluidity in helium @-@ 3 , and Charles Townes for his work on quantum electronics . Other alumni in research and academia include Turing Award winners Fred Brooks , Edmund M. Clarke and John Cocke , Templeton Prize winning physicist and religion scholar Ian Barbour , MacArthur Award recipient Paul Farmer , and former Dean of the Graduate School at Princeton Theodore <unk> . Duke professor Robert J. Lefkowitz shared the 2012 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Ingrid <unk> , currently a James B. Duke professor of mathematics , served as the first woman president of the International Mathematical Union and is known for pioneering work on <unk> . 
 = = = Journalism = = = 
 Prominent journalists include talk show host Charlie Rose , The Washington Post sports writer John Feinstein , Chief Washington Correspondent for CNBC and The Wall Street Journal writer John Harwood , CBS News President Sean McManus , chief legal correspondent for Good Morning America Dan Abrams , and CNN anchor and senior correspondent for The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer Judy Woodruff . Basketball analysts and commentators include Jay Bilas , Mike <unk> , Jim <unk> , and Jay Williams . Magazine editors include Rik Kirkland of Fortune and Clay Felker , founder of New York Magazine . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 In the area of literature , William Styron won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1968 for his novel The Confessions of Nat Turner and is well known for his 1979 novel Sophie 's Choice . Anne Tyler also received the Pulitzer Prize for her 1988 novel Breathing Lessons . Additionally , Elizabeth A. Fenn won the Pulitzer Prize for History in 2015 . Other acclaimed writers include John W. Campbell and Reynolds Price . 
 In the visual arts realm , Annabeth Gish ( actress in the X @-@ Files and The West Wing ) , Ken Jeong ( actor in The Hangover and Community ) , Retta ( actress and comedian ) , Jared Harris ( actor in Mad Men ) , Randall Wallace ( screenwriter , producer , and director , Braveheart , Pearl Harbor , We Were Soldiers ) , Mike Posner ( singer , songwriter , and producer , Cooler Than Me , Please Don 't Go ) , David Hudgins ( television writer and producer , Everwood , Friday Night Lights ) and Robert Yeoman ( cinematographer , The Grand Budapest Hotel ) headline the list . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 On the business front , the current or recent President , CEO , or Chairman of each of the following Fortune 500 companies is a Duke alumnus : Apple ( Tim Cook ) , BB & T ( John A. Allison IV ) , Boston Scientific Corporation ( Peter Nicholas ) , Chesapeake Energy ( Aubrey McClendon ) , Cisco Systems ( John Chambers ) , General Motors ( Rick Wagoner ) , JPMorgan Chase ( Steven Black ) , Medtronic ( William A. Hawkins ) , Morgan Stanley ( John J. Mack ) , Norfolk Southern ( David R. Goode ) , Northwest Airlines ( Gary L. Wilson ) , PepsiCo ( Karl von der Heyden ) , Procter & Gamble ( David S. Taylor ) , Pfizer ( Edmund T. Pratt , Jr . ) , The Bank of New York Mellon ( Gerald Hassell ) , and Wachovia ( Robert K. Steel ) . Kevin Martin was Chairman of the FCC , and Rex Adams serves as the Chairman of PBS . Another alumna , Melinda Gates , is the co @-@ founder of the $ 31 @.@ 9 billion Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation , the nation 's wealthiest charitable foundation . Some startups founded by Duke alumni include Box ( Dylan Smith ) and <unk> ( Howard Lerman ) . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 Management and ownership of professional athletic franchises include Adam Silver ( NBA commissioner ) , John P. Angelos ( Executive Vice President of the Baltimore Orioles ) , Aubrey McClendon ( partial owner of the Oklahoma City Thunder ) , John Canning , Jr . ( co @-@ owner of Milwaukee Brewers ) , Danny Ferry ( former general manager of the Cleveland Cavaliers ) , Stephen <unk> ( co @-@ owner of Boston Celtics ) , and Jeffrey <unk> ( owner of the Tampa Bay Lightning ) . 
 Finally , several athletes have become stars at the professional level , especially in basketball 's NBA . Shane Battier , Corey Maggette , Elton Brand , Carlos Boozer , <unk> Deng , Christian Laettner , Bobby Hurley , Grant Hill , Kyrie Irving and J.J. Redick are among the most famous . 
 = Exploding cigar = 
 An exploding cigar is a variety of cigar that explodes shortly after being lit . Such cigars are normally packed with a minute chemical explosive charge near the lighting end or with a non @-@ chemical device that ruptures the cigar when exposed to heat . The customary intended purpose of exploding cigars is as a form of hostile practical joke , rather than to cause lasting physical harm to the butt of the joke . Nevertheless , the high risk of unintended injuries from their use caused a decline in their manufacture and sale . 
 Although far rarer than their prank cousins , exploding cigars used as a means to kill or attempt to kill targets in real life has been claimed , and is well represented as a fictional plot device . The most famous case concerning the intentionally deadly variety was an alleged plot by the CIA of the US in the 1960s to assassinate Fidel Castro . Notable real @-@ life incidents involving the non @-@ lethal ilk include an exploding cigar purportedly given by Ulysses S. Grant to an acquaintance and a dust @-@ up between Turkish military officers and Ernest Hemingway after he pranked one of them with an exploding cigar . 
 = = Manufacture and decline = = 
 During the early- to mid @-@ 20th century , exploding cigars were a popular practical joke device , frequently advertised and mentioned in newspapers of the era . Despite their popularity , the history of the exploding cigar 's development is apparently not well documented , including how , where and when they first appeared . The largest manufacturer and purveyor of exploding cigars in the United States during the middle of the 20th century was the S. S. Adams Company , which , according to The Saturday Evening Post , made more exploding cigars and other gag novelty items as of 1946 than its next eleven competitors combined . 
 The company was founded by Soren Sorensen Adams , dubbed " king of the professional pranksters " , who invented and patented many common gag novelties such as sneezing powder , itching powder , the dribble glass and the joy buzzer . The largest New York – based manufacturer of exploding cigars was Richard Appel , a German refugee from Nuremberg , who in or about 1940 opened a gag novelty factory on Manhattan 's Lower East Side . 
 By the time exploding cigars were being turned out by manufacturers such as Adams and Appel , the chemical explosive variety had fallen out of favor . According to Adams , the large @-@ scale switch to a non @-@ chemical device occurred in approximately 1915 in the aftermath of a death caused by a homemade exploding cigar rigged with dynamite . Though exploding cigars were not normally rigged with dynamite but with explosive caps using a less powerful incendiary , following the incident , a number of U.S. states banned the product altogether . The replacement for chemical explosives was a metal spring mechanism , bound with cord — as the victim puffed away , the cord burned through , causing the device to spring open , thus rupturing the cigar 's end . 
 However , the decline in the use and advertisement of the exploding cigar was neither complete , nor permanent , and they can be obtained worldwide . In the United States , makers include Don Osvaldo and Hawkins Joke Shop . However , their availability in the USA is limited , as some states , such as Massachusetts , have banned their sale entirely . 
 Prank exploding cigars have caused many injuries over their history . For example , in 1902 one Edward <unk> sued a cigar shop for an exploding cigar which burned his hand so badly three of his fingers had to be amputated . As has been observed by one legal scholar , " [ t ] he utility of the exploding cigar is so low and the risk of injury so high as to warrant a conclusion that the cigar is defective and should not have been marketed at all . " Laws have been enacted banning the sale of exploding cigars entirely , such as Chapter 178 of Massachusetts ' Acts and Resolves , passed by its legislature in 1967 . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Both prank and intentionally deadly exploding cigars have been featured in numerous works of fiction , spanning many forms of media including literature , film , comics books , cartoons and others . A well @-@ known use of the exploding cigar in literature , for example , appears in Thomas Pynchon 's 1973 novel , Gravity 's Rainbow . In it , the character Etzel <unk> symbolically betrays his death wish by eagerly smoking a cigar he knows to be of the prank explosive variety . Other book examples include Robert Coover 's 1977 novel , The Public Burning , where a fictionalized Richard Nixon hands an exploding cigar to Uncle Sam , and Sherburne James ' Death 's <unk> Fist ( 1982 ) , in which a Tammany Hall politico of the 1890s is murdered with an exploding cigar . 
 Film examples include Cecil B. DeMille 's 1921 romance Fool 's Paradise , wherein the main character is blinded by an exploding cigar ; Laurel and Hardy 's Great Guns ( 1941 ) , which features a gag in which tobacco is replaced by gunpowder ; the <unk> Sommer vehicle , <unk> Than the Male ( 1967 ) , where a murder by exploding cigar is a key plot element ; in The Beatles ' 1968 animated feature film , Yellow Submarine , where an exploding cigar is used to rebuff a psychedelic boxing monster ; the 1984 comedy Top Secret ! , in which Omar Sharif 's British secret agent character is pranked with an exploding cigar by a <unk> ; and in the 2005 film V for Vendetta , where the main antagonist 's cigar is swapped with an exploding one during a comedy skit . 
 Appearance of exploding cigars in the Warner Bros. cartoon franchises , Merrie Melodies and Looney Tunes was fairly common , often coupled with the explosion resulting in the pranked character appearing in blackface . Some examples include : Bacall to Arms ( 1942 ) , wherein an animated Humphrey Bogart gets zapped by an exploding cigar leaving him in blackface , 1949 's Mississippi Hare , where the character , ' Colonel Shuffle ' likewise ends up in blackface after the explosion , 1952 's Rabbit 's Kin , in which Pete Puma offers Bugs Bunny an exploding cigar ( true to form , Bugs Bunny turns the tables on the hapless feline , placing the cigar in Pete 's mouth after he is dazed and lighting it with expected results ) , and 1964 's Dr. Devil and Mr. Hare , where the Tasmanian Devil successfully gets Bugs Bunny to smoke an exploding cigar . 
 Other media examples include television appearances such as when Peter Falk 's Columbo must solve an industrial magnate 's death by exploding cigar in the episode " Short Fuse " ( 1972 ) , in a season four episode of the United States television , CBS crime drama , CSI : NY titled " Child 's Play " , wherein the forensic team investigate the death of a man killed by an exploding cigar , and in a 1966 episode of The Avengers entitled " A Touch of Brimstone " ; in video games such as Day of the Tentacle where the player can offer George Washington an exploding cigar ; and as a stock device by the Joker in Batman comic books . For example , in Batman # 251 ( 1973 ) entitled The Joker 's Five @-@ way Revenge , an exploding cigar is used by the Joker to decapitate a man . 
 = = In reality = = 
 = = = CIA plot to assassinate Castro = = = 
 In the late 1950s under Dwight D. Eisenhower 's presidential administration and in the early 1960s under John F. Kennedy 's , the CIA had been brainstorming and implementing plots to assassinate Fidel Castro , going as far as enlisting the help of mafia leaders such as Johnny Roselli and Santo <unk> , Jr. to assist in carrying out their plans . Many assassination ideas were floated by the CIA in the covert operation which was dubbed " Operation Mongoose . " The most infamous was the CIA 's alleged plot to capitalize on Castro 's well known love of cigars by slipping into his supply a very real and lethal " exploding cigar . " A November 4 , 1967 Saturday Evening Post article reported that during Castro 's visit to the United Nations in 1966 a CIA agent approached New York City police chief inspector Michael J. Murphy with a plan to get Castro to smoke an exploding cigar . 
 While numerous sources state the exploding cigar plot as fact , at least one source asserts it to be simply a myth , and another , mere supermarket tabloid fodder . Another suggests that the story does have its origins in the CIA , but that it was never seriously proposed by them as a plot . Rather , the plot was made up by the CIA as an intentionally " silly " idea to feed to those questioning them about their plans for Castro , in order to deflect scrutiny from more serious areas of inquiry . 
 Whether true or not , the CIA 's exploding cigar assassination plot inspired the cover of the October 1963 issue ( # 82 ) of Mad Magazine . The cover ( pictured at right ) bears the headline , " You 'll Get a <unk> out of this issue of Mad Magazine " , and features a painting by Norman Mingo depicting Castro in the act of lighting a cigar wrapped with a cigar band on which is drawn Alfred E. Neuman with his fingers plugging his ears , awaiting the explosion . An exploding cigar is also featured on the poster for the Channel 4 British Documentary , 638 Ways to Kill Castro , which shows Castro with a cigar in his mouth that has a fuse projecting from the end and a lit match approaching . An exploding cigar was tested on a season 2 episode of Deadliest Warrior , KGB vs. CIA . The cigar completely destroyed the upper and lower jaw of a gel head but was determined to be very unreliable due to its timed fuse and small explosive payload . 
 = = = Ulysses S. Grant 's delayed gift = = = 
 According to a 1932 Associated Press story , U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant gave Horace Norton , the founder of a defunct college in Chicago , an exploding cigar soon after being introduced to him , but the " joke " wasn 't revealed until many years later . 
 According to the story , unaware of the nature of the gift , Norton saved the cigar , keeping it on display in his college 's museum . Years later , when the school was shutting its doors for good , the alumni thought it would be a fitting gesture to smoke the cigar at the college 's annual reunion . The honor was given to Winstead Norton , Horace 's grandson . During the sober speech he was presenting , Winstead lit the cigar , and after two puffs , it exploded . A 1952 news report contradicts one detail , holding that the explosion ultimately occurred at a family reunion rather than the alumni affair noted . 
 The tale of " Grant 's cigar " has unquestionably been embellished over time . The possibility exists that the tale is a hoax or urban legend or that the cigar was tampered with by someone after Grant 's purported presentation . 
 = = = Ernest Hemingway = = = 
 Reportedly , Ernest Hemingway , urged on by a group of journalists with whom he was drinking at the Palace Hotel bar in Rapallo , Italy , presented an exploding cigar to one of four bodyguards of Turkish general İsmet İnönü . When the cigar " went off " , all four guards drew their guns and aimed at Hemingway . He apparently escaped without any grievous bodily injury . 
 = Hungarian Revolution of 1956 = 
 The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 or the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 ( Hungarian : 1956 @-@ os <unk> or 1956 @-@ os <unk> ) was a nationwide revolt against the government of the Hungarian People 's Republic and its Soviet @-@ imposed policies , lasting from 23 October until 10 November 1956 . Though leaderless when it first began , it was the first major threat to Soviet control since the USSR 's forces drove out Nazi Germany from its territory at the end of World War II and broke into Central and Eastern Europe . 
 The revolt began as a student demonstration , which attracted thousands as they marched through central Budapest to the Parliament building , calling out on the streets using a van with loudspeakers via Radio Free Europe . A student delegation , entering the radio building to try to broadcast the students ' demands , was detained . When the delegation 's release was demanded by the demonstrators outside , they were fired upon by the State Security Police ( ÁVH ) from within the building . One student died and was wrapped in a flag and held above the crowd . This was the start of the revolution . As the news spread , disorder and violence erupted throughout the capital . 
 The revolt spread quickly across Hungary and the government collapsed . Thousands organised into militias , battling the ÁVH and Soviet troops . Pro @-@ Soviet communists and ÁVH members were often executed or imprisoned and former political prisoners were released and armed . Radical impromptu workers ' councils wrested municipal control from the ruling Hungarian Working People 's Party and demanded political changes . A new government formally disbanded the ÁVH , declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact , and pledged to re @-@ establish free elections . By the end of October , fighting had almost stopped and a sense of normality began to return . 
 After announcing a willingness to negotiate a withdrawal of Soviet forces , the Politburo changed its mind and moved to crush the revolution . On 4 November , a large Soviet force invaded Budapest and other regions of the country . The Hungarian resistance continued until 10 November . Over 2 @,@ 500 Hungarians and 700 Soviet troops were killed in the conflict , and 200 @,@ 000 Hungarians fled as refugees . Mass arrests and denunciations continued for months thereafter . By January 1957 , the new Soviet @-@ installed government had suppressed all public opposition . These Soviet actions , while strengthening control over the Eastern Bloc , alienated many Western Marxists , leading to splits and / or considerable losses of membership for Communist Parties in the West . 
 Public discussion about this revolution was suppressed in Hungary for more than 30 years . Since the thaw of the 1980s , it has been a subject of intense study and debate . At the inauguration of the Third Hungarian Republic in 1989 , 23 October was declared a national holiday . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 During World War II Hungary was a member of the Axis powers , allied with the forces of Nazi Germany , Fascist Italy , Romania , and Bulgaria . In 1941 , the Hungarian military participated in the occupation of Yugoslavia and the invasion of the Soviet Union . The Soviet army was able to force back the Hungarian and other Axis invaders . By 1944 Soviet armies were advancing towards Hungary . 
 Fearing invasion , the Hungarian government began armistice negotiations with the Allies . These ended when Nazi Germany invaded and occupied the country and set up its own pro @-@ Axis regime , the Government of National Unity . 
 Both Hungarian and German forces stationed in Hungary were subsequently defeated when the Soviet Union invaded the country in 1945 . 
 = = = Postwar occupation = = = 
 After World War II , the Soviet Army occupied Hungary , with the country coming under the Soviet Union 's sphere of influence . At the time , Hungary was a multiparty democracy , and elections in 1945 produced a coalition government under Prime Minister Zoltán <unk> . However , the Hungarian Communist Party , a Marxist – Leninist group who shared the Soviet government 's ideological beliefs , constantly wrested small concessions in a process named salami tactics , which sliced away the elected government 's influence , despite the fact that it had received only 17 % of the vote . 
 After the elections of 1945 , the portfolio of the Interior Ministry , which oversaw the Hungarian State Security Police ( <unk> <unk> , later known as the ÁVH ) , was forcibly transferred from the Independent Smallholders Party to a nominee of the Communist Party . The ÁVH employed methods of intimidation , falsified accusations , imprisonment , and torture to suppress political opposition . The brief period of multi @-@ party democracy came to an end when the Communist Party merged with the Social Democratic Party to become the Hungarian Working People 's Party , which stood its candidate list unopposed in 1949 . The People 's Republic of Hungary was then declared . By 1949 , the Soviets had concluded a mutual assistance treaty , the Comecon , with Hungary , that granted the Soviet Union rights to a continued military presence , assuring ultimate political control . 
 The Hungarian Working People 's Party set about to modify the economy into socialism by undertaking radical nationalization based on the Soviet model . This forced method of economic socialisation during infrastructural recovery from the war initially resulted in economic stagnation , lower standards of living , and a deep malaise . Writers and journalists were the first to voice open criticism of the government and its policies , publishing critical articles in 1955 . By 22 October 1956 , Technical University students had resurrected the banned <unk> student union , and staged a demonstration on 23 October that set off a chain of events leading directly to the revolution . 
 = = = Political repression and economic decline = = = 
 Hungary became a communist state under the severely authoritarian leadership of Mátyás Rákosi . Under Rákosi 's reign , the Security Police ( ÁVH ) began a series of purges , first within the Communist Party to end opposition to Rákosi 's reign . The victims were labeled as " <unk> , " " western agents , " or " Trotskyists " for as insignificant a crime as spending time in the West to participate in the Spanish Civil War . In total , about half of all the middle and lower level party officials — at least 7 @,@ 000 people — were purged . 
 From 1950 to 1952 , the Security Police forcibly relocated thousands of people to obtain property and housing for the Working People 's Party members , and to remove the threat of the intellectual and ' bourgeois ' class . Thousands were arrested , tortured , tried , and imprisoned in concentration camps , deported to the east , or were executed , including ÁVH founder László Rajk . In a single year , more than 26 @,@ 000 people were forcibly relocated from Budapest . As a consequence , jobs and housing were very difficult to obtain . The deportees generally experienced terrible living conditions and were interned as slave labor on collective farms . Many died as a result of poor living conditions and malnutrition . 
 The Rákosi government thoroughly politicised Hungary 's educational system to supplant the educated classes with a " toiling intelligentsia " . Russian language study and Communist political instruction were made mandatory in schools and universities nationwide . Religious schools were nationalized and church leaders were replaced by those loyal to the government . In 1949 the leader of the Hungarian Catholic Church , Cardinal József Mindszenty , was arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment for treason . Under Rákosi , Hungary 's government was among the most repressive in Europe . 
 The post @-@ war Hungarian economy suffered from multiple challenges . Hungary agreed to pay war reparations approximating US $ 300 million to the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia , and Yugoslavia and to support Soviet garrisons . The Hungarian National Bank in 1946 estimated the cost of reparations as " between 19 and 22 per cent of the annual national income . " In 1946 , the Hungarian currency experienced marked depreciation , resulting in the highest historic rates of hyperinflation known . Hungary 's participation in the Soviet @-@ sponsored COMECON ( Council Of Mutual Economic Assistance ) prevented it from trading with the West or receiving Marshall Plan aid . 
 In addition , Rákosi began his first Five @-@ Year Plan in 1950 @-@ based on Joseph Stalin 's industrial program of the same name that sought to raise industrial output by 380 percent . Like its Soviet counterpart , the Five @-@ Year Plan never achieved these outlandish goals due in part to the crippling effect of the exportation of most of Hungary 's raw resources and technology to the Soviet Union as well as Rákosi 's purges of much of the former professional class . In fact , the Five @-@ Year Plan weakened Hungary 's existing industrial structure and caused real industrial wages to fall by 18 percent between 1949 and 1952 . Rákosi 's agricultural programs met with the same lack of success , with attempted collectivization of the peasantry causing a marked fall in agricultural output and a rise in food shortages . 
 Although national income per capita rose in the first third of the 1950s , the standard of living fell . Huge income deductions to finance industrial investment reduced disposable personal income ; mismanagement created chronic shortages in basic foodstuffs resulting in rationing of bread , sugar , flour , and meat . Compulsory subscriptions to state bonds further reduced personal income . The net result was that disposable real income of workers and employees in 1952 was only two @-@ thirds of what it had been in 1938 , whereas in 1949 , the proportion had been 90 % . These policies had a cumulative negative effect and fueled discontent as foreign debt grew and the population experienced shortages of goods . 
 = = = International events = = = 
 On 5 March 1953 , Joseph Stalin died , ushering in a period of moderate liberalization , when most European communist parties developed a reform wing . In Hungary , the reformist Imre Nagy replaced Rákosi , " Stalin 's Best Hungarian Disciple " , as Prime Minister . However , Rákosi remained General Secretary of the Party , and was able to undermine most of Nagy 's reforms . By April 1955 , he had Nagy discredited and removed from office . After Khrushchev 's " secret speech " of February 1956 , which denounced Stalin and his protégés , Rákosi was deposed as General Secretary of the Party and replaced by Ernő Gerő on 18 July 1956 . Radio Free Europe would broadcast the " secret speech " to Eastern Europe on the advice of Ray S. Cline , who saw it as a way to " as I think I told [ Allen Dulles ] to say , ' indict the whole Soviet system ' . " 
 On 14 May 1955 , the Soviet Union created the Warsaw Pact , binding Hungary to the Soviet Union and its satellite states in Central and Eastern Europe . Among the principles of this alliance were " respect for the independence and sovereignty of states " and " non @-@ interference in their internal affairs " . 
 In 1955 , the Austrian State Treaty and ensuing declaration of neutrality established Austria as a demilitarised and neutral country . This raised Hungarian hopes of also becoming neutral and in 1955 Nagy had considered " ... the possibility of Hungary adopting a neutral status on the Austrian pattern " . 
 In June 1956 , a violent uprising by Polish workers in Poznań was put down by the government , with scores of protesters killed and wounded . Responding to popular demand , in October 1956 , the government appointed the recently rehabilitated reformist communist Władysław Gomułka as First Secretary of the Polish United Workers ' Party , with a mandate to negotiate trade concessions and troop reductions with the Soviet government . After a few tense days of negotiations , on 19 October the Soviets finally gave in to Gomułka 's reformist demands . News of the concessions won by the Poles , known as Polish October , emboldened many Hungarians to hope for similar concessions for Hungary and these sentiments contributed significantly to the highly charged political climate that prevailed in Hungary in the second half of October 1956 . 
 Within the Cold War context of the time , by 1956 , a fundamental tension had appeared in US policy towards Hungary and the Eastern Bloc generally . The United States hoped to encourage European countries to break away from the bloc through their own efforts but wanted to avoid a US @-@ Soviet military confrontation , as escalation might lead to nuclear war . For these reasons , US policy makers had to consider other means of diminishing Soviet influence in Eastern Europe , short of a rollback policy . This led to the development of containment policies such as economic and psychological warfare , covert operations , and , later , negotiation with the Soviet Union regarding the status of the Eastern states . Vice President Richard Nixon had also argued to the National Security Council that it would serve US interests if the Soviet Union would turn on another uprising as they had in Poland , providing a source of anti @-@ Communist propaganda . However , while CIA director Allen Dulles had claimed he was creating an extensive network in Hungary , at the time the agency had no Hungarian station , almost no agents who spoke the language , and unreliable , corrupt local assets . The agency 's own secret history would admit " at no time did we have anything that could or should have been mistaken for an intelligence operation " . 
 In the summer of 1956 , relations between Hungary and the US began to improve . At that time , the US responded very favourably to Hungary 's overtures about a possible expansion of bilateral trade relations . Hungary 's desire for better relations was partly attributable to the country 's catastrophic economic situation . Before any results could be achieved , however , the pace of negotiations was slowed by the Hungarian Ministry of Internal Affairs , which feared that better relations with the West might weaken Communist rule in Hungary . 
 = = = Social unrest builds = = = 
 Rákosi 's resignation in July 1956 emboldened students , writers , and journalists to be more active and critical in politics . Students and journalists started a series of intellectual forums examining the problems facing Hungary . These forums , called Petőfi circles , became very popular and attracted thousands of participants . On 6 October 1956 , László Rajk , who had been executed by the Rákosi government , was reburied in a moving ceremony that strengthened the party opposition . 
 On 16 October 1956 , university students in Szeged snubbed the official communist student union , the <unk> , by re @-@ establishing the <unk> ( Union of Hungarian University and Academy Students ) , a democratic student organization , previously banned under the Rákosi dictatorship . Within days , the student bodies of Pécs , Miskolc , and Sopron followed suit . On 22 October , students of the Technical University compiled a list of sixteen points containing several national policy demands . After the students heard that the Hungarian Writers ' Union planned on the following day to express solidarity with pro @-@ reform movements in Poland by laying a wreath at the statue of Polish @-@ born General Bem , a hero of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 ( 1848 – 49 ) , the students decided to organize a parallel demonstration of sympathy . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 = = = First shots = = = 
 On the afternoon of 23 October 1956 , approximately 20 @,@ 000 protesters convened next to the statue of József Bem — a national hero of Poland and Hungary . Péter Veres , President of the Writers ' Union , read a manifesto to the crowd , which included : The desire for Hungary to be independent from all foreign powers ; a political system based on democratic socialism ( land reform and public ownership of some businesses ) ; Hungary joining the United Nations ; and citizens of Hungary should have all the rights of free men . After the students read their proclamation , the crowd chanted a censored patriotic poem the " National Song " , with the refrain : " This we swear , this we swear , that we will no longer be slaves . " Someone in the crowd cut out the Communist coat of arms from the Hungarian flag , leaving a distinctive hole and others quickly followed suit . Afterwards , most of the crowd crossed the River Danube to join demonstrators outside the Parliament Building . By 18 : 00 , the multitude had swollen to more than 200 @,@ 000 people ; the demonstration was spirited , but peaceful . 
 At 20 : 00 , First Secretary Ernő Gerő broadcast a speech condemning the writers ' and students ' demands . Angered by Gerő 's hard @-@ line rejection , some demonstrators decided to carry out one of their demands , the removal of Stalin 's 30 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) bronze statue that was erected in 1951 on the site of a church , which was demolished to make room for the monument . By 21 : 30 , the statue was toppled and crowds celebrated by placing Hungarian flags in Stalin 's boots , which was all that was left of the statue . 
 At about the same time , a large crowd gathered at the Radio Budapest building , which was heavily guarded by the ÁVH . The flash point was reached as a delegation attempting to broadcast their demands was detained and the crowd grew increasingly unruly as rumours spread that the protesters had been shot . Tear gas was thrown from the upper windows and the ÁVH opened fire on the crowd , killing many . The ÁVH tried to re @-@ supply itself by hiding arms inside an ambulance , but the crowd detected the ruse and intercepted it . Hungarian soldiers sent to relieve the ÁVH hesitated and then , tearing the red stars from their caps , sided with the crowd . Provoked by the ÁVH attack , protesters reacted violently . Police cars were set ablaze , guns were seized from military depots and distributed to the masses and symbols of the Communist regime were vandalised . 
 = = = Fighting spreads , government falls = = = 
 During the night of 23 October , Hungarian Working People 's Party Secretary Ernő Gerő requested Soviet military intervention " to suppress a demonstration that was reaching an ever greater and unprecedented scale . " The Soviet leadership had formulated contingency plans for intervention in Hungary several months before . By 02 : 00 on 24 October , acting in accordance with orders of Georgy Zhukov , the Soviet defence minister , Soviet tanks entered Budapest . 
 By noon , on 24 October , Soviet tanks were stationed outside the Parliament , and Soviet soldiers guarded key bridges and crossroads . Armed revolutionaries quickly set up barricades to defend Budapest , and were reported to have already captured some Soviet tanks by mid @-@ morning . That day , Imre Nagy replaced András Hegedüs as Prime Minister . On the radio , Nagy called for an end to violence and promised to initiate political reforms that had been shelved three years earlier . The population continued to arm itself as sporadic violence erupted . 
 Armed protesters seized the radio building . At the offices of the Communist newspaper <unk> <unk> unarmed demonstrators were fired upon by ÁVH guards who were then driven out as armed demonstrators arrived . At this point , the revolutionaries ' wrath focused on the ÁVH ; Soviet military units were not yet fully engaged , and there were reports of some Soviet troops showing open sympathy for the demonstrators . 
 On 25 October , a mass of protesters gathered in front of the Parliament Building . ÁVH units began shooting into the crowd from the rooftops of neighbouring buildings . Some Soviet soldiers returned fire on the ÁVH , mistakenly believing that they were the targets of the shooting . Supplied by arms taken from the ÁVH or given by Hungarian soldiers who joined the uprising , some in the crowd started shooting back . 
 During this time , the Hungarian Army was divided as the central command structure disintegrated with the rising pressures from the protests on the government . The majority of Hungarian military units in Budapest and the countryside remained uninvolved , as the local commanders generally avoided using force against the protesters and revolutionaries . From 24 to 29 October , however , there were 71 cases of armed clashes between the army and the populace in fifty communities , ranging from the defence of attacks on civilian and military objectives to fighting with insurgents depending on the commanding officer . 
 One example is in the town of <unk> on 26 October , where demonstrations in front of the office of State Security and the local jail led to military action by the Third Corps under the orders of Major General Lajos <unk> , in which seven protesters were shot and several of the organizers were arrested . In another case , a fighter jet strafed a protest in the town of <unk> , killing 17 people and wounding 117 . 
 The attacks at the Parliament forced the collapse of the government . Communist First Secretary Ernő Gerő and former Prime Minister András Hegedüs fled to the Soviet Union ; Imre Nagy became Prime Minister and János Kádár First Secretary of the Communist Party . Revolutionaries began an aggressive offensive against Soviet troops and the remnants of the ÁVH . 
 Units led by Béla Király , after attacking the building of the Central Committee of the Communist Party , executed dozens of suspected communists , state security members , and military personnel . Photographs showed victims with signs of torture . On 30 October , Király 's forces attacked the Central Committee of the Communist Party building . Hungarian politician János <unk> referred to how rebels detained thousands of people , and that thousands more had their names on death lists . In the city of Kaposvár , 64 persons including 13 army officers were detained on 31 October . 
 In Budapest and other areas , the Hungarian Communist committees organised defence . At the Csepel neighbourhood of Budapest , some 250 Communists defended the Csepel Iron and Steel Works . On 27 October , army units were brought in to secure Csepel and restore order . They later withdrew on 29 October , after which the rebels seized control of the area . Communists of Budapest neighbourhood <unk> led more than 350 armed workers and 380 servicemen from the <unk> Factory . Anti @-@ fascist resistance veterans from World War II participated in the offensive by which the <unk> <unk> newspaper 's building was recaptured . In the countryside , defence measures were taken by pro @-@ Communist forces . In <unk> County , in and around the town of <unk> , the armed guards of the Communist Party were in control throughout . 
 As the Hungarian resistance fought Soviet tanks using Molotov cocktails in the narrow streets of Budapest , revolutionary councils arose nationwide , assumed local governmental authority , and called for general strikes . Public Communist symbols such as red stars and Soviet war memorials were removed , and Communist books were burned . Spontaneous revolutionary militias arose , such as the 400 @-@ man group loosely led by József <unk> , which attacked or murdered Soviet sympathisers and ÁVH members . Soviet units fought primarily in Budapest ; elsewhere the countryside was largely quiet . One armoured division stationed in Budapest , commanded by Pál Maléter , instead opted to join the insurgents . Soviet commanders often negotiated local cease @-@ fires with the revolutionaries . 
 In some regions , Soviet forces managed to quell revolutionary activity . In Budapest , the Soviets were eventually fought to a stand @-@ still and hostilities began to wane . Hungarian general Béla Király , freed from a life sentence for political offences and acting with the support of the Nagy government , sought to restore order by unifying elements of the police , army and insurgent groups into a National Guard . A ceasefire was arranged on 28 October , and by 30 October most Soviet troops had withdrawn from Budapest to garrisons in the Hungarian countryside . 
 = = = Interlude = = = 
 Fighting ceased between 28 October and 4 November , as many Hungarians believed that Soviet military units were withdrawing from Hungary . There were approximately 213 Hungarian Working People 's Party members lynched or executed during this period . 
 = = = = New Government = = = = 
 The rapid spread of the uprising in the streets of Budapest and the abrupt fall of the Gerő @-@ Hegedüs government left the new national leadership surprised , and at first disorganised . Nagy , a loyal party reformer described as possessing " only modest political skills " , initially appealed to the public for calm and a return to the old order . Yet Nagy , the only remaining Hungarian leader with credibility in both the eyes of the public and the Soviets , " at long last concluded that a popular uprising rather than a counter @-@ revolution was taking place " . At 13 : 20 on 28 October , Nagy announced an immediate and general cease @-@ fire over the radio and , on behalf of the new national government , declared the following : 
 that the government would assess the uprising not as counter @-@ revolutionary but as a " great , national and democratic event " 
 an unconditional general ceasefire and amnesty for those who participated in the uprising ; negotiations with the insurgents 
 the dissolution of the ÁVH 
 the establishment of a national guard 
 the immediate withdrawal of Soviet troops from Budapest and negotiations for the withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Hungary 
 On 1 November , in a radio address to the Hungarian people , Nagy formally declared Hungary 's withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact as well as Hungary 's stance of neutrality . Because it held office only ten days , the National Government had little chance to clarify its policies in detail . However , newspaper editorials at the time stressed that Hungary should be a neutral , multi @-@ party social democracy . Many political prisoners were released , most notably Cardinal József Mindszenty . Political parties that were previously banned , such as the Independent Smallholders and the National Peasant Party ( under the name " Petőfi Party " ) , reappeared to join the coalition . 
 During this time , in 1 @,@ 170 communities across Hungary there were 348 cases in which revolutionary councils and protesters dismissed employees of the local administrative councils , 312 cases in which they sacked the persons in charge , and 215 cases in which they burned the local administrative files and records . In addition , in 681 communities demonstrators damaged symbols of Soviet authority such as red stars , Stalin or Lenin statues ; 393 in which they damaged Soviet war memorials , and 122 communities in which book burnings took place . 
 Local revolutionary councils formed throughout Hungary , generally without involvement from the preoccupied National Government in Budapest , and assumed various responsibilities of local government from the defunct Communist party . By 30 October , these councils had been officially sanctioned by the Hungarian Working People 's Party , and the Nagy government asked for their support as " autonomous , democratic local organs formed during the Revolution " . Likewise , workers ' councils were established at industrial plants and mines , and many unpopular regulations such as production norms were eliminated . The workers ' councils strove to manage the enterprise while protecting workers ' interests , thus establishing a socialist economy free of rigid party control . Local control by the councils was not always bloodless ; in Debrecen , Győr , Sopron , Mosonmagyaróvár and other cities , crowds of demonstrators were fired upon by the ÁVH , with many lives lost . The ÁVH were disarmed , often by force , in many cases assisted by the local police . 
 In total there were approximately 2 @,@ 100 local revolutionary and workers councils with over 28 @,@ 000 members . These councils held a combined conference in Budapest decided to end the nationwide labour strikes and resume work on 5 November , with the more important councils sending delegates to the Parliament to assure the Nagy government of their support . 
 = = = = Soviet perspective = = = = 
 On 24 October , the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( the Politburo ) discussed the political upheavals in Poland and Hungary . A hard @-@ line faction led by Molotov was pushing for intervention , but Khrushchev and Marshal Zhukov were initially opposed . A delegation in Budapest reported that the situation was not as dire as had been portrayed . Khrushchev stated that he believed that Party Secretary Ernő Gerő 's request for intervention on 23 October indicated that the Hungarian Party still held the confidence of the Hungarian public . In addition , he saw the protests not as an ideological struggle , but as popular discontent over unresolved basic economic and social issues . The concurrent Suez Crisis was another reason to not intervene ; as Khrushchev said on 28 October , it would be a mistake to imitate the " real mess " of the French and British . 
 After some debate , the Presidium on 30 October decided not to remove the new Hungarian government . Even Marshal Georgy Zhukov said : " We should withdraw troops from Budapest , and if necessary withdraw from Hungary as a whole . This is a lesson for us in the military @-@ political sphere . " They adopted a Declaration of the Government of the USSR on the Principles of Development and Further Strengthening of Friendship and Cooperation between the Soviet Union and other Socialist States , which was issued the next day . This document proclaimed : " The Soviet Government is prepared to enter into the appropriate negotiations with the government of the Hungarian People 's Republic and other members of the Warsaw Treaty on the question of the presence of Soviet troops on the territory of Hungary . " Thus for a brief moment it looked like there could be a peaceful solution . 
 On 30 October , armed protesters attacked the ÁVH detachment guarding the Budapest Hungarian Working People 's Party headquarters on <unk> <unk> ( Republic Square ) , incited by rumours of prisoners held there and the earlier shootings of demonstrators by the ÁVH in the city of Mosonmagyaróvár . Over 20 ÁVH officers were killed , some of them lynched by the mob . Hungarian army tanks sent to rescue the party headquarters mistakenly bombarded the building . The head of the Budapest party committee , Imre <unk> , was wounded and later died . Scenes from Republic Square were shown on Soviet newsreels a few hours later . Revolutionary leaders in Hungary condemned the incident and appealed for calm , and the mob violence soon died down , but images of the victims were nevertheless used as propaganda by various Communist organs . 
 On 31 October the Soviet leaders decided to reverse their decision from the previous day . There is disagreement among historians whether Hungary 's declaration to exit the Warsaw Pact caused the second Soviet intervention . Minutes of the 31 October meeting of the Presidium record that the decision to intervene militarily was taken one day before Hungary declared its neutrality and withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact . Historians who deny that Hungarian neutrality — or other factors such as Western inaction in Hungary or perceived Western weakness due to the Suez crisis — caused the intervention state that the Soviet decision was based solely on the rapid loss of Communist control in Hungary . However , some Russian historians who are not advocates of the Communist era maintain that the Hungarian declaration of neutrality caused the Kremlin to intervene a second time . 
 Two days earlier , on 30 October , when Soviet Politburo representatives Anastas Mikoyan and Mikhail Suslov were in Budapest , Nagy had hinted that neutrality was a long @-@ term objective for Hungary , and that he was hoping to discuss this matter with the leaders in the Kremlin . This information was passed on to Moscow by Mikoyan and Suslov . At that time , Khrushchev was in Stalin 's dacha , considering his options regarding Hungary . One of his speech writers later said that the declaration of neutrality was an important factor in his subsequent decision to support intervention . In addition , some Hungarian leaders of the revolution as well as students had called for their country 's withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact much earlier , and this may have influenced Soviet decision making . 
 Several other key events alarmed the Presidium and cemented the interventionists ' position : 
 Simultaneous movements towards multi @-@ party parliamentary democracy , and a democratic national council of workers , which could " lead towards a capitalist state . " Both movements challenged the pre @-@ eminence of the Soviet Communist Party in Eastern Europe and perhaps Soviet hegemony itself . For the majority of the Presidium , the workers ' direct control over their councils without Communist Party leadership was incompatible with their idea of socialism . At the time , these councils were , in the words of Hannah Arendt , " the only free and acting soviets ( councils ) in existence anywhere in the world " . 
 Khrushchev stated that many in the Communist Party would not understand a failure to respond with force in Hungary . <unk> had alienated the more conservative elements of the Party , who were alarmed at threats to Soviet influence in Eastern Europe . On 17 June 1953 , workers in East Berlin had staged an uprising , demanding the resignation of the government of the German Democratic Republic . This was quickly and violently put down with the help of the Soviet military , with 84 killed and wounded and 700 arrested . In June 1956 , in Poznań , Poland , an anti @-@ government workers ' revolt had been suppressed by the Polish security forces with between 57 and 78 deaths and led to the installation of a less Soviet @-@ controlled government . Additionally , by late October , unrest was noticed in some regional areas of the Soviet Union : while this unrest was minor , it was intolerable . 
 Hungarian neutrality and withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact represented a breach in the Soviet defensive buffer zone of satellite nations . Soviet fear of invasion from the West made a defensive buffer of allied states in Eastern Europe an essential security objective . 
 In the light of what was taking place in China and the news from Budapest , these militants arrived at the conclusion that " the Party is the incarnation of bureaucratic despotism " and that " socialism can develop only on the foundations of direct democracy " . For them the struggle of the Hungarian workers was a struggle " for the principle of direct democracy " and " all power should be transferred to the Workers Committees of Hungary " . The Presidium decided to break the de facto ceasefire and crush the Hungarian revolution . The plan was to declare a " Provisional Revolutionary Government " under János Kádár , who would appeal for Soviet assistance to restore order . According to witnesses , Kádár was in Moscow in early November , and he was in contact with the Soviet embassy while still a member of the Nagy government . Delegations were sent to other Communist governments in Eastern Europe and China , seeking to avoid a regional conflict , and propaganda messages prepared for broadcast when the second Soviet intervention had begun . To disguise these intentions , Soviet diplomats were to engage the Nagy government in talks discussing the withdrawal of Soviet forces . 
 According to some sources , the Chinese leader Mao Zedong played an important role in Khrushchev 's decision to suppress the Hungarian uprising . Chinese Communist Party Deputy Chairman Liu Shaoqi pressured Khrushchev to send in troops to put down the revolt by force . Although the relations between China and the Soviet Union had deteriorated during the recent years , Mao 's words still carried great weight in the Kremlin , and they were frequently in contact during the crisis . Initially , Mao opposed a second intervention , and this information was passed on to Khrushchev on 30 October , before the Presidium met and decided against intervention . Mao then changed his mind in favour of intervention but , according to William Taubman , it remains unclear when and how Khrushchev learned of this and thus if it influenced his decision on 31 October . 
 From 1 to 3 November , Khrushchev left Moscow to meet with his European allies and inform them of the decision to intervene . At the first such meeting , he met with Władysław Gomułka in Brest . Then , he had talks with the Romanian , Czechoslovak , and Bulgarian leaders in Bucharest . Finally Khrushchev flew with Malenkov to Yugoslavia , where they met with Josip Broz Tito , who was on holiday on his island Brioni in the Adriatic . The Yugoslavs also persuaded Khrushchev to choose János Kádár instead of Ferenc <unk> as the new leader of Hungary . Two months after the Soviet crackdown , Tito confided in Nikolai <unk> , the Soviet ambassador to Yugoslavia , that " the reaction raised its head , especially in Croatia , where the reactionary elements openly incited the employees of the Yugoslav security organs to violence . " 
 = = = = International reaction = = = = 
 Although John Foster Dulles , the United States Secretary of State recommended on 24 October for the United Nations Security Council to convene to discuss the situation in Hungary , little immediate action was taken to introduce a resolution , in part because other world events unfolded the day after the peaceful interlude started , when allied collusion started the Suez Crisis . The problem was not that Suez distracted US attention from Hungary but that it made the condemnation of Soviet actions very difficult . As Vice President Richard Nixon later explained , " We couldn 't on one hand , complain about the Soviets intervening in Hungary and , on the other hand , approve of the British and the French picking that particular time to intervene against [ Gamel Abdel ] Nasser " . 
 The US response was reliant on the CIA to covertly effect change , with both covert agents and Radio Free Europe . However , their Hungarian operations collapsed rapidly and they could not locate any of the weapon caches hidden across Europe , nor be sure who they 'd send arms too . The agency 's main source of information were the newspapers and a State Department employee in Budapest called Geza Katona . By the 28th of October , on the same night that the new Nagy government came to power , RFE was ramping up its broadcasts – encouraging armed struggle , advising on how to combat tanks and signing off with " Freedom or Death ! " – on the orders of Frank Wisner . When Nagy did come to power , CIA director Allen Dulles advised the White House that Cardinal Mindszenty would be a better leader ( due to Nagy 's communist past ) ; he had CIA radio broadcasts run propaganda against Nagy , calling him a traitor who 'd invited Soviet troops in . Broadcasts continued to broadcast armed response while the CIA mistakenly believed that the Hungarian army was switching sides and the rebels were gaining arms . ( Wisner was recorded as having a " nervous breakdown " by William Colby as the uprising was crushed ) 
 Responding to the plea by Nagy at the time of the second massive Soviet intervention on 4 November , the Security Council resolution critical of Soviet actions was vetoed by the Soviet Union ; instead resolution 120 was adopted to pass the matter onto the General Assembly . The General Assembly , by a vote of 50 in favour , 8 against and 15 abstentions , called on the Soviet Union to end its Hungarian intervention , but the newly constituted Kádár government rejected UN observers . 
 US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was aware of a detailed study of Hungarian resistance that recommended against US military intervention , and of earlier policy discussions within the National Security Council that focused upon encouraging discontent in Soviet satellite nations only by economic policies and political rhetoric . In a 1998 interview , Hungarian Ambassador Géza <unk> was critical of Western inaction in 1956 , citing the influence of the United Nations at that time and giving the example of UN intervention in Korea from 1950 to 1953 . 
 During the uprising , the Radio Free Europe ( RFE ) Hungarian @-@ language programs broadcast news of the political and military situation , as well as appealing to Hungarians to fight the Soviet forces , including tactical advice on resistance methods . After the Soviet suppression of the revolution , RFE was criticised for having misled the Hungarian people that NATO or United Nations would intervene if citizens continued to resist . Allen Dulles lied to Eisenhower that RFE had not promised US aid ; Eisenhower believed him , as the transcripts of the broadcasts were kept secret . 
 = = = Soviet intervention of 4 November = = = 
 On 1 November , Imre Nagy received reports that Soviet forces had entered Hungary from the east and were moving towards Budapest . Nagy sought and received assurances ( which proved false ) from Soviet ambassador Yuri Andropov that the Soviet Union would not invade . The Cabinet , with János Kádár in agreement , declared Hungary 's neutrality , withdrew from the Warsaw Pact , and requested assistance from the diplomatic corps in Budapest and the UN Secretary @-@ General to defend Hungary 's neutrality . Ambassador Andropov was asked to inform his government that Hungary would begin negotiations on the removal of Soviet forces immediately . 
 On 3 November , a Hungarian delegation led by the Minister of Defense Pál Maléter were invited to attend negotiations on Soviet withdrawal at the Soviet Military Command at <unk> , near Budapest . At around midnight that evening , General Ivan Serov , Chief of the Soviet Security Police ( KGB ) ordered the arrest of the Hungarian delegation , and the next day , the Soviet army again attacked Budapest . 
 During the early morning hours of 4 November , Ferenc <unk> announced on Radio Szolnok the establishment of the " Revolutionary Workers ' <unk> ' Government of Hungary " . 
 The second Soviet intervention , codenamed " Operation Whirlwind " , was launched by Marshal Ivan Konev . The five Soviet divisions stationed in Hungary before 23 October were augmented to a total strength of 17 divisions . The 8th Mechanized Army under command of Lieutenant General Hamazasp Babadzhanian and the 38th Army under Lieutenant General <unk> @-@ Umar <unk> from the nearby Carpathian Military District were deployed to Hungary for the operation . Some rank @-@ and @-@ file Soviet soldiers reportedly believed they were being sent to Berlin to fight German fascists . By 21 : 30 on 3 November , the Soviet Army had completely encircled Budapest . 
 At 03 : 00 on 4 November , Soviet tanks penetrated Budapest along the Pest side of the Danube in two thrusts : one up the <unk> road from the south and the other down the <unk> road from the north . Thus before a single shot was fired , the Soviets had effectively split the city in half , controlled all bridgeheads , and were shielded to the rear by the wide Danube river . Armoured units crossed into Buda and at 04 : 25 fired the first shots at the army barracks on <unk> Road . Soon after , Soviet artillery and tank fire was heard in all districts of Budapest . Operation Whirlwind combined air strikes , artillery , and the co @-@ ordinated tank @-@ infantry action of 17 divisions . 
 Between 4 and 9 November , the Hungarian Army put up sporadic and disorganised resistance , with Marshal Zhukov reporting the disarming of twelve divisions , two armoured regiments , and the entire Hungarian Air Force . The Hungarian Army continued its most formidable resistance in various districts of Budapest and in and around the city of Pécs in the <unk> Mountains , and in the industrial centre of Dunaújváros ( then called <unk> ) . Fighting in Budapest consisted of between ten and fifteen thousand resistance fighters , with the heaviest fighting occurring in the working @-@ class stronghold of Csepel on the Danube River . Although some very senior officers were openly pro @-@ Soviet , the rank and file soldiers were overwhelmingly loyal to the revolution and either fought against the invasion or deserted . The United Nations reported that there were no recorded incidents of Hungarian Army units fighting on the side of the Soviets . 
 At 05 : 20 on 4 November , Imre Nagy broadcast his final plea to the nation and the world , announcing that Soviet Forces were attacking Budapest and that the Government remained at its post . The radio station , Free Kossuth <unk> , stopped broadcasting at 08 : 07 An emergency Cabinet meeting was held in the Parliament but was attended by only three ministers . As Soviet troops arrived to occupy the building , a negotiated evacuation ensued , leaving Minister of State István <unk> as the last representative of the National Government remaining at his post . He wrote For Freedom and Truth , a stirring proclamation to the nation and the world . 
 At 06 : 00 , on 4 November , in the town of Szolnok , János Kádár proclaimed the " Hungarian Revolutionary Worker @-@ Peasant Government " . His statement declared " We must put an end to the excesses of the counter @-@ revolutionary elements . The hour for action has sounded . We are going to defend the interest of the workers and peasants and the achievements of the people 's democracy . " Later that evening , Kádár called upon " the faithful fighters of the true cause of socialism " to come out of hiding and take up arms . However , Hungarian support did not materialise ; the fighting did not take on the character of an internally divisive civil war , but rather , in the words of a United Nations report , that of " a well @-@ equipped foreign army crushing by overwhelming force a national movement and eliminating the Government . " 
 By 08 : 00 organised defence of the city evaporated after the radio station was seized , and many defenders fell back to fortified positions . During the same hour , the parliamentary guard laid down their arms , and forces under Major General K. <unk> captured Parliament and liberated captured ministers of the Rákosi @-@ Hegedüs government . Among the liberated were István Dobi and Sándor <unk> , both of whom became members of the re @-@ established socialist Hungarian government . Hungarian civilians bore the brunt of the fighting , as Soviet troops spared little effort to differentiate military from civilian targets . For this reason , Soviet tanks often crept along main roads firing indiscriminately into buildings . Hungarian resistance was strongest in the industrial areas of Budapest , which were heavily targeted by Soviet artillery and air strikes . 
 The longest holdouts against the Soviet assault occurred in Csepel and in Dunaújváros , where fighting lasted until 11 November before the insurgents finally succumbed to the Soviets . At the end of the fighting , Hungarian casualties totalled at around 2 @,@ 500 dead with an additional 20 @,@ 000 wounded . Budapest bore the brunt of the bloodshed , with 1 @,@ 569 civilians killed . Approximately 53 percent of the dead were workers , and about half of all the casualties were people younger than thirty . On the Soviet side , 699 men were killed , 1 @,@ 450 men were wounded , and 51 men were missing in action . Estimates place around 80 percent of all casualties occurring in fighting with the insurgents in the eighth and ninth districts of Budapest . 
 = = = Soviet version of the events = = = 
 Soviet reports of the events surrounding , during , and after the disturbance were remarkably consistent in their accounts , more so after the Second Soviet intervention cemented support for the Soviet position among international Communist Parties . Pravda published an account 36 hours after the outbreak of violence , which set the tone for all further reports and subsequent Soviet historiography : 
 On 23 October , the honest socialist Hungarians demonstrated against mistakes made by the Rákosi and Gerő governments . 
 Fascist , <unk> , reactionary , counter @-@ revolutionary hooligans financed by the imperialist west took advantage of the unrest to stage a counter @-@ revolution . 
 The honest Hungarian people under Nagy appealed to Soviet ( Warsaw Pact ) forces stationed in Hungary to assist in restoring order . 
