 The Nagy government was ineffective , allowing itself to be penetrated by counter @-@ revolutionary influences , weakening then disintegrating , as proven by Nagy 's culminating denouncement of the Warsaw Pact . 
 Hungarian patriots under Kádár broke with the Nagy government and formed a government of honest Hungarian revolutionary workers and peasants ; this genuinely popular government petitioned the Soviet command to help put down the counter @-@ revolution . 
 Hungarian patriots , with Soviet assistance , smashed the counter @-@ revolution . 
 The first Soviet report came out 24 hours after the first Western report . Nagy 's appeal to the United Nations was not reported . After Nagy was arrested outside of the Yugoslav embassy , his arrest was not reported . Nor did accounts explain how Nagy went from patriot to traitor . The Soviet press reported calm in Budapest while the Western press reported a revolutionary crisis was breaking out . According to the Soviet account , Hungarians never wanted a revolution at all . 
 In January 1957 , representatives of the Soviet Union , Bulgaria , Hungary , and Romania met in Budapest to review internal developments in Hungary since the establishment of the Soviet @-@ imposed government . A communiqué on the meeting " unanimously concluded " that Hungarian workers , with the leadership of the Kádár government and support of the Soviet army , defeated attempts " to eliminate the socialist achievements of the Hungarian people " . 
 Soviet , Chinese , and other Warsaw Pact governments urged Kádár to proceed with interrogation and trial of former Nagy government ministers , and asked for punitive measures against the " counter @-@ revolutionists " . In addition the Kádár government published an extensive series of " white books " ( The Counter @-@ Revolutionary Forces in the October Events in Hungary ) documenting real incidents of violence against Communist Party and ÁVH members , and the confessions of Nagy supporters . These white books were widely distributed in several languages in most of the socialist countries and , while based in fact , present factual evidence with a colouring and narrative not generally supported by non @-@ Soviet aligned historians . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Hungary = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath , many thousands of Hungarians were arrested . Eventually , 26 @,@ 000 of these were brought before the Hungarian courts , 22 @,@ 000 were sentenced , 13 @,@ 000 imprisoned , and several hundred executed . Hundreds were also deported to the Soviet Union , many without evidence . Approximately 200 @,@ 000 fled Hungary as refugees . Former Hungarian Foreign Minister Géza <unk> estimated 350 were executed . Sporadic armed resistance and strikes by workers ' councils continued until mid @-@ 1957 , causing substantial economic disruption . By 1963 , most political prisoners from the 1956 Hungarian revolution had been released . 
 With most of Budapest under Soviet control by 8 November , Kádár became Prime Minister of the " Revolutionary Worker @-@ Peasant Government " and General Secretary of the Hungarian Communist Party . Few Hungarians rejoined the reorganised Party , its leadership having been purged under the supervision of the Soviet <unk> , led by Georgy Malenkov and Mikhail Suslov . Although Party membership declined from 800 @,@ 000 before the uprising to 100 @,@ 000 by December 1956 , Kádár steadily increased his control over Hungary and neutralised dissenters . The new government attempted to enlist support by espousing popular principles of Hungarian self @-@ determination voiced during the uprising , but Soviet troops remained . After 1956 the Soviet Union severely purged the Hungarian Army and reinstituted political indoctrination in the units that remained . In May 1957 , the Soviet Union increased its troop levels in Hungary and by treaty Hungary accepted the Soviet presence on a permanent basis . 
 The Red Cross and the Austrian Army established refugee camps in <unk> and Graz . Imre Nagy along with Georg Lukács , Géza <unk> , and László Rajk 's widow , <unk> , took refuge in the Embassy of Yugoslavia as Soviet forces overran Budapest . Despite assurances of safe passage out of Hungary by the Soviets and the Kádár government , Nagy and his group were arrested when attempting to leave the embassy on 22 November and taken to Romania . <unk> died while on a hunger strike in prison awaiting trial when his jailers " carelessly pushed a feeding tube down his windpipe . " 
 The remainder of the group was returned to Budapest in 1958 . Nagy was executed , along with Pál Maléter and Miklós Gimes , after secret trials in June 1958 . Their bodies were placed in unmarked graves in the Municipal Cemetery outside Budapest . 
 During the November 1956 Soviet assault on Budapest , Cardinal Mindszenty was granted political asylum at the United States embassy , where he lived for the next 15 years , refusing to leave Hungary unless the government reversed his 1949 conviction for treason . Because of poor health and a request from the Vatican , he finally left the embassy for Austria in September 1971 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Despite Cold War rhetoric by western countries espousing a roll @-@ back of the domination of Europe by the USSR and Soviet promises of the imminent triumph of socialism , national leaders of this period as well as later historians saw the failure of the uprising in Hungary as evidence that the Cold War in Europe had become a stalemate . 
 The Foreign Minister of West Germany recommended that the people of Eastern Europe be discouraged from " taking dramatic action which might have disastrous consequences for themselves . " The Secretary @-@ General of NATO called the Hungarian revolt " the collective suicide of a whole people " . In a newspaper interview in 1957 , Khrushchev commented " support by United States ... is rather in the nature of the support that the rope gives to a hanged man . " 
 In January 1957 , United Nations Secretary @-@ General Dag Hammarskjöld , acting in response to UN General Assembly resolutions requesting investigation and observation of the events in Soviet @-@ occupied Hungary , established the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary . The Committee , with representatives from Australia , Ceylon ( Sri Lanka ) , Denmark , Tunisia , and Uruguay , conducted hearings in New York , Geneva , Rome , Vienna , and London . Over five months , 111 refugees were interviewed including ministers , military commanders and other officials of the Nagy government , workers , revolutionary council members , factory managers and technicians , Communists and non @-@ Communists , students , writers , teachers , medical personnel , and Hungarian soldiers . Documents , newspapers , radio transcripts , photos , film footage , and other records from Hungary were also reviewed , as well as written testimony of 200 other Hungarians . 
 The governments of Hungary and Romania refused the UN officials of the Committee entry , and the government of the Soviet Union did not respond to requests for information . The 268 @-@ page Committee Report was presented to the General Assembly in June 1957 , documenting the course of the uprising and Soviet intervention , and concluding that " the Kádár government and Soviet occupation were in violation of the human rights of the Hungarian people . " A General Assembly resolution was approved , deploring " the repression of the Hungarian people and the Soviet occupation " but no other action was taken . The chairman of the Committee was <unk> Andersen , a Danish politician and leading figure of Denmark 's Social Democratic Party . He served in the Buhl government in 1942 during the Nazi German occupation of Denmark . He defended collaboration with the occupation forces and denounced the Resistance . He was appointed Interior Minister in 1947 , but resigned because of scrutiny of his role in 1940 as Defence Minister . He then entered Denmark 's UN delegation in 1948 . 
 The Committee Report and the motives of its authors were criticised by delegations to the United Nations . The Hungarian representative disagreed with the report 's conclusions , accusing it of falsifying the events , and argued that the establishment of the Committee was illegal . The Committee was accused of being hostile to Hungary and its social system . An article in the Russian journal " International Affairs " , published by the Foreign Affairs Ministry , carried an article in 1957 in which it denounced the report as a " collection of falsehoods and distortions " . 
 Time magazine named the Hungarian Freedom Fighter its Man of the Year for 1956 . The accompanying Time article comments that this choice could not have been anticipated until the explosive events of the revolution , almost at the end of 1956 . The magazine cover and accompanying text displayed an artist 's depiction of a Hungarian freedom fighter , and used pseudonyms for the three participants whose stories are the subject of the article . 
 In 2006 , Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc <unk> referred to this famous Time Man of the Year cover as " the faces of free Hungary " in a speech to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1956 uprising . Prime Minister <unk> , in a joint appearance with British Prime Minister Tony Blair , commented specifically on the Time cover itself , that " It is an idealised image but the faces of the figures are really the face of the revolutionaries " 
 At the Melbourne Olympics in 1956 , the Soviet handling of the Hungarian uprising led to a boycott by Spain , the Netherlands , and Switzerland . At the Olympic Village , the Hungarian delegation tore down the Communist Hungarian flag and raised the flag of Free Hungary in its place . A confrontation between Soviet and Hungarian teams occurred in the semi @-@ final match of the water polo tournament on 6 December . The match was extremely violent , and was halted in the final minute to quell fighting among spectators . This match , now known as the " blood in the water match " , became the subject of several films . The Hungarian team won the game 4 – 0 and later was awarded the Olympic gold medal . In 1957 , Norway was invited to the first ever Bandy World Championship but declined because the Soviet Union was invited too . 
 On Sunday , 28 October 1956 , as some 55 million Americans watched Ed Sullivan 's popular television variety show , with the then 21 @-@ year @-@ old Elvis Presley headlining for the second time , Sullivan asked viewers to send aid to Hungarian refugees fleeing from the effects of the Soviet invasion . Presley himself made another request for donations during his third and last appearance on Sullivan 's show on 6 January 1957 . Presley then dedicated a song for the finale , which he thought fit the mood of the time , namely the gospel song " Peace in the Valley " . By the end of 1957 , these contributions , distributed by the Geneva @-@ based International Red Cross as food rations , clothing , and other essentials , had amounted to some SFR 26 million ( US $ 6 million in 1957 dollars ) , the equivalent of $ 50 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 in today 's dollars . On 1 March 2011 , István <unk> , the Mayor of Budapest , made Presley an honorary citizen , posthumously , and a plaza located at the intersection of two of the city 's most important avenues was named after Presley , as a gesture of gratitude . 
 Meanwhile , as the 1950s drew to a close , the events in Hungary produced ideological fractures within the Communist parties of Western Europe . Within the Italian Communist Party ( PCI ) a split ensued : most ordinary members and the Party leadership , including <unk> Togliatti and Giorgio Napolitano , regarded the Hungarian insurgents as counter @-@ revolutionaries , as reported in l 'Unità , the official PCI newspaper . However Giuseppe Di Vittorio , chief of the Communist trade union <unk> , repudiated the leadership position , as did the prominent party members Antonio Giolitti , Loris Fortuna , and many other influential Communist intellectuals , who later were expelled or left the party . Pietro <unk> , the national secretary of the Italian Socialist Party , a close ally of the PCI , opposed the Soviet intervention as well . Napolitano , elected in 2006 as President of the Italian Republic , wrote in his 2005 political autobiography that he regretted his justification of Soviet action in Hungary , and that at the time he believed in Party unity and the international leadership of Soviet communism . 
 Within the Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) , dissent that began with the repudiation of Stalin by John Saville and E. P. Thompson , influential historians and members of the Communist Party Historians Group , culminated in a loss of thousands of party members as events unfolded in Hungary . Peter Fryer , correspondent for the CPGB newspaper The Daily Worker , reported accurately on the violent suppression of the uprising , but his dispatches were heavily censored . Fryer resigned from the paper upon his return , and was later expelled from the Communist Party 
 In France , moderate Communists , such as historian Emmanuel Le Roy <unk> , resigned , questioning the French Communist Party 's policy of supporting Soviet actions . The French philosopher and writer Albert Camus wrote an open letter , The Blood of the Hungarians , criticising the West 's lack of action . Even Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , still a determined Communist , criticised the Soviets in his article Le <unk> de <unk> , in Situations VII . Left Communists were particularly supportive of the revolution . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 In December 1991 , the preamble of the treaties with the dismembered Soviet Union , under Mikhail Gorbachev , and Russia , represented by Boris Yeltsin , apologised officially for the 1956 Soviet actions in Hungary . This apology was repeated by Yeltsin in 1992 during a speech to the Hungarian parliament . 
 On 13 February 2006 , the US State Department commemorated the fiftieth anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution . Former US Secretary of State Rice commented on the contributions made by 1956 Hungarian refugees to the United States and other host countries , as well as the role of Hungary in providing refuge to East Germans during the 1989 protests against Communist rule . US President George W. Bush also visited Hungary on 22 June 2006 , to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary . 
 On 16 June 1989 , the 31st anniversary of his execution , Imre Nagy 's body was reburied with full honours . The Republic of Hungary was declared in 1989 on the 33rd anniversary of the Revolution , and 23 October is now a Hungarian national holiday . 
 In the north @-@ west corner of MacArthur Park in Los Angeles , California , the Hungarian @-@ American community built a commemorative statue to honour the Hungarian freedom fighters . Built in the late 1960s , the obelisk statue stands with an American eagle watching over the city of Los Angeles . 
 = = More information = = 
 From the noon bell to the lads of Pest ( <unk> ) 
 = Hung Up = 
 " Hung Up " is a song by American singer Madonna from her tenth studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) . It was written and produced by Madonna in collaboration with Stuart Price , and released as the lead single from the album . Initially used in a number of television advertisements and serials , the song was released as the album 's lead single on October 17 , 2005 . It has also made an appearance on her 2009 greatest hits album , Celebration . It also became Madonna 's first track to be released to the iTunes Store for digital download . 
 " Hung Up " prominently features a sample from the instrumental introduction to ABBA 's hit single " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! ( A Man After Midnight ) " , for which Madonna personally sought permission from ABBA 's songwriters Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus . Musically the song is influenced by 1980s pop , with a chugging groove and chorus and a background element of a ticking clock that suggests the fear of wasting time . Lyrically the song is written as a traditional dance number about a strong , independent woman who has relationship troubles . 
 " Hung Up " received critical praise from reviewers , who believed that the track would restore the singer 's popularity , which had diminished following the release of her 2003 album American Life . Critics suggested it was her best dance track to date and have compared it favorably to other Madonna tracks in the same genre . They also complimented the effective synchronization of the ABBA sample with the actual song . " Hung Up " became a worldwide commercial success , peaking atop the charts of 41 countries and earning a place in the Guinness Book of World Records . It was Madonna 's 36th top 10 single on the Billboard Hot 100 , tying her with Elvis Presley as the artist with most top ten hits . It also became the most successful dance song of the decade in the United States . " Hung Up " remains one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time , with sales of over nine million copies worldwide . 
 The music video is a tribute to John Travolta , his movies and to dancing in general . Directed by Johan Renck , the clip starts with Madonna clad in a pink leotard dancing alone in a ballet studio and concludes at a gaming parlor where she dances with her backup troupe . Interspersed are scenes of people displaying their dancing skills in a variety of settings , including a Los Angeles residential neighborhood , a small restaurant and the London Underground . It also features the physical discipline Parkour . Madonna has performed the song in a number of live appearances , including as the finale number in 2006 's Confessions Tour , a heavy metal @-@ inspired arrangement in the 2008 Sticky & Sweet Tour and during the 2012 MDNA Tour where the singer performed the song while slacklining . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In 2004 , after the release of her ninth studio album American Life , Madonna began working on two different musicals : one tentatively called Hello Suckers and another one with Luc Besson , who previously directed the music video for her single " Love Profusion " , which would portray her as a woman on her deathbed looking back on her life . Madonna collaborated with Patrick Leonard , Mirwais Ahmadzaï and Stuart Price to write new songs , Price being assigned to pen disco songs sounding like " ABBA on drugs " . However , Madonna found herself dissatisfied with the script written by Besson and scrapped it . When she began composing Confessions on a Dance Floor , she decided to rework " Hung Up " and include it in her record . 
 " Hung Up " was one of the first songs written for the album , along with " Sorry " and " Future Lovers " . It was inspired by the 1970s disco era , notably ABBA , Giorgio Moroder and the film Saturday Night Fever ( 1977 ) . Madonna imagined it to be a cross between the music played at Danceteria , the New York City night club she frequented in her early days , and the music of ABBA . Their 1979 hit " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! ( A Man After Midnight ) " formed the basis of the song . Songwriters Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus generally do not allow anyone to sample any of their tracks , an exception being Fugees , who sampled their song " The Name of the Game " for their single " Rumble in the Jungle " . In order to gain the rights to sample " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! " , Madonna had to send her emissary to Stockholm with a letter which begged them to allow her to sample the song and also telling how much she loved their music . To the BBC she explained : " [ T ] hey never let anyone sample their music . Thank God they didn 't say no . [ ... ] They had to think about it , Benny and Björn . They didn 't say yes straight away . " The pair agreed to let Madonna use the sample only after making a copyright agreement that entitled them to a significant share of the royalties from subsequent sales and airplay . Andersson , in an interview with The Daily Telegraph in October 2005 , declared " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! " to be the essence of " Hung Up " while joking that it was his favourite Madonna song thus far . He further said : 
 " We get so many requests from people wanting to use our tracks but we normally say ' no ' . This is only the second time we have given permission . We said ' yes ' this time because we admire Madonna so much and always have done . She has got guts and has been around for 21 years . That is not bad going . " 
 The song premiered in September 2005 , during a television advertisement for Motorola 's iTunes compatible <unk> mobile phone . The advertisement featured Madonna and other artists jammed in a phone booth . On October 17 , 2005 , the song made its premiere during a live ten @-@ minute radio interview between Ryan Seacrest and Madonna . It was also made available as a master ringtone with various mobile service providers . " Hung Up " was sent to mainstream radio in the United States on October 18 . The song was added to episodes of CSI : Miami and CSI : NY on November 7 and 9 , 2005 , respectively . While promoting Confessions on a Dance Floor , Madonna played both " Hung Up " and the next single " Sorry " at Luke & Leroy 's nightclub in Greenwich Village , where she was invited by Junior Sanchez to perform briefly as the DJ , mixing the two songs . Regarding her decision to release the song to iTunes , Madonna said : " I 'm a businesswoman . The music industry has changed . There 's a lot of competition , and the market is glutted with new releases – and new ' <unk> and thats ' . You must join forces with other brands and corporations . You 're an idiot if you don 't . " 
 = = Music structure and lyrics = = 
 Musically , " Hung Up " is a dance @-@ pop and disco song . According to The New York Times , the song has vaguely familiar hooks , sustained overlays of the string arrangement and acoustic guitar enfolding the music to create a haze like sound . Billboard described the music as frothy , nonsensical and joyous . The instant familiarity of the sampled music is changed by Stuart Price and Madonna by adding a chugging groove and a chorus which singles it out as an independent song . Besides the ABBA sample , Rolling Stone said that the song also incorporated Madonna 's older songs like " Like a Prayer " and " Holiday " and features fleeting quotes from bands like S.O.S. and the Tom Tom Club . 
 According to Musicnotes.com , " Hung Up " is set in common time , and has a moderate dance @-@ beat tempo of 120 beats per minute . The key of the song is in D minor with Madonna 's vocal range spanning from G3 to B ♭ 4 . The song progresses in the following chord progressions of Dm – F – C – Dm in the verses and Dm – F – Am – Dm – Dm – F – Am – Dm in the chorus , and changes to B ♭ – F – A – Dm – B ♭ – F – A – Dm for the bridge . " Hung Up " uses the sound of a ticking clock to symbolize fear of wasted time , which was incorporated by composer Stuart Price , from his remix of Gwen Stefani 's 2004 single " What You Waiting For ? " . According to Slant Magazine , the song embodies some of Madonna 's old hits , incorporating them into the song 's pitched @-@ upward vocals while presenting an archetypical key change / <unk> during the bridge . 
 Lyrically , the song is written from the perspective of a girl who once had nothing and the theme centers around love . About.com compared the lyrics of " Hung Up " and another song " I Love New York " from the Confessions on a Dance Floor album , to the style of the songs in Madonna 's American Life album . According to About.com , the song is written as a very traditional dance number which is rooted in relationship issues . Also present in the lyrics is Madonna 's enduring embrace of strong , independent women . The song 's hook , " Time goes by so slowly for those who wait , " is taken from Madonna 's 1989 collaboration with Prince , " Love Song , " as is the line , " Those who run seem to have all the fun . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Keith Caulfield from Billboard , while reviewing Confessions on a Dance Floor , called the song " a fluffier cut " . Chris Tucker from Billboard explained that " Madonna returns with a song that will restore faith among her minions , fans of pop music and radio programmers " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that Madonna kept her pop touch in " Hung Up " and called it a love song which is both happy as well as sad . Alan Light from Rolling Stone called the song candy coated . David Browne from Entertainment Weekly was impressed by the song and said " ' Hung Up ' shows how effortlessly she [ Madonna ] can tap into her petulant inner teen " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine compared the song to the remix of Gwen Stefani 's 2004 single " What You Waiting For ? " . Ed Gonzalez from the same magazine called the song the biggest hit of her career . Margaret Moser from The Austin Chronicle said that the song strobes and pulses along with another album track " Forbidden Love " . Peter Robinson from The Guardian commented that " Hung Up " is Madonna 's " most wonderfully commercial single since the mid Eighties " . Alexis Petridis from The Guardian said that the song could have been more campy by addition of Liza Minnelli inspired vocals in the background and lyrics which talk about Larry Grayson . 
 Ben Williams from New York magazine described the song as sounding both throbbing as well as wistful . Christian John Wikane from PopMatters called the song a propulsive track . Alan Braidwood of the BBC , noted of the track : " full @-@ on dance , dark , disco , fun , big " and compared it to other Madonna songs like " Vogue " , " Deeper and Deeper " and " Ray of Light " . Tom Bishop from the BBC commented that Madonna has either reinvigorated her career or she is " merely throwing one final dance party for her long @-@ term fans before settling down to record more sedate material " . Jason Shawhan from About.com commented that the song has " way too much Abba in it for its own good . " He went on to elaborate that " [ t ] he only reason I can think of for this to be chosen as the first single was the Motorola ad campaign . It 's not a bad song by far , it has pep and a sense of fun , but it 's not even close to being one of the best songs on the record " . Bill Lamb of About.com said that the ABBA sample sounded completely effortless like much of Madonna 's best dance music . He further elaborated that what " ' Hung Up ' amounts to is a big gushy love note to Madonna 's core fans , those club kids who pack the floor every time they hear the pounding beats of a Madonna classic and the dj 's who can 't get enough of spinning her records . ' Hung Up ' will send those fans into ecstasy , and it sounds good on the radio , too " . Thomas Inskeep of Stylus Magazine declared that " Hung Up " and the next single " Sorry " might not have the same sleaze as Madonna 's older songs like " Physical Attraction " or " Burning Up " , but have the same modus operandi of being designed for " sweaty up @-@ all @-@ night dancing " . Rob Harvilla from The Village Voice called the song a triumphant jazz exercise . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 " Hung Up " was ranked at number 76 on Rolling Stone 's " 100 Best Songs of the 2000s " decade @-@ end list , calling it " One of her [ Madonna 's ] most captivating hits ever — and thanks to those deceptively hard @-@ hitting lyrics , one of her most personal . " NME ranked it at number 39 in their list of the best tracks of 2005 . Slant Magazine 's writers listed the song at number 36 on their list of Best of the Aughts : Singles saying : " ' Hung Up ' employs a ticking clock to represent fear of wasted time , but Madonna isn 't singing about aging or saving the world — she 's talking about love . It had been years since Madge sounded this vapid . With its pitched @-@ upward vocals , infectious arpeggio sample from ABBA 's ' Gimme Gimme Gimme ( A Man After Midnight ) , ' and the bridge 's unironic , archetypical key change , the track decidedly points to the past , and it proved that , 20 years into her career , Madonna was still the one and only Dancing Queen . " The song was also named the 26th best single of 2005 by Pitchfork Media . Stylus Magazine included " Hung Up " on their ranking of the best singles from 2005 at number 11 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hung Up " was a worldwide commercial success , peaking at number one in charts of 41 countries and earning a place in the 2007 Guinness Book of World Records , as the song topping the charts in most countries . It also remains one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time , with sales of over 9 million copies worldwide . In the United States , " Hung Up " debuted at twenty on the Billboard Hot 100 on the issue dated November 5 , 2005 . It became her highest opening position since " Ray of Light " entered the chart at five in 1998 . The same week the song entered the Hot Digital Songs chart at number six and became the highest debuting single of the week on the Pop 100 Airplay , where it debuted at number 38 . On the issue dated November 21 , 2005 , the song reached a peak of number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 , jumping from number 14 from previous week . The song became the chart 's greatest digital gainer for that week and claimed the top position on the Hot Digital Songs chart . It also tied Madonna with Elvis Presley for 36 top ten hits , which was subsequently broken by Madonna 's 2008 song " 4 Minutes " , which peaked at number three on the Hot 100 . " Hung Up " debuted at numbers 25 and 10 on the Hot Dance Club Play and Hot Dance Airplay charts respectively ultimately reaching the top of both . It became the most successful dance song of the 2000s in the United States , by topping the Dance / Club Play Songs Decade @-@ end tally . The song also reached a peak of seven on the Pop 100 chart . In 2008 , the single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for selling at least a million copies in paid digital downloads . As of April 2010 , the song has sold 1 @.@ 2 million digital units in the United States . 
 " Hung Up " became the fastest rising single on radio in Canada , according to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems . On the second week itself , the song reached the top of the Contemporary Hit Radio chart of Canada , while reaching the top five of the Adult Contemporary and Canadian Airplay charts . Paul <unk> from Nielsen clarified that " Hung Up " achieved this feat within 10 days only . Consequently , " Hung Up " also peaked atop the Canadian Singles Chart for 15 non @-@ consecutive weeks , and was certified double platinum by Music Canada for sales of 160 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , the song debuted atop the ARIA Singles Chart on November 20 , 2005 , breaking her tie with Kylie Minogue as the female artist with most number @-@ one singles in Australian chart history . It was present within the top 50 of the chart for 23 weeks . The song was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies . " Hung Up " debuted at number 67 in the French singles chart and jumped to the top next week , remaining there for five non @-@ consecutive weeks . It received a gold certification from Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for sales of 150 @,@ 000 copies . " Hung Up " reached a peak position of number two in New Zealand , being kept from the top spot by Kanye West 's single , " Gold Digger " . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Hung Up " debuted at number one on the issue dated November 13 , 2005 , thus giving Madonna her 11th number one single on this chart . It sold 105 @,@ 619 copies becoming the first single to sell more than 100 @,@ 000 copies in a week since Crazy Frog 's " Axel F " did it 23 weeks earlier . The first week sales of " Hung Up " were a little lower than Madonna 's last UK number one , " Music " ( 2000 ) , which opened with 114 @,@ 925 sales , but exceeded her last single " Love Profusion " , which debuted at number 11 with 15 @,@ 361 sales in December 2003 . The next week the single had a decline in sales of 43 % to 59 @,@ 969 ; copies , but remained on the top as Confessions on a Dance Floor debuted atop the UK Albums Chart . It remained at the top position for three weeks and a total of 40 weeks on the Singles Chart . According to the Official Charts Company , by the end of 2005 , " Hung Up " was Madonna 's biggest selling single with 339 @,@ 285 copies since " Music " sold 390 @,@ 624 copies in 2000 . It was certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and has sold 617 @,@ 000 in the UK to date . In Ireland , the song debuted at number two on the chart dated November 10 , 2005 becoming the highest debut of the week . The song also topped Billboard 's European Hot 100 Singles chart where it soared from 73 to the top of the chart on the issue dated November 21 , 2005 . The song was able to peak the charts in almost all the European nations including Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Denmark , Finland , Germany , Italy , Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Originally the video for " Hung Up " was to be directed by photographer David LaChapelle . He wanted the video to have a " documentary " -style look , much like that of his 2005 film , Rize , in which five of the dancers from the " Hung Up " video appeared . LaChapelle and Madonna disagreed on the concept , prompting the project to be reassigned to Johan Renck , who worked with Madonna in her video for " Nothing Really Matters " . According to an interview with MTV , Renck was directing Kate Moss for a H & M commercial when he received a phone call from Madonna who desperately wanted to work with him . The next day he went to Los Angeles to meet the stylist and the choreographer hired by Madonna , who mailed him with her ideas for the video . The director explained that he " kind of liked that we didn 't have time to over @-@ think this and be too clever , I like being out on a limb and not know what we 're doing and why . Just deal with it , the mayhem , you know ? " 
 Madonna clarified that the video was a tribute to John Travolta and to dance in general . Her dance moves for the video , which were inspired by Travolta 's movies like Saturday Night Fever ( 1977 ) , Grease ( 1978 ) and Perfect ( 1985 ) took three hours to shoot . Madonna had broken eight bones in a horseback @-@ riding accident a few weeks before shooting the video and faced difficulty doing the steps devised by choreographer Jamie King . Renck said , 
 " She was such a trooper , [ ... ] She just fell off a horse ! [ Madonna said ] ' If you were a real dance choreographer , you could tell I can 't lift my left arm higher than this ' — and it was like , what , a 20 @-@ centimeter difference ? [ ... ] But when she said it ' hurts like f--- , ' she 'd take a break and sit down for two minutes . [ Madonna ] ' I have broken ribs , remember that ! ' I just can 't imagine dancing like that . Talk about priorities . " 
 Madonna wanted to use a few performers from her tour , such as Daniel " Cloud " Campos , Miss Prissy from LaChapelle 's Rize crew and <unk> Sebastien Foucan , a practitioner of Parkour , a philosophical French sport . Renck said that " It 's not about the music , but the bodily expression , [ ... ] We wanted to show the whole spectrum , be it krumping , breakdancing , jazz or disco . " Since they could not shoot all over the world , Madonna wanted the video to have an " omnipresent feel " , with the middle section of the song generating a sense of congregation . Renck suggested that they include a boombox , used as a means of uniting everyone and everything since it was through listening to songs on a boombox that street dancing started . Though some scenes in the video feature cities like London , Paris , New York , Los Angeles , Shanghai and Tokyo , in reality the actual sets were constructed in Los Angeles and London only . A London suburb was made to look like a Parisian one , where the routine for Parkour takes place , whereas a restaurant in London 's Chinatown was used for the Shanghai sequence and Compton stood in for the Bronx . The dancers ' scenes were shot in early October 2005 within half a day , for a total of six days of shooting . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 Madonna was also associated with the editing process of the video . She was Renck 's editing supervisor . Madonna wanted a raw documentary look for the video which allowed her to be portrayed more realistically . Regarding the making of " Hung Up " , Renck said that it was a massive work to undertake , " It 's like you form this little family that 's flourished and prospered for the month , and then you chop it down like a tree , [ ... ] You come out with a sense of yearning and longing , like , ' Can we just do that again ? Please ? ' " 
 The video starts with Madonna coming to a ballet studio carrying a boombox . She switches it on as the clock ticking sound of the music starts . Wearing a pink leotard , Madonna starts gyrating to the music while doing warm up exercises . The scene interchanges with a group of people on the street who start dancing to the music while listening to a similar boombox . They also display aspects of the physical discipline Parkour , while climbing over buildings and jumping from staircases . As the song starts , Madonna dances to the music in the ballet studio . The second verse shows her continuing dancing while the people from the street take their boombox and board a taxi . Scenes are interspersed with people dancing in a Chinese restaurant and Parisian streets . In the meantime , Madonna finishes her workout in the ballet studio , drops her towel , changes her clothes and comes out on the street . The people on the taxi , leave it and take the Underground instead . After another round of dancing in the train , the intermediate music starts . Madonna is shown mingling with some dancers on a dance floor and riding on a boombox . As the song starts again , Madonna and the people from the street , who act as her background dancers , all dance on a Dance Dance Revolution machine in a gaming parlor . The video ends showing Madonna lying on the ballet studio floor . The video was nominated for five awards at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards including Best Female Video , Dance Video , Pop Video , Best Choreography and the Video of the Year award although it did not win any of them . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On November 4 , 2005 Madonna opened the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards at the <unk> <unk> in Lisbon , Portugal with her first performance of " Hung Up " . She emerged from a glitterball to perform sing the song while wearing a purple leotard and matching leather boots . During next days , Madonna performed " Hung Up " on TV shows such as Wetten , dass .. ? in Germany , Parkinson in England and Star Academy in France , as well as on the Children in Need 2005 telethon in London . She opened her concerts at Koko and G @-@ A @-@ Y nightclubs in London with " Hung Up " , respectively on November 15 and 19 . The performance again saw Madonna emerge from a glitter ball while wearing a purple jacket , velvet pedal pushers and knee @-@ high boots . In December Madonna travelled to Tokyo , Japan , where " Hung Up " was performed on TV show SMAP × SMAP and her concert at Studio Coast . On February 8 , 2006 Madonna opened the 2006 Grammy Awards at the Staples Center in Los Angeles . She sang the song by pairing up with the fictional animated band Gorillaz . The band appeared on the stage via a three dimensional technique which projected their holograms on the stage . They performed their song " Feel Good Inc . " while rappers De La Soul made a guest appearance . Madonna then appeared on the stage and started performing the song while interchanging places with the hologram figures of the band . She was later joined by her own group of dancers and the performance was finished on the main stage rather than the virtual screen . Another performance of " Hung Up " came on April 30 , 2006 during the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in Indio , California . 
 The song was performed as the last song of her 2006 Confessions Tour . It was performed at the last " disco fever " segment of the tour . During the performance , her dancers displayed the Parkour routine all over the stadium as the familiar ABBA sample played . Madonna changed her aerobics costume for a purple leotard . As the music progressed , she and her dancers appeared on the center stage and she started singing . During the second verse , she left her sunglasses and jacket and proceeded towards the front of the stage . A boombox appeared in the center with Madonna playing with it . The song starts again as balloons fall on the crowd from the top . The finale had Madonna engaging the audience to sing @-@ along with her to the song while making a contest as to which side of the stadium can sing the loudest . Madonna then uttering the line " I 'm tired of waiting for you " while the backdrop showed the phrase " Have You <unk> ? " . The New York Times ' Ginia Belafonte compared this performance with that of Ethel Merman . Slant Magazine commented that the performance reminded Madonna 's ability to encapsulate the audience as a part of her performance . On July 7 , 2007 Madonna closed her set during the Live Earth concert at the Wembley Stadium in London with " Hung Up " . 
 The song was also added to the six song set list of the Hard Candy Promo Tour in 2008 . Madonna wore a shiny black outfit with black tails , Adidas track pants and high @-@ heeled , lace @-@ up boots . " Hung Up " was the fourth song of the set list . It was re @-@ invented as a heavy @-@ metal version . As the performance of " 4 Minutes " ended , Madonna picked up an electric guitar and played the first few chords of The Rolling Stones single " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " . She then asked the crowd whether they thought they had come to a Rolling Stones concert . When the crowd responded negatively , she started " Hung Up " , while dedicating it to all the people who had waited outside in the queue to watch the show . She declared that the noisy , metallic guitar breakdown of the song symbolised what waiting sounded like in the brain of all those who had waited . The song was performed in the futuristic rave with Japanese influences segment of the 2008 Sticky & Sweet Tour . Madonna wore a futuristic robotic outfit designed by <unk> , with plates on her shoulder and a wig with long curled hair . The similar heavy @-@ metal version of " Hung Up " was performed but it later gave way to the ABBA music . Before starting the performance , she played a capella versions of her older hit songs on audience demand , mostly " Express Yourself " and " Like a Virgin " . However , after that , the electric guitar was played to make noises , which Madonna dedicated to Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee for the 2008 election , Sarah Palin . She said , " I 'd like to express myself to Sarah Palin right now . [ Playing a screeching note on her guitar ] This is the sound of Sarah Palin thinking . [ ... ] Sarah Palin can 't come to my party . Sarah Palin can 't come to my show . It 's nothing personal . " The performance ended with Madonna playing the guitar riff of " A New Level " by heavy @-@ metal band Pantera . For the second European leg of the tour in 2009 , " Hung Up " was removed from the setlist and was replaced by an up @-@ beat version of " Frozen " . 
 For The MDNA Tour of 2012 , " Hung Up " was added to the setlist as part of the opening segment , known as Transgression . After performing a fragment of " Papa Don 't Preach " , several dancers wearing tribal masks , surrounded Madonna , tied her up and proceeded to carry her to the center of the main stage just as the song 's opening riffs , underpinned by the dramatic sound of church bells with vocoder vocals , started to play in the background . Dressed in a black skintight outfit with an ample cleavage , gloves of the same color and heeled boots , Madonna and her dancers performed the song while at the same time realizing a slacklining session on some ropes held on the middle of the stage . As Madonna sang the song , her dancers slid under the ropes . This performance received generally mixed reviews , Jon Pareles from The New York Times believed that changing the composition of the song in lieu of the theme for the segment made it " ominous and obsessive " , while making it " a memory of distant innocence " . Jim Farber from the Daily News felt that the introduction of slacklining gave the whole tour " some needed bounce " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine was negative on his review of the performance , as he felt it was out of place on the show 's segment , and compared it negatively to the performance of the Sticky & Sweet Tour , concluding that the song " should never be performed in any way other than its original form . " 
 On April 13 , 2015 , Madonna made a surprise appearance at the Coachella Festival and performed a medley of her 1994 song " Human Nature " and " Hung Up " during Drake 's act , sporting thigh @-@ high boots and a tank top that read " Big as Madonna " . She then went on to kiss Drake ; the kissing becoming an Internet viral . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Writer and Producer – Madonna , Stuart Price 
 Writer of Sample – Benny Andersson , Björn Ulvaeus 
 Cover Artwork – Giovanni Bianco 
 Digital Imaging – Lorenzo <unk> ( <unk> NYC ) 
 Management – Angela Becker , Guy Oseary 
 Photography – Steven Klein 
 Hair and makeup – Andy <unk> 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = David Villa = 
 David Villa Sánchez ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 3 December 1981 ) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays as a striker and is the captain for New York City FC . He is nicknamed El Guaje ( The Kid in Asturian ) because as a youngster he frequently played football with children much older than him . 
 Despite sustaining a serious injury as a child , Villa started his professional career with Sporting de Gijón . He moved to Real Zaragoza after two seasons , where he made his La Liga debut , winning the Copa del Rey and Supercopa de España . He joined Valencia CF in 2005 for a transfer fee of € 12 million and was part of the Valencia team that won the Copa del Rey in the 2007 – 08 season . Villa hit his La Liga goalscoring peak while at Valencia , scoring 28 league goals in the 2008 – 09 season . In 2010 , he moved to FC Barcelona for € 40 million , where he won his first La Liga and UEFA Champions League titles . He was one of the goalscorers in the 2011 final of the Champions League as Barcelona defeated Manchester United , 3 – 1 . After a € 5 @.@ 1 million transfer , he spent the 2013 – 14 season at Atlético Madrid , winning another La Liga title before leaving to play for New York City . 
 Villa made his international debut for Spain in 2005 . He has since participated in four major tournaments , becoming an integral member of the Spain teams that won UEFA Euro 2008 and the 2010 FIFA World Cup . He scored three goals at the 2006 World Cup , was the top scorer at Euro 2008 and earned the Silver Boot at the 2010 World Cup . He is the first Spanish player to ever reach 50 international goals and retired from internationals after the 2014 World Cup with 59 in 97 matches , making him Spain 's all @-@ time top goalscorer as well as the country 's top scorer in the World Cup , with nine goals . 
 = = Childhood and early career = = 
 Villa was born in <unk> , a small parish in Langreo , Asturias , a region in northern Spain , the son of José Manuel Villa , a miner . When Villa was four , his chances of becoming a footballer were put in jeopardy when he suffered a fracture to the femur in his right leg , but he made a complete recovery . Due to the injury , he and his father worked on strengthening his left leg and Villa ultimately became ambidextrous . He recalls his father being consistently supportive : " He would be there throwing me the ball over and over , making me kick it with my left leg when my right was in plaster after breaking it , I was four . I can barely remember a single training session when my dad wasn 't there . I have never been alone on a football pitch . " 
 Villa admitted that he came close to giving up football at the age of 14 after growing disillusioned and falling out with his coach . However , thanks to his parents ' encouragement , he persisted in pursuing his dream , realising his talent could earn him a living . " In those days I was a nobody , not earning a penny and after being made to sit on the bench all season I just wanted to get away and play with my friends " he said . " But my dad always supported me and cheered me up until my career turned round . " He went on to begin his footballing career at UP Langreo and when he turned 17 he joined the <unk> football school . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Sporting Gijón = = = 
 Villa attracted interest from many Asturian teams , but one of the province 's bigger teams , Real Oviedo , declared that he was too short and that they did not believe he had sufficient potential . He subsequently got his professional breakthrough at his local club Sporting de Gijón , following in the footsteps of his childhood idol Quini . Starting out at the team 's youth ranks , he made his first @-@ team debut in the 2000 – 01 season . After scoring 25 goals in two seasons , he became a first team regular . Pepe <unk> , Sporting 's manager at the time , said that Villa initially lacked the stamina to have a real impact and had to be given his chance bit by bit and that Villa 's capacity for work was " unrivalled " . 
 = = = Real Zaragoza = = = 
 = = = = 2003 – 04 season = = = = 
 With his goal tally nearly reaching 40 goals after spending two full seasons in Sporting 's main team , Villa got his chance in Spain 's top @-@ flight when Sporting were in financial difficulty – newly promoted Real Zaragoza signed him for approximately € 3 million in the summer of 2003 . The striker had no trouble adapting to playing at the higher level , netting 17 times in his first season at Zaragoza . His league debut came during Zaragoza 's first La Liga game since his arrival , where the team were defeated 1 – 0 away by Galician side Deportivo de La Coruña while his first goal came two games later , an eighth @-@ minute goal against Real Murcia which put Zaragoza 2 – 0 up in a match which ended 3 – 0 . 4 December 2003 saw him net his first brace ( two goals ) in a 2 – 2 draw against Athletic Bilbao and on 25 April 2004 , he scored his first hat @-@ trick in a tight 4 – 4 draw against Sevilla which saw Villa score all four of Zaragoza 's goals , putting his team ahead on two occasions . 
 Zaragoza reached the 2004 Copa del Rey final where he played a big part in the team 's victory , scoring a crucial goal to put the Aragonese outfit 2 – 1 up against Real Madrid in a match which eventually ended 3 – 2 . Soon after , he earned his first international call @-@ up and cap , which resulted in Zaragoza fans becoming so proud of his achievements that they invented the football chant " illa illa illa , Villa <unk> " , a play on the words " Villa " and " <unk> " , the latter which translates to " marvel " but can also mean " wonderful " or " great " in that context . 
 = = = = 2004 – 05 season = = = = 
 After Zaragoza 's triumph in the Copa del Rey , they were granted a place in the 2004 – 05 UEFA Cup ; this was Villa 's first time playing in a European competition . In the team 's opening group game , against Utrecht , Villa netted a brace in the dying minutes of the game , which ended 2 – 0 in Zaragoza 's favour . In the round of 16 , Zaragoza faced Austria Wien . The first leg ended 1 – 1 , while Villa scored in the second leg in an eventual 2 – 2 draw ; Austria Wien progressed on the away goals rule . Meanwhile , in La Liga , Villa excited Zaragoza fans on 23 September 2004 by putting the team 1 – 0 up against Barcelona at the Camp Nou , although Barcelona came back to win the game 4 – 1 . On 17 April 2005 , Villa scored a brace which helped see off Sevilla in a 3 – 0 victory . 
 = = = Valencia = = = 
 = = = = 2005 – 06 season = = = = 
 After his success at Zaragoza , the team was in need of money , as a result , Villa made his big move to one of Spanish football 's heavyweights , as a new look Valencia under Quique Sánchez Flores parted with € 12 million to secure his services in the summer of 2005 . During his first game in a Valencia shirt , an Intertoto Cup match against Belgian outfit Gent , Villa scored the first goal in a game which Valencia won 2 – 0 . He made his league debut for Valencia coming on as a substitute against Real Betis in a 1 – 0 win on 27 August 2005 . The next match would see his previous team , Zaragoza , leading 2 – 1 for the majority of the match ; however , on the 81st minute , Villa came on as a late substitute for Rubén <unk> and scored the equalizer within the space of a minute , earning Valencia a point in a 2 – 2 draw . 
 On 21 September , Villa would once again save Valencia a vital point by netting a brace against Barcelona at Camp Nou , actually giving his team the lead at one point after Víctor Valdés ' clearance rebounded off Villa 's back and into the net . On 23 October , Villa scored the winning goal against another Spanish giant , this time Real Madrid at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium , and would once again score against Barcelona on 12 February 2006 , his one @-@ goal proving enough to secure all three points in a 1 – 0 victory . Villa scored a goal against Deportivo La Coruña at the Riazor on 4 February 2006 , later described as " superb " by ESPN and " his best " by Sid Lowe , who went on to credit it even more pointing out he achieved it " on the turn " . Hitting the ball from the half way line ( 50 yards out ) it sailed over the keepers head and into the net . 
 Villa scored his first hat @-@ trick for Valencia against Athletic Bilbao at San Mamés in La Liga on 23 April 2006 . He managed the hat @-@ trick in just over five minutes ( 80th to the 85th minute ) , making it one of the quickest hat @-@ tricks ever recorded . Valencia won that game 3 – 0 . That season saw him score 25 goals in 35 league matches for Valencia , finishing one goal behind the league 's top scorer Samuel Eto 'o of Barcelona . Villa 's goal tally that year was the best that any Valencia player had ever achieved since Edmundo Suárez over 60 years prior . 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 season = = = = 
 Villa 's form continued into the 2006 – 07 season , with the striker forming a partnership up front with former Real Madrid star Fernando Morientes . Between them , Villa and Morientes netted 43 goals in all competitions . That year also saw Villa debut in the UEFA Champions League ; his first match was a qualifying match , coming on as a late substitute in a 1 – 0 first leg loss against Red Bull Salzburg . He went on to start the second leg and scored in a 3 – 0 win which saw Valencia qualify for the Champions League group stages . Crucial goals against Roma and Shakhtar Donetsk helped Valencia qualify for the knockout stages , where they faced Inter Milan . Villa scored a free @-@ kick goal in the first leg away from home , while one of Inter 's defenders complained that Villa had " made us look like idiots , all on his own " . Valencia went through to the quarter @-@ finals , where they faced Chelsea . Villa featured in both games but failed to make the score sheet as Valencia were knocked out by the London team 3 – 2 on aggregate . In October 2006 , he was included among the 50 nominees for the Ballon d 'Or ( often referred to as the European Footballer of the Year Award ) . 
 A crucial goal against Espanyol and a brace against Sevilla helped him reach 16 goals that season and would see him come sixth in La Liga 's top scorer list that season ( scoring the same amount of goals as fellow international Raúl <unk> ) while he created more assists than anyone . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 season = = = = 
 The 2007 – 08 season was not easy for Villa nor for his teammates . Early in the season , their manager , Quique Sánchez Flores , was fired and replaced by Ronald Koeman , who ended up being fired on 22 April , after a run of poor results , even though he managed to win a trophy with Valencia after the team defeated Getafe in the Copa del Rey @-@ final . Koeman was replaced by highly rated Almería coach Unai Emery at the end of the season . Under Koeman , Villa managed to see the back of the net 18 times in his 26 appearances . He also won the first professional trophy of his Valencia spell , winning the Copa del Rey for the second time in his career , beating Barcelona 3 – 2 in the semi @-@ finals and then Getafe 3 – 1 in the <unk> ensuring the team 's place for the following season 's UEFA Cup . By the end of the season , he signed a new six @-@ year contract with Valencia , committing his future to the club until 2014 . 
 That season , Villa once again saw himself playing Champions League football . He scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 win against Schalke 04 and went on to put Valencia 1 – 0 up against Chelsea , although goals from Joe Cole and Didier Drogba saw Valencia lose 2 – 1 . Valencia finished bottom of the group and were knocked out . On his 100th league appearance for Valencia , Villa scored a hat @-@ trick against Levante ; his 54th , 55th and 56th league goals for the club . Another two goals on the final day of the season against Atlético Madrid completed his tally of 18 goals that season . 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 season = = = = 
 After finishing as the top scorer at Euro 2008 , Villa continued his form into the 2008 – 09 season , where he scored the first goal in a 3 – 0 win against Mallorca in what was the opening game of the season . After failing to sign the player , Real Madrid 's manager at the time , Bernd Schuster , accused Villa of having " no ambition " , whereupon Villa responded by saying , " Footballing ambition is not about your mouth , it is about your feet . You can accuse me of lots of things – of having a bad day , of missing chances , of many things – but I have always had ambition and always will have . I think I have proved that on the pitch with Zaragoza , Sporting , UD Langreo , and the national team . " In October 2008 , Kaká praised Villa : speaking to Canal + , he claimed that Villa is " the best Spanish footballer " adding that , " The player with whom I would most like to play is David Villa of Valencia . " On 2 December 2008 , Villa came seventh in the Ballon d 'Or 2008 rankings and on 12 January 2009 , he was announced as the joint ninth @-@ best player of 2008 alongside international teammate Andrés Iniesta of Barcelona , according to the 2008 FIFA World Player of the Year awards . 
 Valencia finished second in their UEFA Cup group , although Villa was not featured heavily and was often an unused or late @-@ match <unk> . He scored a late winner against Marítimo and was used in the Round of 32 against Dynamo Kyiv , though he did not make the score sheet . The two legs finished in a 3 – 3 aggregate score , with Dynamo progressing through the away goals rule . 
 Hitting a consistent goalscoring form during mid @-@ season , Villa scored against Deportivo La Coruña , although he was sent off during the match after his second yellow card , received due to a foul on Daniel <unk> ; as a result , he missed Valencia 's next match against Real Valladolid , a game Valencia lost 2 – 1 at home . Ready to return from suspension , Villa suffered from an inflammation in the joint in his left knee due to a partial dislocation and would be ruled out for the next 15 days , missing games against Numancia , <unk> de Huelva and Racing de Santander . When he finally returned from injury on 5 April 2009 , he had no trouble recovering form , netting a brace in a match against Getafe which Valencia won 4 – 1 . On 12 April , Villa was set to return to El <unk> , the home ground of Sporting de Gijón where he started his career . He admitted that the encounter would be very emotional for him but went on to score the second Valencia goal in a 3 – 2 win and kept a pre @-@ match promise by not celebrating the goal . His goal against Villarreal brought his tally to 26 , and he then scored another two against Athletic Bilbao , finishing with 28 goals after the last game of the season , thus equalling records set by the Argentinian Mario <unk> and the Montenegrin Predrag Mijatović , who also scored 28 goals in a Valencia shirt in 1978 and 1996 , respectively . <unk> reached his tally of 28 goals in 34 games while Mijatović achieved it in 40 , ultimately seeing Villa beat their percentages , as he achieved the 28 goals in 33 games , recording a goal ratio of 0 @.@ 84 goals per game . That season saw Villa 's best goal @-@ scoring season at Valencia . 
 With the season over , Villa had marked his fourth year at Valencia , with only Barcelona 's Samuel Eto 'o scoring more goals than him in that period , with just six more . British columnist Sid Lowe , however , pointed out that Eto 'o achieved this " in a team that racked up 129 [ goals ] more than Villa 's side " , and noted that " most of that time he [ Villa ] has taken Valencia 's corners and free @-@ kicks – and however good a player is he can 't head in his own crosses " . Villa also ended the season as the third top scorer in La Liga with 28 goals , just behind Eto 'o ( 30 ) and Diego Forlán ( 32 ) . After recording the best goal tally for a Valencia player in 60 years back in the 2005 – 06 season , he went three better in the 2008 – 09 season . The 28 league goals , in addition to three more in other competitions that season , accumulated a total of 101 goals in 180 official games with the Valencian outfit . 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 After the shock exit from the Confederations Cup with Spain , Villa returned from his holidays on 27 July amidst much media speculation linking him with top clubs such as Real Madrid , Barcelona , Liverpool , Chelsea , and Manchester United . Villa quelled such rumours after announcing his desire to remain at the Mestalla to fulfil his contract , underlining that he " could not spend all summer refuting things , so I wanted to be quiet ... I was told I should leave Valencia for the good of the club , soon after that everything changed and from that moment on I never saw myself out of here – before the Euros , the club told me what my asking price was , and I thought they were going to sell me , but when I returned from my vacations , Vicente Soriano said that he did not want me to leave Valencia . That removed all doubt for me . There is no train missed because all that I have achieved is because of Valencia and the Spanish national team . " When questioned on whether or not he should apologise to Valencia fans , he simply replied , " I did not kill anyone , I do not think I have to ask for forgiveness . " 
 On 20 August 2009 , Villa scored in his first official match of the season , a 3 – 0 Europa League qualifier against Stabæk . He followed this up with two goals against Real Valladolid on 13 September , Villa 's first league goals of the 2009 – 10 season . He scored twice more a week later against former club Sporting Gijón in a 2 – 2 draw at the Mestalla , where he also performed duties as the team 's captain . After the match , Villa hinted towards being unhappy with Unai Emery 's managerial decisions , stating , " The approach for the second half was not right . We relaxed and ended up with the same result as last year . What has happened , has happened , but their goalkeeper was good , unlike our approach , which was not good , " however a day later he denied being critical of Emery , pointing out that , " When I talked about the approach , I was referring to the whole team , I spoke in the heat of the moment , I was annoyed at the way we lost two points and I said what I thought , but I have clarified everything that needed to be cleared up . " 
 In 2009 , Villa scored more goals than any other footballer , tallying 43 goals in 54 games across all competitions for both Spain and Valencia . The IFFHS listed him fourth in the " World 's Top Goal Scorer 2009 " rankings . 
 On 18 October , Villa was nominated for the Ballon d 'Or , while nearly two weeks later , on 30 October , he was nominated for the FIFA World Player of the Year . After going three league games without scoring , Villa contributed two goals towards Valencia 's 4 – 1 victory against Villarreal on 17 January 2010 , the first of his two goals became his 100th league goal with Valencia . Another brace came against Getafe on 22 February 2010 , the second goal being " a superb chip " ( as described by ESPN ) over Jordi Codina . On 18 March , Valencia went to the <unk> to play Werder Bremen in the Europa League . Villa scored a hat @-@ trick , his third goal being of note , which was fired in from eight yards out . The match ended 4 – 4 while Valencia proceeded to the next round on away goals . On 4 May 2010 , Valencia played Xerez ; Villa did not start but came on as a substitute 62 minutes into the match , which ended 3 – 1 . Valencia still had two more games to play in the league , although Villa did not feature , making the game against Xerez the last time he played for Valencia . 
 = = = Barcelona = = = 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 On 19 May 2010 , Barcelona reached an agreement with Valencia for the acquisition of Villa for a € 40 million transfer fee . Villa signed a four @-@ year contract with Barça with the option for a fifth , worth a reported € 7 million per season , thus following in the footsteps of his heroes Luis Enrique and Quini , both of whom , like Villa , started out at Sporting Gijón and ended up at Barcelona . On 21 May 2010 , over 35 @,@ 000 Barcelona supporters packed into Camp Nou to see Villa 's presentation , where he revealed the kit Barcelona would use during the 2010 – 11 season . He was given his favourite number 7 , a number which had been free at the club since Eiður Guðjohnsen left in 2009 . He made his first appearance for the club in the second leg of the Supercopa de España , during the second half as a substitute for fellow Spanish international Pedro . His debut appearance would also see him win his first piece of silver @-@ ware with the Catalonian side , as Barcelona won 4 – 0 and 5 – 3 on aggregate due to a hat @-@ trick by teammate Lionel Messi . His first goal came during the Joan Gamper Trophy ( an annual friendly competition ) against Milan ; Barcelona won 3 – 1 on penalties after the match had ended 1 – 1 during normal time . 
 On 29 August 2010 , Villa made his La Liga debut with Barcelona against Racing de Santander , where he scored the third goal of the match to help seal a 3 – 0 victory . On 14 September 2010 , he scored on his Champions League debut with Barcelona in a 5 – 1 victory over Panathinaikos 
 Against Sevilla , on 31 October 2010 , Barcelona won 5 – 0 against the Andalusian side , while Villa netted a brace . His first goal that match was voted " The Best Goal of the Week ( October 25 – 31 ) " by the readers of <unk> Villa 's first El Clásico against Real Madrid came on 29 November 2010 , where he scored two goals as Barcelona won 5 – 0 at the Camp Nou . Talking about the match , he commented that , " It 's been a very important win . We looked for the victory and we got it . And the result and the manner in which we achieved it , you cannot ask for more . " He then scored a goal against Real Sociedad , a match Barcelona won 5 – 0 . He followed with a brace against Espanyol , helping Barcelona to a 5 – 1 win . 
 On 27 December 2010 , Villa was named " Male Athlete of the Year " by the United States Sports Academy , as he edged fellow Spaniard Rafael Nadal and previous winner Manny Pacquiao for the title . 
 On 28 May 2011 , Villa scored the third goal – curling the ball into the net from 25 @-@ yards out – in Barcelona 's 3 – 1 victory over Manchester United in the 2010 – 11 UEFA Champions League final . After the victory , Villa said that he would like to dedicate the victory " to all my family , my daughters and also Pepe Reina 's , who are like my nieces " . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 Villa started the season with goals against Mexican clubs Guadalajara and América in pre @-@ season friendly matches . His first official match of the season was against Real Madrid in the first leg of the 2011 Supercopa de España , where Villa scored a " world @-@ class " goal to help Barça seal a 2 – 2 tie at the Santiago Bernabéu , while on 17 August 2011 , Villa was sent off in the dying moments of the second leg ( which Barcelona won 3 – 2 ) after an altercation with Mesut Özil . Against Osasuna on 17 September 2011 , Villa contributed two goals and forced <unk> into scoring an own goal in Barcelona 's 8 – 0 win over the team from Pamplona . He then broke his tibia in a Club World Cup match in Yokohama against Al <unk> . Doctors said he was to be out of action for up to six months , but this eventually led to him missing the entire 2011 – 12 season with both Barcelona and the Spanish football team at Euro 2012 . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 After spending eight months without being able to play any football , Villa finally returned from his injury in the 73rd minute of Barcelona 's 2 – 0 win over Dinamo Bucharest on 11 August 2012 . Eight days later , he played his first competitive football match since December 2011 in Barcelona 's first La Liga game of the season where he received a standing ovation while coming on as a substitute for Pedro . It only took seven minutes before Villa found himself on the score @-@ sheet while sealing a 5 – 1 victory for his team against Real Sociedad . On 28 November , Villa scored two goals in a 3 – 1 over Deportivo Alavés , which included his 300th career goal . 
 Against Milan in the second leg of round of 16 of the Champions League , Villa scored the decisive third goal in Barcelona 's 4 – 0 victory , helping his team overturn a two @-@ goal first @-@ leg deficit . In the next round , Villa assisted Pedro 's equalising goal against Paris Saint @-@ Germain which took Barcelona through to the semi @-@ final , where they were eventually knocked out by Bayern Munich . 
 David Villa ended the season with a large amount of his appearances coming from the bench , partly due to the recovery time of his previous injury . Despite this , he was still able to amass 16 goals in 39 appearances while his performances earned him a spot in Spain 's 2013 Confederations Cup squad . 
 = = = Atlético Madrid = = = 
 On 8 July 2013 , Barcelona announced that they had reached an agreement for the transfer of Villa to Atlético Madrid for a cut @-@ price deal of € 5 @.@ 1 million . On 21 August 2013 , he scored in the 2013 Supercopa de España first leg on his debut for Atlético against his former club Barcelona with a right @-@ footed volley . 
 Villa scored his first goal of the league season on 1 September , also assisting Koke as Atlético won 2 – 1 away at Real Sociedad . On 27 October , he scored his first Atlético brace as the side defeated Real Betis 5 – 0 at the Vicente Calderón Stadium . He added two further braces during the season : on 23 November in a 7 – 0 win over Getafe and the other in the space of 90 seconds in a 2 – 0 away win against Celta de Vigo on 8 March 2014 . He finished his only season at the club with 13 league goals from 36 appearances , contributing to Atlético 's first league title since 1996 . 
 = = = New York City FC = = = 
 On 1 June 2014 , Villa announced that he would leave Atlético . While he called the club he was joining " an irresistible project " , he did not reveal the identity of the club . The following day , he was announced as the first player for the newly formed New York City FC , who would start playing in the 2015 season of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . He was handed the number 7 shirt on arrival , and stated , " I want to try to help MLS continue to grow and try to make New York City become the best team in the league . " 
 = = = = Melbourne City ( loan ) = = = = 
 Parallel to his joining New York City FC , Villa was announced to have joined the Australian A @-@ League with Melbourne City , following the team 's association with Manchester City . Villa was on a guest stint , allowing him to make up to ten appearances for Melbourne City during the 2014 – 15 season , taking advantage of the scheduling of the A @-@ League and MLS to maintain match fitness ahead of his debut with New York City . After only joining Melbourne City for pre @-@ season training just over a week before their first game , Villa was brought on in the 48th minute of the first game of the season against Sydney FC , and scored a debut goal a quarter of an hour into his appearance . On 19 October 2014 , in his second match , Villa scored an 87th @-@ minute equaliser against the Newcastle Jets for a 1 – 1 draw . 
 Despite signing for ten matches , Villa was recalled by New York after just four matches , none of which were won by Melbourne City ; the last was a 1 – 2 home defeat to Adelaide United . It was estimated that he tripled the club 's attendance , and manager John van ' t <unk> credited Villa with bringing attention to the club . 
 = = = = Return to New York City = = = = 
 Villa was named NYCFC 's first ever team captain on 1 February 2015 , as well as a Designated Player . Nine days later , in a friendly against Scottish club St Mirren , he scored the team 's first ever goal . On 8 March , he started in the team 's first MLS game , away to fellow newcomers Orlando City . In a 1 – 1 draw , he set up Mix <unk> for the first goal and was fouled by <unk> Collin , who was sent off for the challenge . A week later , in their first home match at Yankee Stadium , Villa opened the scoring in a 2 – 0 win over the New England Revolution for the team 's first competitive victory . 
 On 12 July , Villa netted twice in a 4 – 4 home draw against Toronto FC , despite missing a penalty in the first half . He was selected to take part in the 2015 MLS All @-@ Star Game on 29 July , at the Dick 's Sporting Goods Park in Commerce City , Colorado ; he scored the match @-@ winning goal from a Kaká assist as the MLS All @-@ Stars defeated Tottenham Hotspur 2 – 1 . Despite Villa 's prolific performances , which saw him score 18 goals during the 2015 MLS regular season , New York City FC did not qualify for the MLS Cup Playoffs in their inaugural campaign . 
 In July 2016 , Villa was included in the roster for the 2016 MLS All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = 2006 World Cup = = = 
 An occasional member of the Under @-@ 21 team , Villa marked his international début under Luis Aragonés on 9 February 2005 in a 2006 World Cup qualifier where Spain beat San Marino 5 – 0 at the Estadio del <unk> while his first international goal came in the form of a late equaliser during a World Cup qualifier against Slovakia on 16 November . 
 A successful season with Valencia saw him get called up as part of the 23 @-@ man squad to represent Spain at the 2006 FIFA World Cup . Spain 's first match at the tournament and Villa 's World Cup debut resulted in a 4 – 0 win against Ukraine where Villa netted a brace , and also put his nation 1 – 0 up against France in the Round of 16 , although Spain went on to lose the match 3 – 1 . He and Fernando Torres finished as Spain 's top scorers with three goals each . 
 = = = Euro 2008 = = = 
 By the end of 2006 , Villa had become an integral part of Luis Aragonés ' plans and ousted Raúl from the team . Proving vital in Spain 's qualification for Euro 2008 , he scored six goals , including a bicycle kick against Liechtenstein . He was subsequently called up for the tournament where he formed a striking relationship with Torres , with whom he would often celebrate his goals . He scored a hat @-@ trick in Spain 's 4 – 1 win over Russia , making him the first player to do so at a UEFA European Championship since Patrick Kluivert in 2000 , and only the seventh overall . After the third goal , he went out of his way to meet Torres , who was on the bench at the time , to celebrate with him : " I had just scored a hat @-@ trick and I knew people would be talking about me , but I wanted them to see that I had benefited from Torres 's work , just as he sometimes benefits from mine . " In the next match , he secured a 2 – 1 win against Sweden with a goal in the 92nd minute . Rested for the next match against Greece , he started once again in the quarter @-@ finals , where Spain beat Italy 4 – 2 on penalties ; Villa took the first penalty and scored . 
 Reaching their first semi @-@ final in 24 years , Spain went on to face Russia for the second time during the tournament , though during the early stages of the match , Villa sustained a thigh injury after taking a free kick and was replaced by Cesc Fàbregas . The injury meant that he could not participate in the final where Spain beat Germany 1 – 0 to claim their second win at the European Football Championships . Despite missing the final and the majority of the semi @-@ final , Villa 's four goals in the four games he played were enough for him to be top scorer of the tournament and was awarded the Golden Boot . He also made the UEFA Euro 2008 Team of the Tournament alongside striking partner Torres . 
 = = = 2009 Confederations Cup = = = 
 Spain 's first match during qualification for the 2010 World Cup was against Bosnia and Herzegovina where Villa scored the only goal of the game . He would go on to score four goals in Spain 's next three games , including a last minute winner against Belgium . Another goal during a friendly match against Chile saw him end the year with 12 goals , breaking Raúl 's record of 10 goals held since 1999 . Villa began 2009 with a goal against England in a 2 – 0 friendly , with this goal , he broke another record and became the first Spanish international to have scored in six consecutive games , seeing off records set by Telmo Zarra and László Kubala . Speaking of the goal , he said , " I am very happy with the goal . Truth is , I really want to see it on TV . The record is very nice . I would never have imagined in years that I would be able to obtain it . I am very proud and I hope I can continue breaking records . " 
 On 1 June 2009 , Vicente del Bosque named Villa in his 23 @-@ man squad for the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup . In a friendly match before the tournament , Villa scored his second international hat @-@ trick against Azerbaijan , nearly exactly a year after his hat @-@ trick against Russia at Euro 2008 . He debuted at the Confederations Cup with a goal , the last of the five goals in Spain 's 5 – 0 victory over New Zealand , while in the next game he scored the decisive goal against a defensive Iraqi team . Against South Africa , he missed a penalty , but within a minute made up for the miss by putting Spain ahead , helping them equal the records of most consecutive wins and most consecutive matches undefeated before making way for Pablo Hernández . The goal was his last of the tournament but was enough to see him win the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup Bronze Shoe , he would also go on to make the team of the tournament . 
 Villa earned his 50th cap during a friendly against the Republic of Macedonia in a match where Spain won 3 – 2 . 
 = = = 2010 World Cup = = = 
 On 5 September 2009 , Villa added two more goals to his goal tally for Spain , while assisting twice during the World Cup qualifier against Belgium , in A Coruña . The match ended 5 – 0 to Spain , where Villa also had a first @-@ half penalty saved by Belgian goalkeeper Jean @-@ François Gillet . Villa finished the year with his sixth international brace against Austria in the Ernst @-@ Happel @-@ Stadion , the setting where Spain were crowned European champions the previous year . With these two goals , Villa equalled the record he set last year of most goals scored in one calendar year by a Spanish international . Spain 's first match in 2010 came on 3 March , against France at the Stade de France ; Villa scored the opening goal in a game which Spain went on to win 2 – 0 . 
 In 2010 , Villa came first in the IFFHS " 2010 's World Top Goalscorer at International Level " rankings , he was subsequently selected as a part of Vicente del Bosque 's 23 @-@ man squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . In a friendly against Saudi Arabia on 29 May 2010 , Villa scored the first of Spain 's goals as they won 3 – 2 at the Tivoli Neu – the stadium where he scored his hat @-@ trick against Russia during Euro 2008 . Failing to score in Spain 's next match against South Korea , he opened the score sheet in Spain 's next match against Poland , in which Spain won 6 – 0 , recording Poland 's their worst defeat in 50 years . 
 In Spain 's first 2010 World Cup match , Villa was chosen as a lone striker , but could do nothing to prevent their shock defeat at the hands of Switzerland . Five days later , Spain defeated Honduras 2 – 0 , where Villa scored both goals , but wasted his chance to complete a hat @-@ trick when he was awarded a penalty kick – side @-@ footing the ball just wide of the post . It was the first time in 14 attempts Spain ever missed a penalty in a World Cup during the run of play . In the same game , Villa was shown to slap Emilio <unk> in the face after the Honduran player trod on him . Villa said he was " not proud " of the heat of the moment incident , but he escaped a ban . Villa helped secure Spain 's place in the round of 16 after scoring the first goal in a 2 – 1 win over Chile , with a long @-@ range shot into an empty net after Chilean goalkeeper Claudio Bravo ran out of his area to prevent Fernando Torres from scoring . The goal would become his sixth goal in FIFA World Cup matches , becoming Spain 's all @-@ time top scorer at the World Cup finals , ahead of Emilio Butragueño , Fernando Hierro , Fernando Morientes and Raúl , all of whom have five . 
 Spain were up against Portugal in the round of 16 , and Villa would prove to be vital once again , as Xavi <unk> an Andrés Iniesta pass to the on @-@ rushing Villa , who hit the back of the net on the rebound after having his first shot saved by Eduardo , proving enough to give Spain a place in the quarter @-@ finals against Paraguay , where Villa scored a goal from a rebound after Pedro hit the post . Once again , Villa 's goal proved to be the difference as the match finished 1 – 0 , while Spain booked a game with Germany in the semi @-@ finals , where Spain recorded yet another 1 – 0 victory with the only goal coming from Carles Puyol . 
 Villa started in the final against the Netherlands , where he had an opportunity to score from close range , but was impeded by John Heitinga who managed to block his shot . Villa was replaced by Fernando Torres in the 106th minute and Spain won the championship 1 – 0 on Iniesta 's goal in the 116th minute . Villa , who scored five of Spain 's eight goals in the World Cup Finals , was awarded the Silver Shoe ; he had the same number of goals as Thomas Müller , the Gold Shoe winner , but fewer assists . Villa was named in the FIFA World Cup All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = = Euro 2012 qualifying and missing out on Euro 2012 = = = 
 Spain 's first match of UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying was against Liechtenstein on 3 September 2010 , Villa scored the second goal of the match which eventually ended 4 – 0 . It was believed that this goal meant that he had equalled Raúl 's record 44 @-@ goal tally , however after many debates about whether he or Dariusz Dudka scored the first goal in Spain 's 6 – 0 win over Poland , FIFA eventually decided that the goal was indeed an own goal by Dudka , meaning Villa 's goal tally would remain at 43 . On 12 October 2010 , he finally equalled Raúl 's record , scoring a penalty against Scotland and helping Spain see off the Scots in a 3 – 2 victory at Hampden Park . 
 On 25 March 2011 , Villa scored two goals against the Czech Republic in a Euro 2012 qualifier , which ultimately handed Spain a 2 – 1 victory , while at the same time he managed to eclipse Raúl as Spain 's all @-@ time leading goalscorer . Speaking of the achievement , he stated that , " The goals are dedicated to all the team @-@ mates , all the coaches , all partners and friends I had during my career ... But long ago I promised José , who is a friend of mine , that the goal which overtook Raúl would be for him . " 
 On 7 September 2011 , Villa helped secure Spain 's qualification for UEFA Euro 2012 by scoring two goals in Spain 's 6 – 0 victory over Liechtenstein . In Spain 's last Euro 2012 qualifying match , Villa scored his 50th international goal against Scotland in a 3 – 1 victory for Spain . That same match was also the first time Villa was able to wear the captain 's armband while playing for the Spanish national team . 
 Villa finished as top scorer of Group I with seven goals , however , after fracturing his tibia in December 2011 , he was left out of Spain 's final squad for Euro 2012 after telling Vicente del Bosque that he would not be fit for the tournament . He tweeted , " I 've tried , but I can 't be 100 % to play the Eurocup . I called Del Bosque . It 's the honest thing . " Del Bosque was hoping to include Villa in the squad and promised to give Villa as long as possible to return to fitness . 
 = = = 2013 Confederations Cup and 2014 World Cup = = = 
 After Spain had won Euro 2012 , Villa had returned to fitness and was subsequently called up to the Spain team again . He made his return in the 53rd minute during a friendly against Saudi Arabia and found himself on the score sheet just ten minutes later . 
 On 3 June 2013 , Vicente del Bosque included Villa in his 23 @-@ man squad for the 2013 Confederations Cup where he scored three goals , all of which were against Tahiti in a 10 – 0 victory for Spain . 
 Villa was named in Spain 's squad for the 2014 World Cup . Prior to the World Cup , he confirmed that he would retire from international football after the tournament . With Spain 's elimination already confirmed , Villa was selected to start in Spain 's final group match against Australia . He scored his 59th goal for La Furia Roja , and ninth in World Cup finals , in his final international appearance , a 3 – 0 win on 23 June 2014 . 
 In December 2015 , Villa revealed that he was considering reversing his international retirement . 
 = = = Succeeding Raúl as Spain 's number 7 = = = 
 The Spanish media has often compared Villa with Raúl , to the point where Villa was accused of taking the number 7 jersey away from the then @-@ Real Madrid player . In March 2009 , Villa spoke out , saying , " I have not taken anything away from anybody , I was simply playing well for my club and the national coach gave me an opportunity . Too much has been said about the number issue . I ’ m not looking to cause any controversy . In fact , Raúl and I were in the national squad together in the past . I haven ’ t forced anybody out . " When questioned on whether the whole uproar created over Raúl 's omission was affecting him personally , he said , " I 've never liked it because I think it has been damaging for the both of us . We 've always got on well together whenever we 've met up for international duty , so I 'm not concerned . I just work hard for myself . All I want is to be in the squad for every game , to have the Spain badge on my chest and to score as many goals as I can . " 
 In February 2010 , Bernd Schuster was asked if Raúl did not favour Villa moving to Real Madrid , to which he responded , " I have a cough , " which caused many to believe that he was implying the rumour to be true . Villa firmly ridiculed that idea by saying , " It is impossible that a player with as much class on and off the pitch as Raúl would speak poorly of me . I have always had a good relationship with Raúl , even though we have hardly met on international duty . " Speaking about Raúl 's record with the Spanish national team as the nation 's leading top scorer , Villa said , " I 've got 25 goals but he 's got 44 and is still playing . I 'd be delighted to reach that tally as I 'd help the national team achieve great victories and , in many years ' time , I could see my name on a [ scorers ' list ] that another young lad was trying to beat . That would be great . " On 25 March 2011 , two years after making that remark , Villa surpassed Raúl as Spain 's all @-@ time top scorer . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 A prolific goalscorer , Villa is regarded by pundits as one of the best forwards of his generation , and one of the best Spanish strikers of all @-@ time . An opportunistic , versatile and well @-@ rounded player , Villa is naturally right @-@ footed , but an accurate and powerful finisher with either foot , due to his ambidexterity , both inside and outside the area , despite his lack of height or physicality ; he is also a set piece and penalty kick specialist . Villa is a quick , agile , and mobile team player , with excellent technique and dribbling skills , who is also known for his work @-@ rate and intelligent offensive movement , as well as his ability to either create space for teammates or make attacking runs into the area . Due to his vision and passing ability , he is also capable of dropping deep to link up play with midfielders , and of creating chances and providing assists for teammates , which has allowed him to be deployed as a supporting forward , as an attacking midfielder or as a winger throughout his career , in addition to his more common role as a centre @-@ forward . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2003 , Villa married his childhood sweetheart Patricia González , who had also been a footballer in her teenage years . Together they have three children : <unk> , <unk> — named after the wife of Fernando Torres , who is a close friend of Patricia — and Luca . The names of his children are engraved on his personalised Adidas <unk> boots ; while one boot bears the Spanish flag , the other has the flag of Asturias . 
 His footballing idols are fellow <unk> Luis Enrique and Quini , both of whom also played for Sporting de Gijón and Barcelona . 
 Villa frequently attends charity events . He is actively involved with the campaigns of the UNICEF charity . 
 Beginning in July 2008 , a David Villa Camp is held annually , where children receive training from professional footballers . Villa also participates in a training session with the children . 
 Villa features in EA Sports ' FIFA video game series ; he was on the cover of the Spanish edition of the video game FIFA 07 , and he also appeared on the cover of the MLS custom edition of FIFA 16 . 
 In 2010 , Villa sang alongside Grammy Award @-@ nominated Spanish singer Ana <unk> on the song " Insurrection " by El Último de la Fila . The recording was made for the beneficiary project Voces <unk> to help raise money to build an art and education school in Mali . Villa commented that footballers " are an example for society and we have to be ready to get involved in these projects , where we can help people who need it " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 17 July 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = = International statistics = = = = 
 As of 23 June 2014 . 
 Note : Each season is September – August 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Real Zaragoza 
 Copa del Rey ( 1 ) : 2003 – 04 
 Supercopa de España ( 1 ) : 2004 
 Valencia 
 Copa del Rey ( 1 ) : 2007 – 08 
 Barcelona 
 La Liga ( 2 ) : 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 Copa del Rey ( 1 ) : 2011 – 12 
 Supercopa de España ( 2 ) : 2010 , 2011 
 UEFA Champions League ( 1 ) : 2010 – 11 
 UEFA Super Cup ( 1 ) : 2011 
 FIFA Club World Cup ( 1 ) : 2011 
 Atlético Madrid 
 La Liga ( 1 ) : 2013 – 14 
 UEFA Champions League Runner @-@ up ( 1 ) : 2013 – 14 
 New York City 
 MLS All @-@ Star : 2015 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Spain 
 FIFA World Cup ( 1 ) : 2010 
 UEFA European Championship ( 1 ) : 2008 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Awards 
 Spanish Player of the Year : 2005 – 06 
 Zarra Trophy : 2005 – 06 , 2006 – 07 , 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 UEFA Euro 2008 Golden Boot 
 UEFA Euro 2008 Team of the Tournament 
 UEFA Euro 2008 Man of the Match Spain vs Russia , Spain vs Sweden 
 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup Bronze Shoe 
 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup Team of the Tournament . 
 2010 FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe 
 2010 FIFA World Cup Bronze Ball 
 2010 FIFA World Cup Dream Team 
 2010 FIFA World Cup Man of the Match Spain vs Honduras 
 USSA Male Athlete of the Year : 2010 
 FIFA / FIFPro World XI : 2010 
 UEFA Team of the Year : 2010 
 MLS Player of the Week 2015 : Week 2 
 MLS Player of the Week 2015 : Week 15 
 MLS All @-@ Star : 2015 
 NYCFC Etihad Player of the month : July 2015 
 Ride of Fame : September 2015 
 NYCFC Most Valuable Player : 2015 
 NYCFC Goal of the Year : 2015 
 NYCFC Etihad Player of the month : April 2016 
 Achievements 
 Valencia Top Scorer : 2005 – 06 , 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 , 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 La Liga 's Top Assisting Player : 2006 – 07 
 Spain all @-@ time top scorer : 59 goals 
 Spain 's all @-@ time top scorer in FIFA World Cup matches 
 Most goals scored in one World Cup ( by a Spanish international ) : 5 
 Most goals scored in one calendar year ( by a Spanish international ) : 12 ( 2008 , 2009 ) 
 Largest streak of games having scored ( by a Spanish international ) : 6 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 Prince of Asturias Awards : 2010 
 Gold Medal of the Royal Order of Sporting Merit : 2011 
 = Courageous ( song ) = 
 " Courageous " is a song by contemporary Christian music band Casting Crowns , released by Beach Street Records , Reunion Records , and Provident Label Group . Written by Mark Hall and Matthew West and produced by Mark A. Miller , it was released on July 19 , 2011 as the first single from the band 's 2011 album Come to the Well . Hall has said the inspiration for the song was at the National Day of Prayer breakfast in 2008 . A rock , pop rock and soft rock song , it calls fathers to be better spiritual leaders . 
 " Courageous " was received positively by critics , many of whom praised the song as one of the best off of Come to the Well . It peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Christian AC Indicator charts and also peaked inside the top five on the Hot Christian Songs , Christian CHR , and Soft AC / Inspirational charts . It peaked at number four on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which measures the top twenty @-@ five singles that have not entered the Billboard Hot 100 , and number sixteen on the Heatseekers Songs chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 According to lead vocalist Mark Hall , the inspiration for " Courageous " came at the National Day of Prayer breakfast in 2008 . Casting Crowns was performing at the event and Hall met with Alex Kendrick , who was also a part of the event . The two started talking about various topics until Hall told Kendrick about his church 's Bible study program for fathers . Hall said that " our hearts just sort of joined on this passion to see men rise up and be the godly men of the house that God has called us to be " . Kendrick mentioned that he wanted a song to be at the end credits of a movie and that " lit [ Hall ] up " . 
 " Courageous " was written by Mark Hall and Matthew West and produced by Mark A. Miller . It was recorded and mixed by Sam Hewitt at Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee , with additional vocals recorded at Eagle 's Landing Studio in McDonough , Georgia . The song was mastered by Andrew Mendelson . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Courageous " is a song with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ nine seconds . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , it is set common time in the key of F ♯ minor and has a tempo of 82 beats per minute . Mark Hall 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of A3 to the high note of F ♯ 5 . A rock , pop rock , and soft rock song , " Courageous " features " jangling " guitars and a " muscular " guitar riff . Lyrically , it calls fathers to be better spiritual leaders ; the song 's bridge quotes the Book of Micah , calling the listener to " live justly and love mercy and walk humbly with your God " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Courageous " was received positively by music critics . James Christopher Monger of Allmusic selected it as a ' Track pick ' and felt it contributed to a strong opening for Come to the Well . Grace S. Aspinwall of CCM Magazine felt " Courageous " was one of the best tracks on the album . Tom Lennie of Cross Rhythms was less positive , calling the song " one of the least melodic tunes on offer on [ Come to the Well ] . Lindsay Williams of Gospel Music Channel felt the song demonstrated how Matthew West 's songwriting on Come to the Well made the album better . Alex " <unk> " Caldwell of Jesus Freak Hideout felt the song was an " apt challenge to men of God in this world who maintain spectator lifestyles and live vicariously through television shows and sports teams " and said the bridge made the song " thought @-@ provoking " . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 " Courageous " was released as a digital download on July 19 , 2011 and to Christian AC , Christian CHR , and Soft AC / Inspirational radio on August 13 , 2011 . It debuted at number thirty @-@ eight on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart for the chart week of August 27 , 2011 . It advanced to number eighteen in its second chart week and to number fifteen in its sixth week . In its eight chart week , it jumped from number eleven to number four . In its eleventh chart week , " Courageous " advanced to the number one position , which it held for a total of four consecutive weeks . It dropped to the number two position in its fifteenth chart week but returned to the number one position the following week . In total , " Courageous " spent twenty @-@ seven weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart . 
 It also peaked at number one on the Christian AC Indicator chart , number two on the Hot Christian AC chart , number three on the Soft AC / Inspirational and Christian CHR charts . It peaked at number four on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which ranks the top twenty @-@ five songs that have not reached the Billboard Hot 100 , and at number sixteen on the Heatseekers Songs chart , which measures the top songs by artists who have never reached the top fifty on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Courageous " was the twenty @-@ ninth best @-@ selling Christian song of 2011 , also ranking on the 2011 year @-@ end Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts at number thirty @-@ one and thirty @-@ three , respectively . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits lifted from the digital booklet for Come to the Well . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release and radio history = = 
 = Willow ( film ) = 
 Willow is a 1988 American @-@ British high fantasy film directed by Ron Howard , produced and with a story by George Lucas , and starring Warwick Davis , Val Kilmer , Joanne Whalley , Jean Marsh , and Billy Barty . Davis plays the eponymous lead character and hero : a reluctant farmer who plays a critical role in protecting a special baby from a tyrannical queen who vows to destroy her and take over the world in a high fantasy setting . 
 Lucas conceived the idea for the film in 1972 , approaching Howard to direct during the post @-@ production phase of Cocoon in 1985 . Bob Dolman was brought in to write the screenplay , coming up with seven drafts before finishing in late 1986 . It was then set up at Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer and principal photography began in April 1987 , finishing the following October . 
 The majority of filming took place at Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire , England , as well as Wales and New Zealand . Industrial Light & Magic created the visual effects sequences , which led to a revolutionary breakthrough with digital morphing technology . The film was released in 1988 to mixed reviews from critics , but was a modest financial success , received two Academy Award nominations , and has developed a cult following amongst fantasy fans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A prophecy states that a female child with a special birthmark will herald the downfall of the evil sorceress Queen Bavmorda . Bavmorda imprisons all pregnant women in her realm to prevent fulfilment of the prophecy . When the prophesied child is born , the mother begs the midwife to take her to safety . The midwife reluctantly accepts and leaves Nockmaar castle unnoticed . The mother is executed and the midwife is eventually found . Knowing she cannot escape , she sets the baby on a makeshift raft of grass and sends her down the river hoping for fate to run its course . The midwife is then killed by Nockmaar hounds . Bavmorda sends her daughter Sorsha and General Kael to find the baby . 
 The baby drifts downriver to a Nelwyn village . She comes into the care of Willow Ufgood , a kind farmer and conjurer who hopes to become a sorcerer ; his wife <unk> and his children fall in love with the baby immediately , and Willow too soon grows to love her as one of his own . During a town festival the village is attacked by a Nockmaar hound which is quickly killed by the village warriors . The High <unk> , the village sorcerer , learns about the baby and selects Willow , due to his devotion to the child , to accompany a party of volunteers returning the baby to the <unk> ( human ) people . At a crossroads , they find a human warrior named Madmartigan trapped in a crow 's cage . The rest of the party want to give the baby to Madmartigan and go home immediately , but Willow and his friend Meegosh refuse , so the others leave . After spending the night at the crossroads , and meeting an army led by Airk <unk> , an old friend of Madmartigan 's , marching against Bavmorda , Willow reluctantly decides to free Madmartigan so that he can take care of the baby for them . 
 Later on , the baby is stolen by a group of brownies . While chasing them , Willow and Meegosh are trapped , but rescued by <unk> , a Fairy Queen , who identifies the baby as Elora Danan , the future princess of Tir Asleen and Bavmorda 's bane , and assigns Willow the task of helping the baby fulfil her destiny . Willow sends Meegosh home , and two of the brownies , <unk> and Rool , are instructed to guide Willow to the sorceress Fin Raziel . The three of them later encounter Madmartigan at a tavern , where he is disguised as a woman to hide from Lug , a cuckolded husband , who then flirts with the disguised Madmartigan . Sorsha arrives and reveals his identity , and in the ensuing brawl started by the furious Lug upon realisation that Madmartigan is not a woman , Willow , Madmartigan and the brownies escape . Madmartigan guides them to a lake where Raziel lives , but departs again as they cross it . 
 Raziel has been transformed into a possum by Bavmorda , and Willow and his party return with her to shore . They are captured by Sorsha , who already has Madmartigan in custody , and are taken to a snowbound mountain camp of the Nockmaar army . Willow tries to restore Raziel , but turns her into a rook instead . Madmartigan is dosed with love dust by the brownies and declares his undying love for Sorsha . The prisoners escape and reach a village at the foot of a mountain , where they again encounter Airk and the remains of his army , recently defeated by Bavmorda 's forces . Madmartigan proclaims his loyalty to the Nelwyn and promises to protect Willow and Elora . 
 With Sorsha as their temporary hostage , they escape to the castle of Tir Asleen , but discover that its inhabitants have all been frozen by Bavmorda and the castle is overrun by trolls . The castle is surrounded by Kael 's army . During Kael 's assault on the castle , Sorsha realizes she also loves Madmartigan and decides to join him and Willow in opposing her mother 's army . Willow accidentally turns a troll into a massive , fire @-@ breathing , two @-@ headed monster that turns the tide of the battle , and Airk arrives with his army to assist . However , Kael captures Elora and returns to Nockmaar , where he reports Sorsha 's betrayal to Bavmorda . 
 Airk 's army , Willow , and the others arrive at Nockmaar to lay siege , but Bavmorda turns the soldiers into pigs . Instructed by Raziel , Willow protects himself with a spell and avoids transformation . He succeeds in turning Raziel into a human again , and she restores the others to their original forms . Willow 's group tricks their way into the castle and start a battle . Airk is killed by Kael , who is in turn slain by Madmartigan after a lengthy sword duel . Sorsha leads Willow and Raziel to the ritual chamber where they interrupt Elora 's sacrifice . Bavmorda and Raziel have a magical duel , during the course of which Raziel is incapacitated . Willow uses a " disappearing pig trick " he had performed as a conjurer to fool Bavmorda into thinking that Elora was sent out of her reach . <unk> at Willow , Bavmorda accidentally triggers the ritual 's final part to send Elora 's soul to oblivion and banishes her own soul instead . 
 Willow is rewarded with a magic book to aid him in becoming a sorcerer , and Sorsha and Madmartigan remain in Tir Asleen to raise Elora together . Willow returns home to a hero 's welcome and is happily reunited with his family . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Warwick Davis as Willow Ufgood , a Nelwyn dwarf and aspiring sorcerer who plays a critical role in protecting infant Elora Danan from the evil queen Bavmorda . 
 Val Kilmer as Madmartigan , a boastful mercenary swordsman who helps Willow on his quest . In the film ( further explained in the film 's novelization ) it is partly revealed that he is a disgraced knight from the kingdom of <unk> . 
 Kate and Ruth Greenfield / Rebecca Bearman as Elora Danan , an infant princess that prophecy says will bring about Queen Bavmorda 's downfall . 
 Joanne Whalley as Sorsha , Bavmorda 's warrior daughter who falls in love with Madmartigan . In the film 's novelization , her father is revealed as the king of Tir Asleen , which becomes a further factor for Sorsha to turn against her mother . 
 Jean Marsh as Queen Bavmorda , the villainous ruler of Nockmaar , a powerful black sorceress and mother of Sorsha . 
 Patricia Hayes as Fin Raziel , the aging sorceress who is turned into a possum due to a curse by Bavmorda . 
 Billy Barty as The High <unk> , the Nelwyn wizard who commissions Willow to go on his journey , realizing the potential that Willow possesses in magic . 
 Pat Roach as General Kael , the villainous associate to Queen Bavmorda and high commander of her army . 
 Gavan O 'Herlihy as Airk <unk> , the military commander of the destroyed kingdom of <unk> who shares a mixed friendship with Madmartigan . 
 Maria <unk> as <unk> , the fairy queen who resides in the forest and updates Willow on the importance of his quest . 
 Kevin Pollak and Rick Overton as Rool and <unk> , a brownie duo who also serve as comic relief in Willow 's journey . 
 David J. Steinberg as Meegosh , Willow 's closest friend who accompanies Willow partway on his journey . 
 Mark Northover as <unk> , the leader of the Nelwyn village council who maintains a running enmity with Willow . 
 Phil <unk> as <unk> , a Nelwyn warrior who also accompanies Willow partway on his journey . In the film 's novelization , <unk> is portrayed as far @-@ travelled and worldly . 
 Julie Peters as Kaiya Ufgood , Willow 's wife ; a loving mother and enthusiastic in caring for Elora . 
 Tony Cox as a Nelwyn warrior . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 George Lucas conceived the idea for the film ( originally titled Munchkins ) in 1972 . Similar in intent to Star Wars , he created " a number of well @-@ known mythological situations for a young audience " . During the production of Return of the Jedi in 1982 , Lucas approached Warwick Davis , who was portraying Wicket the Ewok , about playing Willow Ufgood . Five years passed before he was actually cast in the role . Lucas " thought it would be great to use a little person in a lead role . A lot of my movies are about a little guy against the system , and this was just a more literal interpretation of that idea . " 
 Lucas explained that he had to wait until the mid @-@ 1980s to make the film because visual effects technology was finally advanced enough to execute his vision . Meanwhile , actor @-@ turned @-@ director Ron Howard was looking to do a fantasy film . He was at Industrial Light & Magic during the post @-@ production phase of Cocoon , when he was first approached by Lucas to direct Willow . He had previously starred in Lucas ' American Graffiti , and Lucas felt that he and Howard shared a symbiotic relationship similar to the one he enjoyed with Steven Spielberg . Howard nominated Bob Dolman to write the screenplay based on Lucas ' story . Dolman had worked with him on a 1983 television pilot called Little Shots that had not resulted in a series , and Lucas admired Dolman 's work on the sitcom <unk> in Cincinnati . 
 Dolman joined Howard and Lucas at Skywalker Ranch for a series of lengthy story conferences , and wrote seven drafts of his script between the spring and fall of 1986 . Pre @-@ production began in late 1986 . Various major film studios turned down the chance to distribute and co @-@ finance it with Lucasfilm because they believed the fantasy genre was unsuccessful . This was largely due to films such as Krull , Legend , Dragonslayer , and Labyrinth . Lucas took it to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) , which was headed by Alan Ladd , Jr . Ladd and Lucas shared a relationship as far back as the mid @-@ 1970s , when Ladd , running 20th Century Fox , greenlighted Lucas ' idea for Star Wars . However , in 1986 , MGM was facing financial troubles , and major investment in a fantasy film was perceived as a risk . Ladd advanced half the $ 35 million budget for it in return for theatrical and television rights , leaving Lucasfilm with home video and pay television rights to offer in exchange for the other half . 
 Lucas based the character of General Kael ( Pat Roach ) on the film critic Pauline Kael , a fact that was not lost on Kael in her printed review of the film . She referred to General Kael as an " homage a moi " . Similarly , the two @-@ headed dragon was named " <unk> " ( " <unk> " in the novelization ) after film critics Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on April 2 , 1987 and ended that following October . Interior footage took place at Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire , England , while location shooting took place in Wales and New Zealand . Lucas initially visualized shooting the film similar to Return of the Jedi , with studio scenes at Elstree and locations in Northern California , but the idea eventually faded . However , some exteriors were done around Skywalker Ranch and on location at Burney Falls , near Mount Shasta . The Chinese government refused Lucas the chance for a brief location shoot . He then sent a group of photographers to South China to photograph specific scenery , which was then used for background blue screen footage . Tongariro National Park in New Zealand was chosen to house Bavmorda 's castle . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Lucasfilm 's Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) created the visual effects sequences . The script called for Willow to restore Fin Raziel ( Patricia Hayes ) from a goat to her human form . Willow recites what he thinks is the appropriate spell , but turns the goat into an ostrich , a peacock , a tortoise , and finally a tiger , before returning her to normal . ILM supervisor Dennis Muren considered using stop motion animation for the scene . He also explained that another traditional and practical way in the late @-@ 1980s to execute this sequence would have been through the use of an optical dissolve with cutaways at various stages . 
 Muren found both stop motion and optical effects to be too technically challenging and decided that the transformation scene would be a perfect opportunity for ILM to create advances with digital morphing technology . He proposed filming each animal , and the actress doubling for Hayes , and then feeding the images into a computer program developed by Doug Smythe . The program would then create a smooth transition from one stage to another before outputting the result back onto film . Smythe began development of the necessary software in September 1987 . By March 1988 , the impressive result Muren and fellow designer David Allen achieved what would represent a breakthrough for computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . The head of ILM 's animation department , Wes Takahashi , supervised the film 's animation sequences . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film score was written by James Horner and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra . 
 " I am a musicologist , a doctor of music . Therefore I listened to , studied and analysed a lot of music . I also enjoy metaphors , the art of quoting and of cycles . The harmonic draft of the Willow score , and most particularly its spiritual side , came from such a cycle , from such mythology and music history that I was taught , and that I myself convey with my own emotions and compositions . " 
 Eclectic influences on the score include Leos <unk> 's " Glagolitic Mass " , Mozart 's " Requiem " , " The Nine Splendid Stags " from Béla Bartók , Edvard Grieg 's " Arabian Dance " for the theater play Peer Gynt , and compositions by Sergei Prokofiev . 
 " Willow 's Theme " purposefully ( see Horner 's quote above ) contains a reworking / alteration of part of the theme of the first movement ( " <unk> " ) of Robert Schumann 's Symphony No 3 referencing it , while " Elora Danan 's Theme " shows a reference to the Bulgarian folk song " Mir <unk> Le " ( Мир <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the " Harvest Song from Thrace " . 
 Track listing 
 " Elora Danan " – 9 : 45 
 " Escape from the Tavern " – 5 : 04 
 " Willow 's Journey Begins " – 5 : 26 
 " Canyon of Mazes " – 7 : 52 
 " Tir Asleen " – 10 : 47 
 " Willow 's Theme " – 3 : 54 
 " Bavmorda 's Spell is Cast " – 18 : 11 
 " Willow the Sorcerer " – 11 : 55 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was shown and promoted at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival . It was released on May 20 , 1988 in 1 @,@ 209 theaters , earning $ 8 @,@ 300 @,@ 169 in its opening weekend , placing number one at the weekend box office . Lucas had hoped it would earn as much money as E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , but the film faced early competition with Crocodile Dundee II , Big and Rambo III . Making over $ 57 million at the North American box office , it was not the blockbuster hit insiders had anticipated . It was not , however , a financial flop either , as it made a profit because of strong international , home video , and television sales . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film was released to mixed reviews from critics . Based on 29 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 48 % of the critics gave the film a positive review with an average score of 5 @.@ 6 / 10 . 
 Janet Maslin from The New York Times praised Lucas ' storytelling , but was critical of Ron Howard 's direction . " Howard appears to have had his hands full in simply harnessing the special effects , " Maslin said . 
 Desson Thomson writing in The Washington Post , explained " Rob Reiner 's similar fairytale adventure The Princess Bride ( which the cinematographer Adrian Biddle also shot ) managed to evoke volumes more without razzle @-@ dazzle . It 's a sad thing to be faulting Lucas , maker of the Star Wars trilogy and Raiders of the Lost Ark , for forgetting the tricks of entertainment . " Mike Clark in USA Today wrote that " the rainstorm wrap @-@ up , in which Good edges Evil is like Led Zeppelin Meets The Wild Bunch . The film is probably too much for young children and possibly too much of the same for cynics . But any 6 – 13 @-@ year @-@ old who sees this may be bitten by the " movie bug " for life . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the Academy Awards , the film was nominated for Sound Editing and Visual Effects , but lost both to Who Framed Roger Rabbit , which was similarly done by Industrial Light & Magic . It won Best Costume Design at the Saturn Awards , where it was also nominated for Warwick Davis for Best Performance by a Younger Actor ( lost to Fred Savage for Vice Versa ) and Jean Marsh for Best Supporting Actress ( lost to Sylvia Sidney for Beetlejuice ) . It also lost Best Fantasy Film and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation to Who Framed Roger Rabbit . It was also nominated for two Golden Raspberry Awards including Worst Screenplay , which lost to Cocktail and Worst Supporting Actor for Billy Barty , who lost to Dan Aykroyd for Caddyshack II . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD as a " special edition " in November 2001 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment . The release included an audio commentary by Warwick Davis and two " making of " featurettes . In the commentary , Davis confirms that there were a number of " lost scenes " previously rumored to have been deleted from it including a battle in the valley , Willow battling a boy who transforms into a shark in a lake while retrieving Fin Raziel , and an extended sorceress duel at the climax . ( Though removed from the theatrical version , the battle with the lake monster was retained for both Marvel Comics ' adaptation and Wayland Drew 's novelization of the film . ) 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on Blu @-@ ray Disc on March 12 , 2013 , with an all @-@ new transfer supervised by George Lucas . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Board game = = = 
 In 1988 , Tor Books released The Willow Game , a two to six player adventure board game based on the film designed by Greg Costikyan . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Three video games based on the film were released . Mindscape published an action game in 1988 for Amiga , Atari ST , Commodore 64 , and DOS . Capcom published two different games in 1989 , a platform game for the arcades and a role @-@ playing game for the Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Wayland Drew adapted Lucas ' story into a film novel , providing additional background information to several major characters and various additional scenes , including an encounter with a lake monster near <unk> 's island which was filmed , but ultimately not used in the movie . A segment of that scene 's filmed material can be found in the DVD 's " Making of Willow " documentary . 
 Lucas outlined the Chronicles of the Shadow War trilogy to follow the film and hired comic book writer / novelist Chris Claremont to adapt them into a series of books . They take place about fifteen years after the original film and feature the now teenage Elora Danan as a central character . 
 Shadow Moon ( 1995 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Shadow Dawn ( 1996 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 Shadow Star ( 2000 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In April 2005 , Lucas and Davis commented that a television series acting as a sequel was under consideration . In June 2008 , Davis reiterated his hopes to return for a theatrically @-@ released second installment of the film . On February 15 , 2013 Val Kilmer posted a photo via Twitter implying that it was " Right around the corner ! " . However , this coincided with a Life 's Too Short mockumentary featuring Davis and Kilmer , and is likely to have been a hoax . In March 2013 , Davis indicated an interest in seeing a sequel ( perhaps as a TV series ) , but gave no indication that any development was ongoing . 
 = Madlax = 
 Madlax ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 26 @-@ episode Japanese anime television series produced in 2004 by the Bee Train animation studio . Kōichi Mashimo directed Madlax and the soundtrack was composed by Yuki Kajiura . The DVD version was released by ADV Films in North America and the United Kingdom and by Madman Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand . 
 The story revolves around two young women who seemingly have little in common and do not know of the other 's existence at the beginning . The eponymous Madlax is a legendary mercenary and assassin in the fictional civil war @-@ torn country of Gazth @-@ Sonika , who cannot remember her past or indeed her real name before twelve years ago , when the war started . The other main character is Margaret Burton , the sole heir of a wealthy aristocratic family in the peaceful European country Nafrece . Twelve years before the story begins , an airliner Margaret and her mother were on crashed over Gazth @-@ Sonika , and its passengers , as well as Margaret 's father who led the rescuers , have been missing ever since . Margaret , however , mysteriously traveled back to Nafrece on her own , losing her memories prior to her return ; the only thing she recalls is a single word , " Madlax " . With this thread linking the two girls , they both independently start investigating the powerful crime syndicate Enfant after its enigmatic mastermind shows interest in both of them . 
 Madlax was produced as a spiritual successor to the studio 's earlier project , Noir , and together with El Cazador de la <unk> , these series constitute a trilogy exploring the " girls @-@ with @-@ guns " genre . The production of Madlax began in 2002 but it wasn 't until Yōsuke Kuroda joined the project that the series took its final form . While the critics noted the resulting similarities between Noir and Madlax , they also acknowledged the differences , such as the latter 's less episodic and more plot @-@ driven style and , in particular contrast to the predominantly realistic Noir , incorporation of many supernatural elements , which the audience must often interpret without further explanation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The first half of the series alternates between the two leads . Madlax is one of the most efficient special ops agents for hire in the war @-@ torn Gazth @-@ Sonika , while Margaret Burton is a sleepy , clumsy amnesiac living in Nafrece , a country styled after France . When a " picture book " , presumably given to Margaret by her late father , attracts the attention of international criminal network Enfant , she discovers that the origins of the book lie in Gazth @-@ Sonika . Enfant 's top operative , Carrossea Doon , tracks Margaret down but tips off his superiors in the wrong direction , towards Madlax , who has been causing Enfant trouble for some time . Meanwhile , Vanessa Rene , Margaret 's former tutor whose parents died because of Gazth @-@ Sonikan war , discovers that her current employer , <unk> Industries , covertly supports the war by supplying both sides with firearms and starts investigating its true cause . Her investigation brings her to Gazth @-@ Sonika , where Madlax is hired as her bodyguard , and together , they uncover data that proves that Enfant orchestrated the entire conflict . Enfant eventually intercepts them and they are forced into hiding . Back in Nafrece , Margaret decides to help Vanessa and travels to Gazth @-@ Sonika , accompanied by her devoted and sometimes overprotective maid Elenore Baker and Carrossea Doon . 
 Eventually , Madlax and Margaret meet and embark on a search for Quanzitta <unk> , a Gazth @-@ Sonikan mystic who supposedly knows about Margaret 's book , Enfant 's involvement with it , and Enfant itself . Lady Quanzitta does indeed tell them about Enfant and its plans to plunge the entire world into a total war , starting with Gazth @-@ Sonika . She reveals that Enfant 's leader Friday Monday possesses supernatural powers connected to the three ancient books , one of which belongs to Margaret . Margaret uses her own supernatural abilities and that of her book to return her lost memories . Carrossea , who has been aiding Margaret , requests that his memories be restored as well despite warnings not to do so ; he discovers that he , in fact , died 12 years ago and held on to life only by sheer force of will to protect Margaret . Carrossea disappears , and Margaret is captured by Monday who intends to use her abilities to advance his own plans . 
 While Margaret and Carrossea perform the ritual , Madlax is attacked by Limelda Jorg , a Gazth @-@ Sonikan sniper who holds a grudge against Madlax ever since she failed to stop an assassination by Madlax earlier in the show . Limelda kills Vanessa while targeting Madlax , sending the latter into clinical depression . Elenore and Lady Quanzitta 's servant <unk> manage to restore Madlax 's will to live and persuade her to save Margaret , and the three storm Enfant 's headquarters together . During the assault , Elenore is killed and Margaret , now under Monday 's control , shoots Madlax . Believing her to be dead , Monday commences a ritual to unleash people 's inhibitions and trigger worldwide anarchy ; but Margaret 's memories return and she snaps out of his mind control . Only now does the audience learn the back @-@ story : back in 1999 , Monday drove Margaret 's father insane with his powers and she was forced to kill her own father . To escape the horrible truth of her patricide , Margaret split herself into three personae : the " memory keeper " Laetitia , the sinful Madlax , and the innocent Margaret herself . Margaret then fuses her three personae back together to undo the ritual she previously performed with Monday , saving the world from insanity . Madlax , who should no longer exist after the fusion , appears and guns down Monday . It becomes apparent that Margaret has once again split herself into three , judging that after twelve years , she no longer has the right to make decisions for her other personae . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Madlax is set against the backdrop of Gazth @-@ Sonikan war and the first episodes contrast the tranquil Nafrece with the war @-@ torn Gazth @-@ Sonika ; later , the story moves completely to the combat zone , focusing on the central characters , such as Limelda Jorg , and their suffering . In an interview , the director Mashimo stated that " [ t ] he story is about portraying inner struggles of people , while showing what life is like in this place of madness and this other place of peace " . Accordingly , the series ' title is a portmanteau of two English words , " mad " and " relaxed " , mirroring the authors ' intention to portray the two extremes of human being . 
 Madlax also plays as the story of Margaret Burton 's search for her psychological identity . Based on the Mashimo Menu theme titles available to her , Yuki Kajiura has suggested an interpretation that while searching for her memories , Margaret meets the other characters ( " <unk> " ) one after another and learns about the lifestyles ( " Gates " ) they represent . In the end , she finds her own " Gate " , which is the new identity that finally replaces the one she lost twelve years ago . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 According to the director Kōichi Mashimo , he envisioned Noir and Madlax as part of a trilogy exploring the girls @-@ with @-@ guns genre , and soon after the release of the latter , he confirmed having plans to produce the third installment , which would later become El Cazador de la <unk> . In late 2002 , Mashimo invited Shigeru Kitayama , the producer of Noir who once came up with its original idea , to discuss a new series entitled Madlax . Kitayama greatly expanded Mashimo 's original screenplay plan , but it was not until Yōsuke Kuroda was put in charge of the script that the series took its final appearance . It took Kuroda around one year to finish the screenplays for all 26 episodes , during which he was constantly encouraged by Mashimo to add his own original ideas to their initial plan . Kuroda has admitted that at the time he received Mashimo 's invitation , he felt frustrated after his first project has been canceled by the publisher , so he decided to make Madlax " really extravagant " , blending as many genres at once as he could . Kōichi Mashimo , furthermore , admitted that the most unusual plot twists , like Margaret and Madlax 's connection to each other , were invented by Kuroda and him while drunk . 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 By comparison with Noir , Madlax features a much larger primary cast , including multiple recurring male characters , an element nearly absent in the former . It was not so in the original screenplay draft written by Mashimo and Kitayama : for example , " Madlax " was Margaret 's own nickname and Charlie ( Vanessa 's colleague at <unk> Industries ) had one of the central roles similar to Speedy 's in Avenger . Only the " draft " characters ' names remained of them when Kuroda has rewritten the script . A total of three character designers collaborated on Madlax cast : Satoshi <unk> ( who also worked on Noir cast ) created the central heroines Margaret and Madlax ; Minako Shiba drew Friday Monday and Carrossea Doon ; and Satoko <unk> was entrusted with the " mysterious " characters , Laetitia and <unk> . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As with many of studio Bee Train 's other works , the entire Madlax soundtrack was composed by the acclaimed Yuki Kajiura , making it her and Kōichi Mashimo 's fifth project together . In an interview Kajiura recalls having written the score in a hotel high @-@ rise to save studio costs , and that this change in location helped her to explore different styles of music . 
 Kajiura and Yuuka Nanri 's duo <unk> Yuuka recorded the series ' opening and ending themes , " Fragments of an Eye " ( <unk> , Hitomi no Kakera ) and " Inside Your Heart " , respectively , as well as two insert songs : " nowhere " and " I 'm here " . Aside from the opening sequence , " Fragments of an Eye " is featured in the series itself : at the end of episode 18 and in the episode 24 , when Margaret is humming its tune to herself in the flower field . 
 In the insert song " nowhere " , there is a frequently repeated background refrain " <unk> " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . It doesn 't have any particular meaning but since the song usually plays when Madlax is fighting , " <unk> " has become something of a joke to Japanese fans , claiming that it apparently gives her superpowers . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Television series = = = 
 Originally , Madlax was broadcast in Japan by TV Tokyo from 5 April to 27 September 2004 , from 1 : 30 to 2 : 00 a.m. every Tuesday ( formally , Monday night ) . Shortly before the series finished airing , it has been licensed in North America and Europe by ADV Films , which has previously acquired distribution rights for Noir and has long had plans to license its successor , as well . The official English dub has been released in the United States under the trademark <unk> on a total of seven DVDs from 12 April 2005 to 28 March 2006 . A complete collection was released by ADV on 17 July 2007 . Madlax has become the first series on which ADV Films ' director and producer David Williams tested the technology of distributing promotional materials via P2P network BitTorrent . As of September 1 , 2009 , all of the titles from ADV 's catalog , including Madlax , were transferred to AEsir Holdings , with distribution from Section23 Films . 
 The North @-@ American DVD release contains extras available in English only , such the controversial self @-@ parody Conversations with SSS and Sock Puppet Theater , an Easter egg live action about Madlax going after Chris Patton , <unk> ' voice actor and an annoying womanizer . 
 On 7 February 2006 , the first episode of Madlax aired on Anime Network ( which was , like ADV Films , a subsidiary of A.D. Vision at the time ) . On 4 April , shortly after the last DVD volume has been released , the consequent broadcast was put on halt and until 27 June , only the first 8 episodes were repeated . Since then , the series has been relaunched multiple times . Madman Entertainment , who previously licensed Noir in its region , has acquired rights for distribution of Madlax in Australia and New Zealand and released it on seven DVD volumes between 20 July 2005 and 26 July 2006 . A complete collection was released on 4 April 2007 . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The series ' original soundtrack was released on two albums on 21 July and 22 September 2004 by Victor Entertainment . Two singles , Hitomi no Kakera and Inside Your Heart , were published in the same year by <unk> Yuuka , each containing an opening / ending theme and one insert song , as well as their respective karaoke versions . 
 = = = Artbook = = = 
 <unk> the Bible is a 95 @-@ page artbook that was published in Japan on 21 May 2005 by Hobby Japan . Aside from illustrations and artworks for the series , it contains interviews with its authors and voice actors , as well as diverse additional information about the show in Japanese . The artbook has never been published outside Japan . Since the word " Bible " is derived from Ancient Greek : τὰ <unk> τὰ <unk> , meaning " holy books " , it is likely that the artbook 's title is a reference to the Holy Books that play an important role in the series ' plot . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 A resin model kit known as " Madlax with Guns " has been produced , featuring a figurine of Madlax dual wielding her signature SIG <unk> . A polystone figurine entitled simply " Madlax " , was launched in August 2007 . In Japan , a T @-@ shirt with Madlax logo has been added to the limited edition of the first DVD volume , and the " first press " of the OST albums came with logotype mousepads . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Madlax was often accused of being secondary and reusing Noir 's stylistic solutions , such as the story premise , the two heroines ' appearance , and the musical style . Nevertheless , some sources praised the story for being more monolithic and consequent than its predecessor 's , owing to all its episodes and subplots being tightly intertwined and held together by the primary plot . 
 The majority of reviewers perceived the early episodes of Madlax as boring and too slow @-@ paced , but some of the same critics later remarked that the prolonged exposition is crucial to the unusual finale of the series , which fully establishes the series ' own identity and sets it apart from other works . According to them , after the initial volume , the story gets better and better with every new episode , though some have been dissatisfied with its " pseudo @-@ <unk> " ending . Erica Friedman , the president of Yuricon , highly praised Kuroda 's script , naming it " the best writing that Bee Train has done " . Professional reviewers welcomed the increased number of sympathetic characters , especially the distinguishable male ones ( Friday , Carrossea , Colonel Burton ) , as opposed to stormtrooper @-@ like operatives of <unk> in Noir , but the female character designs were still said to be much more detailed ( to the point of fanservice in the case of Madlax ) than the more generic male characters . 
 The high quality of the animation in Madlax was generally acknowledged . On the negative side , the episodes that involve computer use and hacking received criticism for their lack of realism . In terms of soundtrack , Madlax has not become as innovative as Noir , with critics suggesting its OST to be a blend of Noir and .hack / / Sign styles . Nevertheless , the reviewers acknowledged its superiority over the majority of contemporary works . The English translation released by ADV Films was praised for preserving most of the series ' original stylistic aspects and inviting veteran voice actors for the dub . Reviewers went as far as to suggest that several English voices ( especially Mike <unk> 's ) match the characters better than the Japanese ones . Others , however , criticized the dub , e.g. Carl Kimlinger of Anime News Network in his 2009 review of the series rated the performance as " wildly uneven , ranging from good ... to plain amateurish " , citing " delivery issues " as main problem of the dub . 
 The initial slow pacing , especially compared to the first episodes of Noir , became a main reason why the audience often dropped watching Madlax before it could present its later story turns which eventually resulted in the moderate success of the series . Among other suggested reasons behind the mediocre popularity of the show were : the market saturation , which resulted from other anime series attempting to repeat the success of Noir since 2001 ; the <unk> disinterest against a " Noir remake " , found among the fans of the first series ; the over @-@ the @-@ top action scenes that some felt to be ridiculous ; and its unconventional genre , which straddled Madlax uncomfortably between fans of mystical science fiction and those who prefer Noir 's strict realism . 
 = The Rescue ( Doctor Who ) = 
 The Rescue is the third serial of the second season of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which was first broadcast in two weekly parts on 2 January and 9 January 1965 on BBC1 . It was written by outgoing story editor David Whitaker and directed by Christopher Barry . 
 The Rescue was produced in a six @-@ episode block with The Romans and was the first story produced in Doctor Who 's second production block . Rehearsals and recording took place from 30 November to 11 December 1964 , entirely in @-@ studio . The two episodes were watched by 12 and 13 million viewers in the UK respectively and have received generally positive reviews from critics , who praise the character @-@ based storytelling , although plot holes were noted . Both episodes of The Rescue have been retained in the BBC archives , and the story has been novelised and released on VHS and DVD . The serial is notable as the first appearance of Maureen O 'Brien as companion Vicki . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor , Ian , and Barbara are still missing the Doctor 's granddaughter Susan when the TARDIS lands on a planet the Doctor eventually recognises as Dido , a world he has visited before . The trio soon encounter two survivors of a space crash , Vicki and Bennett , who are awaiting a rescue ship that is due to arrive in three days time . Vicki and Bennett live in fear of Koquillion , a bipedal inhabitant of Dido , who is stalking the area . Koquillion encounters the time travellers and attacks , pushing Barbara over a cliff and temporarily trapping Ian and the Doctor . Vicki finds Barbara injured and rescues her from Koquillion , and they share reminiscences . Vicki 's father was amongst those who died when the survivors of the crash , save Bennett and Vicki , were lured to their deaths by the natives of Dido . She is evidently very lonely , having befriended an indigenous Sand Beast for company . However , when Ian and the Doctor reach the ship , tempers are fraught because Barbara mistook the Sand Beast for a threat and killed it . 
 The Doctor enters Bennett 's room , and finds things are not as they seem . The supposedly crippled Bennett is missing , and a tape recorder hides his absence . He finds a trap door in the floor of the cabin and follows it to a temple carved from rock where he unmasks Koquillion as Bennett . Bennett reveals he killed a crewmember on board the ship and was arrested , but the ship crashed before the crime could be radioed to Earth . It was he who killed the crash survivors and the natives of Dido to cover his crime . He has been using the Koquillion alias so that Vicki would back up his story , and had hoped the planet would be destroyed when his version of events was given . Just as Bennett is about to kill the Doctor , two surviving native <unk> arrive and force Bennett to his death over a ledge . They then stop the signal to prevent the Rescue Ship reaching their planet . With no living family and nothing left for her on Dido , Vicki is welcomed aboard the TARDIS . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Rescue was written as a short vehicle to introduce Vicki as the new companion , replacing Carole Ann Ford ( Susan ) when Ford decided she wanted to leave the series , and is thus more character @-@ driven than anything that had preceded it . Vicki was a replacement for the Doctor 's granddaughter , Susan ( Carole Ann Ford ) , who was the first companion to leave Doctor Who ; Ford was displeased with the lack of her character 's development . In contrast to Susan , Vicki is an Earth orphan from the future ; the production team considered many names from here , some of them odd like " <unk> " and " Tanni " . Doctor Who creator Sydney Newman told actress Maureen O 'Brien that they were considering having her cut her hair and dye it black . O 'Brien refused , saying , " Why don 't you just get Carole Ann Ford back ? " 
 The Rescue is the first story under Dennis Spooner as script editor , though he is not listed in the credits because he had little to do since much of the job was given to his predecessor David Whitaker and thus he is not credited . The story was commissioned on 1 November 1964 , the day after his contract with the BBC for his position as script editor had expired . The scripts were due on 10 November . In Whitaker 's original draft , entitled Doctor Who and Tanni after one of Vicki 's original names , there are a few differences from the broadcast version . Bennett was more unkind to Vicki . Notably , Koquillion had a " torch " device , which he used to paralyse Ian upon meeting and interrogating him and Barbara in the first episode . He hypnotised Ian and Barbara and tried to get them to encourage the Doctor to come out of the TARDIS , but the Doctor could see this on the TARDIS ' scanner and demands the teachers be released . In a scuffle Ian 's trance was broken when he was shoved against the TARDIS and Barbara 's was broken when she was thrown to the ground . The beginning of the first episode also had Ian confide to Barbara that he was afraid of a time where the Doctor would close the TARDIS on them and leave like he did with Susan , to which the Doctor , overhearing , replied that there would be warning if they were to part . 
 O 'Brien had just come out of drama school when she was cast as Vicki ; it was her first television acting job . Director Christopher Barry originally wanted Bernard <unk> for the role of Bennett / Koquillion , but was not able to get him . Barry would later cast <unk> in The Power of the Daleks ( 1966 ) . The role went to Australian actor Ray Barrett , whom Barry had seen on TV and marked in his book of actors he wanted to remember , and so he " dug him out of the book " when the time came . Barrett played Bennett as a " normal , straight human being " so as not to give the ending away . To preserve the mystery , Koquillion was credited in the first episode as being played by " Sydney Wilson " — a name made up by the production team in tribute to two of the creators of Doctor Who , Sydney Newman and Donald Wilson . This was the first instance of an alias being used in the credits in order to conceal a plot twist in Doctor Who ; the practice would be employed later on to conceal the appearance of villains Davros and the Master . Tom Sheridan provided the voice of the space captain and also played the Sand Beast . He was originally scheduled to play one of the <unk> at the end , but for unknown reasons they were played by two uncredited extras , John Stuart and Colin Hughes . 
 The Rescue was the first in a new production block of Doctor Who ; the first production block lasted for 52 weeks with one episode filmed per week , though the final two stories , Planet of Giants and The Dalek Invasion of Earth , were held back and the first season ended early . As such , there was a six @-@ week break for the regular cast before work on The Rescue <unk> Rescue used the same production team as the following story , The Romans , and the two were combined to form a single six @-@ episode production block . Model filming took place in Ealing studios on 16 November 1965 . The models were made by an outside <unk> called <unk> . As they were not designers , Doctor Who designer Raymond Cusick drew what he wanted the spacecraft to look like in more detail than he normally would have . He drew the spacecraft in flight as well as it wrecked so they could visualise it from the two . Cusick had found a cheap material he called " reeded hardboard " , which was spray @-@ painted silver and used for the outside of the craft prop . The design of Koquillion was based on a close @-@ up of a fly . 
 Rehearsals for the first episode took place from 30 November 1964 to 3 December , with the episode recorded on 4 December . Ford visited during rehearsals to meet O 'Brien and wish her luck . Rehearsals for the second episode took place from 7 − 10 December 1964 , with the episode recorded on 11 December . Recording of the first episode overran its schedule by fifteen minutes . The Dido temple was a large set that was lit in such a way to create a dark atmosphere ; dark drapes and smoke were also used . When shooting Vicki 's Sand Beast , Jacqueline Hill underestimated the gun 's power and fired too soon ; she was not seriously injured , though suffered shock and a sore face because it blew back in her face . The sound the Sand Beast makes while dying was modelled after the " horrible noise " a dying Dalek made in The Daleks . To save money , the score is reused from The Daleks , which Barry had partially directed . He selected pieces from episodes one and four through seven of that serial . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The Rescue was broadcast on BBC1 in two weekly parts ; the first episode aired on 2 January 1965 , with the second on 9 January . The first episode , " The Powerful Enemy " , was watched by 12 million viewers and was the eleventh most @-@ watched programme of the week . The second episode , " Desperate Measures " , was watched by 13 million viewers and was the eighth most @-@ watched programme of the week . This figure was higher than the preceding story , The Dalek Invasion of Earth , which was an event story . Audience Appreciation Indexes were taken for both episodes and garnered 57 and 59 per cent respectively . 
 On 13 December 1966 , a retention order was issued that included both episodes of The Rescue to be retained by the BBC . However , both episodes were wiped , the first on 17 August 1967 and the second on 31 January 1969 . Fortunately , BBC Enterprises had retained both episodes and returned them to the BBC in 1978 . 
 Paul Cornell , Martin Day , and Keith Topping wrote of the serial in The Discontinuity Guide ( 1995 ) , " As a vehicle to introduce a companion , The Rescue just about works , but it 's too inconsequential to sustain any real interest . " In The Television Companion ( 1998 ) , David J. Howe and Stephen James Walker described the story as " one of the best examples of character @-@ driven drama from this period of the series ' history " . While they noted there were some unexplained parts of the plot , they felt that it was generally believable and said that " Vicki actually steals the show here " . In 2008 , Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times described The Rescue as a " neglected gem " with a strong debut for Vicki and many production improvements . Despite this , he wondered " how convincing Bennett 's masquerade as Koquillion was in 1965 " as in the present day it seems " a tad obvious " . DVD Talk 's Stuart Galbraith felt that the story was " quite strong " with a " smart , if somewhat predictable climax and resolution " that worked due to the dialogue . Den of Geek wrote that the serial was only let down by its " weak and convenient resolution " and provided good material for the main cast . Dreamwatch gave The Rescue a score of 7 out of 10 , calling it a " solid enough adventure " with a slight plot but brisk pacing that allowed Ian and Barbara to be more heroic . 
 = = Commercial releases = = 
 = = = In print = = = 
 A novelisation of this serial written by Ian Marter was published by Target Books in August 1987 . Marter died soon after completing the manuscript . It was subsequently edited and published , with some new material added , by Nigel Robinson , editor of the Target Books line . An unabridged audio reading of the novelisation , read by O 'Brien , was released by AudioGo on 1 April 2013 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Rescue was released on 5 September 1994 on VHS with The Romans . It was released on DVD on 23 February 2009 , again with The Romans . The Region 1 release followed on 7 July 2009 . 
 = Phil Simms = 
 Phillip Martin Simms ( born November 3 , 1954 ) is a former American football quarterback who spent his entire 14 @-@ year professional career playing for the New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He is currently a television sportscaster for the CBS network . After playing college football at Morehead State University , Simms was drafted in the first round by the New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) with the number seven selection overall in the 1979 NFL Draft . Simms was named Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of Super Bowl XXI , after he led the Giants to a 39 – 20 victory over the Denver Broncos and set the record for highest completion percentage in a Super Bowl , going 22 for 25 ( 88 % ) . He also was named to the Pro Bowl for his performances in the 1985 and 1993 seasons . 
 He finished his career with 33 @,@ 462 passing yards and has since gone on to be a career broadcaster of NFL games — first as an analyst for ESPN , then as a in @-@ game color commentator with NBC , and currently with CBS . He is the father of former NFL quarterback , New England Patriots assistant coach , and current FOX Sports College Football analyst Chris Simms , as well as Atlanta Falcons quarterback Matt Simms . 
 = = Early life and rookie season = = 
 Simms was born in Springfield , Kentucky on his grandfather 's farm , a place now called Maple Hill Manor in Washington County , Kentucky where he attended St. Dominic 's Elementary . While an elementary school student his family moved and Simms grew up in Louisville , Kentucky . He went to St. Rita catholic grade school also . He attended Southern High School in Louisville and was quarterback of the Southern Trojans , graduating in 1974 . Simms chose to attend Morehead State University in nearby Morehead , Kentucky , and joined Tau Kappa Epsilon there . The team featured a ball control offense , and Simms ' numbers at Morehead State were unspectacular — in his senior season he completed 92 of 173 passes for a 53 @.@ 2 % completion percentage and had six touchdown passes , 11 interceptions , and 1 @,@ 229 yards . The team also finished with a 2 – 6 – 1 record in his senior season and failed to make a bowl game during Simms ' four years . Simms finished his career at Morehead State with 409 completions in 835 attempts for a 48 @.@ 9 % completion percentage . He also totalled 32 touchdowns , 45 interceptions , and a school @-@ record 5 @,@ 545 yards . 
 Before the 1979 NFL Draft , Bill Walsh , who was the new coach of the San Francisco 49ers , flew to Morehead State with assistant coach Sam Wyche to work out Simms . Walsh was so impressed with Simms that he planned to draft him in the third round , preferring him over another young quarterback they scouted and ultimately drafted , Joe Montana . But the New York Giants decided to make Simms their first round pick to the surprise of many . As Simms acknowledged , " most people have never heard of me . " When Simms 's name was announced by Commissioner Pete Rozelle in front of the audience at the draft ( which was held in New York ) , his selection was booed loudly by the Giants fans in attendance . Simms was not happy being a Giant either , " All I was thinking was which teams I would rather play for — the Green Bay Packers , the Kansas City Chiefs , San Diego , San Francisco ... " Nonetheless , he became popular with his teammates who jokingly dubbed him " Prince Valiant " in his rookie training camp . 
 Simms won his first five starts of his rookie year . He led the team to a 6 – 4 record as a starter , throwing for 1 @,@ 743 yards and 13 touchdown passes and was named to the NFL All Rookie Team . He was runner @-@ up in 1979 for Rookie of the Year , losing out to future teammate , Ottis Anderson . 
 = = Early career : 1980 – 1986 = = 
 Simms ' next four years were marred by injuries and inconsistent play . He finished the 1980 season with 15 touchdowns and 19 interceptions , while completing a subpar 48 @.@ 0 % of his passes for 2 @,@ 321 yards . In 1981 , Simms threw for 2 @,@ 031 yards , 11 touchdowns , and 9 interceptions on 54 @.@ 4 % completion percentage before suffering a separated shoulder in a November 15 loss to the Washington Redskins . With Simms out , the Giants went on a run led by Scott Brunner and advanced to the second round of the playoffs . Simms suffered a torn knee ligament in a preseason game against the New York Jets , preventing him from playing the entire 1982 season . Following the season , Ray Perkins resigned as head coach to take over the same position at the University of Alabama , and was replaced by the team 's defensive coordinator Bill Parcells . In the coming years this change would prove crucial to the Giants and Simms . 
 One of Parcells first decisions as coach was to replace Simms as the starting quarterback with Brunner . Simms asked to be traded after the benching , but his request was ignored . During the sixth game of the Giants ' 1983 Season , Simms came in to replace the struggling Brunner against the Philadelphia Eagles . On his second drive , Simms suffered a season @-@ ending injury when the thumb on his throwing hand hit a player 's helmet on his follow @-@ through . The injury was reported as a dislocation , but according to the book , Simms to McConkey , written by Phil McConkey , Simms , and Dick Schaap , the injury was much more severe , with the thumb literally hanging off after impact , and the bone sticking out through the skin . 
 During his first few years on the team , Giants fans were merciless in their treatment of Simms , who they felt was a disappointment . He commented that his wife " had to sit up in the stands and listen to them cuss me . " However , in 1984 , after many seasons plagued by injuries and up @-@ and @-@ down play , Simms finally emerged as a team offensive leader . During his 1983 injury , offensive coordinator Ron Erhardt talked Simms into watching more game film , something he had not regularly done in college or the pros . He gained a better understanding of NFL defenses , his team 's formations , and pass protection schemes , and improved his ability to audible at the line of scrimmage . He also changed his strength training regimen in an attempt to make his body more resistant to injury . He passed for 4 @,@ 044 yards ( second most in the National Football Conference ( NFC ) ) , 22 touchdown passes , and led the Giants to a playoff berth . 
 He was voted to the Pro Bowl and named Pro Bowl MVP as he led the NFC to a comeback win over the American Football Conference ( AFC ) by throwing three touchdowns . In 1985 , he passed for 3 @,@ 829 yards , 22 touchdowns , and led the Giants to 10 victories , the most for a Giants team since 1963 . In a game against the Cincinnati Bengals during the 1985 season , Simms passed for 513 yards — the fifth most passing yards in a single game in NFL history . In 1986 , he passed for 3 @,@ 487 yards and 21 touchdown passes during a season in which the Giants won 14 games . In week 11 , he completed a desperate fourth @-@ and @-@ 17 pass to Bobby Johnson late in the game to set up Raul Allegre 's game @-@ winning field goal , which gave the Giants a 22 – 20 victory over the Minnesota Vikings . Simms later commented : 
 It 's my favorite game in my career , because it 's everything I always wanted to be as a player . I wanted to be tough , making big throws , immune to pressure , not worried about outcomes . It was truly like standing on the tee box in golf and there 's trees on each side and water and you just go ' Man , I 'm gonna rip it down the middle . ' And no other thought crosses your mind . 
 = = = Super Bowl XXI = = = 
 On January 25 , 1987 , the Giants met the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXI . In the biggest game of his life , Simms had one of the finest performances in Super Bowl history . He completed 22 of 25 passes ( with 2 of his 3 incompletions being drops by receivers ) for 268 yards , setting Super Bowl records for consecutive completions ( 10 ) , accuracy ( 88 % ) , and passer rating ( 150 @.@ 9 ) . In addition , he threw 3 touchdown passes and his passer rating set an NFL postseason record . " This might be the best game a quarterback has ever played " , Giants coach Bill Parcells later said . Two of the most famous plays from the game were the flea flicker to McConkey , and the touchdown pass caught by McConkey off of the fingertips of Giants tight end , Mark Bavaro . The Giants defeated the Broncos 39 @-@ 20 , and Simms was named MVP of Super Bowl XXI . He is credited for being the first to use the phrase " I 'm going to Disney World ! " following a championship victory . 
 = = Later career : 1987 – 1993 = = 
 Simms performed well in the strike @-@ shortened 1987 NFL season , finishing with the second highest quarterback rating in the NFC . He threw for 2 @,@ 230 yards , 17 touchdowns , and 9 interceptions . He passed for 3 @,@ 359 yard , 21 touchdowns , and 11 interceptions while completing 54 @.@ 9 % of his passes in the 1988 season . The Giants rebounded from a 6 – 9 record in 1987 to finish 10 – 6 but fell just short of the playoffs due to the NFL tie @-@ breaker system . In 1989 , the Giants started 8 – 1 and finished 12 – 4 , Simms passed for 3 @,@ 061 yards , 14 touchdowns , and 14 interceptions on 56 @.@ 3 % completion percentage . He performed consistently most of the season except for a two @-@ game stretch against the Eagles and 49ers where he produced seven turnovers , six of which resulted in points for the opposition . He also struggled in the Giants playoff game against the Los Angeles Rams , and the Giants lost 19 – 13 . In 1990 , Simms was having one of his finest seasons , leading the NFC with the highest quarterback rating ( 92 @.@ 7 ) and the Giants to an 11 – 3 record . But his season was cut short due to a broken foot suffered in the fourteenth game against the Giants ' eventual Super Bowl XXV opponent , the Buffalo Bills . The Giants went on to defeat the Bills 20 – 19 in the Super Bowl with Jeff Hostetler filling in at quarterback . 
 After the Giants Super Bowl victory , Parcells resigned and was replaced by the team 's running backs coach Ray Handley . One of Handley 's first decisions was to select Jeff Hostetler as the team 's starting quarterback following his performance in Super Bowl XXV . Simms saw only spot action in two games prior to Week 13 , when Hostetler broke his back in a game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . Simms finished the game and reclaimed the starting job , but won only once in his remaining four starts as the Giants failed to return to the playoffs at 8 @-@ 8 . Simms was named starter for the 1992 season after beating out Hostetler , whom Handley still thought high of as a quarterback in the preseason . However , Simms suffered a severe arm injury in a Week 4 loss to the Los Angeles Raiders and missed the remainder of the season . In those two seasons Simms amassed only a combined 1 @,@ 905 yards , 13 touchdowns , and 7 interceptions while completing 59 @.@ 3 % of his passes . The Giants finished the 1992 season at 6 @-@ 10 , which led to the termination of the unpopular Handley and the hiring of former Denver Broncos coach Dan Reeves . As part of an overall house cleaning , Reeves released Hostetler and named Simms his starting quarterback . He started all 16 games in 1993 , being one of only seven quarterbacks to do so , and led the Giants to a resurgent 11 – 5 season including a victory over the Minnesota Vikings in the playoffs . However , Simms underwent shoulder surgery after the 1993 NFL Season to repair a torn labrum . The surgery was successful , and team doctor Russell F. Warren 's prognosis for recovery was excellent , and Simms was expected to be ready in time for training camp . However , later during that offseason , Simms was released by the Giants , and subsequently decided to retire . Upon his release , co @-@ owner Wellington Mara called it " a day of overwhelming sadness . " . Phil Simms considered playing for the Browns in 1995 , but eventually decided to stay retired . 
 In his 14 seasons with the Giants , Simms completed 2 @,@ 576 out of 4 @,@ 647 passes for 33 @,@ 462 yards and 199 touchdowns . His career passing yardage total ranks him twenty first in NFL history . He added 349 carries for 1 @,@ 252 rushing yards and 6 touchdowns on the ground . He set team records for most passes completed and attempted in one game ( 40 and 62 , respectively ) , season ( 286 , 533 ) and career ( 2 @,@ 576 , 4 @,@ 647 ) , most career touchdown passes ( 199 ) and most 300 @-@ yard games in a career ( 21 ) . Simms still owns some of the New York Giants passing records , although Eli Manning , who is in his tenth year with the Giants as of the 2013 season , has started to surpass some of them : season passes ( 359 completed , 589 attempted ) , career completed passes ( 2 @,@ 679 ) , career touchdowns ( 216 ) , career 300 @-@ yard games ( 26 ) . Sports Illustrated considered Simms to be the " Most Underrated Quarterback " in NFL history in their August 27 , 2001 issue entitled , " The Most Overrated and Underrated " . 
 = = After retirement from the NFL = = 
 On September 4 , 1995 , Simms ' jersey was retired in a halftime ceremony of a game versus the Dallas Cowboys . During an emotional speech , Simms stated that he wanted to don his jersey one final time , and throw " one more pass " to teammate Lawrence Taylor . Simms later commented , " [ a ] ll of a sudden it kind of hit me , I 've put Lawrence in a really tough spot ; national TV , he 's got dress shoes and a sports jacket on , and he 's had a few beers and he 's going to run down the field and I 'm going to throw him a pass . " Simms then motioned for Taylor to run a longer pattern , and after 30 – 40 yards , threw him the pass . Taylor later stated that the situation made him more nervous than any play of his career , " I 'm saying to myself ( as the pass is being thrown ) , ' If I drop this pass , I got to run my black ass all the way to Upper Saddle River because there ain 't no way I 'm going to be able to stay in that stadium ' . " Taylor caught the pass however , and the capacity crowd in attendance cheered in approval . Since he has been retired for more than five years , Simms is eligible for selection into the Pro Football Hall of Fame ; he has yet to be inducted , however . 
 After his retirement as a player in 1994 , Simms first joined ESPN then went on to join NBC 's lead broadcast crew , teaming with Dick Enberg and Paul Maguire on that network 's coverage of Super Bowl XXX and Super Bowl XXXII . Simms also announced Weightlifting at the 1996 Summer Olympics and served as a sideline reporter on the NBA on NBC for NBC Sports . In 1998 , he moved to CBS with the AFC package , teaming first with Greg Gumbel ( through the end of the 2003 season ) and currently with Jim Nantz on the CBS 's lead broadcast team . He also worked with Armen <unk> , Bonnie Bernstein and Lesley Visser . He hosts Inside the NFL on Showtime ( another CBS holding ) with James Brown and Cris Collinsworth . He has appeared on CBS Daytime since joining CBS , with a 2007 appearance as himself on the CBS soap opera As the World Turns , and in February 2010 an appearance on The Price Is Right ( with Nantz ) to present a Super Bowl XLIV showcase . Simms is part of the commentary team , along with his broadcast partner Jim Nantz , in the Madden NFL 16 video game . 
 As of the 2014 – 15 NFL season , Simms has been a commentator for the CBS and NFL Network broadcasts of Thursday Night Football . 
 On November 13 , 2014 , Simms appeared uncredited on the " Just a Regular Irregular " episode of the CBS TV series Elementary . Simms ' cameo was as a character named " Phillip " who had , like Simms himself , spent 15 years as a professional football player , but was a consultant to Sherlock Holmes in the art of knife throwing . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Simms and his wife , Diana , live in Franklin Lakes , New Jersey . They have three children : Chris , Deirdre and Matthew ( currently backup quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons ) . Simms is fond of New Jersey , remarking in 1987 ; " I wasn 't overjoyed about coming to New York . When I thought of New York I thought of New York City . But out here , it 's just like anywhere else . " 
 Simms is a relative of former Vanderbilt quarterback Oliver " Doc " Kuhn and former Kentucky quarterback John Simms " Shipwreck " Kelly . 
 In 2011 , Simms was inducted into the Kentucky Pro Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = NFL passing statistics = = 
 Key to abbreviations 
 GP 
 = Games played 
 <unk> = 
 Passes attempted 
 Com 
 = Passes completed 
 <unk> = 
 Completion percentage 
 Yds 
 = Yards 
 TD = 
 Touchdowns 
 In 
 = Interceptions 
 Rate = 
 Passer rating 
 = Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike = 
 Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike is a comedy play written by Christopher Durang . The story revolves around the relationships of three middle @-@ aged single siblings , two of whom live together , and takes place during a visit by the third , Masha , who supports them . They discuss their lives and loves , argue , and Masha threatens to sell the house . Some of the show 's elements were derived from works of Anton Chekhov , including several character names , the play 's setting in a cherry orchard , and the theme of the possible loss of an ancestral home . 
 The play premiered at McCarter Theatre in Princeton , New Jersey in 2012 , followed by an Off @-@ Broadway production later the same year . It transferred to Broadway in 2013 . The original McCarter , Off @-@ Broadway , and Broadway casts included David Hyde Pierce , Kristine Nielsen , Sigourney Weaver and Billy Magnussen . Subsequently , the play has been produced in Tennessee , California , Indiana , Minnesota , Arizona , Washington , Massachusetts , Missouri , Wyoming , Georgia , South Carolina and the District of Columbia . 
 Critics praised Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike as a humorous adaptation of Chekhov themes that doesn 't require familiarity with Chekhov . The original Broadway production proved to be a commercial success , recouping its $ 2 @.@ 75 million investment in under four months . In 2013 , it won the Tony Award for Best Play and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play , among other awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Middle @-@ aged siblings Vanya and Sonia live in the family home in Bucks County , Pennsylvania . Named after Chekhov 's characters by their theater @-@ enthusiast professor parents , Vanya and Sonia have not had to grow up . After spending their adulthood looking after their now @-@ dead parents , neither has a job , and money is provided by their movie star sister Masha , who owns the house and pays the bills . Vanya ( who is gay ) and Sonia ( who is forever reminding everyone that she was adopted ) spend their days reflecting on their lost chances , debating whether the grove of nine cherry trees on their property constitutes an orchard , and bemoaning their rather Chekhovian lot in life . The only other resident of the house is their cleaning woman Cassandra , who , like her namesake , is prone to making dire prophecies that no one believes . 
 This static environment is disrupted when Masha returns home , bringing with her a flurry of drama , an endless litany of insecurity , and a much younger , gorgeous , dimwitted lover named Spike . Sonia 's resentments and Masha 's competitive nature begin to spark arguments , and while Vanya tries to keep the peace , he is repeatedly distracted by the preening Spike , who takes every opportunity possible to strip down and show off his muscular body . Masha 's fifth marriage has recently ended and her career is starting to stall . Spike 's career has never started , and his biggest claim to fame is nearly landing a part in the sequel to Entourage , Entourage 2 . Another interloper arrives , the neighbor 's pretty niece Nina , an aspiring actress who provokes envy in Masha , lust in Spike , and sympathy in Vanya . 
 Masha has returned home to attend a costume party at an influential neighbor 's house and insists that her friends and family dress as characters from Disney 's animated Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , choosing to dress as Snow White . When told she will be going as one of the dwarfs , Sonia rebels and dresses up as the Evil Queen , imagining her as portrayed by Maggie Smith on her way to the Oscars . As they prepare for the party , Masha tells them she intends to sell the house , leaving Vanya and Sonia devastated . 
 Things come to a head the day after the party . As Cassandra uses a voodoo doll on Masha , trying to dissuade thoughts of selling the house , Sonia receives a phone call from a man she met at the party , requesting a date . Hesitantly , she accepts . Vanya , who is secretly writing a play inspired by Konstantin 's imagined symbolist drama in The Seagull , is convinced by Nina to let her read it in front of the others . During the reading ( which stars Nina as a molecule and takes place after the destruction of the earth ) , Spike rudely answers a text on his phone , and dismisses Vanya 's suggestion of a handwritten response . Vanya reacts by launching into an impassioned rant , criticizing America 's cultural regression in communication and media , while fondly and wistfully recalling the surroundings and memories of his childhood . Concluding that the intent of such progress seems to make people like him feel lost and forgotten , he retreats into the kitchen in tears . 
 Masha realizes that the person Spike is texting is her personal assistant , with whom he has been having an affair . She ends her relationship with him and kicks him out of the house , announcing she no longer intends to sell it . As the play ends , the three siblings , optimistic for the first time in a very long time , sit quietly together and listen to The Beatles ' song " Here Comes the Sun " . 
 = = Characters = = 
 According to Durang , " My play is not a Chekhov parody ... I take Chekhov scenes and characters and put them into a blender . " Although the characters in the play , named by university professors , share names with Chekhov characters , they are not the same characters . They share some elements but are fully imagined . Durang mentioned that Masha is more like Madame Arkadina in The Seagull than any of Chekhov 's characters named Masha . Rather than mimic Three Sisters , his play has a sister , brother and adopted sister , with the latter two being the most Chekhovian of the title characters . Durang has described Nina as most like a Chekhov character , and related to the character of the same name in The Seagull . After five marriages to her contemporaries , Masha has taken up with Spike in a May – December relationship . Durang says that " Cassandra , who 's a cleaning woman and soothsayer , is like the Greek @-@ tragedy Cassandra . In some ways , she 's like the nanny in Vanya , but she doesn 't reflect Chekhov as much . " 
 = = = Principal roles and original cast = = = 
 = = Production history = = 
 Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike was commissioned by the McCarter Theatre , Princeton , New Jersey , in association with the Lincoln Center Theater . The play , which was originally a one @-@ act play , ran at the McCarter Theatre from September 7 , 2012 , to October 14 , 2012 . 
 The play opened Off @-@ Broadway at Lincoln Center 's Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater on November 12 , 2012 , after previews from October 25 , and ran until January 20 , 2013 . The show 's run at Lincoln Center was sold out . On January 29 , it was announced that the show would transfer to Broadway for 17 weeks beginning March 5 with its original cast under the production of Joey Parnes , Larry Hirschhorn , and John O 'Boyle , in association with McCarter Theatre and Lincoln Center Theater . 
 It opened on Broadway on March 14 , 2013 , at the John Golden Theatre , after previews beginning March 5 . The Broadway engagement , originally announced to close on June 30 , was extended to July 28 , 2013 and again to August 25 . On July 1 , the show recouped its $ 2 @.@ 75 million investment . The play closed on August 25 , 2013 , after 201 performances on Broadway . " The house expanded with each of the play 's moves , first from McCarter Theatre 's proscenium stage to Newhouse Theater 's thrust stage , then to the Golden Theatre 's proscenium stage . The actors had to make adjustments to compensate for the changes . Nielsen and Pierce both said that the proscenium accentuated their comedic performances . 
 The original Off @-@ Broadway and Broadway casts featured Pierce as Vanya , Weaver as Masha , Magnussen as Spike , Nielsen as Sonia , <unk> as Nina , and Grant as Cassandra . The play was directed by Nicholas Martin with the set designed by David <unk> and costumes by Emily Rebholz . On July 28 , Weaver left the cast and was replaced by Julie White as Masha . Magnussen departed the cast on August 4 and was replaced by understudy Creed <unk> as Spike . 
 Following its Broadway run , the show ran at Berkeley , California 's Berkeley Repertory Theatre in September and October 2013 with Anthony Fusco as Vanya , Sharon Lockwood as Sonia , Lorri Holt as Masha , and Mark <unk> as Spike . Hyde Pierce reunited with the show to direct the January 29 – March 9 , 2014 , production at Los Angeles ' Mark Taper Forum by Center Theatre Group . The cast was Mark Blum , Christine <unk> , Grant , David Hull , Nielsen and <unk> Allen Yaeger . 
 In September / October 2013 , a separate production ran in the Phoenix Theatre , Indianapolis , produced by Bryan Fonseca . In 2014 , the show ran at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis , and in Tucson and Phoenix , Arizona . The show was produced in Seattle at the ACT Theatre from October 17 – November 16 , 2014 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike is a comedy , it has some darker elements that pervade its themes . Ben Brantley of The New York Times described the play as a " sunny new play about gloomy people " . Patrick Healy of The New York Times described it as a " black comedy about unhappy siblings " . 
 According to Robin <unk> of The New York Times , " The play sets characters and themes from Chekhov in present day Bucks County , PA . " The characters Vanya , Sonia and Masha are middle @-@ aged siblings named after Chekhov characters . Their deceased parents were " college professors who dabbled in community theater " . The character names are borrowed from Chekhov plays . Vanya is the protagonist in Uncle Vanya and Sonia is his niece . Meanwhile , Masha comes from Chekhov 's Three Sisters . Other characters also embody the themes and characters from Chekhov works , such as Nina from The Seagull . The play depicts a home of siblings who have quarreled their entire lives . 
 According to Charles Isherwood of The New York Times , not only are the character names derived from Chekhov , but also " The country @-@ house setting is also borrowed from the work of that Russian master , as are the self @-@ delusions and self @-@ pity that plague the central characters , all of whom have reached the difficult age when life ’ s path has narrowed uncomfortably , and there is little point in turning around and looking to take another , more rewarding course . " 
 = = Critical review = = 
 Knowledge of Chekhov will increase the enjoyment of this work 's in @-@ jokes , but not as much as an understanding of Durang 's absurdism , according to <unk> 's Brian Scott Lipton . Brantley noted that the work was suitable for any audience : " Even if you ’ ve never read a word of Chekhov , you ’ re likely to find plenty to make you laugh : Mr. Hyde Pierce ’ s skillfully low @-@ key comic discomfort ; Ms. Nielsen ’ s segues from manic eruption into glazed smiling stupor ; Ms. Weaver ’ s game sendup of every self @-@ loving , self @-@ doubting movie queen there ever was . " He noted the play does not compare with some of Durang 's most absurd work , calling it " blander and thinner " . Brantley said there was comfort in an evening of deliverance of Chekhov 's " lost souls " , by Durang . 
 Isherwood noted that as Nielsen demonstrated her ability to lighten the play 's stream of Chekhovian themes , " broad comic acting [ was ] raised to the level of high art . " He also noted that in Durang 's plays , " heartache is generally fodder for belly laughs " and that Vanya and Sonia and Masha and Spike had plenty . Lipton noted that the show was quite funny , but also belabored and " scattershot " . Several reviewers agreed that the show was " a bit of a patchwork " . 
 According to the New York Post critic , Elisabeth Vincentelli , the show improved with its transfer from Off @-@ Broadway to Broadway , especially Weaver 's performance , which Vincentelli deemed the weakest . Weaver portrayed a movie star who was " overindulgent , self @-@ centered and unaware she ’ s on the decline . " Mark Kennedy of The Washington Post suggested Durang , with whom Weaver graduated from the Yale School of Drama in 1974 , may have written the role for her . Both Hyde Pierce and Nielsen exhibited mastery of their monologues , according to Vincentelli : " Hyde Pierce is a master of the slow burn , while Nielsen ’ s wild @-@ eyed Sonia often looks as if her train of thought has a loose caboose . " Vincentelli also noted that Weaver 's character had " turned her life into a performance . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 The play received six Tony Award nominations for the 67th Tony Awards , winning the Tony Award for Best Play . Magnussen earned his first Tony nomination for his role . Grant also earned her first Tony nomination . The play won the 58th Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play and the 2013 New York Drama Critics ' Circle Award for Best Play . Grant received a Theatre World Award for Best Debut Performance . Emily Rebholz earned a 2013 Lucille Lortel Award nomination for Outstanding Costume Design of the Off @-@ Broadway production . 
 The Off @-@ Broadway and Original Broadway productions were jointly recognized with Drama League Award nominations for Outstanding Production of a Broadway or Off @-@ Broadway Play and with Distinguished Performance Award nominations for both Nielsen and Pierce ; the play won for Outstanding Production of a Broadway or Off @-@ Broadway Play . The production received four Outer Critics Circle Award nominations : Outstanding New Broadway Play , Outstanding Director of a Play ( Martin ) , Outstanding Actor in a Play ( Pierce ) , and Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play ( Nielsen ) , and won the awards for Outstanding New Broadway Play and Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play . The production won the 2013 Off @-@ Broadway Alliance Award for Best New Play . The show received an Artios Award from The Casting Society of America for Outstanding Achievement in Casting , New York Broadway Theatre – Comedy . 
 = = = Original Broadway / Off @-@ Broadway productions = = = 
 = Early life of Keith Miller = 
 This article chronicles the life of Keith Miller , an Australian Test cricketer and Australian rules footballer , from his birth on 28 November 1919 until 20 August 1940 , when he left civilian life and joined the Militia ( army reserve ) during World War II . Born in the town of Sunshine on the outskirts of Melbourne , Miller made sport the focal point of his early life . The youngest of four children of Scottish descent , Miller joined his siblings in being inculcated with a love of sport by their father , playing football in winter and cricket in summer . Miller 's father — an engineer and <unk> — emphasised the importance of technique over power ; Miller benefited as he was of small stature during his childhood and could not rely on brute strength . Miller yearned to be a horse racing jockey , as he felt that he would not have the physique to succeed in cricket or football . 
 Miller received his secondary education at the academically selective Melbourne High School , where his mathematics teacher was the incumbent Australian cricket captain Bill Woodfull . He was an academically poor student who neglected his studies but excelled at sports . He made the school 's first @-@ choice cricket team at the age of 14 and gained attention for his technical and defensive ability , which was compared to that of Woodfull . Miller was rejected by the St Kilda Cricket Club so he joined South Melbourne in district competition , making his first @-@ grade debut at the start of the 1935 – 36 season , still only 162 cm ( 5 ft 4 in ) tall . In one match , he scored 61 runs to orchestrate a lower @-@ order fightback in a low @-@ scoring match against Woodfull 's Carlton team , prompting his teacher to award him a silver eggcup during maths class . It remained one of his most treasured possessions . 
 In the following year , Miller grew 28 cm ( 11 in ) and began to play cricket and football with more power . Leaving school at the end of year 10 , having just turned 17 , Miller played cricket for the Victorian Colts for two seasons , before breaking through to be selected for his first @-@ class debut late in the 1937 – 38 season . He played sporadically until making his Sheffield Shield debut during the 1939 – 40 season and scoring his maiden century . During this time , Miller played exclusively as a batsman ; he was yet to become a fast bowler . Miller 's football career also took off . Starting in 1937 , Miller played for the Brighton Football Club in the Victorian Football Association for three years , mainly as a defender . At the start of his fourth season , he restricted Bob Pratt , regarded as the best forward of the time , to one goal for the match and was named best on ground . He was promptly signed by the St Kilda Football Club to play in the leading Victorian Football League in 1940 , where his team came second to last . 
 = = Birth = = 
 Born in the western Melbourne suburb of Sunshine on 28 November 1919 , Keith Ross Miller was the youngest of Leslie ( Les Sr ) and Edith ( Edie ) Miller 's four children . He had two older brothers and a sister . Sister Gladys was 12 when Miller was born , while Les Jr and Ray were nine and seven respectively . Miller was named after the Australian pioneer aviator brothers Keith and Ross Smith , who were half @-@ way through their historic flight from England to Australia at the time of his birth . Miller 's two Christian names reflected his Scottish heritage ; his father 's family originated from the dock area of Edinburgh and Dundee , and his paternal grandfather arrived in Australia in April 1849 . The family lived in a one @-@ level terrace house in Sunshine , which at the time was a separate town of 900 people , 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) west of Melbourne 's city centre . The area was and remains a working @-@ class area . The town 's lifeblood was the farm machinery maker H. V. McKay , which employed a large proportion of the population . Miller 's father started as a teacher in Warracknabeal in rural Victoria , before working as an engineer for McKay in Ballarat until a transfer brought him to Sunshine . 
 = = Early schooling = = 
 Sunshine offered open fields , and the three Miller boys quickly took a liking to sport during their childhood , playing Australian rules football in winter and cricket in summer . Their father had played cricket for Warracknabeal , winning a premiership in the local league in 1900 . Les taught the boys to play with a side @-@ on stance and underlined the importance of orthodox batting technique , reminding his sons to maintain a high leading elbow when hitting the ball . They were taught to rely on a solid defence , concentration , and self @-@ control in the mould of the leading Victorian and Australian Test batsman of the era , Bill Ponsford . Miller began his schooling in Sunshine , where he quickly became known for his diminutive height ; he was one of the smallest children in the school . At the age of seven , Miller moved to the inner @-@ eastern middle @-@ class Melbourne suburb of Elsternwick , where his parents had purchased a two @-@ storey house with a spacious garden that allowed the children to play sport . By this time , his elder brothers had given him the derisive nickname <unk> . Miller 's small size and age deficit meant that he conceded a strength advantage to his brothers in backyard cricket matches . This forced him to develop his technique rather than rely on power , which held him in good stead for his future career . Whenever Miller managed to dismiss his brothers and earn himself some batting time , he typically played with a straight bat in a watchful manner , as it was difficult for him to remove his brothers , meaning that his opportunities with the bat were rare . Miller and his friends would loiter outside Ponsford 's home , just 400 m ( 440 yd ) away , in the hope of catching a glimpse of their hero . Like Miller in his backyard , Ponsford was known for his powers of concentration and was the first person to score two quadruple centuries in first @-@ class cricket . Miller often practised for hours by himself ; he put a tennis ball inside a stocking , before suspending it from a clothes line and hitting it back and forth . Indoors , Miller developed a lifelong love of classical music through a cousin who liked to play Mozart . He played flute in the Elsternwick school band but could not read music . 
 As a small child , Miller 's major sporting aspiration was to be a jockey , but he continued to play cricket and Australian football . At the age of 12 , he played for an under @-@ 15 Victorian schoolboys cricket team that toured Queensland under the captaincy of future Test batsman Merv Harvey . At the time , Miller stood only 150 cm ( 4 ft 11 in ) and wielded a sawn @-@ off bat . His shots did not travel far , but he impressed observers with the manner in which he moved his feet and stroked the ball . Miller 's small stature in a contact sport such as football forced him to rely on physical courage , something for which he became famed . However , his lack of height prompted him to turn to horseracing . Miller saw his first Melbourne Cup in 1926 at the age of seven and had been fascinated ever since . Caulfield Racecourse was only a short distance from the family home , and Miller spent many early mornings watching the trainers and jockeys go through their routines . He eventually persuaded his father to let him take horseriding lessons . Aside from being attracted to the racing culture , Miller felt that as he appeared destined to be a small person , he was more likely to have a successful career as a jockey than in cricket or football . 
 = = Melbourne High School = = 
 Miller went to the local state school before transferring to Melbourne High School — a selective government institution that accepted students through an academic exam — at the start of 1934 . The school 's emphasis on scholastic and sporting excellence and its culture was more in line with that of a private school than a standard government school . Australian Test captain Bill Woodfull was on the teaching staff as Miller 's mathematics teacher . Because he did little study and focused his energy on sport , Miller was a mediocre student . In addition to cricket and football , Miller played baseball and competed in swimming . This disappointed Woodfull , a disciplined man who invoked the school 's motto Honour the Work in exhorting his students to work hard as Australia was attempting to emerge from the depths of the Great Depression . Despite being Australia 's captain , Woodfull refused to involve himself in the coaching of the school 's cricket teams , feeling that it would intrude on the responsibilities of the sports teachers . Despite this , Woodfull watched the students at cricket training and quickly noticed Miller 's skills . Aged 14 and still under 153 cm ( 5 ft 0 in ) , Miller was selected in the school 's First XI . With his pads flapping against his stomach and sporting a sawn @-@ down bat , Miller batted at No. 6 and scored 44 on his senior debut . Although his lack of power was obvious , Miller 's control and solidity prompted the spectators to call him the <unk> , the same nickname that was accorded to Woodfull , who had a similarly strong defensive style . Melbourne went on to win the match , and Miller impressed his captain Keith Truscott , who fought for his selection and took him under his wing . Truscott later became an ace fighter pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force , and Miller would follow in his footsteps . Truscott 's social influence compounded the distractions from Miller 's study . Miller failed all eight of his subjects at the end of 1934 , and with an average mark of 25 % , was the class dunce . He scored zero in his final exam for Woodfull 's geometry class , and was forced to repeat year 9 . 
 = = Club cricket = = 
 At the start of the 1934 – 35 season , Truscott took Miller to a try out with St Kilda Cricket Club , but his protege could not find a place in any of the club 's five teams . Joining the local sub @-@ district cricket club Elsternwick , Miller did not get to bat or bowl on debut , and was then dropped to the Second XI after his first match for poor fielding . Nevertheless , the former Victorian state player Hughie Carroll spotted Miller 's talent and lured him to the rival South Melbourne club . However , Elsternwick used the competition rules to prevent Miller from playing for Souths , so he continued to play in the former 's second @-@ choice team . In the meantime , Miller continued to play for his school with steady results , scoring 30 and 25 in two matches against Melbourne 's main rival , University High School . A loosening of the zoning rules allowed Miller to start competing for South Melbourne in the following season . However , the rules required South Melbourne to play Miller in their First XI , else St Kilda could reclaim him , so he made his district cricket debut for South at the start of the 1935 – 36 season after a trial in the nets . At this stage , Miller was just 162 cm ( 5 ft 4 in ) tall — the Test batsman Keith Rigg recalled his first encounter with the diminutive youngster in a district match : 
 He was so small he came in to bat with pads flapping around up near his waist . Hans Ebeling was bowling and Keith hit him through the covers for four . I thought , ' Crikey , who 's this kid ? ' 
 It was at South Melbourne that Miller met Ian Johnson and Lindsay Hassett , his future Australia team @-@ mates and captains . On debut against St Kilda , Miller scored only 11 not out after batting for 62 minutes at No. 7 , but observers felt the young batsman would succeed if he physically grew . Miller passed his exams at the end of 1935 and continued his development on the field . He began to develop a leg break and googly and represented his school against a visiting schoolboy team from Ceylon . Miller scored an unbeaten 28 to prevent a loss and later cited the experience as helping to broaden his horizons towards other cultures . Assisted by cross @-@ training in baseball , his improved fielding skills saw him placed in the slips and he was named as Melbourne High School 's cricket sports champion for 1936 . Miller averaged 86 with the bat and took 13 wickets at an average of 9 @.@ 23 , including innings figures of seven wickets for 29 runs against St Kevin 's and 3 / 5 against University High . These performances prompted Woodfull to write in the school magazine that " Miller has Test possibilities " . In March , Miller played for South Melbourne against Carlton , who were captained by Woodfull . South Melbourne batted first and collapsed to 5 / 6 . The sixth wicket fell at 32 , bringing Miller to the crease . He guided his team to 141 , and was the last man out for 61 after putting on a stand of 65 in 95 minutes with the No. 11 . Miller struck four boundaries in a 147 @-@ minute innings . The crowd of 14 @,@ 000 — the largest of the season — gave Miller a standing ovation , and newspapers compared him to Ponsford and Alan Kippax . Carlton went on to win the game , and when it was obvious that this would be the case , Miller 's captain let him bowl for the first time . The small batsman took his first wicket in district cricket when Test paceman Laurie Nash took a high @-@ leaping catch . Miller 's performance prompted Carlton to donate a silver eggcup as a memento " for sterling performance " . Woodfull presented Miller with the trophy during algebra class . It was one of the few sports trophies that Miller kept in later life . 
 During 1936 , Miller underwent a sudden growth spurt , including a three @-@ month period during which he added 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) to his height . He began to play football with more physical aggression and developed the ability to leap high and take airborne marks . The increase in size allowed Miller to become the longest kicker in the school team . Having grown 28 cm ( 11 in ) in a year , Miller was unrecognisable to Hassett upon his return to South Melbourne the following season . Eventually , Miller reached 185 cm ( 6 ft 1 in ) in height , thwarting his ambition to be a jockey , although he never lost his love for the racetrack . 
 = = Representative beginnings = = 
 At the start of the 1936 – 37 season , Miller was selected for the Colts , a state under @-@ 21 team that played at district level . At the end of the 1936 school year , Miller completed year 10 by passing five of his eight subjects . <unk> towards university studies , he left school without finishing his leaving year and began working as a clerk for a car business . Miller felt confident that he could make a career out of sport and therefore felt that further education was unnecessary . 
 Miller spent the 1937 – 38 season with the Colts and won the team 's batting trophy for having the best average ; he made 340 runs at 42 @.@ 50 . Across the entire competition , Miller had the eighth highest average . He scored three half @-@ centuries and a 102 against Northcote . At this stage , Miller was a solid , slow and steady batsman , who accumulated his runs gradually , but The Age predicted that his physical growth would open his horizons , opining " Once he fills out — he is rather tall for his weight — Miller should become a brilliant , aggressive batsman " . In early February 1938 , late in the summer , he made his first @-@ class debut for Victoria as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old and hit 181 in 289 minutes against Tasmania at the Melbourne Cricket Ground . With his increased power , Miller began to loft the ball over the infield and struck five fours . During the 1938 – 39 season , he rejoined South Melbourne and played four first @-@ class matches for Victoria , scoring 125 runs at an average of 25 @.@ 00 . However , Miller was yet to play in the Sheffield Shield competition , only taking to the field in one @-@ off matches against other teams . In the two matches against Tasmania in December 1938 , Miller took his first catch , but managed only four , seven not out and three , and he spent a period of time outside the team . Miller was recalled in March 1939 — late in the season — for two matches against Western Australia in Perth , scoring 111 runs at 37 @.@ 00 , notching his first first @-@ class fifty of the season in the second innings of the first match . 
 Miller achieved more success as a footballer . In 1937 , he followed his brothers Les and Ray and joined the Brighton Football Club in the Victorian Football Association ( VFA ) . The VFA was the second tier of Australian rules football below the Victorian Football League ( VFL ) . A defender , Miller played his first two seasons on the flanks ; he was yet to reach his physical peak and lacked the power required to play in central defensive positions until his third season , in 1939 . At this stage , he was unable to hip and shoulder his opponents and relied on his running ability and accurate kicking . 
 During the 1939 – 40 season , Miller was selected to make his Sheffield Shield debut in a match against South Australia at Adelaide Oval . Batting at No. 4 , Miller came to the crease at 2 / 9 after a top @-@ order collapse , but managed only four runs before being caught by Richard Whitington — with whom he later wrote cricket books — from the bowling of Harold Cotton . When Victoria fielded , Miller ran out his future Invincibles captain Don Bradman ; it was the first time that Bradman had been caught short of his ground in first @-@ class cricket . Miller also took his first catch at Shield level , that of Mervyn Waite . In the second innings , he managed seven before being bowled by leg spinner Clarrie Grimmett , one of the leading bowlers in the world in the 1930s . One of Miller 's teammates was Percy Beames , who also happened to be his manager at Vacuum Oil , where he had moved from his first job . Miller made 41 and 47 not out in his second match against Queensland , top @-@ scoring in the second innings as his team completed a seven @-@ wicket victory . Miller retained his place for the match against New South Wales , but was out for 14 in both innings . He had difficulties against leg spin , falling to Bill O 'Reilly and Cec Pepper . In the return match against South Australia , Miller decided to take the initiative against Grimmett , charging down the wicket to drive the leg spinner . He featured in a 165 @-@ run partnership with Hassett , and at times bluffed Grimmett by moving forward before leaning back after the bowler had adjusted his length . Miller reached 108 to complete his first century in Shield competition . He was given out caught by Bradman from Garth Burton , after an appeal for a disputed catch ; Miller asked the umpires if Bradman had caught a bump ball . Nevertheless , Bradman praised Miller 's innings , and Clem Hill predicted a bright future for the Victorian . Apart from the century , Miller had an average season , making 37 , 1 and 24 in his remaining innings to end the campaign with 298 runs at 29 @.@ 80 . He did not bowl during the season . 
 = = = Breakthrough into the VFL = = = 
 In 1940 , Miller started his fourth season in the VFA . In a match against Coburg , regarded as one of the strongest teams in the competition , he was assigned to man Bob Pratt , who was regarded as the greatest forward of the era . Pratt had scored 678 goals in ten seasons for South Melbourne in the Victorian Football League ( VFL ) , the top tier of football , and had scored more than 100 goals in each of his last three seasons . Miller restricted Pratt to one goal for the match and was named as the best on ground . In the third quarter , Miller restricted Pratt to two marks , and in the fourth quarter , he prevented the forward from getting a single kick . Scouts from the VFL club St Kilda signed Miller on the spot . Reacting to Miller 's signing , The Age opined that he " is one of the most promising players ever to enter league ranks , and can be played anywhere in defence . It was he who kept Bob Pratt to one goal in last week 's Association match . " 
 At the time , World War II had broken out and by mid @-@ 1940 , France , Belgium and the Netherlands had fallen to Nazi Germany . Australia had declared war on Germany and Miller wanted to join the military , but St Kilda told him that if he was deployed outside Victoria , his career would be in jeopardy . As a result , Miller postponed his enlistment until the end of the season . 
 Playing as a defender , Miller debuted for St Kilda in their fifth round home game against Carlton , at the Junction Oval on 25 May , playing on the half @-@ back flank . At the start of the game , Miller 's opponent Ron Cooper king hit and concussed him . Miller said of the experience , " I learnt more in a second or two than I would have in a year " . When St Kilda met Carlton in the return match at Princes Park , Miller shoulder bumped Cooper in the first minute of the match , forcing his opponent to leave the field . In a match against Richmond , Miller was physically targeted by renowned enforcer Jack Dyer , known as Captain Blood . However , Dyer slipped and missed Miller . In one game , Miller was reported for showing dissent to a goal umpire , but was let off without punishment . St Kilda came second to last , so they did not make the finals . 
 = E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial ( album ) = 
 E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial is an audiobook and soundtrack album for the 1982 blockbuster film of the same name directed by Steven Spielberg . Narrated by American recording artist Michael Jackson , the album was produced by composer Quincy Jones and distributed by MCA Records . The production of the audiobook brought Jackson together with several former collaborators , such as Rod Temperton , Freddy DeMann , and Bruce Swedien . 
 The E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial audiobook was released by MCA on November 7 , 1982 — the same month as Jackson 's acclaimed sixth studio album Thriller despite conditions given by Epic Records , Jackson 's record label , that it should not be released until after Thriller . As a result , Epic took legal action against MCA which forced the album 's withdrawal . During its curtailed release , E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial reached number 82 on the UK Albums Chart . It was well @-@ received critically and won Jackson a Grammy Award for Best Recording for Children . 
 = = Content = = 
 The E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial album package contains a storybook , which allows listeners to read along with Jackson as he narrates the tale of E.T. and the alien 's visit to planet Earth . The book contains a photograph of E.T. placing hands on Jackson 's shoulders , while one of the extraterrestrial 's fingers glows . This picture is included in the album package as a 22 inches ( 56 cm ) × 22 inches ( 56 cm ) full @-@ color poster . The 20 @-@ page storybook include stills from the movie and the lyrics to the song " Someone in the Dark " ( written by Alan and Marilyn Bergman ) , which Jackson sings on the audiobook . The recording , on a 12 @-@ inch vinyl LP , features original music by John Williams , integrated sound effects from the movie , as well as the voice of E.T. in the background . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the recording of the E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial album , Jackson released four solo studio albums with Motown Records ( Got to Be There , Ben , Music & Me and Forever , Michael ) , and several with his brothers as part of The Jackson 5 . In 1975 , he moved to Epic Records and in 1979 released Off the Wall , to critical and commercial success . 
 In June 1982 , the Steven Spielberg – directed science fiction film E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial was released . Created by Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment and distributed by Universal Pictures ( then a subsidiary of MCA Inc . ) , it starred Henry Thomas , Dee Wallace , Robert MacNaughton , Drew Barrymore and Peter Coyote . The film tells the story of Elliott , a boy who befriends a good @-@ natured extraterrestrial called E.T. , who is stranded on Earth . Upon its release , the film became a blockbuster and surpassed Star Wars to become the highest @-@ grossing film released to that point . Critics lauded it as a timeless story of friendship , and the American Film Institute ranks it as the third greatest science fiction film ever produced in the United States . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jackson began work on the audiobook of E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial in June 1982 — around the same time he began recording his sixth studio album Thriller . Quincy Jones served as the producer for both projects , in addition to working as the narrative writer for the audiobook . During the recording of the narration , Jackson became so upset when E.T. died that he wept . Jones and Spielberg both felt that trying to record the part again would not change the pop star 's emotional reaction , and decided to leave Jackson 's crying in the finished recording . Jackson biographer Lisa D. Campbell wrote that Jones had learned this during the recording of " She 's Out of My Life " ( from the Off the Wall album ) , where the singer also broke down in tears . 
 Several of the contributors to the E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial storybook album had worked with Jackson on his solo projects in the past . Rod Temperton , who had written several songs featured on Off the Wall and Thriller , wrote the music for " Someone in the Dark " . Freddy DeMann and Ron Weisner , former managers of The Jacksons , served as the production coordinators for the album . Bruce Swedien engineered E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial , a task he had performed on Off the Wall and Thriller and would go on to perform for the albums Bad ( 1987 ) and Dangerous ( 1991 ) . Dick Zimmerman photographed Jackson for the Thriller album cover , before again capturing the singer for the accompanying poster to the E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial album . 
 Once the recording and engineering aspects of production had been completed , MCA Records ( the distributor of the album ) pressed more than 1 million copies of the audiobook . In 1982 , a journalist for Billboard wrote that it was one of the " most ambitious " projects that MCA Records had taken on to date . 
 = = Jackson 's empathy with the E.T. character = = 
 According to the biography Michael Jackson : The Magic and the Madness , written by journalist J. Randy Taraborrelli , the pop singer had shown an early attachment to the story of E.T. After a publicity photo shoot for the soundtrack album in which an animatronic robot of the extraterrestrial character hugged Jackson , the singer stated with wonderment , " He was so real that I was talking to him . I kissed him before I left . The next day , I missed him . " Jackson later revealed in the December 1982 issue of Ebony magazine — in which both he and E.T. appear on the cover — that he felt he actually was the creature during the album recording and shared his thoughts on why he had such a strong connection to the character : 
 " He 's in a strange place and wants to be accepted — which is a situation that I have found myself in many times when travelling from city to city all over the world . He 's most comfortable with children , and I have a great love for kids . He gives love and wants love in return , which is me . And he has that super power which lets him lift off and fly whenever he wants to get away from things on Earth , and I In can identify with that . He and I are alike in many ways " 
 = = Release and legal issues = = 
 Epic Records allowed Jackson to record the album on two conditions : 
 MCA Records was not to release E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial until after Christmas 1982 . ( This was to avoid the audiobook competing with Jackson 's new album , Thriller . ) 
 The song " Someone In the Dark " was not to be released as a single . 
 MCA Records breached both conditions , releasing the storybook in November 1982 and giving 7 @-@ inch promo copies of " Someone In the Dark " to radio stations . After Epic lodged a $ 2 million lawsuit , MCA Records was forced to withdraw the album and prohibited from releasing " Someone In the Dark " as a single . Epic executives had felt that MCA was misleading members of the public into believing that the then @-@ recently released single " The Girl Is Mine " was featured on the storybook album . The plaintiffs further requested that MCA Records be banned from working with Jackson in the future and that any other media owned by MCA featuring the singer be prohibited from release . 
 As a result of the legal restrictions that prohibited the public release of " Someone In the Dark " as a single , the promo copies which were made have since become one of the singer 's rarest and most sought @-@ after records ; some have been sold for over £ 1000 ( $ 1587 ) . The song was later included as a bonus track on the 2001 special edition of Thriller , as well as the box set Michael Jackson : The Ultimate Collection . 
 = = Reception = = 
 E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial was a commercial success ; it reached number 82 on the UK Albums Chart , which was considered high for a storybook album . The audiobook won Jackson a Grammy Award in 1984 for Best Recording for Children . Upon collecting the award and taking home a record eight Grammys from an unprecedented twelve nominations , the singer stated that of all the awards had received that night , he was " most proud of this one " . 
 E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial was also well @-@ received critically . Charles L Sanders of Ebony magazine described it as an " extraordinary album " . Mark Bego of the Toledo Blade asserted that the song " Someone in the Dark " was " one of the most beautiful ballads " that Jackson had ever recorded . He further commented that the amalgamation of Jones ' production , dialogue from the film , Jackson 's " effective and emotional " reading of the narrative and the audiobook 's " grand soaring orchestration " made the E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial album " [ elicit ] as many tears as the movie does " . A writer for Billboard described the audiobook as being " lavishly packaged , lovingly produced " and worth its high asking price . A journalist for the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader concluded that it was a " delightful " storybook album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Eva Cassidy = 
 Eva Marie Cassidy ( February 2 , 1963 – November 2 , 1996 ) was an American vocalist and guitarist known for her interpretations of jazz , blues , folk , gospel , country , rock and pop classics . In 1992 , she released her first album , The Other Side , a set of duets with go @-@ go musician Chuck Brown , followed by the 1996 live solo album titled Live at Blues Alley . Although she had been honored by the Washington Area Music Association , she was virtually unknown outside her native Washington , D.C .. She died of melanoma in 1996 . 
 Two years later , Cassidy 's music was brought to the attention of British audiences when her versions of " Fields of Gold " and " Over the Rainbow " were played by Mike Harding and Terry Wogan on BBC Radio 2 . Following the overwhelming response , a camcorder recording of " Over the Rainbow " , taken at Blues Alley in Washington by her friend Bryan McCulley , was shown on BBC Two 's Top of the Pops 2 . Shortly afterwards , the compilation album Songbird climbed to the top of the UK Albums Charts , almost three years after its initial release . The chart success in the United Kingdom and Ireland led to increased recognition worldwide ; her posthumously released recordings , including three UK number 1 records , have sold more than ten million copies . Her music has also charted top 10 positions in Australia , Germany , Sweden , Norway and Switzerland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on February 2 , 1963 , at the Washington Hospital Center , Cassidy grew up in Oxon Hill and later Bowie , Maryland , suburbs of Washington , DC . She was the third of four children . Her father Hugh Cassidy , a retired teacher , sculptor , musician , former army medic and world champion powerlifter , is of Scottish and Irish descent , while her mother , Barbara ( Kratzer ) , was a horticulturist and originally German , born in Bad Kreuznach . From an early age , Cassidy displayed interest in art and music . When she was nine , her father began teaching her to play the guitar , and she began to play and sing at family gatherings . 
 At age 11 , Cassidy began singing and playing guitar in a Washington @-@ area band called Easy Street . This band performed in a variety of styles at weddings , corporate parties , and pubs . Due to her shyness , she struggled with performing in front of strangers . While a student at Bowie High School , she sang with a local band called Stonehenge . During the summer of 1983 , Cassidy sang and played guitar six days a week at the theme park Wild World . Her younger brother Dan , a fiddler , was also a member of this working band . She enrolled in art classes at Prince George 's Community College but dropped out after finding them unhelpful . 
 Throughout the 1980s , Cassidy worked with several other bands , including the techno @-@ pop band Characters Without Names . During this period , Cassidy also worked as a propagator at a plant nursery and as a furniture painter . In her free time , she explored other artistic expressions including painting , sculpting , and jewelry design . Despite holding a belief in God , Cassidy was not part of any organized religion . 
 = = Music career = = 
 In 1986 , Cassidy was asked by Stonehenge guitarist and high school friend , David Lourim , to lend her voice to his music project , Method Actor . This brought her to Black Pond Studios , where she met recording engineer and bassist Chris Biondo . Biondo helped her find work as a session singer and later introduced her to Al Dale , who would become her manager . She sang back @-@ ups for various acts , from go @-@ go rhythm and blues band Experience Unlimited to rapper E @-@ 40 . Biondo and Cassidy , who were in a romantic relationship for a time , formed the five @-@ piece " Eva Cassidy Band " with Lenny Williams , Keith Grimes and <unk> McLeod in 1990 . They began to perform frequently in the Washington area . 
 In 1992 , Biondo played a tape of Cassidy 's voice for Chuck Brown , the " Godfather of go @-@ go " . It resulted in the duet album The Other Side featuring performances of classic songs such as " Fever " , " God Bless the Child , " and what would later become Cassidy 's signature song , " Over the Rainbow " . The album was released and distributed in 1992 by Liaison Records , the label that also released Brown 's Go @-@ go albums . Brown originally intended to record an additional duet with Cassidy for his next solo album , but this was postponed due to ongoing negotiations between Dale and other labels for a solo deal . Cassidy 's unwillingness to narrow her stylistic focus to one genre hindered her chances of securing a deal . After talks broke down , the two decided to record their own duet album . As a duo , they performed at the Columbia Arts Festival and opened for acts like Al Green and The Neville Brothers . 
 In 1993 , Cassidy was honored by the Washington Area Music Association with a <unk> award for the Vocalist Jazz / Traditional category . The next year she was invited to perform at the event and chose to sing " Over the Rainbow " . A Washington Times review of the event called her performance " a show @-@ stopper " . She took home two <unk> that night , again for Vocalist Jazz / Traditional and also for Roots Rock / Traditional R & B. For a brief period that year , Cassidy signed a deal with Blue Note Records to pair up with pop @-@ jazz band Pieces of a Dream to release an album and tour the country . She sang two tracks in a mainly instrumental album . It was a musically unsatisfying experience for her . 
 After having a potential contract with Apollo Records collapse when the label went bankrupt , Biondo and Dale decided that she should release her own live album . In January 1996 , the material for Live at Blues Alley was recorded over a two @-@ day period at Blues Alley in Washington , DC . Due to a technical glitch on the first night of recording , only the second night 's recording was usable . Unhappy with the way she sounded due to a cold , she was reluctant to release the album . She eventually relented , on the condition that the studio track " Oh , Had I a Golden Thread " , Cassidy 's favorite song , would be included in the release , and that they start working on a follow @-@ up studio album . Her apprehension appeared unfounded as local reviewers and the public responded positively . The Washington Post commented that " she could sing anything — folk , blues , pop , jazz , R & B , gospel — and make it sound like it was the only music that mattered . " The subsequent studio album she worked on was released posthumously as Eva by Heart in 1997 . In the liner notes of Eva by Heart , critic Joel E. Siegel described Cassidy as " one of the greatest voices of her generation . " 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1993 , Cassidy had a malignant mole removed from her back . Three years later , during a promotional event for the Live at Blues Alley album in July 1996 , Cassidy noticed an ache in her hips , which she attributed to stiffness from painting murals while perched atop a stepladder . The pain persisted and a few weeks later , X @-@ rays revealed that the melanoma had spread to her lungs and bones . Her doctors estimated she had three to five months to live . Cassidy opted for aggressive treatment , but her health deteriorated rapidly . In the early fall , at a benefit concert for her at the Bayou , she made her final public appearance , closing the set with " What a Wonderful World " in front of an audience of family , friends , and fans . Additional chemotherapy was ineffective and Cassidy died on November 2 , 1996 at her family 's home in Bowie , Maryland . In accordance with her wishes , her body was cremated and the ashes were scattered on the lake shores of St. Mary 's River Watershed Park , a nature reserve near Callaway , Maryland . 
 = = Posthumous recognition = = 
 After Cassidy 's death , local folk singer Grace Griffith introduced the Blues Alley recording to Bill Straw from her label , Blix Street Records . Straw approached the Cassidy family to put together a new album . In 1998 , a compilation of tracks from Cassidy 's three released recordings was assembled into the CD Songbird . This CD lingered in relative obscurity for two years until being given airplay by Terry Wogan on his wide @-@ reaching BBC Radio 2 show Wake Up to Wogan , following recommendation by his producer Paul Walters . The album sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies in the following months . The New York Times spoke of her " silken soprano voice with a wide and seemingly effortless range , unerring pitch and a gift for phrasing that at times was heart @-@ stoppingly eloquent . " 
 Before Christmas of 2000 , Top Of The Pops 2 aired a video of Cassidy performing " Over the Rainbow " , which resulted in Songbird climbing steadily up the UK charts over the next few weeks . Just as ITV 's Tonight with Trevor McDonald aired a feature on Cassidy , the album topped the chart . Shot at Blues Alley by a friend with a camcorder the same night the album was recorded , the video became the most requested video ever shown on Top Of The Pops 2 . " There 's an undeniable emotional appeal in hearing an artist who you know died in obscurity singing a song about hope and a mystical world beyond everyday life " , wrote The Guardian . 
 Paul McCartney and Eric Clapton were among her new @-@ found fans . Jazz critic Ted Gioia writes , " you might be tempted to write off the ' Cassidy sensation ' [ ... ] as a response to the sad story of the singer 's abbreviated life rather than as a measure of her artistry . But don 't be mistaken , Cassidy was a huge talent , whose obscurity during her lifetime was almost as much a tragedy as her early death . " Songbird has since achieved significant chart success throughout Europe and six times platinum status in the UK . Although still relatively unknown in the United States at that time , the album would eventually be certified gold in the United States as well . 
 In May 2001 , ABC 's Nightline in the United States broadcast a well @-@ received short documentary about Cassidy , a labor of love from Nightline correspondent Dave Marash who was a fan of her music . Over the weekend , all five of Cassidy 's albums occupied Amazon.com 's best sellers list top spots . The Nightline episode has since been rebroadcast three times due to popular demand . Producer Leroy Sievers has said that it is " probably the most popular Nightline ever " . In December , a nine @-@ minute segment on NPR resulted in a similar sales surge , with five of the top seven spots going to Cassidy . A rebroadcast of the Tonight with Trevor McDonald feature on Cassidy in Britain also bumped up sales . 
 Since Songbird , several other CDs with original material have been released : Time After Time ( 2000 ) , Imagine ( 2002 ) and American Tune ( 2003 ) . 2008 saw the release of another new album titled Somewhere . Unlike previous albums , which consisted solely of cover songs , this release contains two original songs co @-@ written by Cassidy . An acoustic album titled Simply Eva was released in January 2011 . 
 Together with word of mouth and internet fansites , online commerce has played a big role in Cassidy 's success . This point was further affirmed when in 2005 , Amazon.com released a list of its top 25 best @-@ selling musicians , which placed Cassidy in fifth position , behind The Beatles , U2 , Norah Jones and Diana Krall . 
 In 2004 , during the gala opening of the Bowie Center for the Performing Arts , the Bowie Regional Arts Vision Association , Inc . ( <unk> ) dedicated the Star 's Dressing Room to Eva . Following a moving tribute to Eva , Chuck Brown took the stage and performed his duet " with " Eva as her photos and video appeared in the background . 
 = = Unofficial releases = = 
 A collection of previously unreleased studio recordings from 1987 to 1991 , was released in 2000 as No Boundaries . This release was not endorsed by the Cassidy family and was released under a different label . An AllMusic review of the album stated that even " a gifted vocalist like Eva Cassidy can only do so much with bad material " . 
 In 2002 , the self @-@ titled 1988 album by the band Method Actor , which featured Cassidy , was re @-@ released by the band 's guitarist and producer David Lourim with Cassidy 's name displayed prominently on the cover . The Cassidy family and Blix Street Records filed a lawsuit against Lourim , claiming that Cassidy 's name was used in a misleading fashion and that Blix Street has exclusive rights to her recordings . Lourim had Cassidy 's written permission to release the album and eventually the cover was changed to look like the original LP album while already released copies were affixed with a sticker indicating that they are not solo Eva Cassidy albums . 
 A bootleg recording that has been in circulation is called Live at Pearl 's . It was recorded at Pearl 's Restaurant in Annapolis , Maryland in 1994 . Copies of the recording were circulated among friends and family after her death . Some of the songs on the recording are also on Imagine and American Tune . Another recording from the early ' 90s , featuring Mick Fleetwood on drums and recorded at his restaurant ( named Fleetwood 's ) in Alexandria , Virginia , was in the possession of writer / musician Niki Lee , the former wife of pianist Lenny Williams , 1988 @-@ 1996 . Lee discovered it in her garage and attempted to sell it on eBay in 2008 . She asserts that she converted the dollars to pounds incorrectly and was lambasted by Cassidy fans for her mistake . On September 19 , 2013 , Lee donated Cassidy 's lost recording , Eva Cassidy Live at Fleetwoods , to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland , Ohio . The recording will remain in the museum 's archives . Two other lost cassettes of Cassidy 's recordings are being remastered for entrance . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 2001 , a book titled Songbird : Eva Cassidy : Her Story By Those Who Knew Her , on the life and work of Cassidy based on interviews with close family and associates was released in the UK . The hardcover edition has since sold in excess of 100 @,@ 000 copies . A US edition published by Gotham Books was released in late 2003 and includes two additional chapters on her influences and success in the US . Her life story has also been adapted into a musical and also a Broadway piece for cancer benefit . 
 At the 2002 Winter Olympics gala , and later on tour , figure skater Michelle Kwan brought Cassidy 's music to a new audience when she skated to a recording of Cassidy 's version of Sting 's " Fields of Gold " . Kwan 's part in exposing the music of Cassidy to the international and American public led Cassidy 's label to present her a gold record from the certification of Songbird . Subsequently , other figure skaters such as Kristi Yamaguchi , Sarah Hughes and Kimmie Meissner have used Cassidy 's music in their routines . 
 Anglo @-@ Georgian singer Katie Melua is a keen fan of Cassidy . Her debut album Call Off the Search contained the song " Faraway Voice " , written in Cassidy 's memory . Melua has also performed Cassidy 's arrangement of " Anniversary Song " in concert . On Christmas Eve 2006 , she performed alongside video footage of Cassidy singing Over The Rainbow on BBC One 's " Duet Impossible " . One year later , Cassidy 's " What a Wonderful World " was spliced together with new vocals by Melua and released as a single exclusively at the British retail chain Tesco . It debuted at # 1 on the UK Singles chart on December 16 . All profits from the single went to the British Red Cross . Irish singer Chris de Burgh has stated that his song " Songbird " from his album The Road to Freedom was written in honour of Cassidy . Singer Mary Chapin Carpenter made reference to Cassidy in the song " My Heaven " on the album Between Here and Gone : " More memories than my heart can hold , when Eva 's singing ' Fields of Gold ' . " In 2008 , her rendition of " Fields Of Gold " was also featured in the final set of scenes on the season finale of " Army Wives " on Lifetime television . 
 In 2008 , Cassidy 's recording of " Autumn Leaves " was used by the Canadian National Professional Latin Champions , Andre and Natalie <unk> , when they competed in America 's Ballroom Challenge as finalists in the International Latin Competition . 
 The first film to feature an Eva Cassidy recording was Flight of Fancy starring Dean Cain . Since then her music has appeared in various film and TV series including the Dawson 's Creek season four episode titled " The Graduate , " Judging Amy , Joe Somebody , Love Actually , Maid in Manhattan , The Man from Elysian Fields , Alpha Dog and Smallville . Cassidy 's arrangement of " Over the Rainbow " is a popular cover choice by singing competition contestants , with American Idol season 5 runner @-@ up Katharine McPhee and The X Factor season 3 winner Leona Lewis among the singers . Her interpretation of " Imagine " has been performed by American Idol season 7 runner @-@ up David Archuleta . 
 In March 2012 , Sweden 's Caroline Larsson and Bengt Magnusson released an album titled A Tribute to Eva Cassidy . The Eva Cassidy biography Behind the Rainbow by Johan Bakker won The People 's Book Prize 2011 / 2012 in London on May 30 , 2012 . 
 = = Possibility of feature film = = 
 A number of filmmakers have proposed films based on Cassidy 's life , and have worked with her family to greater or lesser degrees , but to date these projects have not progressed past the early development stages . In late 2007 , AIR Productions acquired the rights to produce a film based on Cassidy 's life . It is being produced by Amy Redford ( daughter of Robert Redford ) , Irwin Shapiro and Rick Singer . In an interview a year earlier , Cassidy 's parents suggested Kirsten Dunst or Emily Watson as possible actresses who could play their daughter . 
 = = New Album = = 
 To mark the 20th anniversary of the Blues Alley concert , Blix Street Records will release Nightbird , a 32 track double CD album , in November 2015 . Nightbird comprises the complete Blues Alley concert recordings , including 8 previously unreleased songs , from the night of January 3 , 1996 . The European version of the CD package will also include a DVD comprising 12 video performances from the Blues Alley concert . Nightbird will also be released as a <unk> vinyl package worldwide . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Unauthorized releases = = = 
 = = Videography = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Rob Burley ; Jonathan Maitland ; Elana Rhodes Byrd ( 2003 ) . Eva Cassidy : Songbird : Her Story by Those Who Knew Her . Gotham Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 035 @-@ 5 . 
 Johan Bakker ; Behind the Rainbow , the tragic life of Eva Cassidy ( 2012 ) Omnibus Press , 207 pages , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 231 @-@ 9 ( Winner of The People 's Book Prize 2011 / 2012 ) 
 = Homer the Smithers = 
 " Homer the Smithers " is the 17th episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 25 , 1996 . In the episode , Mr. Smithers takes a vacation and hires Homer to take over as Mr. Burns ' assistant . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Steven Dean Moore . The story came from another writer on the show , Mike Scully . The episode features cultural references to The Little Rascals , a series of comedy short films from the 1930s , and the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , and was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a company night out to the Springfield drag races , Smithers fails to protect Mr. Burns from being harassed by a drunken Lenny . Though he tries to make amends the next day , Smithers again <unk> his duties and attempts to drown himself in the water cooler out of guilt , so Burns suggests he take a vacation . Seeking a replacement who will not outshine him , Smithers purposely selects Homer for the job . He then proceeds to go on vacation to what appears to be a gay male resort . However , Burns soon proves to be ridiculously demanding for someone who has not devoted his life to him like Smithers had . After putting up with Mr. Burns 's constant abuse for several days , Homer finally snaps and punches Burns in anger . Fearing he has killed the old man , Homer runs away in panic , and hides at home . 
 Homer returns to apologize but is turned away by a fearful Burns . With no one around , Burns learns to do things himself , such as making coffee and operating the telephone . Burns soon becomes completely self @-@ reliant and thanks Homer for making him learn that he can fend for himself . Burns then fires Smithers when he returns from his vacation . Smithers tries to find other employment but eventually decides he can only be happy working for Mr. Burns . He enlists Homer in a scheme to get his job back by handling a call from Burns ' mother ( the one task that Burns still cannot do ) , but it backfires when Homer accidentally hangs up the phone and then attempts to impersonate Burns ' mother . Smithers and Homer engage in a fight within Burns ' office which ends when Burns accidentally falls out the window . Burns is seriously injured and becomes reliant on Smithers once again . In gratitude , Smithers sends Homer a fruit basket . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder , who got the story from another member of the writing staff , Mike Scully . When the show runners of this season , Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , took over the job from David Mirkin , they wanted to " take the show back " to the Simpson family . Their goal was to have at least 15 episodes per season that revolved around the family or a member of the family , but they still wanted to do the annual Halloween episode , a Sideshow Bob episode , an Itchy and Scratchy episode , and a " format bending " episode , which in this season was " 22 Short Films About Springfield " . They wanted the family episodes to be realistic , and Oakley thought " Homer the Smithers " was a good example . When Scully pitched the idea to the writers , Oakley was surprised that it had not been done earlier on the show . He thought the story sounded like something that would have been done by the third season because it was " simple " and " organic " . 
 Weinstein said that this episode was an opportunity for him , Oakley , and Swartzwelder to " go nuts " with the " Burns @-@ ism " . He said that they enjoy to write for characters such as Burns and Abe Simpson because of their " out @-@ datedness " , and because they get to use <unk> for looking up " old time slang " . Burns answers the phone by saying " Ahoy , hoy ! " , for example , which was suggested by Alexander Graham Bell to be used as the proper telephone answer when the telephone was first invented . Burns ' kitchen is full of " crazy old @-@ time " devices and contraptions . For inspiration , Weinstein brought in " a bunch " of old books with designs of old kitchen devices . Oakley commented that the stuffed polar bear had always been in Burns ' office , and they were excited to " finally " have a use for it . 
 Matt Groening has noted the challenges of sound mixing with this episode , the results of which influenced future episodes of the show and Groening 's other series Futurama . When the animation for the episode returned , the production staff found the scene of Homer fighting Smithers " horrifying " , as the sounds of character exertion made it seem too violent . After experimenting with the sound , they were eventually able to make the scene humorous by only leaving in sounds of the characters ' agony . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Homer gets up early to make Mr. Burns breakfast , he wakes up Marge in bed . She says : " Homie , it 's 4 : 30 in the morning . Little Rascals isn 't until 6 " , referencing The Little Rascals , a series of comedy short films from the 1930s and a 1994 comedy film of the same name . Smithers uses a Macintosh computer with the Mac OS operating system to search for his replacement . Burns tells Homer to make him Postum for breakfast , a hot drink designed to rival tea and coffee . At the end of the episode , Burns is lying in bed in a body cast , chewing loudly and pausing his speech for Smithers to spoon @-@ feed him , as in A Clockwork Orange when a bedridden Alex is <unk> steak . The manner in which Burns becomes injured is also similar to Alex : they both take a potentially life @-@ threatening fall from a top story window . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Homer the Smithers " finished 60th in the ratings for the week of February 19 to February 25 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 . The episode was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Beverly Hills , 90210 , Melrose Place and Married ... With Children . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Dave Foster of DVD Times said that in " Homer the Smithers " we see " just how dependent upon Smithers Mr. Burns is " . He added that the staging and animation of the scene in which Homer tries to apologize to Burns " will remain engraved in your memory in the same way as some of the series finest dialogue can . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and commented that " any doubts about Smithers ' sexuality will not last long when we see his vacation . " Jacobson would have liked to see more scenes from Smithers ' vacation , but he still thought the episode offered " nice exposition " for the character . He added : " It ’ s fun to see more about his pampering of Burns , and it ’ s amusing to watch Homer take over for him . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be the scenes of Smithers on vacation . She concluded her review by giving the episode a grade of A − . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it a " very good episode , and an unusually straightforward one for this surreal season . " 
 = Shashthi = 
 Shashthi or Shashti ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> , <unk> , literally " sixth " ) is a Hindu folk goddess , venerated as the benefactor and protector of children ( especially , as the giver of male child ) . She is also the deity of vegetation and reproduction and is believed to bestow children and assist during childbirth . She is often pictured as a motherly figure , riding a cat and nursing one or more infants . She is symbolically represented in a variety of forms , including an earthenware pitcher , a banyan tree or part of it or a red stone beneath such a tree ; outdoor spaces termed <unk> are also consecrated for her worship . The worship of Shashthi is proscribed to occur on the sixth day of each lunar month of the Hindu calendar as well as on the sixth day after a child 's birth . Barren women desiring to conceive and mothers seeking to ensure the protection of their children will worship Shashthi and request her blessings and aid . She is especially venerated in eastern India . 
 Most scholars believe that Shashthi 's roots can be traced to Hindu folk traditions . References to this goddess appear in Hindu scriptures as early as 8th and 9th century BCE , in which she is associated with children as well as the Hindu war @-@ god Skanda . Early references consider her a foster @-@ mother of Skanda , but in later texts she is identified with Skanda 's consort , Devasena . In some early texts where Shashthi appears as an attendant of Skanda , she is said to cause diseases in the mother and child , and thus needed to be propitiated on the sixth day after childbirth . However , over time , this malignant goddess became seen as the benevolent saviour and bestower of children . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 Shashthi is portrayed as a motherly figure , often nursing or carrying as many as eight infants in her arms . Her complexion is usually depicted as yellow or golden . A Dhyana @-@ mantra – a hymn describing the iconography of a deity , upon which a devotee of Shashthi should meditate – describes her as a fair young woman with a pleasant appearance , bedecked in divine garments and jewellery with an auspicious twig laying in her lap . A cat ( <unk> ) is the vahana ( mount ) upon which she rides . Older depictions of Shashthi may show her as cat @-@ faced , while another reference describes her as bird @-@ faced . 
 In Kushan era representations between the first and third centuries CE , she is depicted as two @-@ armed and six @-@ headed like Skanda . A significant number of Kushan and <unk> coins , sculptures and inscriptions produced from 500 BCE to 1200 CE picture the six @-@ headed Shashthi , often on the reverse of the coin , with the six @-@ headed Skanda on the observe . Shashthi is also pictured in a Kushan @-@ era <unk> triad from the Mathura region , surrounded by Skanda and <unk> . In <unk> images , she is shown to have two arms and six heads that are arranged in two tiers of three heads each , while in Kushan images , the central head is surrounded by five female heads , sometimes attached to female torsos . Terracotta Gupta era ( 320 – 550 CE ) figures from <unk> show the goddess with three heads on the front and three on the back . 
 The folk worship representation of Shashthi is a red @-@ coloured stone about the size of a human head , typically placed beneath a banyan tree such as those usually found on the outskirts of villages . The banyan may be decorated with flowers or strewn with rice and other offerings . Shashthi is also commonly represented by planting a banyan tree or a small branch in the soil of a family 's home garden . Other common representations of the goddess include a <unk> stone , an earthen water pitcher , or a Purna Ghata – a water vase with an arrangement of coconut and mango leaves – generally set beneath a banyan tree . 
 = = Evolution and textual references = = 
 The general consensus among scholars of Hinduism traces the origins of Shashthi , like Skanda , back to ancient folk traditions . Over the course of the early centuries BCE , the Vedic fertility goddess of the new moon , Sinivali @-@ Kuhu , and Shri @-@ Lakshmi , the Vedic antecedent of Lakshmi , were gradually fused with the folk @-@ deity Shashthi . This merger created a " new " Shashthi that was associated in various ways with Skanda ( also known as Kartikeya or Murugan ) . From her origins as a folk goddess , Shashthi was gradually assimilated into the Brahmanical Hindu pantheon , and ultimately , came to be known in Hinduism as the Primordial Being and Great Mother of all . The fifth century text Vayu Purana includes Shashthi in a list of 49 goddesses , while a Puranic text calls her " the worthiest of worship among mother goddesses . " However , the long @-@ standing universality of her worship has led scholar David Gordon White to challenge the classification of Shashthi as a folk goddess , observing that Shashthi has been worshipped on the sixth day after childbirth by " all Hindus : rural as well as urban people , since the Kushan era . " 
 In textual references , Shashthi is often depicted as closely connected to Skanda . An early textual reference dating to 8th – 9th century BCE relates Shashthi to the six Krittikas who nurtured and nursed Skanda . Sometimes regarded as an aspect of the goddess Durga ( identified with Parvati – the mother of Skanda ) , she is also called <unk> ( " Skanda 's mother " ) . The 3rd to 5th century text Yajnavalkya Smriti describes Shashthi as the foster @-@ mother and protector of Skanda . However , later texts identified her as Devasena , the consort of Skanda , including the epic Mahabharata wherein Shashthi ( as Devasena ) -the daughter of <unk> is betrothed by the god @-@ king Indra to Skanda . She is also identified with goddesses Shri , Lakshmi , Sinivali , and Kuhu in this text . The scripture Padma Purana also describes Shashthi as the wife of Skanda . In the 7th century text Kadambari , the images of Skanda and Shashthi are also said to have painted together on the wall of a palace lying @-@ in chamber of the queen . 
 Scriptures and folk traditions also connect Shashthi and Skanda in numerous indirect ways . The Mahabharata , finalised around the 4th century CE , describes a relationship between the infant Skanda and the Matrikas ( " Mothers " ) , a group of female deities who embody the perils that afflict children until the age of sixteen . The Encyclopaedia of Hinduism identifies this textual account as a source of the modern @-@ day practice of mothers worshipping Shashthi until their child reaches the age of sixteen . In the Mahabharata , Shashthi is described as an attendant of Skanda who behaves <unk> by causing disease . Skanda is furthermore said to have 18 malevolent spirit @-@ followers collectively known as the <unk> <unk> , one of whom – Revati – is given the epithet " Shashthi . " This association of Revati with Shashthi is reiterated in the 5th century text Kashyapa Samhita , wherein Shashthi is also identified as the sixth form of Skanda and a sister of the five Skanda deities . Like Skanda , Shashthi is occasionally depicted with six heads , in which form she is also known by the epithet <unk> ( " six @-@ headed " ) . 
 Shashthi is historically associated with a variety of other deities . The second century BCE composition Manava Grhya Sutra identifies Shashthi with Lakshmi , the goddess of wealth and beauty . It also describes the Shashthi @-@ kalpa rite was performed on the sixth lunar day of every fortnight invoking Shashthi to provide sons , cattle , treasures , corn , and the fulfilment of wishes . The scripture Padma Purana , composed between the 8th and 11th centuries , describes Shashthi as the daughter of Indra . Texts written over the last 500 years , such as the Brahma Vaivarta Purana and the Devi Bhagavata Purana describe Shashthi as the daughter of the creator @-@ god Brahma . In addition , she is associated with Mula @-@ Prakriti , the universal female energy said to be composed of six aspects : one of these , typically the sixth aspect , is said to be Shashthi . 
 Over time , the characterisation of Shashthi underwent a gradual evolution . <unk> folk traditions originating between the 10th and 5th centuries BCE associated the goddess with both positive and negative elements of fertility , birth , motherhood and childhood . However , between the 4th century BCE and the 5th century CE , a shift occurred in which Shashthi was increasingly depicted as a malevolent deity associated with the sufferings of mothers and children . The fifth century text Kashyapa Samhita calls Shashthi by the epithet <unk> ( " one who steals the born " ) and provides a list of the malevolent activities in which Shashthi is believed to engage , including her practice of stealing foetuses from the womb and devouring children on the sixth day following birth . For this reason , the text recommends that she be propitiated through worship in her honour on this day in the lying @-@ in room and on the sixth day of every fortnight thereafter . 
 Eventually , Shashthi came to represent all goddesses and forces responsible for causing diseases in children and their mothers , who needed to be propitiated on the sixth day after childbirth to prevent these illnesses . Consequently , Shashthi came to personify the sixth day of a child 's life . The sixth day of the lunar fortnight is itself called Shashti , a name derived from the name of the goddess . The Yajnavalkya Smriti , composed during Gupta rule between the 3rd and 5th centuries CE , describes the rites of Shashthi Puja in which Shashthi is worshipped on the sixth day after childbirth to ensure the protection of the newborn baby . According to one explanation for the worship of Shashthi on this day , folk belief associates this critical time in an infant 's life with great susceptibility to diseases related to childbirth , such as puerperal fever and tetanus , and that worship of Shashthi is performed to help ward off these diseases . 
 Over the past 1500 years , the characterisation of Shashthi gradually shifted toward that of a benevolent and protective figure . In Banabhatta 's 7th century work <unk> , Shashthi is called <unk> ( " mother of the born one " ) , while the Kadambari by the same author calls her <unk> , meaning " having many children " . Shashthi 's evolution mirrors that of the demoness Jara of the Mahabharata and a similar Buddhist goddess , <unk> : all of them are characterised in early texts as malevolent goddesses , but over the course of time these deities transform from <unk> of children into their saviours and protectors . 
 = = Legends = = 
 A chapter entitled <unk> , appended to the texts Brahma Vaivarta Purana and Devi Bhagavata Purana , narrates the tale of Shashthi . King Priyavrata – the son of <unk> Manu ( the progenitor of mankind ) – and his wife Malini performed the <unk> yajna ( a fire @-@ sacrifice ritual to gain a son ) in an effort to conceive , but after twelve years of pregnancy , a still @-@ born son was delivered to Malini . Priyavrata set off to the cremation grounds with the corpse of his son . On his way , he saw a celestial woman dressed in white silk and jewels , riding in a heavenly chariot . She declared to Priyavrata that she was Devasena , the daughter of Brahma and wife of Skanda . She further said that she was Shashthi , foremost of the Matrikas ( " Mothers " ) of Skanda , and had the power to grant children to devotees . She held the child in her hand and resurrected the infant , then began to leave for her heavenly abode , taking the child with her . Priyavrata stopped the goddess , praising her and pleading that she return his son to him . The goddess agreed on the condition that Priyavrata would initiate and propagate her worship in all three worlds : heaven , earth and the netherworld . She returned the child to the king , naming him <unk> and declaring that he should become famous as a great , virtuous , and learned ruler . Priyavrata decreed that Shashthi should be worshipped on the sixth day of every month , as well as the sixth and twenty @-@ first days after childbirth , and on all occasions auspicious to a child . She would be worshipped in the form of a <unk> stone , a Purna Ghata under a banyan tree , or an image of her on a wall . 
 A Bengali folk @-@ tale about Shashthi tells of the youngest of seven daughters @-@ in @-@ law in a prosperous household who was a glutton that used to secretly steal food and then blame a black cat , which was thrashed as punishment . The black cat happened to be the vahana ( mount ) of Shashthi and complained about the mistreatment to the goddess , who pledged to avenge it . When the youngest daughter @-@ in @-@ law gave birth to a son , the cat stole the child in the night and gave it to the goddess , and did the same for her next six sons . The neighbours accused the young mother of carelessness and began to believe she might be a witch who ate her own children . Finally , when a daughter was born , the young mother decided to remain awake the whole night to resolve the mystery . She managed to catch the cat in the act of robbery and wounded it with her bracelet , but the cat escaped with the child , leaving a trail of blood . The mother followed this trail to the abode of Shashthi . There she saw her sons playing around Shashthi as the goddess held the mother 's infant daughter in her arms . Shashthi explained the reason for the mother 's ordeal and told her to ask pardon of the cat . The mother asked the cat 's pardon , which was granted , and then she promised the goddess that she would offer worship in a ritual dedicated to her , which would come to be known as the Jamai @-@ <unk> Vrata . The mother returned home with her children and spread the worship of the goddess , who blessed her family with children , wealth and happiness . 
 A different version of this tale narrates that when the youngest daughter @-@ in @-@ law was pregnant , she secretly ate the food @-@ offerings ritually dedicated to Shashthi and then blamed the theft on the black cat . Angered by the dishonour of its mistress and the unjust accusation of theft , the cat pledged to teach the young mother a lesson . In this version of the tale , the cat not only stole her six children , but also ate them . But when the seventh child was born , the mother caught the cat fleeing with her child and followed it but tripped in middle of the chase and fainted . The cat took the infant to Shashthi 's abode , where she told the goddess the whole tale of her insult . The benign goddess , however , was annoyed with the cat and rushed to the aid of the mother . The goddess explained the reason of her suffering , and after the mother had begged the cat for forgiveness and had sworn to worship Shashthi on anointed days , all seven of her children were returned to her . 
 Shashthi 's Bengali legends appear in the Mangal @-@ Kavya texts , especially in the Shashthi @-@ <unk> section of this work . The Mangal @-@ Kavya and Bengali folk tales describe Shashthi as closely related to Manasa , the serpent goddess . Shashthi furthermore appears as an ally of Manasa in a famous Bengali folk @-@ tale describing Shashthi 's activities during the Nag Panchami festival of Manasa . 
 = = Worship = = 
 Among Hindus , Shashthi is widely regarded the benefactor and protector of children and tutelary deity of every household . She is also worshipped as a bestower of children to the childless , and regarded as the foremost goddess for blessing children . One of the earliest scriptural sources to describe a ritual in her honour is the second century BCE composition Manava Grhya Sutra , appended to the Yajurveda ( written between the 14th and 10th centuries BCE ) , which describes a ritual called Shashthi @-@ kalpa . In the Shashthi @-@ kalpa rite , which was described as performed on the sixth lunar day of every fortnight , Shashthi was invoked to provide sons , cattle , treasures , corn , and the fulfilment of wishes . Today , Shashthi continues to be worshipped on the sixth day of each of the twelve lunar months of the Hindu calendar , as well as on the sixth day after childbirth in the lying @-@ in chamber where the birth has taken place . Shashthi is worshipped in a different form in each of these lunar months as the deities Chandan , Aranya , Kardama , <unk> , <unk> , Durga , Nadi , <unk> , Anna , Sitala , <unk> or Ashoka . 
 In North India , Shashthi is worshipped at childbirth and puberty , and during marriage rites . When the pregnant woman is isolated during childbirth in the lying @-@ in chamber , a cow @-@ dung figure of the goddess is traditionally kept in the room . The birth of a living child is considered the blessing of Shashthi , while the birth of a stillborn infant or the early death of a child are considered manifestations of her wrath . Before childbirth , Shashthi is worshipped to protect the welfare of the expecting mother . She is also invoked after childbirth on the sixth day of each month until the child reaches puberty , especially when the child is sick . 
 In Bengal and South India , Shashthi is worshipped on the sixth day after childbirth and on Aranya @-@ Shashthi ( also called Jamai @-@ Shashthi ) , the sixth day of the bright fortnight of the Hindu month of <unk> . Her worship can be performed in the house , where she is symbolised as an earthenware pitcher ; she may also be worshipped outdoors in a natural , open space consecrated to her , termed a <unk> . In honour of Shashthi , women tie a stone in a small rag to the branch of a tree in the <unk> : a mother does this to ask for long life for her child , while a barren woman does so to entreat the goddess to aid her in conceiving . The vrata ( ritual ) performed on the day of Jamai @-@ Shashthi is also prescribed to be performed by pregnant women at least once on any Monday , Tuesday , Friday or Saturday in the month of Jyestha . Dough images of Shashthi and her black cat are prepared and worshipped , along with a water pitcher with a banyan tree branch near it . Betel nuts and leaves , fruits , sweets and <unk> are offered to her in units of six . In North India , Shashthi is worshipped in the form of the banyan tree , which is sacred to her . 
 In Bengal , on the night of the sixth day after childbirth , a number of items may be placed in the lying @-@ in chamber in deference to Shashthi , such as an earthen pitcher of water covered with a napkin , offerings of husked rice , cooked rice , bananas and sweets , bangles , and pieces of gold and silver . A pen and paper are also kept in the room , because it is believed that Shashthi ( or , according to some traditions , <unk> or Brahma ) comes into the home after everyone is asleep and writes the child 's fortune on the paper with invisible ink . In Bihar , the sixth day ceremony is called <unk> or Chati ( " sixth " ) and Shashthi is known by the epithet Chati Mata ( " Mother Chati " ) . A lump of cow dung dressed in red cloth or paper and covered with vermilion , symbolising the goddess , is kept in the lying @-@ in room . Here , the new @-@ born baby is oiled and dressed in new clothes and rings and then named ; a feast follows this ceremony . Childless people may perform a vrata ( ritual ) in worship of Shashthi , called either Chati Mata or Shashthi Vrata , in an effort to conceive . 
 In Orissa , the goddess is worshipped in the lying @-@ in room on the sixth day after childbirth , on the 21st day after childbirth and on every subsequent birthday of the child until he or she reaches the age of sixteen . Shashthi is also prescribed to be worshipped the sixth day of each of the two lunar <unk> occurring each month ; as part of the vrata rites , the worship occurring on the bright fortnight of the month of Bhadrapada is the most important of these and holds the same status in Orissa as the <unk> @-@ Shashthi ritual in Bengal . By these rites , it is believed a childless woman may gain offspring , while a mother may secure the longevity and welfare of her child by the grace of the goddess . 
 In North India , women worship Shashthi on Ashoka Shashthi , the sixth lunar day of the month of Chaitra . In this region , women will drink water from six flower @-@ buds of the Ashoka tree to secure the well @-@ being of their children . Women observe Khas Shashthi in the month of <unk> by fasting to ensure the longevity of their children . 
 = Sir Francis Bernard , 1st Baronet = 
 Sir Francis Bernard , 1st Baronet ( bapt . 12 July 1712 – 16 June 1779 ) was a British colonial administrator who served as governor of the provinces of New Jersey and Massachusetts Bay . His uncompromising policies and harsh tactics in Massachusetts angered the colonists and were instrumental in the building of broad @-@ based opposition within the province to the rule of Parliament in the events leading to the American Revolution . 
 Appointed governor of New Jersey in 1758 , he oversaw the province 's participation in the later years of the French and Indian War , and had a generally positive relationship with its legislature . In 1760 he was given the governorship of Massachusetts , where he had a stormy relationship with the assembly . Early actions turned the colony 's populists against him , and his responses to protests against Parliament 's attempts to tax the colonies deepened divisions . After protests against the Townshend Acts in 1768 , Bernard sought British Army troops be stationed in Boston to overawe the colonists . He was recalled after the publication of letters in which he was critical of the colony . 
 After returning to England , he continued to advise the British government on colonial matters , calling for hardline responses to ongoing difficulties in Massachusetts that culminated in the 1773 Boston Tea Party . He suffered a stroke in 1771 and died in 1779 , leaving a large family . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francis was born in Brightwell @-@ cum @-@ <unk> , ( then in Berkshire , but part of Oxfordshire since 1974 ) , England to the Rev. Francis and Margery ( <unk> ) Bernard and was christened on 12 July 1712 . His father died three years later . His mother remarried , but died herself of smallpox in 1718 . He was thereafter probably raised by an aunt for several years , since his stepfather was forced by a failed courtship to flee to Holland . His stepfather , Anthony Alsop , returned to Berkshire a few years later , and continued to play a role in the boy 's upbringing . Bernard 's formal education began at Westminster in 1725 , and he then spent seven years at Oxford , where Christ Church granted him a master of arts in 1736 . He read law at the Middle Temple and was called to the bar in 1737 , after only four years ( instead of the typical seven ) of study . He settled in Lincoln , where he practiced law and took on a variety of municipal posts . Among his neighbors in Lincoln were the <unk> , who had one son ( John ) serving in the Colonial Office , and another , Thomas , who went to the North American colonies in 1753 and was appointed governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in 1757 . 
 Bernard married Amelia Offley , daughter of the sheriff of Derbyshire , in December 1741 , and the couple raised a large family : by 1757 the couple had eight living children . Because his prospects for further income to support this large family were unlikely in Lincoln , he apparently decided to seek a posting in the colonies . John Adams later described Bernard as " avaricious to a most infamous degree ; needy at the same time , having a numerous family to provide for . " 
 = = Governor of New Jersey = = 
 Bernard 's wife was cousin to Lord Barrington , who became a Privy Councillor in 1755 . Probably through his connections to Barrington and the <unk> , he secured an appointment as governor of the Province of New Jersey on 27 January 1758 , a post that became available upon the death of Jonathan Belcher . Leaving some of his children with relatives , the couple sailed for North America with four of their children , arriving at Perth Amboy on 14 June . 
 The colonies were in the middle of the French and Indian War at the time of Bernard 's arrival . He established a good working relationship with New Jersey 's assembly , and was able to convince the province to raise troops and funds for the ongoing war effort . He signed the Treaty of Easton , an agreement between New Jersey and Pennsylvania on one side , and a group of Indian tribes ( the Lenape being of principal concern to New Jersey ) fixing boundaries between colonial and Indian lands . This effort was important , for it reduced raiding on the frontiers and made possible the reallocation of provincial military strength to the war with New France . It and other agreements negotiated by Bernard extinguished all of the remaining Indian titles to New Jersey . Negotiations with the Lenape also resulted in the establishment of the first formal Indian reservation , Brotherton , near present @-@ day Indian Mills . This reservation was only sparsely populated , and was abandoned in 1801 when its remaining inhabitants joined the Stockbridge Indians in upstate New York . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Through the influence of his connections in the Colonial Office , Bernard was appointed governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in late 1759 . Delays in communications and slow travel were such that Bernard did not arrive in Boston until 2 August 1760 . Although initially warmly welcomed , his tenure in Massachusetts was difficult . Bernard sought to vigorously enforce the Navigation Acts , in part because crown officials ( including the governor and the customs officials ) received shares of the proceeds from the seizure of ships that were caught violating the acts . The legal actions involving these seizures were heard in a jury @-@ less admiralty court before a Crown @-@ appointed judge , and were extremely unpopular . Bernard also made an early opponent of James Otis , Jr. by appointing Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson to be chief justice of the province 's highest court , a post that had been promised by several previous governors to Otis ' father . Upset over the snub the younger Otis resigned his post as advocate general ( i.e. the Crown 's representative , equivalent to a government prosecutor ) before the admiralty court , and devoted himself instead to arguing ( sometimes pro bono ) on behalf of the merchants in defense of their ships . These early actions during Bernard 's tenure drew a clear dividing line between the " popular party " ( exemplified by the Otises ) opposed to British colonial policy and the " court party " ( exemplified by Hutchinson ) who supported it . 
 Bernard 's difficulties were compounded when , after the death in late 1760 of King George II , it became necessary to reissue writs of assistance to customs tax collectors . These writs , which were essentially open @-@ ended search warrants , were judicially controversial and so unpopular that their issuance was later explicitly disallowed by the United States Constitution . Hutchinson , who approved the writs in one of his first acts as chief justice , saw his popularity fall , and Otis , who argued the writs violated the Rights of Englishmen , gained in popularity . He was elected to the provincial legislature in May 1761 , where he was well placed to continue his attacks on Bernard 's policies . In the 1761 session of the assembly Otis engineered the gift of Mount Desert Island to Bernard , a partially successful stratagem to divert Bernard 's attention from ongoing customs seizures . 
 Bernard 's unpopularity continued through other tax measures , including the Sugar Act ( 1763 ) and the Stamp Act ( 1765 ) . While the passage of both acts occasioned protest , the response to the Stamp Act included rioting in the streets , and united many factions in the province against the governor . In 1767 the passage by Parliament of the Townshend Acts again raised a storm of protest in the colonies . In Massachusetts the provincial assembly issued a circular letter , calling on the other colonies to join it in a boycott of the goods subject to the Townshend taxes . Bernard was ordered in April 1768 by Lord Hillsborough , who had recently been appointed to the newly created office of Colonial Secretary , to dissolve the assembly if it failed to retract the letter . The assembly refused , and Bernard prorogued it in July . 
 Maier says that his letters to London greatly influenced officials there , but they " distorted " reality . " His misguided conviction that the ' faction ' had espoused violence as its primary method of opposition , for example , kept him from recognizing the radicals ' peace @-@ keeping efforts .... Equally dangerous , Bernard 's elaborate accounts were sometimes built on insubstantial evidence . " Warden argues that Bernard was careful not to explicitly ask London for troops , but his exaggerated accounts strongly suggested they were needed . In the fall of 1767 he warned about a possible insurrection in Boston any day , and his exaggerated report of one disturbance in 1768 , " certainly had given Lord Hillsboro the impression that troops were the only way to enforce obedience in the town . " Warden notes that other key British officials in Boston wrote London with the " same strain of hysteria . " Four thousand British Army troops arrived in Boston in October 1768 , further heightening tensions . Bernard was vilified in the local press , and accused of writing letters to the ministry that mischaracterized the situation . Although he was challenged to release those letters he refused . Opposition agents in London were eventually able to acquire some of his letters , which reached members of the Sons of Liberty in April 1769 . They were promptly published by the radical Boston Gazette , along with deliberations of the governor 's council . One letter in particular , in which Bernard called for changes to the Massachusetts charter to increase the governor 's power by increasing the council 's dependence on him , was the subject of particularly harsh treatment , and prompted the assembly to formally request that " he might be forever removed from the Government of the Province . " He was recalled to England , and Lieutenant Governor Hutchinson became acting governor . When Bernard left Boston on 1 August , the town held an impromptu celebration , decorated the Liberty Tree , and rang church bells . 
 His accomplishments in Massachusetts included the design of Harvard Hall at Harvard University and the construction of a summer estate on Pond Street in Jamaica Plain . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 Upon his return to England , he asked for and received a hearing concerning the colonial petition against his rule . The Privy Council in February 1770 considered the petition , and after deliberation dismissed all of the charges as " groundless , vexatious , and scandalous . " Despite this vindication , Bernard resigned as governor in 1771 . He was confirmed in the ownership of Mount Desert Island , a recognition he had been seeking since it was awarded to him in 1761 . Although he had been promised a baronetcy and a pension of £ 1 @,@ 000 for his service , he learned after his return that the pension had been reduced to £ 500 ( the baronetcy , of <unk> , was awarded at crown expense ) . His appeals on the matter were at first rejected , but when Lord North became Prime Minister in 1770 , the pension was raised , but shortly after replaced by an appointment as commissioner on the Board of Revenue for Ireland , which paid the same amount . 
 Bernard became an advisor to the North administration on matters concerning the colonies . He generally took a harder line than his predecessor Thomas Pownall , who advocated for colonial interests in Parliament . Proposals he made in 1771 included ideas central to the 1774 Massachusetts Government Act , which severely constrained colonial political power , including a council appointed by the governor rather than one elected by the assembly . Bernard may also have played a role in the difficulties Benjamin Franklin had in being recognized as a colonial agent ; after Franklin 's credentials were refused by the colonial secretary , he encountered Bernard in an antechamber . Biographer Colin Nicolson observes that Bernard 's presence as an advisor to the ministry " cast a shadow over virtually ever American measure regarding Massachusetts " that the ministry considered , because of Bernard 's role in breaking trust between the colonists and the London government and the subsequent radicalization of Massachusetts politics . 
 In 1774 , when the North government was considering how to respond to the Boston Tea Party , Bernard published Select Letters on Trade and Government , containing proposals on how to deal with the ongoing difficulties in the colonies . He proposed to reconcile the constitutional grievances of the British and radical Americans by the possible introduction of American representatives into the Parliament of Great Britain . In the Select Letters , which included the essay Principles of Law and Polity which he drafted in 1764 , he laid out a point @-@ by @-@ point exposition of his viewpoints concerning imperial governance . Some of his ideas were enacted , notably those enshrined in the Massachusetts Government Act ; the outrage in London even sparked the sympathetic colonial advocate Thomas Pownall to propose the closure of Boston 's port , which was enacted in the Boston Port Act . 
 = = Decline and death = = 
 In late 1771 Bernard was bequeathed the manor at Nether Winchendon upon the death of a cousin to whom he had been close since childhood . Combined with other uncertainties about where various family members would reside after he received the Irish appointment , the stress of the situation led Bernard to suffer a stroke . His mobility was impaired , but he took the waters at Bath , which appear to have helped his recovery . He applied for permission to resign the Irish post , and settled first at the Nether Winchendon manor ; in 1774 his resignation was accepted and his pension restored . He was well enough in 1772 to travel to Oxford , where he received an honorary Doctor of Civil Law from his alma mater , Christ Church . Because of his health he moved later in 1772 to a smaller house in nearby Aylesbury . He died on 16 June 1779 , after an epileptic seizure , at Nether Winchendon . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bernard never believed the difficulties he had in Massachusetts were personal : instead of accepting some responsibility , he blamed his problems on the policies emanating from London that he was instructed to implement . John Adams wrote that Bernard 's " antagonistic reports " of matters in Massachusetts were instrumental in turning British government policymakers against colonial interests . Bernard 's name headed a list drawn up in Massachusetts after the American Revolutionary War broke out of " notorious conspirators against the government " , and most of his property there was confiscated . Mount Desert Island was not entirely taken ; Bernard 's son John , who resided in Maine during the war and sided with the victorious Americans , was able to receive Massachusetts title to half of the island . 
 Upon the election of James Bowdoin to be Governor of Massachusetts in 1786 , Reverend William Gordon in his sermon warned Bowdoin that he ignored the state 's legislature at his peril , as Bernard had . 
 <unk> , New Jersey , a town first settled around 1715 and located in Bernards Township , was renamed Bernardsville in Bernard 's honour in 1840 . <unk> , Massachusetts was incorporated during his Massachusetts administration and is named for him . Bernard also named Berkshire County , Massachusetts ( after his county of birth ) and Pittsfield , Massachusetts ( after British Prime Minister William Pitt ) . 
