 A 1924 document found in the archives of the German Oriental Company recalls the 20 January 1913 meeting between Ludwig Borchardt and a senior Egyptian official to discuss the division of the archeological finds of 1912 between Germany and Egypt . According to the secretary of the German Oriental Company ( who was the author of the document and who was present at the meeting ) , Borchardt " wanted to save the bust for us " . Borchardt is suspected of having concealed the bust 's real value , although he denied doing so . 
 While Philipp Vandenberg describes the coup as " adventurous and beyond comparison " , Time magazine lists it among the " Top 10 Plundered Artifacts " . Borchardt showed the Egyptian official a photograph of the bust " that didn 't show Nefertiti in her best light " . The bust was wrapped up in a box when Egypt 's chief antiques inspector Gustave Lefebvre came for inspection . The document reveals that Borchardt claimed the bust was made of gypsum to mislead the inspector . The German Oriental Company blames the negligence of the inspector and points out that the bust was at the top of the exchange list and says the deal was done fairly . 
 = = Description and examinations = = 
 The bust of Nefertiti is 48 centimetres ( 19 in ) tall and weighs about 20 kilograms ( 44 lb ) . It is made of a limestone core covered with painted stucco layers . The face is completely symmetrical and almost intact , but the left eye lacks the inlay present in the right . The pupil of the right eye is of inserted quartz with black paint and is fixed with beeswax . The background of the eye @-@ socket is unadorned limestone . Nefertiti wears her characteristic blue crown known as the " Nefertiti cap crown " with a golden diadem band looped around like horizontal ribbons and joining at the back , and an <unk> ( cobra ) over her brow – which is now broken . She also wears a broad collar with a floral pattern on it . The ears also have suffered some damage . Gardner 's Art Through the Ages suggests that " With this elegant bust , Thutmose may have been alluding to a heavy flower on its slender sleek stalk by exaggerating the weight of the crowned head and the length of the almost serpentine neck . " 
 According to David Silverman , the Nefertiti bust reflects the classical Egyptian art style , deviating from the " eccentricities " of the Amarna art style , which was developed in Akhenaten 's reign . The exact function of the bust is unknown , though it is theorized that the bust may be a sculptor 's modello to be used as a basis for other official portraits , kept in the artist 's workshop . Surviving royal portraits are normally wholly in stone , though originally painted on a thin plaster layer , but not largely made up of stucco plaster as this piece is . 
 = = = Colors = = = 
 Ludwig Borchardt commissioned a chemical analysis of the colored pigments of the head . The result of the examination was published in the book Portrait of Queen <unk> in 1923 : 
 Blue : powdered frit , colored with copper oxide 
 Skin color ( light red ) : fine powdered lime spar colored with red chalk ( iron oxide ) 
 Yellow : orpiment ( arsenic sulfide ) 
 Green : powdered frit , colored with copper and iron oxide 
 Black : coal with wax as a binding medium 
 White : chalk 
 = = = Missing left eye = = = 
 When the bust was first discovered , no piece of quartz to represent the iris of the left eyeball was present , as in the other eye , and none was found despite an intensive search and a then significant reward of £ 5 being put up for information regarding its whereabouts . Borchardt assumed that the quartz iris of the left eye had fallen out when the sculptor Thutmose 's workshop fell into ruin . The missing eye led to speculation that Nefertiti may have suffered from an ophthalmic infection , and actually lost her left eye , though the presence of an iris in other statues of her contradicted this possibility . 
 Dietrich Wildung proposed that the bust in Berlin was a model for official portraits and was used by the master sculptor for teaching his pupils how to carve the internal structure of the eye , and thus the left iris was not added . Gardner 's Art Through the Ages and Silverman presents a similar view that the bust was deliberately kept unfinished . Hawass suggested that Thutmose had created the left eye , but it was later destroyed . 
 = = = CT scans = = = 
 The bust was first CT scanned in 1992 , with the scan producing cross sections of the bust every 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) . In 2006 , Dietrich Wildung , the director of Berlin 's Egyptian Museum , while trying a different lighting at the Altes Museum — where the bust was then displayed — observed wrinkles on Nefertiti 's neck and bags under her eyes , suggesting the sculptor had tried to depict signs of aging . A CT scan confirmed Wildung 's findings ; Thutmose had added gypsum under the cheeks and eyes in an attempt to perfect his sculpture , Wildung explained . 
 The CT scan in 2006 , led by Alexander Huppertz , the director of the Imaging Science Institute in Berlin , revealed a wrinkled face of Nefertiti carved in the inner core of the bust . The results were published in the April 2009 Radiology journal . The scan revealed that Thutmose placed layers of varying thickness on top of the limestone core . The inner face has creases around her mouth and cheeks and a swelling on the nose . The creases and the bump on the nose are leveled by the outermost stucco layer . According to Huppertz , this may reflect " aesthetic ideals of the era " . The 2006 scan provided greater detail than the 1992 one , revealing subtle details just 1 – 2 mm under the stucco . 
 = = Later history = = 
 The bust of Nefertiti has become " one of the most admired , and most copied , images from ancient Egypt " , and the star exhibit used to market Berlin 's museums . It is seen as an " icon of international beauty " . " Showing a woman with a long neck , elegantly arched brows , high cheekbones , a slender nose and an enigmatic smile played about red lips , the bust has established Nefertiti as one of the most beautiful faces of antiquity . " It is described as the most famous bust of ancient art , comparable only to the mask of Tutankhamun . 
 Nefertiti has become an icon of Berlin 's culture . Some 500 @,@ 000 visitors see Nefertiti every year . The bust is described as " the best @-@ known work of art from ancient Egypt , arguably from all antiquity " . Her face is on postcards of Berlin and 1989 German postage stamps . 
 = = = Locations in Germany = = = 
 The Nefertiti bust has been in Germany since 1913 , when it was shipped to Berlin and presented to James Simon , a wholesale merchant and the sponsor of the Amarna excavation . It was displayed at Simon 's residence until 1913 , when Simon loaned the bust and other artifacts from the Amarna dig to the Berlin Museum . Although the rest of the Amarna collection was displayed in 1913 – 14 , Nefertiti was kept secret at Borchardt 's request . In 1918 , the Museum discussed the public display of the bust , but again kept it secret on the request of Borchardt . It was permanently donated to the Berlin Museum in 1920 . Finally , in 1923 , the bust was first unveiled to the public in Borchardt 's writing and later in 1924 , displayed to the public as part of the Egyptian Museum of Berlin . The bust created a sensation , swiftly becoming a world @-@ renowned icon of feminine beauty , and one of the most universally @-@ recognised artifacts to survive from Ancient Egypt . The Nefertiti bust was displayed in Berlin ’ s Neues Museum on Museum Island until the museum was closed in 1939 ; with the onset of World War II , the Berlin museums were emptied and the artifacts moved to secure shelters for safekeeping . Nefertiti was initially stored in the cellar of the Prussian Governmental Bank and then , in the autumn of 1941 , moved to the tower of a flak bunker in Berlin . The Neues Museum suffered bombings in 1943 by the Royal Air Force . On 6 March 1945 , the bust was moved to a German salt mine at Merkers @-@ <unk> in Thuringia . 
 In March 1945 , the bust was found by the American Army and given over to its Monuments , Fine Arts and Archives branch . It was moved to the Reichsbank in Frankfurt and then , in August , shipped to the U.S. Central Collecting Point in Wiesbaden where it was displayed to the public in 1946 . In 1956 , the bust was returned to West Berlin . There it was displayed at the Dahlem Museum . As early as 1946 , East Germany ( German Democratic Republic ) insisted on the return of Nefertiti to Museum Island in East Berlin , where the bust had been displayed before the war . In 1967 , Nefertiti was moved in the Egyptian Museum in Charlottenburg and remained there until 2005 , when it was moved to the Altes Museum . The bust returned to the Neues Museum as its centerpiece when the museum reopened in October 2009 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Requests for repatriation to Egypt = = = 
 Ever since the official unveiling of the bust in Berlin in 1924 , the Egyptian authorities have been demanding its return to Egypt . In 1925 , Egypt threatened to ban German excavations in Egypt unless Nefertiti was returned . In 1929 , Egypt offered to exchange other artifacts for Nefertiti , but Germany declined . In the 1950s , Egypt again tried to initiate negotiations but there was no response from Germany . Although Germany had previously strongly opposed the repatriation , in 1933 Hermann Göring considered returning the bust to King Farouk Fouad of Egypt as a political gesture . Hitler opposed the idea , and told the Egyptian government that he would build a new Egyptian museum for Nefertiti : " In the middle , this wonder , Nefertiti , will be enthroned , ... I will never relinquish the head of the Queen . " While the bust was under American control , Egypt requested the United States to hand it over ; the USA refused and advised Egypt to take up the matter with the new German authorities . In 1989 , the Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak viewed the bust and announced that Nefertiti was " the best ambassador for Egypt " in Berlin . 
 Dr. Zahi Hawass , the former Secretary General of the Egyptian Supreme Council of Antiquities , believes that Nefertiti belongs to Egypt and that the bust was taken out of Egypt illegally and should therefore be returned . Dr. Hawass has maintained the stance that Egyptian authorities were misled over the acquisition of Nefertiti in 1913 . He has demanded that Germany prove that it was exported legally . According to Kurt G. <unk> , another argument in support of repatriation is that " Archeological finds have their ' home ' in the country of origin and should be preserved in that country . " The Nefertiti repatriation issue sprang up again in 2003 over the Body of Nefertiti sculpture ( see Controversy ) . In 2005 , Hawass requested UNESCO to intervene to return the bust . 
 In 2007 , Hawass threatened to ban exhibitions of Egyptian artifacts in Germany if Nefertiti was not lent to Egypt , but to no avail . Hawass also requested a worldwide boycott of loans to German museums to initiate what he calls a " scientific war " . Hawass wanted Germany to at least lend the bust to Egypt in 2012 for the opening of the new Grand Egyptian Museum near the Great Pyramids of Giza . Simultaneously , a campaign called " Nefertiti Travels " was launched by cultural association <unk> , based in Hamburg , Germany . They distributed postcards depicting the bust of Nefertiti with the words " Return to Sender " and wrote an open letter to the German Culture Minister , Bernd Neumann , supporting the view that Egypt should be given the bust on loan . In 2009 , when Nefertiti moved back to the Neues Museum – her old home , the appropriateness of Berlin as the bust 's location was questioned . 
 Several German art experts have attempted to refute all the claims made by Hawass , pointing to the 1924 document discussing the pact between Borchardt and the Egyptian authorities , though , as discussed earlier , Borchardt has been accused of foul play in the deal . The German authorities have also argued the bust is too fragile to transport and that the legal arguments for the repatriation were insubstantial . According to The Times , Germany may be concerned that lending the bust to Egypt would mean its permanent departure from Germany . 
 In December 2009 Friederike Seyfried , the director of Berlin 's Egyptian Museum and Papyrus Collection , presented to the Egyptians documents held by the museum regarding the discovery of the bust which include a protocol signed by the German excavator of the bust and the Egyptian Antiquities Service . In the documents , the object was listed as a painted plaster bust of a princess . But in the diary of Ludwig Borchardt he clearly referred to it as the head of Nefertiti . " This proves that Borchardt wrote this description so that his country can get the statue , " Hawass commented " These materials confirm Egypt 's contention that ( he ) did act unethically with intent to deceive . " However , Hawass said Egypt didn 't consider the Nefertiti bust to be a looted antiquity . Still , it is one of a handful of truly singular Egyptian antiquities still in foreign hands . " I really want it back , " he said . Hawass ' statement quoted the director of the museum as saying the authority to approve the return of the bust to Egypt lies with the Prussian Cultural Heritage and the German culture minister . 
 = = = Allegations over authenticity = = = 
 The French book , Le <unk> de Nefertiti – une <unk> de l <unk> ? ( The Bust of Nefertiti – a Fraud in Egyptology ? ) by Swiss art historian Henri Stierlin and the book Missing Link in Archaeology by Berlin author and historian <unk> <unk> both claimed that the Nefertiti bust was a modern fake . Stierlin claims that Borchardt may have created the bust to test ancient pigments and that when the bust was admired by Prince Johann Georg of Saxony , Borchardt pretended it was genuine to avoid offending the prince . Stierlin argues that the missing left eye of the bust would have been a sign of disrespect in ancient Egypt , that no scientific records of the bust appear until 11 years after its supposed discovery , and while the paint pigments are ancient , the inner limestone core has never been dated . <unk> suggests Borchardt 's wife was the model for the bust , and both authors argue that it was not revealed to the public until 1924 because it was a fake . Another theory suggested that the existing Nefertiti bust was crafted in the 1930s on Hitler 's orders , and that the original was lost in World War II . 
 Dietrich Wildung dismissed the claims as a publicity stunt , as radiological tests , detailed computer tomography , and material analysis have proved its authenticity . The pigments used on the bust have been matched to those used by ancient Egyptian artisans . The 2006 CT scan that discovered the " hidden face " of Nefertiti proved without doubt – according to Science News – that the bust was genuine . 
 Egyptian authorities also dismissed Stierlin 's theory . Dr Zahi Hawass said " Stierlin is not a historian . He is delirious . " Although Stierlin had argued " Egyptians cut shoulders horizontally " and Nefertiti had vertical shoulders , Hawass said that the new style seen in the Nefertiti bust is part of the changes introduced by Akhenaten , the husband of Nefertiti . Hawass also claimed that the sculptor Thutmose had created the eye , but it was later destroyed . 
 = = = The Body of Nefertiti = = = 
 In 2003 , the Egyptian Museum in Berlin allowed the Hungarian artist duo Little Warsaw , Andras <unk> and Balint Havas , to place the bust atop a nearly nude female bronze for a video installation to be shown at the Venice Biennale modern art festival . The project called the Body of Nefertiti was , according to the artists , an attempt to pay homage to the bust . According to Wildung , it showed " the continued relevance of the ancient world to today 's art . " However , Egyptian cultural officials took offense and proclaimed it to be a disgrace to " one of the great symbols of their country 's history " . As a consequence , they also banned Wildung and his wife from further exploration in Egypt . The Egyptian Minister for Culture , Farouk Hosny , declared that Nefertiti was " not in safe hands " , and although Egypt had not renewed their claims for restitution " due to the good relations with Germany , " this " recent behaviour " was unacceptable . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 In 1930 , the German press described the Nefertiti bust as their new monarch , personifying it as a queen . As the " ' most precious ... stone in the setting of the diadem ' from the art treasures of ' Prussia Germany ' " , Nefertiti would re @-@ establish the imperial German national identity after 1918 . Hitler described the bust as " a unique masterpiece , an ornament , a true treasure " , and pledged to build a museum to house it . By the 1970s , the bust had become an issue of national identity to both German states — East Germany and West Germany — created after World War II . In 1999 , Nefertiti appeared on an election poster for the green political party <unk> 90 / Die Grünen as a promise for cosmopolitan and multi @-@ cultural environment with the slogan " Strong Women for Berlin ! " According to Claudia <unk> , another reason that the Nefertiti bust became associated with a German national identity was its place as a rival to the Tutankhamun find by the British , who then ruled Egypt . 
 The bust became an influence on popular culture with Jack Pierce 's make @-@ up work on Elsa Lanchester 's iconic hair style in the film Bride of Frankenstein being inspired by it . In the Italian film Nefertiti , Queen of the Nile ( 1961 ) Nefertiti is in love with the young sculptor <unk> ( Thutmose ) , played by Edmund <unk> , who is a friend of prince <unk> ( Akhenaten ) . <unk> loses Nefertiti to Akhenaten , but preserves his love for her in the famous sculpture . The American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery uses the bust of Nefertiti as its official emblem . 
 = Andalusian horse = 
 The Andalusian , also known as the Pure Spanish Horse or PRE ( Pura Raza Española ) , is a horse breed from the Iberian Peninsula , where its ancestors have lived for thousands of years . The Andalusian has been recognized as an individual breed since the 15th century , and its conformation has changed very little over the centuries . Throughout its history , it has been known for its prowess as a war horse , and was prized by the nobility . The breed was used as a tool of diplomacy by the Spanish government , and kings across Europe rode and owned Spanish horses . During the 19th century , warfare , disease and crossbreeding reduced herd numbers dramatically , and despite some recovery in the late 19th century , the trend continued into the early 20th century . Exports of Andalusians from Spain were restricted until the 1960s , but the breed has since spread throughout the world , despite their low population . In 2010 , there were more than 185 @,@ 000 registered Andalusians worldwide . 
 Strongly built , and compact yet elegant , Andalusians have long , thick manes and tails . Their most common coat color is gray , although they can be found in many other colors . They are known for their intelligence , sensitivity and docility . A sub @-@ strain within the breed known as the Carthusian , is considered by breeders to be the purest strain of Andalusian , though there is no genetic evidence for this claim . The strain is still considered separate from the main breed however , and is preferred by breeders because buyers pay more for horses of Carthusian bloodlines . There are several competing registries keeping records of horses designated as Andalusian or PRE , but they differ on their definition of the Andalusian and PRE , the purity of various strains of the breed , and the legalities of stud book ownership . At least one lawsuit is in progress as of 2011 , to determine the ownership of the Spanish PRE stud book . 
 The Andalusian is closely related to the Lusitano of Portugal , and has been used to develop many other breeds , especially in Europe and the Americas . Breeds with Andalusian ancestry include many of the warmbloods in Europe as well as western hemisphere breeds such as the Azteca . Over its centuries of development , the Andalusian breed has been selected for athleticism and stamina . The horses were originally used for classical dressage , driving , bullfighting , and as stock horses . Modern Andalusians are used for many equestrian activities , including dressage , show jumping and driving . The breed is also used extensively in movies , especially historical pictures and fantasy epics . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Andalusians stallions and geldings average 15 @.@ 1 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 61 @.@ 5 inches , 156 cm ) at the withers and 512 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 129 lb ) in weight ; mares average 15 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 60 @.@ 5 inches , 154 cm ) and 412 kilograms ( 908 lb ) . The Spanish government has set the minimum height for registration in Spain at 15 @.@ 0 hands ( 60 inches , 152 cm ) for males and 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 59 inches , 150 cm ) for mares - this standard is followed by the Association of Purebred Spanish Horse Breeders of Spain ( Asociación Nacional de Criadores de Caballo de Pura Raza Española or ANCCE ) and the Andalusian Horse Association of Australasia . The Spanish legislation also requires that in order for animals to be approved as either " qualified " or " élite " breeding stock , stallions must stand at least 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 61 inches , 155 cm ) and mares at least 15 1 ⁄ 4 hands ( 60 @.@ 25 inches , 153 cm ) . 
 Andalusian horses are elegant and strongly built . Members of the breed have heads of medium length , with a straight or slightly convex profile . Ultra convex and concave profiles are discouraged in the breed , and are penalized in breed shows . <unk> are long and broad , running to well @-@ defined withers and a massive chest . They have a short back and broad , strong hindquarters with a well @-@ rounded croup . The breed tends to have clean legs , with no propensity for blemishes or injuries , and energetic gaits . The mane and tail are thick and long , but the legs do not have excess feathering . Andalusians tend to be docile , while remaining intelligent and sensitive . When treated with respect they are quick to learn , responsive , and cooperative . 
 There are two additional characteristics unique to the Carthusian strain , believed to trace back to the strain 's foundation stallion Esclavo . The first is warts under the tail , a trait which Esclavo passed to his offspring , and a trait which some breeders felt was necessary to prove that a horse was a member of the Esclavo bloodline . The second characteristic is the occasional presence of " horns " , which are frontal bosses , possibly inherited from Asian ancestors . The physical descriptions of the bosses vary , ranging from calcium @-@ like deposits at the temple to small horn @-@ like protuberances near or behind the ear . However , these " horns " are not considered proof of Esclavo descent , unlike the tail warts . 
 In the past , most coat colors were found , including spotted patterns . Today most Andalusians are gray or bay ; in the US , around 80 percent of all Andalusians are gray . Of the remaining horses , approximately 15 percent are bay and 5 percent are black , dun or palomino or chestnut . Other colors , such as buckskin , pearl , and cremello , are rare , but are recognized as allowed colors by registries for the breed . 
 In the early history of the breed , certain white markings and whorls were considered to be indicators of character and good or bad luck . Horses with white socks on their feet were considered to have good or bad luck , depending on the leg or legs marked . A horse with no white markings at all was considered to be ill @-@ tempered and vice @-@ ridden , while certain facial markings were considered representative of honesty , loyalty and endurance . Similarly , hair whorls in various places were considered to show good or bad luck , with the most unlucky being in places where the horse could not see them – for example the temples , cheek , shoulder or heart . Two whorls near the root of the tail were considered a sign of courage and good luck . 
 The movement of Andalusian horses is extended , elevated , cadenced and harmonious , with a balance of roundness and forward movement . Poor elevation , irregular tempo , and excessive winging ( sideways movement of the legs from the knee down ) are discouraged by breed registry standards . Andalusians are known for their agility and their ability to learn difficult moves quickly , such as advanced collection and turns on the haunches . A 2001 study compared the kinematic characteristics of Andalusian , Arabian and Anglo @-@ Arabian horses while moving at the trot . Andalusians were found to <unk> less ( the degree to which the hind foot lands ahead of the front hoof print ) but also exhibit greater flexing of both fore and hind joints , movement consistent with the more elevated way of going typically found in this breed . The authors of the study theorized that these characteristics of the breed 's trot may contribute to their success as a riding and dressage horse . 
 A 2008 study found that Andalusians experience <unk> ( reduced blood flow ) diseases of the small intestine at a rate significantly higher than other breeds ; and stallions had higher numbers of inguinal hernias , with risk for occurrence 30 times greater than other breeds . At the same time , they also showed a lower incidence of large intestinal obstruction . In the course of the study , Andalusians also showed the highest risk of laminitis as a medical complication related to the intestinal issues . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 The Andalusian horse is descended from the Iberian horses of Spain and Portugal , and derives its name from its place of origin , the Spanish region of Andalusia . Cave paintings show that horses have been present on the Iberian Peninsula as far back as 20 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 BCE . Although Portuguese historian Ruy d 'Andrade hypothesized that the ancient Sorraia breed was an ancestor of the Southern Iberian breeds , including the Andalusian , genetic studies using mitochondrial DNA show that the Sorraia is part of a genetic cluster that is largely separated from most Iberian breeds . 
 Throughout history , the Iberian breeds have been influenced by many different peoples and cultures who occupied Spain , including the Celts , the Carthaginians , the Romans , various Germanic tribes and the Moors . The Iberian horse was identified as a talented war horse as early as 450 BCE . Mitochondrial DNA studies of the modern Andalusian horse of the Iberian peninsula and Barb horse of North Africa present convincing evidence that both breeds crossed the Strait of Gibraltar and were used for breeding with each other , influencing one another 's bloodlines . Thus , the Andalusian may have been the first European " warmblood " , a mixture of heavy European and lighter Oriental horses . Some of the earliest written pedigrees in recorded European history were kept by Carthusian monks , beginning in the 13th century . Because they could read and write , and were thus able to maintain careful records , monastics were given the responsibility for horse breeding by certain members of the nobility , particularly in Spain . Andalusian stud farms for breeding were formed in the late 15th century in Carthusian monasteries in Jerez , Seville and <unk> . 
 The Carthusians bred powerful , weight @-@ bearing horses in Andalusia for the Crown of Castile , using the finest Spanish <unk> as foundation bloodstock . These horses were a blend of Jennet and warmblood breeding , taller and more powerfully built than the original Jennet . By the 15th century , the Andalusian had become a distinct breed , and was being used to influence the development of other breeds . They were also noted for their use as cavalry horses . Even though in the 16th and 17th centuries Spanish horses had not reached the final form of the modern Andalusian , by 1667 William Cavendish , the Duke of Newcastle , called the Spanish horse of Andalusia the " princes " of the horse world , and reported that they were " unnervingly intelligent " . The Iberian horse became known as the " royal horse of Europe " and was seen at many royal courts and riding academies , including those in Austria , Italy , France and Germany . By the 16th century , during the reigns of Charles V ( 1500 – 1558 ) and Phillip II ( 1556 – 1581 ) , Spanish horses were considered the finest in the world . Even in Spain , quality horses were owned mainly by the wealthy . During the 16th century , inflation and an increased demand for harness and cavalry horses drove the price of horses extremely high . The always expensive Andalusian became even more so , and it was often impossible to find a member of the breed to purchase at any price . 
 = = = Dissemination = = = 
 Spanish horses also were spread widely as a tool of diplomacy by the government of Spain , which granted both horses and export rights to favored citizens and to other royalty . As early as the 15th century , the Spanish horse was widely distributed throughout the Mediterranean , and was known in northern European countries , despite being less common and more expensive there . As time went on , kings from across Europe , including every French monarch from Francis I to Louis XVI , had equestrian portraits created showing themselves riding Spanish @-@ type horses . The kings of France , including Louis XIII and Louis XIV , especially preferred the Spanish horse ; the head groom to Henri IV , Salomon de la <unk> , said in 1600 , " Comparing the best horses , I give the Spanish horse first place for its perfection , because it is the most beautiful , noble , graceful and courageous " . War horses from Spain and Portugal began to be introduced to England in the 12th century , and importation continued through the 15th century . In the 16th century , Henry VIII received gifts of Spanish horses from Charles V , Ferdinand II of Aragon and the Duke of Savoy and others when he wed Katherine of Aragon . He also purchased additional war and riding horses through agents in Spain . By 1576 , Spanish horses made up one third of British royal studs at Malmesbury and Tutbury . The Spanish horse peaked in popularity in Great Britain during the 17th century , when horses were freely imported from Spain and exchanged as gifts between royal families . With the introduction of the Thoroughbred , interest in the Spanish horse faded after the mid @-@ 18th century , although they remained popular through the early 19th century . The Conquistadors of the 16th century rode Spanish horses , particularly animals from Andalusia , and the modern Andalusian descended from similar bloodstock . By 1500 , Spanish horses were established in studs on Santo Domingo , and Spanish horses made their way into the ancestry of many breeds founded in North and South America . Many Spanish explorers from the 16th century on brought Spanish horses with them for use as war horses and later as breeding stock . By 1642 , the Spanish horse had spread to <unk> , to the stables of Transylvanian prince George <unk> . 
 = = = 19th century to present = = = 
 Despite their ancient history , all living Andalusians trace to a small number of horses bred by religious orders in the 18th and 19th centuries . An influx of heavy horse blood beginning in the 16th century , resulted in the dilution of many of the bloodlines ; only those protected by selective breeding remained intact to become the modern Andalusian . During the 19th century , the Andalusian breed was threatened because many horses were stolen or requisitioned in wartime , including the War of the Oranges , the Peninsular War and the three Carlist Wars . Napoleon 's invading army also stole many horses . One herd of Andalusians was hidden from the invaders however , and subsequently used to renew the breed . In 1822 , breeders began to add Norman blood into Spanish bloodlines , as well as further infusions of Arabian blood . This was partially because increasing mechanization and changing needs within the military called for horses with more speed in cavalry charges as well as horses with more bulk for pulling gun carriages . In 1832 , an epidemic seriously affected Spain 's horse population , from which only one small herd survived in a stud at the monastery in <unk> . During the 19th and early 20th centuries , European breeders , especially the Germans , changed from an emphasis on Andalusian and Neapolitan horses ( an emphasis that had been in place since the decline of chivalry ) , to an emphasis on the breeding of Thoroughbreds and warmbloods , further depleting the stock of Andalusians . Despite this change in focus , Andalusian breeding slowly recovered , and in 1869 , the Seville Horse Fair ( originally begun by the Romans ) , played host to between ten and twelve thousand Spanish horses . In the early 20th century , Spanish horse breeding began to focus on other breeds , particularly draft breeds , Arabians , Thoroughbreds and crosses between these breeds , as well as crosses between these breeds and the Andalusian . The purebred Andalusian was not viewed favorably by breeders or the military , and their numbers decreased significantly . 
 Andalusians only began to be exported from Spain in 1962 . The first Andalusians were imported into Australia in 1971 , and in 1973 the Andalusian Horse Association of Australasia was formed for the registration of these Andalusians and their offspring . Strict quarantine guidelines prohibited the importation of new Andalusian blood to Australia for many years , but since 1999 , regulations have been relaxed and more than half a dozen new horses have been imported . <unk> in the United States also rely on imported stock , and all American Andalusians can be traced directly to the stud books in Portugal and Spain . There are around 8 @,@ 500 animals in the United States , where the International Andalusian and Lusitano Horse Association ( IALHA ) registers around 700 new purebred foals every year . These numbers indicate that the Andalusian is a relatively rare breed in the United States . In 2003 , there were 75 @,@ 389 horses registered in the stud book , and they constituted almost 66 percent of the horses in Spain . Breed numbers have been increasing during the 21st century . At the end of 2010 , a total of 185 @,@ 926 Pura Raza Española horses were recorded in the database of the Spanish Ministerio de Medio Ambiente , y Medio Rural y Marino . Of these , 28 @,@ 801 or about 15 % were in other countries of the world ; of those in Spain , 65 @,@ 371 or about 42 % were in Andalusia . 
 = = = Strains and sub @-@ types = = = 
 The Carthusian Andalusian or Cartujano is generally considered the purest Andalusian strain , and has one of the oldest recorded pedigree lines in the world . The pure sub @-@ type is rare , as only around 12 percent of the Andalusian horses registered between the founding of the stud book in the 19th century and 1998 were considered Carthusians . They made up only 3 @.@ 6 percent of the overall breeding stock , but 14 @.@ 2 percent of the stallions used for breeding . In the past , Carthusians were given preference in breeding , leading to a large proportion of the Andalusian population claiming ancestry from a small number of horses and possibly limiting the breed 's genetic variability . A 2005 study compared the genetic distance between Carthusian and non @-@ Carthusian horses . They calculated a Fixation index ( <unk> ) based on genealogical information and concluded that the distinction between the two is not supported by genetic evidence . However , there are slight physical differences ; Carthusians have more " oriental " or concave head shapes and are more often gray in color , while non @-@ Carthusians tend toward convex profiles and more often exhibit other coat colors such as bay . 
 The Carthusian line was established in the early 18th century when two Spanish brothers , Andrés and Diego Zamora , purchased a stallion named El Soldado and bred him to two mares . The mares were descended from mares purchased by the Spanish king and placed at Aranjuez , one of the oldest horse breeding farms in Spain . One of the offspring of El Soldado , a dark gray colt named Esclavo , became the foundation sire of the Carthusian line . One group of mares sired by Esclavo in about 1736 were given to a group of Carthusian monks to settle a debt . Other animals of these bloodlines were absorbed into the main Andalusian breed ; the stock given to the monks was bred into a special line , known as Zamoranos . Throughout the following centuries , the Zamoranos bloodlines were guarded by the Carthusian monks , to the point of defying royal orders to introduce outside blood from the Neapolitan horse and central European breeds . They did , however , introduce Arabian and Barb blood to improve the strain . The original stock of Carthusians was greatly depleted during the Peninsular Wars , and the strain might have become extinct if not for the efforts of the Zapata family . Today , the Carthusian strain is raised in state @-@ owned stud farms around Jerez de la Frontera , Badajoz and Cordoba , and also by several private families . Carthusian horses continue to be in demand in Spain , and buyers pay high prices for members of the strain . 
 = = = Influence on other breeds = = = 
 Spain 's worldwide military activities between the 14th and 17th centuries called for large numbers of horses , more than could be supplied by native Spanish mares . Spanish custom also called for mounted troops to ride stallions , never mares or geldings . Due to these factors , Spanish stallions were crossed with local mares in many countries , adding Spanish bloodlines wherever they went , especially to other European breeds . 
 Because of the influence of the later Habsburg families , who ruled in both Spain and other nations of Europe , the Andalusian was crossbred with horses of Central Europe and the Low Countries and thus was closely related to many breeds that developed , including the Neapolitan horse , Groningen , Lipizzaner and <unk> . Spanish horses have been used extensively in classical dressage in Germany since the 16th century . They thus influenced many German breeds , including the Hanoverian , Holstein , East Friesian and Oldenburg . Dutch breeds such as the Friesian and Gelderland also contain significant Spanish blood , as do Danish breeds such as the <unk> and Knabstrupper . 
 Andalusians were a significant influence on the creation of the Alter Real , a strain of the Lusitano , and the Azteca , a Mexican breed created by crossing the Andalusian with American Quarter Horse and Criollo bloodlines . The Spanish jennet ancestors of the Andalusian also developed the Colonial Spanish Horse in America , which became the foundation bloodstock for many North and South American breeds . The Andalusian has also been used to create breeds more recently , with breed associations for both the <unk> ( an Andalusian / Friesian cross ) and the Spanish @-@ Norman ( an Andalusian / Percheron cross ) being established in the 1990s . 
 = = Naming and registration = = 
 Until modern times , horse breeds throughout Europe were known primarily by the name of the region where they were bred . Thus the original term " Andalusian " simply described the horses of distinct quality that came from Andalusia in Spain . Similarly , the Lusitano , a Portuguese horse very similar to the Andalusian , takes its name from Lusitania , an ancient Roman name for Portugal . 
 The Andalusian horse has been known historically as the Iberian Saddle Horse , Iberian War Horse , Spanish Horse , Portuguese , Peninsular , Extremeño , <unk> , Zapata , Zamoranos , Castilian , and Jennet . The Portuguese name refers to what is now the Lusitano , while the Peninsular , Iberian Saddle Horse and Iberian War Horse names refer to horses from the Iberian Peninsula as a whole . The Extremeño name refers to Spanish horses from the Extremadura province of Spain and the Zapata or Zapatero name to horses that come from the Zapata family stud . The Villano name has occasionally been applied to modern Andalusians , but originally referred to heavy , crossbred horses from the mountains north of <unk> . The Carthusian horse , also known as the Carthusian @-@ Andalusian and the Cartujano , is a sub @-@ type of the Andalusian , rather than a distinct breed in itself . A common nickname for the Andalusian is the " Horse of Kings " . Some sources state that the Andalusian and the Lusitano are genetically the same , differing only in the country of origin of individual horses . 
 In many areas today , the breeding , showing , and registration of the Andalusian and Lusitano are controlled by the same registries . One example of this is the International Andalusian and Lusitano Horse Association ( IALHA ) , claimed to have the largest membership of any Andalusian registering organization . Other organizations , such as The Association of Purebred Spanish Horse Breeders of Spain ( Asociación Nacional de Criadores de Caballo de Pura Raza Española or ANCCE ) , use the term " Pura Raza Española " or PRE to describe the true Spanish horse , and claim sole authority to officially register and issue documentation for PRE Horses , both in Spain and anywhere else in the world . In most of the world the terms " Andalusian " and " PRE " are considered one and the same breed , but the public position of the ANCCE is that terms such as " Andalusian " and " Iberian horse " refer only to crossbreds , which the ANCCE considers to be horses that lack quality and purity , without official documentation or registration from official Spanish Stud Book . 
 In Australasia , the Australasia Andalusian Association registers Andalusians ( which the registry considers an interchangeable term for PRE ) , Australian Andalusians , and partbred Andalusians . They share responsibility for the Purebred Iberian Horse ( an Andalusian / Lusitano cross ) with the Lusitano Association of Australasia . In the Australian registry , there are various levels of crossbred horses . A first cross Andalusian is a crossbreed that is 50 percent Andalusian , while a second cross Andalusian is the result of crossing a purebred Andalusian with a first cross – resulting in a horse of 75 percent Andalusian blood . A third cross , also known by the registry as an Australian Andalusian , is when a second cross individual is mated with a foundation Andalusian mare . This sequence is known as a " breeding up " program by the registry . 
 = = = Pure Spanish Horse = = = 
 The name Pura Raza Española ( PRE ) , translated as " Pure Spanish Horse , " is the term used by the ANCCE , a private organization , and the Ministry of Agriculture of Spain . The ANCCE uses neither the term " Andalusian " nor " Iberian horse " , and only registers horses that have certain recognized bloodlines . In addition , all breeding stock must undergo an evaluation process . The ANCCE was founded in 1972 . Spain 's Ministry of Agriculture recognizes the ANCCE as the representing entity for PRE breeders and owners across the globe , as well as the administrator of the breed stud book . ANCCE functions as the international parent association for all breeders worldwide who record their horses as PRE . For example , the United States PRE association is affiliated with ANCCE , follows ANCCE rules , and has a wholly separate governance system from the IALHA . 
 A second group , the Foundation for the Pure Spanish Horse or PRE Mundial , has begun another PRE registry as an alternative to the ANCCE . This new registry claims that all of their registered horses trace back to the original stud book maintained by the Cria Caballar , which was a branch of the Spanish Ministry of Defense , for 100 years . Thus , the PRE Mundial registry asserts that their registry is the most authentic , purest PRE registry functioning today . 
 As of August 2011 , there is a lawsuit in progress to determine the legal holder of the PRE stud book . The Unión de Criadores de Caballos <unk> ( <unk> or Union of Spanish Horse Breeders ) has brought a case to the highest European Union courts in Brussels , charging that the Ministry of Spain 's transfer of the original PRE Libro de Origen ( the official stud book ) from the Cria Caballar to ANCCE was illegal . In early 2009 , the courts decided on behalf of <unk> , explaining that the Cria Caballar formed the Libro de Origin . Because it was formed by a government entity , it is against European Union law for the stud book to be transferred to a private entity , a law that was broken by the transfer of the book to ANCCE , which is a non @-@ governmental organization . The court found that by giving ANCCE sole control of the stud book , Spain 's Ministry of Defense was acting in a discriminatory manner . The court held that Spain must give permission to maintain a breed stud book ( called a Libro <unk> ) to any international association or Spanish national association which requests it . Based on the Brussels court decision , an application has been made by the Foundation for the Pure Spanish Horse to maintain the United States stud book for the PRE . As of March 2011 , Spain has not revoked ANCCE 's right to be the sole holder of the PRE stud book , and has instead reaffirmed the organization 's status . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Andalusian breed has over the centuries been consistently selected for athleticism . In the 17th century , referring to multi @-@ kilometer races , Cavendish said , " They were so much faster than all other horses known at that time that none was ever seen to come close to them , even in the many remarkable races that were run . " In 1831 , horses at five years old were expected to be able to gallop , without changing pace , four or five leagues , about 12 to 15 miles ( 19 to 24 km ) . By 1925 , the Portuguese military expected horses to " cover 40 km over uneven terrain at a minimum speed of 10 km / h , and to gallop a flat course of 8 km at a <unk> speed of 800 metres per minute carrying a weight of at least 70 kg " , and the Spanish military had similar standards . 
 From the very beginning of their history , Andalusians have been used for both riding and driving . Among the first horses used for classical dressage , they are still making a mark in international competition in dressage today . At the 2002 World Equestrian Games , two Andalusians were on the bronze @-@ medal winning Spanish dressage team , a team that went on to take the silver medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics . Today , the breed is increasingly being selectively bred for increased aptitude in classical dressage . Historically , however , they were also used as stock horses , especially suited to working with Iberian bulls , known for their aggressive temperaments . They were , and still are , known for their use in mounted bull fighting . Mares were traditionally used for la <unk> , the Spanish process of threshing grain practiced until the 1960s . Mares , some pregnant or with foals at their side , spent full days trotting over the grain . As well as being a traditional farming practice , it also served as a test of endurance , hardiness and willingness for the maternal Andalusian lines . 
 Andalusians today are used for show jumping , western pleasure and many other classes at horse shows . The current Traveler , the mascot of the University of Southern California , is an Andalusian . The dramatic appearance of the Andalusian horse , with its arched neck , muscular build and energetic gaits , has made it a popular breed to use in film , particularly in historical and fantasy epics . Andalusians have been present in films ranging from Gladiator to Interview with a Vampire , and Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life to Braveheart . The horses have also been seen in such fantasy epics as The Lord of the Rings film trilogy , King Arthur , and The Chronicles of Narnia : The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe . In 2006 , a rearing Andalusian stallion , ridden by Spanish conquistador Don Juan de Oñate , was recreated as the largest bronze equine in the world . Measuring 36 feet ( 11 m ) high , the statue currently stands in El Paso , Texas . 
 = Eyes of the Insane = 
 " Eyes of the Insane " is a 2006 single by the American thrash metal band Slayer , taken from their 2006 album Christ Illusion . The lyrics explore an American soldier 's mental anguish following his return home from the second Gulf War , and are based on an article entitled " Casualty of War " in Texas Monthly magazine . " Eyes of the Insane " was written by vocalist Tom Araya during pre @-@ production for the album . The song was generally well received by critics , and also peaked # 15 on the Danish singles charts . 
 The accompanying music video by the Iranian director Tony Petrossian was recorded in the Los Angeles area in August 2006 . The film is presented as a close @-@ up of the soldier 's pupil and iris , which reflect disconcerting images of war @-@ themed horrors , flashbacks of his home , wife and children , and ultimately images of his death . " Eyes of the Insane " was used on the soundtrack to Saw III , and won an award for the Best Metal Performance at the 49th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Origins = = 
 While walking through an airport , vocalist Tom Araya picked up a March 2006 issue of Texas Monthly with a soldier 's helmet on the front cover . Seeing the article " Casualty of War " , he was interested enough to purchase a copy . The issue explored the involvement of military personnel from Texas in the Iraq War , and included a list of Texan soldiers who had died in the conflict . The feature was accompanied by photographs of some of the dead , while a further article dealt with the anguish of surviving soldiers on their return home . Araya later said that the article " blew his mind " . 
 Araya read the article during his flight back to Los Angeles . Pre @-@ production for Slayer 's ninth studio album Christ Illusion had just begun , and the band was about to undertake a three @-@ day rehearsal with producer Josh Abraham . Araya left his baggage at the hotel to attend the rehearsals , then returned to re @-@ read the article . Finding it to be " very profound " , he woke up in the middle of the night and wrote down the lyrics . He said that his treatment of the topic is " sincere " , and that he believes it to be " one that the military doesn 't want you to know . They sweep it under the rug , but it 's a story that needs to be told . " The band 's guitarist , Kerry King , has said that " these new songs [ from the Christ Illusion album ] aren 't political at all : ' Jihad ' , ' Eyes of the Insane ' — it 's what 's spewing out at us from the TV . " 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Eyes of the Insane " is 3 minutes 23 seconds long . A slow drum pattern played by Dave Lombardo opens the track , over which Hanneman and King play angular and descending scales on guitar . These guitar riffs evolve from verse to verse , and have been described by Allmusic as " intensely harrowing " . The song gradually builds over the course of the verses , refrain and bridge , before resolving with a " towering " chorus . 
 Some reviewers paid particular attention to Araya 's vocal contribution . Zach <unk> of Prefix magazine said the song " allows Araya to show his vocal range , deepening to build up tension and creating a wonderfully chilling 3 and a half minutes " , while Ian Robinson of musicOMH.com felt the track " is a distinct but welcome change of pace , Dave Lombardo 's machine @-@ gun rhythms forming the backbone for Tom Araya 's impressively intact scream . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 By the time Slayer decided that a music video should be filmed , touring commitments prevented their involvement in the actual shoot . Instead , others were contacted to produce the film . Director Tony Petrossian presented Slayer with the first draft , and the group made a few suggestions for improvement . Never having met him , King recalled Petrossian " had a treatment , and we all dug the treatment so we just turned him loose . " " Eyes of the Insane " ' s war @-@ themed music video was filmed on August 13 , 2006 , in the Los Angeles area . Casting company Tolley Casparis Casting sought a male Caucasian between the ages of 18 and 26 to appear in the clip , with auditions held on August 10 , 2006 . The official project notes deemed that " This guy must be a serious actor , capable of emoting everything through his eyes . He was innocent a few months ago , now he is scarred by seeing so much fighting . Strong eyebrows that do not overpower the face . Scars or large veins actually a plus . " 
 The video was shot as a " first @-@ person narrative about the horrors leading up to the final moments of a soldier at war " , and was described as " a single , long and tight close @-@ up of the soldier 's eye with images clearly reflected within his pupil and iris and perfectly choreographed with the rhythm of the music . Reflected are disconcerting images of para trooping into enemy territory , gunfire , helicopters and tanks , explosions , poignant flashbacks of his wife and child and home , and the images of his death . " Two endings were shot ; one in which the soldier is killed as the result of sustained combat wounds , and another in which the soldier commits suicide by hanging - the latter one was used . Jeff Hanneman confirmed that the band " loved " the eye concept , and personally felt that the video was " pretty amazing " when he first viewed it . King admitted that the film is " pretty cool — I thought it was neat idea — very different , especially for us , because we usually do performance based videos . " The video was exclusively posted on <unk> late in October 2006 . In April 2007 , it was announced that the video had earned a Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards nomination for Best Video with the winner to be revealed on June 11 , 2007 , at the Koko Club in London , England . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critics were generally positive when reviewing " Eyes of the Insane " . Stylus magazine 's Cosmo Lee described the track as " a dark , <unk> exploration of a soldier 's psyche " , and remarked that " it 's memorable and would be a good breather between the usual <unk> " . Peter Atkinson of KNAC.com felt that " ' Eyes of the Insane ' offers a post @-@ traumatic sequel to ' Mandatory Suicide ' , again with a soundtrack that recalls the original , but boasting a couple truly mammoth hooks that do shake things up . " Don Kaye of Blabbermouth made a comparison to a different Slayer track than Atkinson , and commented that " ' Eyes of the Insane ' and ' Catatonic ' both have that slow , grinding feeling of doom that the band has done so well before on classics like ' Dead Skin Mask ' . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 The song was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 49th annual Grammy Awards . When asked for his thoughts on the nomination , King revealed that he did not " even care " , and noted that Slayer fans " don 't give a shit and that 's the most important thing to me " . The interviewer expressed his surprise at the nomination given Slayer 's " inflammatory " lyrics , to which King replied , " That would be the coolest thing , you know ? To win with the shit we write about . " The ceremony was held on February 11 , 2007 , at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , with Slayer competing against Mastodon , Lamb of God , Ministry and Stone Sour . Slayer won the Best Metal Performance Grammy award , although the band was unable to attend because of a conflicting North American headlining tour . Araya commented about the win from a hotel room in Columbus , Ohio : " Jeff [ Hanneman ] and I put a lot into ' Eyes of the Insane ' so we 're thrilled that the Grammy voters took the time to listen to it , and then vote for it . We 're out here on the road and we 're all really , really happy . " King disagreed , deeming the song " one of the poorest representations of us [ Slayer ] on the record [ Christ Illusion ] " . He further said that , if given the decision , he would have chosen the controversial track " Jihad " to represent Slayer from their ninth album Christ Illusion . Critical of the Recording Academy , King said , " <unk> , I think people on the academy who vote pick the household name ... And that 's what we are . " 
 = = Other media = = 
 The soundtrack to the 2006 horror film Saw III included " Eyes of the Insane " , and was released on October 24 , 2006 , by <unk> Enterprises . The track was one of six songs performed by Slayer during their first US network television appearance on ABC @-@ TV 's Jimmy Kimmel Live ! ( January 19 , 2007 ) , and was the only song broadcast in its entirety . However , King dislikes playing " Eyes of the Insane " live , commenting , " It 's just dull to play , good song just dull to play on guitar . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Wicklow Way = 
 The Wicklow Way ( Irish : Slí Cualann <unk> , meaning " New Cuala Way " ) is a 131 @-@ kilometre ( 81 @-@ mile ) long @-@ distance trail that crosses the Wicklow Mountains in Ireland . It runs from Marlay Park in the southern suburbs of Dublin through County Wicklow and ends in the village of Clonegal in County Carlow . It is designated as a National Waymarked Trail by the Irish Sports Council and is waymarked by posts with a yellow " walking man " symbol and a directional arrow . Typically completed in 5 – 7 days , it is one of the busiest of Ireland 's National Waymarked Trails , with up to 24 @,@ 000 people a year walking the most popular sections . The Way is also used regularly by a number of mountain running competitions . 
 The trail follows forest tracks , mountain paths , <unk> and quiet country roads . Mountains , upland lakes and steep @-@ sided glacial valleys make up the terrain of the initial northern sections of the Way before giving way to gentler rolling foothills in the latter southern sections . Much of the route follows the contact point between the igneous granite of the western side of Wicklow and the metamorphic schists and slates of the eastern side . The principal habitat of the upland sections is a mixture of broadleaf and coniferous woodland , heath and blanket bog while in the lowland sections the hedgerows marking the boundaries between fields support a variety of wildlife . The Way also passes the Monastic City at Glendalough , founded in the 6th century by Saint Kevin . 
 The Wicklow Way was originally proposed by J. B. Malone in a series of newspaper articles in 1966 . In 1977 , Malone was appointed to the Long Distance Walking Routes Committee of <unk> , the National Sports Council and set about making the concept a reality . Malone ’ s original proposal for a circular route around Wicklow was dropped in favour of the linear route that exists today because the Government wanted the Wicklow Way to form part of a network of walking routes around the country . The first section opened in 1980 and the trail was fully completed in 1982 . It became the first of many National Waymarked Trails to be developed in Ireland : there are now over forty such trails , covering a distance of over 4 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 500 miles ) . The Way forms part of European walking route E8 which stretches from the Atlantic coast of County Cork to Istanbul in Turkey . A memorial to J. B. Malone , who died in 1989 , was erected on the Wicklow Way , near Lough Tay , in honour of his contribution . 
 The provision of and access to the routes through the countryside used by the Wicklow Way is dependent on agreement with local authorities and landowners . Accordingly the route has been criticised for excessive use of routes through forestry plantations and roads . Proposals to address these issues were put forward in a review of the National Waymarked Trails published in 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept of a long @-@ distance trail through County Wicklow was first published by J. B. Malone ( 1914 – 1989 ) in a series of newspaper articles in 1966 . Malone had a regular column on walking in Wicklow in the Evening Herald newspaper and had published two books – The Open Road ( 1950 ) and Walking in Wicklow ( 1964 ) – on the subject as well as contributing to the RTÉ television series Mountain and Meadow ( 1962 ) . He proposed a circular route , dubbed " The Twelve Days of Wicklow " , which he considered to be " a journey comparable to that along the celebrated " Pennine Way " but I would say more varied than its north British counterpart " . The route consisted of twelve stages , beginning at Bohernabreena , near Tallaght , Dublin 24 and ending at <unk> , County Dublin as follows : Bohernabreena to <unk> ( near <unk> ) , via <unk> ; <unk> to <unk> ( near Donard ) , via Hollywood ; <unk> to Aghavannagh , via Lugnaquilla summit ; a rest day at Aghavannagh ; Aghavannagh to Tinahely ; a circular day route beginning and ending in Tinahely , via Shillelagh ; Tinahely to Avoca ; Avoca to Glenmalure , via <unk> ; Glenmalure to Glendalough ; a rest day at Glendalough ; Glendalough to Knockree ; and Knockree to <unk> . 
 In 1977 Malone was appointed , by John Bruton , T. D. , then Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Education , to a committee to develop rural pathways in Ireland . This evolved into the Long Distance Walking Routes Committee ( LDWRC ) of <unk> , the National Sports Council , where Malone , acting as Field Officer , set about developing a scheme for a " Wicklow Way " along the lines of what he had proposed twelve years earlier . The Government 's decision to develop a series of walking routes was prompted in response to the development of the Ulster Way in Northern Ireland . Malone 's original concept of a circular route returning to Dublin via West Wicklow was dropped in favour of the linear path between Marlay Park and Clonegal that exists today , mainly because the Government wanted the Wicklow Way to form part of national network of trails to cover Ireland . Issues regarding access were another reason . Nevertheless , the route remains substantially as planned in 1966 . In developing the route , the LDWRC made use of many existing paths , tracks and forest roads but , having no compulsory powers to include any of these , the provision of and access to such routes was , and continues to be , achieved by agreement with local authorities and landowners . 
 The first section of the Way – from Marlay Park to Luggala – was opened by Jim Tunney , T. D. , Minister of State for Education on 15 August 1980 . The second section – from Luggala to Moyne – was opened by Michael Keating , T. D. , Minister of State for Education on 27 September 1981 . The final stretch as far as Clonegal was completed in 1982 . The Irish name of the Wicklow Way – Slí Cualann <unk> – is not a literal translation but means " New Cuala Way " , a reference to the Slí Cualann , one of five ancient routes that radiated from the Hill of Tara that ran through the land of Cuala ( modern @-@ day Wicklow ) . 
 The route of the Wicklow Way has been altered on a number of occasions since opening in 1980 , generally as a result of problems with erosion or difficulties with rights of way . For instance , concerns about erosion led to the Way being diverted away from Fairy Castle , the summit of Two Rock mountain . Similarly , the Way was also diverted away from the summit of <unk> , which at 657 metres ( 2 @,@ 156 feet ) was the highest point on the Way before the trail was rerouted . In 1999 , the Way was diverted away from the village of Laragh on foot of an objection by a local landowner , to the chagrin of businesses in the village dependent on the custom of walking tourists . A number of information boards and stone landmarks were erected in 2006 to mark the 25th anniversary of the opening of the Way . The state @-@ owned forestry company Coillte has in recent years worked with a number of tourism and voluntary bodies to upgrade sections of the Way that run through its lands . Today , the Wicklow Way is managed by the Wicklow Outdoor Recreation Committee . 
 The Wicklow Way was the first waymarked way to be opened in Ireland . The LDWRC ( now the National Trails Advisory Committee of the Irish Sports Council ) went on to develop many more long distance walking routes , the intention at the time being to develop a walking route around Ireland . There are now more than forty National Waymarked Trails , comprising over 4 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 500 miles ) of trails in Ireland . 
 = = Usage and criticism = = 
 On account of being the first to be developed in Ireland and also on account of its proximity to Dublin , the Wicklow Way is one of the most popular of Ireland 's National Waymarked Trails . It has , however , been subject to some criticisms . Since access to lands along the Way is on a permissive basis , much of the walk ( 41 km ( 25 mi ) ) is on tarred country roads , is highly dependent on access provided by the state , ( 57 km ( 35 mi ) is on land owned by Coillte and 16 km ( 10 mi ) is on land owned by the Wicklow Mountains National Park ) and covers a relatively small amount of private land ( 13 km ( 8 mi ) ) . Most of the road walking is confined to the southernmost section of the Way , between Tinahely and Clonegal , where some 63 % of the route is on roads . Research by the Wicklow Uplands Council showed that while up to 24 @,@ 000 people a year walk along the busiest sections , this number falls to under 2 @,@ 500 a year on the stretches south of Glenmalure . 
 The extensive use of forest roads through conifer plantations has been another criticism : the authors of the Lonely Planet guidebook , Walking in Ireland , found , " The Way 's one shortcoming is the character of the walking [ … ] you 'll become all too familiar with forest tracks and roads through conifer plantations [ … ] where they 're surrounded by tall , dense forest they 're not particularly interesting " . Similarly , Paul Gosling , who walked the Way for The Independent , found that , " While the long distance path is , on occasion , very attractive , it is not so much hazardous as unadventurous . [ … ] Over the next four and a half days , we lost our enthusiasm for conifers [ … ] The views were restricted and there was little sign of wildlife " . In The Irish Times John G. O 'Dwyer described them as " gloomy trails through invading armies of monoculture [ … ] as memorable as a motorway median " . 
 A review of the National Waymarked Trails in Ireland by the National Trails Office in 2010 acknowledged these shortcomings and recommended that the Wicklow Way be selected as one of fourteen trails to be upgraded to a National Long Distance Trail . This is a proposed new standard of trail in Ireland , intended to meet international standards for outstanding trails . It would require sections on unsuitable roads to comprise less than 10 % of the total trail and for appropriate support services – accommodation , meals , transport , luggage transfer etc . – to be available . The review also recommended the development of shorter looped walks off the Wicklow Way and improving parking facilities . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Wicklow Way is waymarked in both directions and can be started at Marlay Park or Clonegal . The trail is marked with square black posts with an image , in yellow , of a walking man and a directional arrow . This image , copied from the symbol used for waymarking the Ulster Way , has become the traditional waymarking symbol for all of the National Waymarked Trails in Ireland . Brown <unk> are used on sections that follow roads . The Way is typically completed in five to seven days . 
 = = = Marlay Park to Knockree = = = 
 If travelling in a North @-@ South direction , the Wicklow Way begins in Marlay Park , a historic demesne on the outskirts of Dublin 's suburbs laid out in the late 18th century by the La Touches , a family of Huguenot merchants and bankers , and later developed as a public park . The trailhead comprises a map board , beside which is a low wall with a stone stile through which walkers pass in order to make their first step on the trail . The Way traverses the park , following a wooded <unk> along the Little Dargle River , before emerging on the southern side of the park onto College Road . Passing under the M50 motorway , it ascends Kilmashogue Lane and enters the forest recreation area on Kilmashogue mountain . This is the first of many forest plantations , owned by Coillte , that the Wicklow Way passes through . The tree species in this area comprise Sitka spruce , Scots pine and beech . Much of this initial section of the Way is underlain by granite . The trail circles the mountain , emerging onto open moorland near Fairy Castle . This upland heath and bog habitat is dominated by heather , purple moor grass and bog cotton and supports many bird species , including red grouse , meadow pipit and skylark . The Way crosses a saddle between Two Rock mountain and Kilmashogue before descending from a broad ridge between Two Rock and <unk> Mountain into the valley of Glencullen where it follows the <unk> road to the hamlet of <unk> . The road is flanked by hedgerow @-@ bordered farmland . Ascending from <unk> , the trail crests the shoulder of Prince William ’ s Seat , at which point the Way leaves County Dublin and enters County Wicklow . The habitat here alternates between blanket bog and upland heath . The trail descends to the floor of the Glencree valley via <unk> Wood where it then enters <unk> Wood and crosses the shoulder of Knockree Hill . 
 = = = Knockree to Oldbridge = = = 
 From Knockree on to Clonegal , much of the Way follows the contact point between the granite of the western part of the Wicklow Mountains and the schists and slates of the east . The trail follows the Glencree River through <unk> Wood , a semi @-@ natural oak and hazel woodland and a habitat for jays . Crossing the river at a footbridge , the trail then passes into Crone Woods and ascends to Ride Rock , which overlooks Powerscourt <unk> and the Powerscourt Waterfall , the tallest in Ireland at 121 metres ( 397 feet ) . Deer – hybrids of imported Japanese Sika and native Red deer – are common in the forests and mountains along the Wicklow Way and all deer in the Wicklow Mountains originated with the Powerscourt herd . The next valley to be crossed is <unk> which , although uninhabited today , before the Great Famine of the 1840s was home to a small population of <unk> and faint traces of their farms can still be seen in the wintertime when the bracken is low . Crossing the River Dargle , the trail ascends the eastern shoulder of <unk> mountain . Here , the heathland gives way to wetter blanket bog . <unk> shares a number of plant and animal species with heathland but is also a habitat for species of bog cotton as well as bog asphodel , sedges ( which contribute to the formation of peat ) and bog moss . The wet <unk> is also a habitat for frogs , <unk> and diving beetles . Near the summit of <unk> , the Way joins a wooden <unk> or bog bridge , constructed to protect the bog from erosion , which crosses White Hill , the highest point on the Way at 630 metres ( 2 @,@ 067 feet ) . The trail descends White Hill towards Luggala along a ridge , known as the Barr , where a memorial stone to J. B. Malone , carved by sculptor Billy Gannon and erected in 1990 , may be found overlooking Lough Tay . From Luggala , the trail passes through a coniferous plantation of spruce and pine on the eastern flanks of <unk> and <unk> Hills to reach Oldbridge , which crosses the River <unk> near Lough Dan . 
 = = = Oldbridge to Glendalough = = = 
 Leaving Oldbridge , the Way follows the road for approximately 4 kilometres ( 2 miles ) before turning onto a boreen . To the left of the boreen is Wart Stone Field , so called on account of a <unk> stone that lies in the field , water from which is said to cure warts . The boreen ends at <unk> Gap , reputed to be a place where locals left food and supplies for Michael Dwyer and his followers when they went on the run after the 1798 Rebellion . The Way enters <unk> forest , a <unk> spruce plantation , where it passes an Adirondack shelter , constructed by Mountain Meitheal , a volunteer group dedicated to trail preservation that has upgraded various sections of the Wicklow Way over the years . The trail climbs Paddock Hill before descending into a plantation of larch trees . The forest floor here is a habitat for <unk> , heath bedstraw and fly agaric toadstools . The trail crosses the Military Road , near Laragh , and then a wooden footbridge across the <unk> River . A dense spread of granite boulders litters the riverbed , glacial erratics deposited by melting glaciers at the end of the last ice age . This stretch of the trail follows an old mass path through a woodland of many native Irish tree species , including oak , rowan , silver birch and willow , carpeted with a forest floor of bilberry , bluebell and hard fern . The Way continues along forest tracks over the shoulder of <unk> Mountain . At the highest point there is a vista over the Vale of Glendalough with the two lakes nestled in the shelter of <unk> and <unk> Mountains . Exiting the forest , the Way reaches the <unk> road and the Glendalough visitor centre . Crossing the <unk> River , it passes the remains of the Monastic City , founded in the 6th century by Saint Kevin . 
 = = = Glendalough to Iron Bridge = = = 
 Most of this stretch of the trail is on forest roads . From the Monastic City at Glendalough , the Way follows the Green Road towards the Upper Lake . It passes through an area of native woodland made up of oak , holly , birch , and rowan . Ascending from the Upper Lake , the trail reaches <unk> Waterfall which , over millennia , has cut a narrow gorge through the slate rock and borne millions of tonnes of rock , sand and mud into Glendalough , dividing what was originally one lake into the two seen today . The trail continues its ascent through forest before emerging onto the saddle between <unk> and <unk> mountains at <unk> . The <unk> route between Glendalough and Glenmalure dates back to ancient times and there is a local tradition that Saint Kevin travelled this way to celebrate Mass in Glenmalure . The view ahead looks across the Glenmalure valley at <unk> Rock Glen and Lugnaquilla , Wicklow 's highest mountain at 925 metres ( 3 @,@ 035 feet ) . The Way then begins a long descent into Glenmalure , the longest glacial valley in Ireland and Great Britain . Along the way the trail passes another Adirondack shelter , constructed in 2006 by Mountain Meitheal . Reaching the floor of the valley , the Way joins the Military Road to reach <unk> Crossroads . Crossing the River <unk> , the route passes the remains of an old military barracks , built around 1800 , and enters <unk> Wood . At the forest entrance is a granite pillar marking the official halfway point of the Wicklow Way . The trail follows a forest road along the flanks of Slieve Maan before briefly re @-@ joining the Military Road and then following a forest road around <unk> Mountain before reaching the road at Iron Bridge where the Way crosses the Ow River . Another Adirondack shelter , again constructed by Mountain Meitheal volunteers with assistance from the <unk> <unk> Club , can be found at <unk> , on the slopes of <unk> Mountain . 
 = = = Iron Bridge to Derry River = = = 
 After Iron Bridge , the character of the Way changes with the steeper hills of the earlier sections giving way to a gentler gradient that meanders between low hills . These latter sections also contain a great deal of road walking as the Way crosses farmland via minor roads and <unk> . 
 Hedgerows of hawthorn and blackthorn , which form the boundaries between the fields , are the principal habitat in these cultivated areas . They support many species of wild flowers , insects and birds , including dog rose , purple foxglove and wild violet as well as wrens , blackbirds and song thrushes . 
 The Way ascends through a gap between <unk> and <unk> Hills , yielding views stretching from Lugnaquilla to <unk> Mountain and beyond to Eagle Hill and the <unk> Plateau . The hills ahead mark the edge of the granite backbone of the Wicklow Mountains ; in the distance they gradually merge with the Blackstairs Mountains , which can be seen on the skyline . The trail follows the road passing close to the village of Moyne before joining a boreen . Along this boreen are the remains of a holy well dedicated to Saint Colmcille . The trail contours around <unk> Hill and then continues along the eastern slopes of <unk> Hill , passing the remains of a <unk> , approximately 15 metres ( 49 feet ) in diameter . Further along is a memorial to a Dr James McNamara who was killed in a shooting accident in 1916 . Passing through a series of gates along the way , the trail follows <unk> Lane , an old droving path with extensive views of south Wicklow . The lane emerges onto the road , crossing a bridge over the River Derry to reach the <unk> road close to Tinahely . 
 = = = Derry River to Clonegal = = = 
 The trail follows an ancient cattle droving path around <unk> Hill before joining a series of country roads . 63 % of this final stretch is on roads . These pass through the village of <unk> whose neo @-@ Gothic church and cottages are built from local granite . At <unk> Crossroads , the Way passes Tallon 's pub , better known as the " Dying Cow " from a story that , when visited by police late one night , the landlady argued that she wasn 't serving drink after hours but providing refreshments to neighbours who helped her with a dying cow . Circling <unk> Hill , which is topped with a windfarm , and passing near the village of <unk> , the Way crosses the <unk> road near Shillelagh . The trail enters forestry at <unk> before joining an old drovers ' road , once used to herd sheep to market in Shillelagh . The Blackstairs Mountains , whose main peak , Mount Leinster , is distinguished by the television mast on its summit , begin to dominate the horizon . The trail meanders along forestry tracks around <unk> and <unk> Hills . <unk> Hill is littered with hornblende @-@ rich schist , a legacy of a chain of long @-@ extinct volcanic islands that existed 450 – 500 million years ago when this part of Ireland lay under the primeval Iapetus Ocean . Joining the road for the final stretch into Clonegal , the Way leaves County Wicklow and enters County Carlow at Wicklow Bridge , about 3 kilometres ( 2 miles ) from the end . The Wicklow Way ends in the village green of Clonegal where a stone bench and a map board , displaying the entire route from Marlay Park , may be found . 
 = = Intersecting and connecting paths = = 
 The Wicklow Way forms part of European walking route E8 which runs from <unk> Island in County Cork to Istanbul in Turkey . The Irish section incorporates the Wicklow Way , the South Leinster Way , the East Munster Way , the Blackwater Way and parts of the Kerry Way and the Beara Way . There is an unmarked link route from Dublin Port ( where the E8 connects to Liverpool by ferry ) which follows the River Dodder to Rathfarnham and on to the Wicklow Way trailhead at Marlay Park via Saint Enda 's Park . Similarly , an unmarked road walk connects Clonegal with the trailhead of the South Leinster Way in <unk> , County Carlow . 
 The Wicklow Way also shares part of its route with the Dublin Mountains Way along a section of the ridge between Two Rock and <unk> . The Saint Kevin 's Way Pilgrim Path starts at either Hollywood or <unk> , County Wicklow and ends at Glendalough where it connects with the Wicklow Way . 
 Sections of the Wicklow Way are also used by several National <unk> Walks : the <unk> Mountain Loop and the <unk> , Kyle , and Mangan 's Loops near Tinahely . 
 = = Sporting events = = 
 A number of mountain running events are held along the route of the Way . The Wicklow Way Relay is a 127 @-@ kilometre ( 79 @-@ mile ) event run between Kilmashogue and Shillelagh for teams of 2 to 8 runners . The Wicklow Way Ultra is a 51 @-@ kilometre ( 32 @-@ mile ) individual event run between Glencullen and <unk> Woods . The record for running the entire distance of the Wicklow Way from Marlay Park to Clonegal is held by Eoin Keith who completed the route in a time of <unk> : 07 on 25 May 2013 . 
 = = Public transport = = 
 The trailhead at Marlay Park is served by a number of Dublin Bus routes . There is no public transport available to or from the trailhead in Clonegal , with the closest bus routes serving the nearby villages of <unk> and <unk> , County Carlow . Some places on or near the route are also served by bus . The St. Kevins ( sic ) Bus Service stops at Roundwood , Laragh and Glendalough . The Wicklow Way Bus provides services to Laragh , Glendalough , Glenmalure , Iron Bridge and Tinahely . 
 = Robert Bathurst = 
 Robert Guy Bathurst ( born 22 February 1957 ) is an English actor . Bathurst was born in the Gold Coast in 1957 , where his father was working as a management consultant . His family moved to Dublin , Ireland , in 1959 and Bathurst was enrolled at an Anglican boarding school . In 1966 , the family moved to England , and Bathurst transferred to Worth School in Sussex , where he took up amateur dramatics . At the age of 18 , he read law at the University of Cambridge and joined the Cambridge Footlights group . After graduating , he took up acting full @-@ time . 
 He made his professional stage debut in 1983 , playing Tim Allgood in Michael Frayn 's Noises Off , which ran for a year at the Savoy Theatre . To broaden his knowledge of working on stage , he joined the National Theatre . He supplemented his stage roles in the 1980s with television roles , appearing in comedies such as the aborted pilot episode of Blackadder , Chelmsford 123 , The Lenny Henry Show , and the first episode of Red Dwarf . In 1991 , he won his first major television role playing Mark Taylor in Steven Moffat 's semi @-@ autobiographical BBC sitcom Joking Apart . Although only thirteen episodes were made between 1991 and 1995 , the role remains Bathurst 's favourite of his whole career . After Joking Apart concluded , he was cast as pompous management consultant David Marsden in the ITV comedy drama Cold Feet , which ran for five series from 1998 to 2003 . 
 Since 2003 , Bathurst has played a fictional prime minister in the BBC sitcom My Dad 's the Prime Minister , Mark Thatcher in the fact @-@ based drama Coup ! , and a man whose daughter goes missing in the ITV thriller The Stepfather . He also made a return to theatre roles , playing Vershinin in The Three Sisters ( 2003 ) , Adrien in the two @-@ hander Members Only ( 2006 ) , government whip Alistair in Whipping it Up ( 2006 – 07 ) , and Alex in Alex ( 2007 , 2008 ) . In the following years he starred in the television dramas The Pillars of the Earth ( 2010 ) , Downton Abbey ( 2010 ) , Hattie ( 2011 ) and joined the cast of Wild at Heart ( 2012 ) . Bathurst appeared in his first Noël Coward play , Present Laughter , in 2010 and followed it with a role in Blithe Spirit in 2010 and 2011 . He is married and has four children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Guy Bathurst was born in Accra , Gold Coast ( modern @-@ day Ghana ) , on 22 February 1957 to Philip Bathurst and Gillian Bathurst ( née Debenham ) . His father was a major in the Royal Engineers during the Second World War and was working in West Africa as a management consultant , and his mother was a physiotherapist . They had two other children ; Nicholas and Charlotte . The family lived in Ghana until 1959 , when they moved to <unk> , Dublin , Ireland . Bathurst and his brother attended two schools in Dublin — the Holy Child School in Killiney and a school in Ballsbridge — before being sent to a preparatory school in Kells , County Meath . He compared the time he and his brother , Catholics , spent at the Anglican boarding school to Lord of the Flies ; " we were incarcerated in a huge , stinking , Georgian house , where we were treated very brutally . " 
 In 1966 , the family moved to England . Bathurst transferred to the Worth Abbey boarding school in Sussex , which he much preferred to the school in Kells . At the age of 13 , he began acting in minor skits and revues and read old copies of Plays and Players magazine , " studying floor plans of theatres and reading about new theatres being built " . He had first become interested in acting when his family saw a pantomime at the Gaiety Theatre in Dublin , and he watched actors waiting for their cues in the wings . 
 He left Worth at the age of 18 to read law at Pembroke College , Cambridge . Describing himself as " hopeless at anything academic " , he spent much of his time at university performing in the Cambridge Footlights alongside Hugh Laurie , Rory McGrath and Emma Thompson . From 1977 to 1978 , he was the secretary of the group , and from 1978 to 1979 the president . Among the Footlights <unk> he participated in were Stage Fright in 1978 , which he also co @-@ wrote , and <unk> in 1979 . He also directed and appeared in the Footlights pantomime Aladdin as Widow <unk> during the 1978 – 79 season . He took the Bar Vocational Course at the University of Law , in London , which allowed him to go on to become a practising barrister , but stuck to acting instead . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After graduating from Cambridge , Bathurst spent a year touring Australia in the Footlights Revue Botham , The Musical , which he described as " a bunch of callow youths flying round doing press conferences and chat shows " . Although he enjoyed his work with Footlights , he did not continue performing with the troupe , worrying that he would be " washed up at 35 having coat @-@ tailed on their success through the early part of [ his ] career " . After leaving , he found that he was considered a dilettante , which resulted in it taking him longer than expected to be accepted as a serious actor . His first professional role out of university was in the BBC Radio 4 series Injury Time , alongside fellow Footlights performers Rory McGrath and Emma Thompson . His first role for television came in 1982 when he appeared as Prince Henry in the unaired pilot episode of Blackadder . He had already appeared in a training video by director Geoff Posner and got the role of Henry by way of thanks . The character was recast and downgraded when the series was commissioned as The Black Adder . 
 Bathurst 's professional stage debut came the next year when he joined the second cast of Michael Frayn 's Noises Off at the Savoy Theatre . He replaced Roger Lloyd @-@ Pack as Tim Allgood and stayed at the Savoy for a year . Between roles , he worked as a television presenter for BBC East . After declining an offer to be a presenter of That 's Life ! he joined the National Theatre in 1984 , where he appeared as a background actor in Saint Joan . He regards it as " the most demoralising " job he has ever had but was grateful for the theatre experience it gave him . The following year , he appeared at The Man In The Moon , a pub theatre in Chelsea , in Judgement , a two @-@ hour monologue on cannibalism . The opening night audience was made up of three people but after good reviews in the national press the audience grew to an average of fifteen . 
 A casting director for the James Bond film The Living Daylights persuaded Bathurst to audition for Bond . Bathurst believes that his " ludicrous audition " was only " an arm @-@ twisting exercise " because the producers wanted to pressure Timothy Dalton to take the role by telling him they were still auditioning other actors . Bathurst noted " I could never have done it - Bond actors are always very different to me " . 
 He continued to make minor appearances in television throughout the 1980s ; in 1987 , he auditioned for the role of Dave Lister in the BBC North science fiction sitcom Red Dwarf . The part eventually went to Craig Charles but Bathurst was given a role in the first episode of the series as Frank Todhunter , second officer on the ship , who is killed in the first ten minutes . Ten years later , Bathurst was invited to reprise the role when a storyline in the series allowed former characters to return , but filming commitments prevented him from appearing . In 1989 , he appeared in Malcolm Bradbury 's Anything More Would Be Greedy for Anglia Television , playing Dennis <unk> , MP . The programme was broadcast in 1990 to little fanfare . In 1990 , he performed on Up Yer News , a live topical programme broadcast on BSB . 
 = = = Joking Apart = = = 
 While working on Up Yer News , Bathurst auditioned for a one @-@ off television comedy called Joking Apart . Earlier in the day , he noticed a fellow Up Yer News performer reading the script to prepare for his own audition . As Bathurst went into the audition room , his colleague was leaving , and told Bathurst he would " break his legs " if he got the part , a threat that seemed not to be " entirely jocular " . Bathurst got the part , and the pilot of Joking Apart was broadcast as an installment of the BBC 2 Comic Asides strand . It returned for two series in 1993 and 1995 . Bathurst appeared as sitcom writer Mark Taylor in the series . After the first series was broadcast , a critic called Bathurst the " Best Comedy Newcomer of 1993 " . 
 The show was punctuated by fantasy sequences in which his character performed his thoughts as a stand @-@ up routine in a small club . In the commentary and the interview on the DVD , Bathurst says that he was told that they would be reshot after filming everything else , an idea abandoned because of the expense . He has an idea of refilming the sequences ' now ' , as his older self , to give them a more retrospective feeling . He has also said that he believes Mark was too " <unk> " and wishes that he had " roughened him up a bit " . The role is his favourite of his whole career ; he has described it as " the most enjoyable job I will ever do " and considers several episodes of the series to be " timeless , beautifully constructed farces which will endure " . Bathurst is often recognised for his appearance in this series , mentioning that " <unk> stop me on public transport and tell me details of the plot of their favourite episode " . As punishment for arriving late for the series one press launch at the Café Royal in Regent Street , London , writer Steven Moffat pledged to write an episode in which Mark is naked throughout . To a large extent , this vow is realised in the second series . 
 Between 1991 and 1995 , Bathurst also appeared on television in No Job for a Lady , The House of Eliott and The Detectives , and on stage in The Choice , George Bernard Shaw 's Getting Married at Chichester with Dorothy Tutin and Gogol 's The Nose adapted by Alastair Beaton , which played in Nottingham and Bucharest . He also filmed a role in The Wind in the Willows ( Terry Jones , 1996 ) as St John Weasel . 
 = = = Wider recognition = = = 
 In 1996 , while appearing in The Rover at the Salisbury Playhouse , Bathurst got an audition for the Granada Television comedy pilot Cold Feet . He arrived for the audition " bearded and shaggy " , on account of his role in the play , and did not expect to win the role of upper @-@ middle class management consultant David Marsden . The role in the pilot was only minor , and created at the last minute to support characters played by James Nesbitt and Helen Baxendale ; the only character note in the script about David related to his high salary . Bathurst identified the character as merely a " post @-@ Thatcherite whipping boy " . 
 Bathurst reprised the role in the Cold Feet series , which ran for five years from 1998 to 2003 . He described the character of David as an " emotional cripple " , originally with little depth . The third series features an affair between David and a political activist played by Yasmin Bannerman . Bathurst appreciated the opportunity to bring some depth a previously one @-@ dimensional character but was more impressed with the storylines that came out of the affair , rather than the affair itself : " It was the deception , the guilt and the recrimination rather than the actual affair , which was neither interesting nor remarkable " . Like other cast members , Bathurst was able to suggest storylines as the series went on ; one episode features David celebrating his fortieth birthday and Bathurst suggested the character could get a Harley @-@ Davidson motorbike . Granada paid for him to take motorbike lessons and a test . On the day before his test , the filming of a scene where David takes off on his new bike was scheduled . Bathurst " wobbled , missed the camera and crashed into the pavement " leading director Simon Delaney to exclaim it was the funniest thing he had ever seen . In another episode , David buys a racehorse — ostensibly as a birthday present for his wife — in a plot borne out of Bathurst 's own love of horseracing . The role made him more widely recognisable and he often received prospective scripts that were " obvious rewrites of the character " . He turned them down , preferring to play a " good person " , which would be more interesting from a dramatic point of view . 
 Between 1998 and 2003 , he made television appearances in Goodbye , Mr Steadman ( 2001 ) , starring opposite Caroline Quentin as a headmaster who has been declared dead after one of his pupils erases all computer records relating to him , and the adaptation of White Teeth ( 2002 ) . On stage he appeared in Michael Frayn 's Alarms and Excursions in 1998 and in Hedda Gabler in 1999 , his last theatre role for several years . In the Daily Telegraph , Charles Spencer described his role as <unk> as a " weird casting choice " but called his acting " a brave stab " . In 2001 , Bathurst appeared in the music video for Westlife 's Comic Relief single " Uptown Girl " . 
 In 2002 , straight after finishing Cold Feet , Bathurst went straight into filming My Dad 's the Prime Minister , a series in which he portrays fictional British prime minister Michael Philips . The first series was broadcast in a Sunday afternoon CBBC slot in 2003 . He watched debates in the House of Commons to prepare for the role but did not base his portrayal on Tony Blair . In 2003 , he returned to theatre for the first time in four years to play Vershinin in The Three Sisters , opposite Kristin Scott Thomas and Eric Sykes . He had not seen The Three Sisters before starring in it . Director Michael Blakemore advised him to turn this to his advantage , as he would not feel he had to live up to previous portrayals . After its run concluded , a special edition of The Three Sisters was filmed with the same cast for television broadcast on BBC Four . In 2005 , the second series of My Dad 's the Prime Minister was broadcast , now moved to a Friday night timeslot to take advantage of the adult humour . The same year , he starred in the ITV thriller The Stepfather playing Christopher <unk> , a man whose daughter goes missing . Bathurst was pleased that this white @-@ collar worker had an emotional side , in comparison to David Marsden , whom he used as a yardstick when accepting those sorts of roles . Also in 2005 , he played Mr <unk> in an adaptation of Heidi and <unk> Massimo in The Thief Lord . 
 = = = 2006 – present = = = 
 In 2006 , he played Mark Thatcher in Coup ! , a dramatisation of the attempted coup in Equatorial Guinea . He also starred as Adrien opposite Nicholas Tennant in the UK premiere of Members Only at the Trafalgar Studios . He accepted the part because it was " funny , plausible , plausibly absurd , and cruel " and he liked that it was a translation from an original French play . He enjoyed working on it , telling What 's on Stage , " Nick is a really good actor and really good to work with in that you can have completely frank discussions about tiny issues and it 's totally ego @-@ free . We 're all just discussing the point and not playing games with each other . It does make the working practice easier . If there 's only two of you in a play , you are equally responsible — there 's nobody else to blame if it goes wrong . So its a greater risk and there 's no hiding . " At the end of the year , he appeared opposite Richard Wilson in Whipping it Up , a play about whips in a fictional David Cameron government . To research his role , he watched more Commons debates . 
 After a season at the Bush Theatre at the end of 2006 , Whipping it Up transferred to the New Ambassadors Theatre from March to June 2007 , The tour coincided with his appearance as the titular character in Alex , based on the comic in The Daily Telegraph . The play ran at the Arts Theatre between October and November 2007 and featured Bathurst interacting with other characters that are projected onto a screen behind him . He was attracted to the role because of the " duplicity and guile " Alex uses to get himself out of tight situations . The role won him a nomination for Best Solo Performance at the What 's on Stage Awards . He reprised the role in an international tour from September to November 2008 , playing in Melbourne , Sydney , Hong Kong , Singapore and Dubai . As Alex he presented a ten @-@ part series on Classic FM , which won a Gold Award at the Sony Radio Academy Awards in 2012 . He now performs Alex as a corporate after dinner entertainment . 2007 also saw Bathurst perform as <unk> Charles in the first series of the BBC Radio 4 sitcom Hut 33 . He reprised the role for two more series in 2008 and 2009 . 
 In 2009 , he made his third and final appearance as art dealer James Garrett in My Family . He also played the role of Mr Weston in the BBC costume drama Emma , which was broadcast on BBC One through October 2009 . He previously played Weston in a two @-@ part adaptation of Emma for BBC Radio 4 in 2000 . Between January and April 2010 , Bathurst starred as Garry <unk> in a national touring revival of Noël Coward 's Present Laughter . He had not seen Present Laughter before , though had seen several Coward plays in his 20s , and did not imitate Coward 's speech patterns while performing . Present Laughter was the first time Bathurst had appeared in a Coward play , and he was cast in another , Blithe Spirit , later in the year . He plays Charles <unk> opposite Alison Steadman and his Cold Feet co @-@ star Hermione Norris . The played toured theatres around southern England in 2010 and early 2011 before beginning a three @-@ month run at the Apollo Theatre in London . 
 On television in 2010 , Bathurst starred as Percy <unk> in the German @-@ Canadian miniseries The Pillars of the Earth and had a recurring role as widower Sir Anthony <unk> in the period drama Downton Abbey . In 2011 he starred as John Le Mesurier in the Hattie Jacques biopic Hattie , and joined the cast of the long @-@ running ITV drama Wild at Heart . 
 He also has a recurring role in the sitcom Toast of London . 
 Bathurst is to star as Andy in the upcoming Sky1 television film television film adaptation of the M. C. Beaton novel Agatha Raisin and the <unk> of Death . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bathurst met artist Victoria Threlfall through mutual friends and they married in 1985 . They have four daughters : Matilda , Clemency , Oriel and Honor . 
 = = Filmography and bibliography = = 
 Written works 
 Bathurst , Robert ( 4 December 2001 ) . " Yes , Cold Feet beat Trollope , but at what cost ? " . The Daily Telegraph : p . 17 . 
 Bathurst , Robert ( 25 October 2008 ) . " Alex tour : Getting Brezhnev to smile would have been easier " . The Daily Telegraph : p . 26 ( Review section ) 
 = = Written works = = 
 Cheltenham Festival : http : / / <unk> / sport / racing / its @-@ their @-@ loss @-@ but @-@ our @-@ pain @-@ <unk> ? <unk> = print 
 = 2015 NBL Canada Finals brawl = 
 The 2015 NBL Canada Finals brawl was an altercation that occurred prior to Game 7 of the year 's National Basketball League of Canada ( NBL ) Finals , between the Windsor Express and Halifax Rainmen on April 30 , 2015 . It led to the Rainmen 's forfeit of the deciding game and allowed the Express to win the championship by default . Windsor 's guard Tony Bennett , who participated in the brawl , said , " It 's a black eye not just for the league , but for basketball . " 
 After the Rainmen reached the site of the game hours early and began warming up , they were discovered by Express assistant coach Gerry <unk> . Windsor head coach Bill Jones later entered the room to retrieve a ball and violence erupted between him and Halifax center Liam McMorrow . This sparked a brawl between both the teams as a whole , causing police to arrive . The Rainmen eventually left the stadium and chose to not compete in Game 7 because of safety concerns . 
 The incident resulted in mass fines and several suspensions , most notably the lifetime ban of Rainmen coaches Josep Clarós and Pedro Monteiro from coaching in the NBL Canada . The league also fined the entire Halifax Rainmen organization , with charges totaling to $ 90 @,@ 000 . Tony Bennett was the sole Express player to be fined and suspended . Many players , including Bennett , were reinstated into the league in the following season . 
 = = Background = = 
 Both teams had previously appeared in the NBL Canada Finals , with the Windsor Express being named the champions in the prior season by topping the Island Storm in seven games . The Halifax Rainmen appeared in the 2012 Finals , which was played in a best @-@ of @-@ five format , but dropped three games and lost to the London Lightning . Halifax finished the 2014 – 15 regular season as the Atlantic Division champions and had the second @-@ best record in the league , behind only the Central Division winners , the Express . In the 2015 NBL Canada Playoffs , the Rainmen were coming off wins over the Moncton Miracles and Island Storm , 3 – 1 and 4 – 1 respectively . Windsor , on the other hand , had beaten the Mississauga Power 3 – 1 and the Brampton A 's 4 – 3 . 
 = = Series = = 
 The Rainmen entered the Finals series without playing a single game in 16 days and were defeated by Windsor in Game 1 , 104 – 113 . Chris Commons led the Express with 33 points and 8 rebounds and Tony Bennett added 25 points . Halifax struggled with fouls in the first quarter , and point guard Cliff Clinkscales most notably committed three fouls in the first 12 minutes of the game . He would finish the contest with six penalties . By the end of the game , seven Rainmen players had committed over three personal fouls and the team totaled for 48 , allowing Windsor to get 55 free throw attempts . The Express , on the other hand , finished with 32 personal fouls . In the fourth quarter , Halifax 's Liam McMorrow took a hard fall to his shoulder and was taken off the court with a stretcher . He would undergo a CT scan and MRI after feeling tingling in the injured area . 
 Halifax rallied in Game 2 , winning a road game at the WFCU Centre in Windsor . The Rainmen committed 37 personal fouls in the entire game , but their opponents allowed them to attempt 44 free throws despite committing only 31 . 
 The Rainmen followed up by ousting the Express in Game 3 at the Scotiabank Centre , their home arena . They were strongly benefited by their accurate free throw shooting , going 28 of 33 from the line ; previously , Halifax shot at about .600 on free throws . 
 However , Windsor tied the series back up with a 109 – 105 road win in a foul @-@ filled Game 4 . A total of 71 fouls were called throughout the contest , and Seiya Ando , Kevin Young , and Liam McMorrow were fouled out for the Rainmen in the final quarter . In turn , both teams often exchanged trash @-@ talk and officials were forced to separate members of the opposing sides on multiple occasions . 
 Halifax started off Game 5 at home on a low note , with Liam McMorrow committing four personal fouls in the first three minutes . Nevertheless , Halifax pulled away with the 125 – 91 victory , putting them one win away from the title . Rainmen forward Forrest Fisher complained about Windsor , " They 're playing very physical , and at times a little bit dirty with sucker punches , and we started playing into their game ( Friday ) and that 's not us . A couple of us can play like that , myself included , and we came out tonight and I told them ' hey , let me take the hits , I 'm used to that . You guys play your normal game . ' We play the way we play , and it doesn 't matter how they play . " According to The Chronicle Herald , " the game featured several incidents that threatened to escalate into a full @-@ scale brawl . " The teams ' coaches would frequently have to break up skirmishes and confront officials for what they felt were bad calls . 
 In Game 6 of the series , the Express led by four points by the end of the first quarter , but the Rainmen responded with a 21 – 9 run and led by 12 points at halftime . Windsor , however , entered the fourth quarter with a score of 85 – 85 after dominating the third . In the third quarter , they shot 21 free throws . The Express kept it close in the final minutes of the game and held Halifax off to win the contest , 119 – 112 , forcing a decisive Game 7 . <unk> Brown led the way for Windsor with 30 points , 16 of them off free throws . After the game , Rainmen head coach Josep Clarós expressed his unhappiness with the calls made by the referees against his team . Clarós said that rather than protesting to the league , he would " send film to FIBA . " He commented on the officiating , " It 's ridiculous for a final of a professional league in Canada . " An anonymous referee later denounced the league 's policy regarding player fines and suspensions . He said , " So you could have a guy punch a guy in the face in Game 1 , get kicked out , and be playing in Game 2 . " 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Altercation = = = 
 The deciding Game 7 of the 2015 Finals was scheduled to be played at 7 : 00 PM on April 30 , 2015 at the WFCU Centre in Windsor , Ontario . The Express shootaround was set to take place before that of the Rainmen . The road team was supposed to arrive for warm @-@ ups at approximately 1 : 00 PM , but entered the stadium approximately two hours earlier . Express assistant coach Gerry <unk> recounted , " They snuck in here before they even had the light on . We were here in the dark , I opened up the curtain and I looked in and there they were . They were still here working out . So they had been here for a while . " The Express told their opponents to leave the arena , but they refused , with one Rainmen player dunking a basketball instead . Windsor 's Bill Jones then attempted to take a ball from Halifax center Liam McMorrow , but the player " flinched , " pretending to throw a punch . According to Rainmen player Forrest Fisher , Jones tackled McMorrow to the ground and Express guard Tony Bennett followed up by hitting McMorrow with a chair . Referring to the Rainmen , Jones said , " A couple of them kicked me and tried to take swings at me . And my players were there and they came to my rescue to be able to get me up . " Soon the violence escalated , with staff members and players from both teams involved . At around 10 : 40 AM , Windsor police received a phone call " that between 15 to 20 men were involved in an altercation . " By the time they arrived at the WFCU Centre , however , the fighting was over and the Rainmen players had already reached their team bus . 
 = = = Forfeit = = = 
 After leaving the stadium , the Rainmen drove to the airport . But midway , they crossed paths with Vito Frijia , London Lightning owner and a member of the NBL Canada executive committee , who stopped the bus in the middle of the highway . Despite Frijia spending a good hour attempting to convince the Rainmen 's coaches to return to the WFCU Centre and play the game , they refused . According to Frijia : 
 The start time of Game 7 of the series was postponed from 8 : 00 to 8 : 30 PM AST , but it was cancelled once the Express were informed that the Rainmen had left the city . By the end of the night , Windsor were declared the NBL Canada champions . Shortly before the scheduled start time , the Rainmen said in an official statement , " Due to a physical altercation between the Halifax Rainmen and the Windsor Express , the game has been cancelled citing safety concerns . " At around 9 : 00 PM , the Express were awarded the championship trophy and conducted their post @-@ game celebrations . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 In the weeks after the forfeit , Rainmen guard Joey Haywood recounted that the team had been approached by an unknown man at their hotel following the brawl . Haywood said , " He was pacing around the lobby on his phone eyeing us . He then went to the ATM but didn 't actually do anything . He went and sat in a parked car out front . We thought something was going to go down , like he was scouting us out . " The Rainmen promptly left on the team bus , but the incident would be ignored by owner Andre Levingston . However , it was considered a motive for forfeiting the game . On the morning of May 2 , two days after the brawl , Rainmen guard Forrest Fisher wrote on Twitter that he had been kicked out of his apartment without warning . He said , " We were in Toronto Friday morning , and I get a message from the landlord at the apartment I stay at , telling me that my bags have been packed and all of my stuff has been moved to storage . " The players also claimed that they had not been paid in more than two weeks . 
 Members from the Rainmen profusely criticized the brutality of the Express throughout the series as well . Kevin Young was notified by players on Windsor saying that their coach had told them to " take out " him , Liam McMorrow and Forrest Fisher . Cliff Clinkscales said , " There 's a difference between playing physical and dirty and hurting people . " Halifax entered Game 7 with two players out with concussions they suffered in the series itself . Clinkscales also played with injured ribs . Despite this , the players had supposedly been " forced " by team owner Andre Levingston to partake in the game . Levingston attempted to convince the players to play without their coaches , who favored forfeiting it . He also offered the Rainmen new coaches , a raised salary , and $ 1 @,@ 000 , but to no avail . Haywood said , " How could we play without coach , bringing another coach in ? And do what ? Coach us ? He doesn 't even know us . " Levingston , on the other hand , slammed Clarós , saying that " instead of leading our team to the championship , he led a group of talented players to broken contracts and a lifetime of controversy . " The owner claimed that he felt cheated and that the players were misled by their coaches . He took full responsibility for leading the Rainmen into the WFCU Centre ahead of schedule but believed that the two teams could have negotiated to avoid conflict . 
 Eric <unk> , who had his jersey retired while playing for Halifax , said that the prospect of having the organization fold was " sad . " He also said , " If what these players are saying is true it ’ s very hurtful to me . It sickening to my stomach that the players say they didn 't get paid or they got kicked out of their living arrangements . " Joey Haywood criticized the league for not having a players ' union or commissioner , with " owners acting like commissioners . " He also condemned Levingston for not standing up for his players . On May 7 , Clarós issued an open letter to the City of Halifax and the fans of the Rainmen . In a paragraph about the forfeit , he wrote , " At this time , we don 't know what the future holds . But there is one thing we know for sure . That when a group of good people unite to take a stand in the name of safety , good values , people ’ s rights and strong principles , that this will rise above any rules or even winning . " 
 = = Investigation and charges = = 
 In the day after the forfeit , the NBL Canada announced , " The league takes this incident very seriously and we are working to address the matter to ensure it never happens in the future , and so that those who were responsible are held accountable . " On May 5 , 2015 , Dave Magley , head coach and general manager of the Brampton A 's during the season , was appointed by the league 's Board of Governors to lead the investigation . He had already conducted interviews and spoken to representatives from both teams involved in the brawl . Magley also said that he would consider assuming the position of commissioner if he was approached , succeeding Paul Riley , who was fired in January 2015 . Vito Frijia would be named league spokesman during the investigation . 
 On May 1 , 2015 , the league 's Board unanimously approved of several charges for players and coaches from the Rainmen . The organization as a whole was fined $ 20 @,@ 000 per league rules , head coach Josep Clarós was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 and assistant coach Pedro Monteiro was fined $ 5 @,@ 000 . Both coaches received lifetime bans from the NBL Canada as well . A $ 5 @,@ 000 fine was imposed on every player on the team 's roster , excluding Douglas <unk> , Jr. who was injured at the time of the brawl . They were also suspended indefinitely during the investigation . Later on , the league allowed the Rainmen 's players to apply for reinstatement into the league , although the coaches would remain banned for life . Halifax 's total fines totaled up to $ 90 @,@ 000 . The Rainmen were not notified of their fines and suspensions through e @-@ mail or a phone call . Instead they learned of it through Twitter . Clarós officially received his termination letter on May 5 , after his contract had already been renewed for one more month . In an effort to give the players and coaches their final paychecks , he contacted the Canadian labour board . After one month , Clarós won the decision , but Levingston declared bankruptcy on July 6 , the following day . According to bankruptcy documents , the Rainmen were about $ 700 @,@ 000 in debt . 
 Later in the investigation , an additional $ 4 @,@ 000 fine was imposed on Monteiro . The coach had a salary of only about $ 1 @,@ 500 per month during the eight months he spent with the Rainmen . Despite this , he was unable to contact team owner Andre Levingston , who did not assist or help him . Monteiro responded to the charges by claiming that they were unfair . In a statement on May 11 , he said , " I am looking for help to fight these unjust sanctions and fines so I can continue to work and be able to support my family . The investigation was not full . The truth of what happened is being ignored . I have not been contacted by any league representative . " 
 For the Express , head coach Bill Jones faced a one @-@ year suspension that would bar him from directing his team in the 2015 – 16 season . He also received a $ 4 @,@ 000 fine with Monteiro . The coach accepted responsibility for his role in the incident . Windsor guard Tony Bennett faced an indefinite suspension from the league during the investigation . Frijia said , " It was a very , very big decision to suspend Jones for a year . " However , Express owner <unk> Willis claimed that the investigation was " botched , " because Magley was an NBL Canada coach that had faced Jones in previous games . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By late August 2015 , it became a strong possibility that a new NBL Canada team would be created in Halifax for the 2015 – 16 season . A new ownership group , led by former Rainmen advisor and CEO of Corporate Research Associates in Don Mills , soon confirmed that the defunct team 's reincarnation would compete for the next season . Mills expected a group of 25 shareholders to help start up the organization , many of whom personally paid for the Rainmen 's flights and hotels in the last season . He chose to not include Levingston in the ownership group but allowed him to assume the position as the team 's general manager . Mills said , " There would not be a new team in Halifax without Andre . We decided that the only way we would go forward to raise the money was if Andre was part of the solution . " Despite this , he preferred to break ties with the Rainmen franchise . It was not disclosed who paid for the $ 250 @,@ 000 fee required for a team to register in the NBL Canada . 
 On October 20 , 2015 , the team was announced as the Halifax Hurricanes . Mills commented , " We think it 's kind of an appropriate name from where we 're located and from a sports team 's point of view . What it really says is energy and power , so some of the descriptions of hurricanes sort of suit the kind of team that we want as well . " The Hurricanes also signed Cliff Clinkscales and Mike Glover as its first players and hired Hugo López as head coach . Mills aimed for lower ticket prices at the team 's games . 
 For the Express , head coach Bill Jones was replaced by his brother Tony Jones , who would assume the position of interim head coach until February 20 , 2016 . At this time , Bill was reinstated into the NBL Canada , with Tony remaining with Windsor as an assistant coach . Bill said , " What happened in that Game 7 was not Bill Jones . It happened in the heat of the moment and is something I 'll probably regret for the rest of my life . " Magley said that his concern with the future of the Express organization helped him make the decision to reinstate Jones , who he believed would help the team 's fan support grow . 
 At the beginning of the new season on December 31 , 2015 , Clinkscales and Tony Benett were both reinstated after applying to return to the league . The two players received unanimous support from the NBL Canada Board of Governors . Bennett was only suspended for two games and received a $ 500 fine , while Clinkscales still had a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine . On March 11 , 2016 , Rainmen player Tyrone Watson was also reinstated to the league after paying his $ 5 @,@ 000 fine and receiving a unanimous vote . 
 = USS New Hampshire ( BB @-@ 25 ) = 
 New Hampshire ( BB @-@ 25 ) was the sixth and final Connecticut @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship , the last vessel of that type built for the United States Navy . Like most contemporary battleships , she was armed with an offensive armament that consisted of four large @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and several medium @-@ caliber 7 and 8 @-@ inch ( 178 and 203 mm ) guns . The ship was laid down in May 1905 , launched in June 1906 , and commissioned in March 1908 , a little over a year after the revolutionary all @-@ big @-@ gun HMS Dreadnought rendered ships like New Hampshire obsolescent . 
 Despite being rapidly surpassed by new American dreadnoughts , New Hampshire had an active career . She made two trips to Europe in 1910 and 1911 , and she sank the old battleship USS Texas , which had been converted into a target ship . New Hampshire was particularly active in the Caribbean during this period , as several countries , including Haiti , the Dominican Republic , and Mexico devolved into internal political conflicts . These actions included the United States occupation of Veracruz , during which the ship 's commander was awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , the ship was used primarily to train gunners and engine room personnel , as the US Navy had expanded significantly to combat the German U @-@ boat campaign . She escorted convoys in late 1918 , and after the war ended she took part in the effort to bring American soldiers back from France . New Hampshire remained in service for only a few years after the war , as the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty significantly reduced the navies of the signatories ; as a result , the ship was sold for scrap in November 1923 . 
 = = Design = = 
 New Hampshire was 456 ft 4 in ( 139 m ) long overall and had a beam of 76 ft 10 in ( 23 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 6 in ( 7 m ) . She displaced 16 @,@ 000 long tons ( 16 @,@ 000 t ) as designed and up to 17 @,@ 666 long tons ( 17 @,@ 949 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 16 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 300 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . As built , she was fitted with heavy military masts , but these were quickly replaced by lattice masts in 1909 . She had a crew of 827 officers and men , though this increased to 881 and later to 896 . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 inch / 45 Mark 5 guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) / 45 guns and twelve 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) / 45 guns . The 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in four twin turrets amidships and the 7 @-@ inch guns were placed in casemates in the hull . For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , she carried twenty 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and twelve 3 @-@ pounder guns . She also carried four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , New Hampshire carried four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . 
 New Hampshire 's main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 6 in ( 152 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets had 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had the 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating . The secondary turrets had 7 in of frontal armor . The conning tower had 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 New Hampshire was laid down on 1 May 1905 at the New York Shipbuilding Corporation in Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 30 June 1906 and was christened by Hazel McLane , the daughter of John McLane , then the Governor of New Hampshire . The ship was commissioned into the US Navy on 19 March 1908 ; her first commander was Captain Cameron Winslow . After completing final fitting @-@ out work , New Hampshire transported a Marine Expeditionary Regiment to Colón , Panama on 20 June , arriving six days later . She then made a series of visits to ports on the eastern coast of North America , including Portsmouth , New York , and Bridgeport , along with a stop in the Canadian province of Quebec . The ship was then overhauled in New York , followed by training exercises in the Caribbean Sea . On 22 February 1909 , she participated in a Naval Review for President Theodore Roosevelt to greet the return of the Great White Fleet in Hampton Roads , Virginia . During this period , Ernest King , later the Chief of Naval Operations during World War II , served aboard the ship in the engine room . 
 New Hampshire conducted training exercises in the Atlantic and Caribbean through late 1910 . On 1 November that year , she steamed out of Hampton Roads with the Second Battleship Division for a visit to Europe . There , the ships stopped in Cherbourg , France and Weymouth , the United Kingdom . The Division departed Weymouth on 30 December and returned to the Caribbean for training , before proceeding to Norfolk on 10 March 1911 . On 21 – 22 March , New Hampshire conducted gunnery training with the target ship San Marcos — the old battleship Texas — in Tangier Sound in Chesapeake Bay . Over the course of the two days of firing , New Hampshire inflicted severe damage to the old ship , sinking her in shallow water . A cursory inspection of the wreck noted that the interior of the ship above the waterline was destroyed and that she had been holed multiple times below the waterline . 
 She then prepared for another trip to Europe . This time the ships cruised into the Baltic Sea , stopping in several ports in Germany , Russia , and Scandinavia , before returning to New England on 13 July . New Hampshire spent the next three years training midshipmen on summer cruises and patrolling the Caribbean . In December 1912 , she steamed off the island of Hispaniola during unrest in both Haiti and the Dominican Republic . From 14 June to 29 December 1913 , she patrolled the Caribbean coast of Mexico during the Mexican Revolution . The following year , she took part in the occupation of Veracruz in Mexico , starting on 15 April . During the operations , the ship 's commander , Edwin Anderson , Jr . , led a landing party that came under fire from the <unk> Escuela Naval Militar academy ( Heroic Naval Military School ) , though gunfire from cruisers in the harbor silenced the Mexican snipers . Anderson and several others were awarded the Medal of Honor for the action . New Hampshire departed the area on 21 April for an overhaul in Norfolk . Exercises off the east coast of the United States followed before the ship returned to Veracruz in August 1915 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The ship was back in Norfolk on 30 September and remained in American waters late 1916 . On 2 December , she steamed to Santo Domingo , the capital of the Dominican Republic , where the United States had instituted a military government under Rear Admiral Harry Knapp in an attempt to put an end to the political instability there . New Hampshire 's captain was involved in the government while the ship was in the country . In February 1917 , she returned to Norfolk for an overhaul ; this work was still ongoing when the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April . Over the course of the next eighteen months , the ship was occupied with training gunners and engine room personnel for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . During training on 1 June 1918 , the crews for three of the 7 @-@ inch guns aboard New Hampshire accidentally began firing at one of the submarine chasers present ; they fired several salvos before they received the order to cease fire . One of the shells struck the nearby battleship USS Louisiana , killing one man and wounding several more . While the ships stopped to regain control of the situation , a lookout reported a periscope from a U @-@ boat ; New Hampshire and the battleship USS Ohio opened fire with their 6 @-@ inch guns to no effect . The submarine chasers could not find a U @-@ boat in the area . 
 In September 1918 , she was assigned to convoy escort duty , with the first such mission on 6 September . The ship departed with the battleship USS Kansas and the dreadnought USS South Carolina to protect a fast HX troopship convoy . On 16 September , the three battleships left the convoy in the Atlantic and steamed back to the United States , while other escorts brought the convoy into port . On the 17th , South Carolina 's starboard propeller fell off , which forced her to reduce speed to 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) using only the port shaft . New Hampshire and Kansas remained with South Carolina to escort her back to port . This duty did not last long , as the Germans signed the Armistice that ended the war on 11 November . On 24 December , New Hampshire began the first of four trips to bring soldiers back from the battlefields of Europe . On the first trip , she steamed with Louisiana , the two ships arriving in Brest , France on 5 January 1919 . Between the two of them , they returned 2 @,@ 169 men , including eight civilians . 
 = = = Postwar career = = = 
 By 1919 , the ship had had all of her 7 @-@ inch guns and eight of the 3 @-@ inch guns removed , and a pair of 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns had been installed . On 22 June 1919 , the ship went into drydock in Philadelphia for an overhaul . A year later , on 5 June 1920 , she began a training cruise for midshipmen to the Pacific Ocean via the Panama Canal . The cruise took the ship to Hawaii and several cities on the western coast of the United States . She was back in Philadelphia by 11 September . From 18 October to 12 January 1921 , New Hampshire served as the flagship for a mission to Haiti . On 25 January she crossed the Atlantic to Europe for the final time to carry the remains of Wilhelm August Ferdinand <unk> , the Swedish ambassador to the United States . She arrived in Stockholm on 14 February ; on the return voyage , she also stopped in Kiel , Germany , and Gravesend , United Kingdom . The ship reached Philadelphia on 24 March , where she was decommissioned on 21 May . According to the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , New Hampshire was sold on 1 November 1923 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Troy McClure = 
 Troy McClure is a fictional character from the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . He was voiced by Phil Hartman and first appeared in the second season episode " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " . McClure is usually shown doing low @-@ level work , such as hosting infomercials and educational films . He appears as the main character in " A Fish Called Selma " , in which he marries Selma Bouvier to aid his failing career and quash rumors about his personal life . McClure also ' hosts ' " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " and " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " . 
 McClure was partially based on B movie actors Troy Donahue and Doug McClure , as well as Hartman himself . Following Hartman 's murder in 1998 , all of his Simpsons characters were retired out of respect , with Hartman 's final appearance as McClure was in the tenth season episode " Bart the Mother " four months later . Since his retirement , McClure is often cited as one of the series ' most popular characters . In 2006 , IGN ranked McClure # 1 on their list of the " Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters " . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 Troy McClure is a stereotypical Hollywood has @-@ been . He was a star in the early 1970s , but his career went downhill due to rumors of a <unk> involving fish . In most of his appearances in the show , he hosts short video clips that other characters watch on television or in a public place . He often presents educational videos and infomercials . McClure introduces himself by saying , " Hi , I 'm Troy McClure . You may remember me from such [ films , educational videos , voiceovers , etc . ] as ... , " mentioning two titles that are similar to his current performance . For example , in the episode " Bart the Mother " , McClure introduces a film about birds by saying , " Hi , I 'm Troy McClure . You may remember me from such nature films as Earwigs : <unk> ! and Man vs. Nature : The Road to Victory . " 
 McClure 's most prominent role occurs in the seventh @-@ season episode " A Fish Called Selma " . In the episode , McClure begins a relationship with Selma Bouvier , whom he meets when she gives him an eye test at the Department of Motor Vehicles . The relationship revives his career , leading him to star in Stop the Planet of the Apes , I Want to Get Off ! , a stage musical version of the film Planet of the Apes . To further boost McClure 's career , McClure 's agent suggests that he get married . Unaware of McClure 's motivation , Selma accepts his proposal , and moves into McClure 's house , a Modernist building which resembles the <unk> . At his bachelor party , a drunken McClure tells Homer Simpson that the marriage is just a sham to help his career . Homer says nothing at the wedding , but later offhandedly mentions McClure 's admission to Marge , who then informs her sister . Selma decides to remain with McClure anyway , but she becomes disturbed when McClure 's agent advises the pair to have a child ( since " all the big parts these days are going to family men " ) . Having a child will secure McClure 's casting as McBain 's sidekick in McBain IV : Fatal Discharge , but Selma is unwilling to bring a child into a loveless relationship and decides to leave McClure . McClure ultimately gets the role , but turns it down in order to direct and star in his own pet project , a 20th Century Fox film called The <unk> <unk> of Professor Horatio <unk> . 
 In addition to his in @-@ story appearances , McClure appears as host of " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " and " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " . The first is a behind the scenes look at The Simpsons , answering questions and featuring extra " never before seen " material . The second is an episode presenting three possible spin @-@ offs from The Simpsons . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 McClure was made into an action figure as part of the World of Springfield toy line , and was released in the " Celebrity Series 1 " wave . He also features briefly in the video game Virtual Springfield , introducing the town of Springfield to the player . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 McClure was based on the typical " washed up " Hollywood actor . B movie actors Troy Donahue and Doug McClure served as inspiration for his name and certain character aspects . Writer Mike Reiss later met Doug McClure 's daughter , who revealed that her father had found the homage funny . His children would call their father " Troy McClure " when his back was turned . According to show creator Matt Groening , Phil Hartman was cast in the role due to his ability to pull " the maximum amount of humor " out of any line he was given . McClure 's visual appearance is similar to that of Hartman himself . When he was designed , McClure was given an extra line under his eyes to suggest that the character had gotten a facelift . 
 In a very brief appearance in the season 2 episode Bart 's Dog Gets an " F " , Troy was voiced by Dan Castellaneta . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 According to executive producer Al Jean , the writers often used McClure as a " panic button " and added the character when they felt an episode needed more humor . 
 McClure 's character is most developed in " A Fish Called Selma " , which provides a more in @-@ depth look into his private life and backstory . Showrunners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were fans of Hartman , and wished to make an episode entirely about McClure in order to give Hartman as much to do as possible . From this came the idea of McClure 's marriage to Selma Bouvier , as she was " always marrying people " . Animator Mark Kirkland was particularly pleased that McClure was the star of the episode . He enjoyed interpreting Hartman 's voice @-@ over performances , and the episode allowed him and the other animators to " open [ McClure ] up visually as a character " . 
 Throughout " A Fish Called Selma " , it is hinted that McClure engages in strange sexual behavior . The writers did not initially know what the " unsavory " sexual preference would be , but eventually decided on a fish fetish , using a suggestion from executive producer James L. Brooks . Josh Weinstein described the fish fetish concept as " so perverted and strange , it was over the top " . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After Hartman 's murder in 1998 , rather than replace him with a new voice actor , the production staff retired McClure , along with Hartman 's other recurring character , Lionel Hutz , from the show . McClure last appeared in the season ten episode " Bart the Mother " , which was dedicated to Hartman . Before his death , Hartman had often expressed an interest in starring in a live @-@ action film about McClure , which would be penned by some of the show 's writers . He noted that he was " looking forward to his live @-@ action movie , publicizing [ McClure 's ] Betty Ford appearances . " Matt Groening later told Empire that the idea never " got further than enthusiasm " , but " would have been really fun " . 
 = = Reception and cultural influence = = 
 Even after his retirement , Troy McClure remains a popular supporting character . IGN ranked McClure first in their 2006 list of the " Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters " , calling him " a wonderfully bizarre and entertaining character that showcases the best of what small roles on The Simpsons can be " . In a 2007 article on Simpsons guest stars , Adam Finley of TV Squad wrote that McClure was " responsible for some of the funniest moments in Simpsons history " . Hartman ranked first on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . Chris Turner argues in Planet Simpson that McClure and Lionel Hutz " together ... represent the most significant contribution to the show outside of its permanent cast " , adding that " the show 's Golden Age is hard to imagine without them " . He continues , " The smarmy Hollywood type ... has been done to death , but Hartman 's version breathed new life into it with each appearance . McClure has become the apotheosis of the stereotype , a gut @-@ achingly funny reinterpretation whose trademark introduction ... has become a shorthand way to describe any grossly artificial media figure . " 
 McClure 's most prominent episode , " A Fish Called Selma " , is a favorite of many of the show 's staff members , and has been cited as one of the series ' best episodes by several publications . Entertainment Weekly placed the episode eighth on their top 25 The Simpsons episode list , and IGN named the episode the best of the seventh season , calling it the " obvious pick " . They also deemed McClure 's Planet of the Apes musical the best moment of the episode and " maybe even the whole show " . 
 McClure was one of Phil Hartman 's best known @-@ roles . He often used his McClure voice to entertain the audience between takes while taping episodes of NewsRadio . He remarked , " My favorite fans are Troy McClure fans . " He added " It 's the one thing that I do in my life that 's almost an avocation . I do it for the pure love of it . " Many obituaries of Hartman mentioned his work as McClure as one of the highlights of his career . The BBC said that " [ Hartman 's ] voice was known to millions " because of McClure and Lionel Hutz . 
 = Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga = 
 Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga , known in Japan as Mario & Luigi RPG ( マリオ ＆ <unk> , Mario ando Ruīji Aru Pī Jī ) , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by AlphaDream and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance in 2003 . The first game in the Mario & Luigi RPG series , Superstar Saga was followed by four sequels : Mario & Luigi : Partners in Time and Mario & Luigi : Bowser 's Inside Story for the Nintendo DS , Mario & Luigi : Dream Team for the Nintendo 3DS and Mario & Luigi : Paper Jam also for the Nintendo 3DS . The game was later re @-@ released for the Wii U Virtual Console on the Nintendo eShop in 2014 . 
 The setting of the game begins in the Mushroom Kingdom , but progresses to the Beanbean Kingdom for the majority of the game . In the game , Mario and Luigi combat Cackletta , the primary antagonist . The quest begins when Cackletta , with the aid of her assistant Fawful , steals Princess Peach 's voice after adopting the guise of an ambassador from the Beanbean Kingdom . 
 A role @-@ playing game , it centers on a battle system different from that of traditional games of the genre , with emphasis on timing and more elaborate attacks . The game is whimsical in tone , with various in @-@ game jokes and comical references to the heritage of the Mario series . Superstar Saga was generally well received by critics , and IGN named it the twelfth best Game Boy Advance game of all time in their feature reflecting on the Game Boy Advance 's lifespan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Mario & Luigi differs from most other role @-@ playing games due its focus on controlling Mario and Luigi simultaneously . During overworld sections , the direction pad controls Mario 's movement with Luigi following closely , while Mario and Luigi 's other actions are controlled individually with the A and B buttons respectively . The game begins with them being able to jump independently , though they will soon gain access to hammers and a variety of other techniques as the game progresses . For example , Luigi 's hammer can be used to squash Mario into a smaller size , allowing to access small gaps , while placing Mario on Luigi 's shoulders allows them to act like a propeller and hover across large gaps . Various enemies roam the overworld , and coming into contact with these enemies initiates a battle . Landing a hit on the enemy while on the overworld allows the player to deal pre @-@ emptive damage , while the opposite is also possible . 
 Battles in Superstar Saga are turn @-@ based . Mario and Luigi can attack normally either by jumping , which can deal multiple hits but when used against enemies covered in flames or with spikes , Mario or Luigi will get hurt , instead of the enemy . Another attack option is the hammer , which is powerful , but ineffective against flying enemies . Similar to previous Mario RPG titles , such as Super Mario RPG and the Paper Mario series , players can time button presses to make their attacks more effective , such as earning an extra jump attack or increasing the hammer 's power . Introduced in this series is the way in which Mario and Luigi can defend themselves during an enemy 's attack . When an enemy attacks , the brothers will be able to either jump or use their hammer which , when successfully timed , allows them to dodge their attacks and even deal counter damage ( for example : if they jump on top of a charging Goomba ) . Throughout the game , players can unlock Bros. Attacks , which use Bros. Points ( BP ) which requires players to cooperate between Mario and Luigi 's actions to perform powerful combination attacks . Players can also use items such as mushrooms for healing , peppers for boosting stats and 1UP mushrooms for reviving fallen bros . Defeating enemies earns experience points which help the bros level up and increase their stats , with players given the option to further increase the stats of one attribute every time they level up . Players can further improve their stats by equipping new gear to the Bros. , or making them wear badges that give them special attributes . 
 Like other Mario titles for the Game Boy Advance , Superstar Saga features the enhanced remake of the Mario Bros. arcade game . The game also supports rumble functionality when used with the Nintendo GameCube 's Game Boy Player accessory . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Unlike most games in the Mario series , this game is not set in the Mushroom Kingdom . Instead , Superstar Saga introduces the Beanbean Kingdom , a neighboring monarchy to the Mushroom Kingdom . Despite this , traditional enemies such as Goombas are present , as well as new enemies exclusive to the game . The predominant race are the " Beanish " , although there are other species such as the " <unk> " and Yoshis . No locations featured in the Beanbean Kingdom , with the exception of Bowser 's Castle , existed in any earlier Mario series games . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The playable protagonists in the game are Mario and Luigi , whose quest is to rescue the voice of Princess Peach , the princess of the Mushroom Kingdom . The voice is stolen by the game 's antagonists Cackletta and Fawful . Throughout the game , Mario and Luigi must work with the Beanbean monarchy headed by Queen Bean . Both she and her son , Prince Peasley , offer Mario and Luigi assistance . The youthful Prince Peasley is a celebrity figure in his native Beanbean Kingdom . 
 Deviating from a tradition of the Mario franchise , Superstar Saga 's central antagonist is not Bowser , but the Beanish witch Cackletta . Bowser aids the protagonists during a period of the game , but Bowser 's body becomes possessed by the consciousness of Cackletta to form the creature Bowletta . Cackletta is aided by the assailant Fawful , who is often characterized by his comical use of language , as evidenced by his famous quote " I HAVE <unk> ! " and who is also the antagonist in the sequel Mario & Luigi : Bowser 's Inside Story . Additionally , Mario and Luigi have recurring incidents with a thief named Popple and his sidekick Rookie ( amnesiac Bowser ) , who engages both protagonists in conflict at various times throughout the game . In one case , Popple fights alone . In another , he uses Birdo instead of Rookie . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with the witch Cackletta and her assistant Fawful arriving to steal Princess Peach 's voice and replace it with explosives . After being summoned to the palace by Toad , Mario and Luigi confront and subdue Bowser , who coincidentally was attempting to kidnap Peach . However , Bowser soon decides against kidnapping her and teams up with the Mario Bros. to retrieve her true voice back from Cackletta , who has fled to the Beanbean Kingdom , with the intention of kidnapping her afterward when her voice would not destroy his castle . 
 Mario , Luigi , and Bowser fly to the Beanbean Kingdom via Bowser 's airship , the Koopa Cruiser . Mid @-@ flight , Fawful attacks the cruiser and blows it out of the sky . Bowser and the brothers become separated . On their journey , the brothers rescue Prince Peasley , who had been transformed into a dragon by Cackletta . The brothers reach Beanbean Castle Town and step into a trap laid by Cackletta that drops them into the sewers . The brothers learn that Cackletta 's goal is to steal the Beanstar , a mystical object inside the castle which once awoken with Peach 's voice will grant all of her wishes . Cackletta takes the Beanstar and attacks Mario and Luigi with a mutated form of the Queen Bean during her escape . After defeating the Queen , Mario and Luigi travel to <unk> Woods to retrieve the <unk> Reserve , a soda which will restore Queen Bean to her former state . They encounter Popple , a thief also after the <unk> Reserve , with an amnesiac Bowser as his accomplice , named Rookie . The brothers manage to obtain the Reserve , return to Beanbean Castle Town , and cure Queen Bean . 
 Mario and Luigi then travel to Woohoo <unk> , where Cackletta plans to awaken the Beanstar . The Beanstar is exposed to Peach 's voice , which causes it to go berserk and flee . Mario and Luigi then battle Cackletta and defeat her . Cackletta is severely incapacitated from the battle , so Fawful sucks up her soul into his " vacuum helmet " to save her life . Cackletta then commands Fawful to attack , but he is stopped by Prince Peasley . The brothers locate the Beanstar but encounter Popple and Rookie again . After battling them , the Beanstar is again exposed to Peach 's voice . The four grab onto the Beanstar in an effort to keep it under control , but it shoots into the sky . The Beanstar explodes into four pieces , which scatter across Beanbean Kingdom , and the brothers become separated from Popple and Bowser . Mario and Luigi backtrack and meet Peach as she arrives in Beanbean Kingdom , who inexplicably has her own voice . They discover that Prince Peasley had learned of Cackletta 's plot and warned the Princess beforehand and Birdo , disguised as Peach , had her voice stolen instead . Bowser 's arrival and presence at her castle had prevented Peach from revealing the plan to Mario and Luigi . Meanwhile , Fawful imbues a weak Bowser with Cackletta 's soul , resulting in the twisted Bowletta . 
 On a trip to Little <unk> , Peach is kidnapped by Bowletta , who demands all the pieces of the Beanstar in exchange . After restoring the Beanstar , Mario and Luigi travel to Joke 's End to make the exchange . Bowletta refuses to hand over Peach , but Luigi , disguised in Peach 's spare dress , ends up being taken in Peach 's stead . He escapes from the repaired Koopa Cruiser , reclaiming the Beanstar in the process . The brothers return to Beanbean Castle Town , finding it under attack by Bowletta using Bowser 's flying castle . The brothers and Prince Peasley fly up to it to stop Cackletta once and for all . Mario and Luigi battle past the Koopalings and Fawful before confronting Bowletta . <unk> defeat , she tricks the brothers and swallows them both . After waking up in her belly , the brothers battle and defeat Cackletta 's soul , exorcising her from Bowser 's body . The two are regurgitated and Bowser returns to normal . Afterwards , the brothers escape the castle before it explodes from a bomb set by Peasley . The explosion sends the castle falling into the ocean . Exhausted from their vacation , Mario , Luigi , Peach and Toadsworth decide to head back to the Mushroom Kingdom . Before they can leave , Peasley brings a farewell gift for them to take home , which is Bowser , who regained memory . The gang then returns home . 
 = = Development and marketing = = 
 Superstar Saga , developed by AlphaDream , is said to take its inspiration from the Nintendo 64 game Paper Mario ; the two games have similar graphics and gameplay . The producers of the game were Shigeru Miyamoto , the creator of the Mario franchise , Tetsuo Mizuno , and Satoru Iwata , the president of Nintendo . The voice acting for Mario and Luigi in the game is provided by Charles Martinet , well known for providing the characters ' voice in Nintendo 's Mario franchise . The game 's music was composed by Yoko Shimomura , who also composed the score for Super Mario RPG . 
 Superstar Saga was first revealed at Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2003 , where a playable demo of the game was available . In August and September 2003 , a playable demonstration was also available at the European Computer Trade Show , the Games Convention , and Nintendo Gamers ' Summit . To link in with the game 's comic themes , Nintendo organized an official competition between October and November 2003 in which contestants would try to submit the best knock @-@ knock joke to win a Game Boy Advance SP and a copy of the game . Nintendo employed comedian Kathy Griffin to choose the winner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Superstar Saga received universal critical acclaim . The game 's comical dialog and themes in particular were lauded by critics . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell commented that " each line of dialogue and identifiable cameo is handled with a loving sense of humour . " Despite this , RPGamer 's Andrew Long labelled the plot as repetitive , and the game 's characters as " a tad shallow " . While also appreciating references to the heritage of the Mario series , critics praised the game for avoiding clichés common in previous games of the Mario series . 
 The gameplay attained a mixed reception . Critics enjoyed the game 's battle system , which deviated from role @-@ playing game tradition . IGN 's Craig Harris commented that " unlike most Japanese RPGs Mario & Luigi 's turn @-@ based battle involves the player at all times " . Despite this novel approach to combat situations , some reviewers thought that the overall gameplay lacked innovation . GameSpy in particular criticized the game for an apparent lack of originality , commenting that " in terms of gameplay , there isn 't much there that we haven 't seen in the NES and SNES Mario and Zelda titles . " Furthermore , some reviewers were disappointed by a perceived lack of difficulty in the gameplay as a result of targeting a younger audience . However , Cubed3 welcomed this approach , citing that " any gamer , be them veterans to the genre or complete amateurs , will find the title to be perfectly accessible . " Edge and other gaming publications have criticized the controls for being occasionally confusing when considering the usage of jumping , hammers , and other combinations between the two characters . 
 A common concern among reviewers is the overhead perspective , which critics have bemoaned for preventing them from judging pathway routes and an object 's location in relation to its background . Besides this , the actual visuals were generally well received , as well as the setting and animations . The audio was commended for combining both originality and nostalgia , even though it looped frequently . 
 In 2006 , Superstar Saga was rated the 37th best game made on a Nintendo System in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . In the same year , the game became part of the Player 's Choice label . In 2007 , the game was named the twelfth best Game Boy Advance game of all time in IGN 's feature reflecting on the Game Boy Advance 's long lifespan . As of 2007 , Superstar Saga has sold over 441 @,@ 000 units in Japan and 1 @.@ 46 million in the US . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Nintendo released Partners in Time , the prequel / sequel to Superstar Saga , on November 28 , 2005 for the Nintendo DS system . The plot and setting is relatively disconnected to that of Superstar Saga , as Cackletta has been replaced by the Shroobs as the primary antagonists . Although the game is set outside the Beanbean Kingdom , there are references to Superstar Saga in Partners in Time , such as the inclusion of Fawful in the sewers of Princess Peach 's Castle in the game . The Bros. Moves have been retained in Partners in Time , although they involve an item system as opposed to the Bros. Points system that Superstar Saga has . A second sequel , Bowser 's Inside Story , was released in 2009 for the Nintendo DS , with Fawful reprising his role as a key villain . A third sequel , Dream Team , was released in 2013 for the Nintendo 3DS . A fourth sequel , Paper Jam , a crossover with the Paper Mario series , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in 2015 . 
 = BBC Symphony Orchestra = 
 The BBC Symphony Orchestra ( BBC SO ) is a British orchestra based in London . Founded in 1930 , it was the first permanent salaried orchestra in London , and is the only one of the city 's five major symphony orchestras not to be self @-@ governing . The BBC SO is the principal orchestra of the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) . 
 The orchestra was originally conceived in 1928 as a joint enterprise by the BBC and the conductor Sir Thomas Beecham , but the latter withdrew the next year ; and the task of assembling and training the orchestra fell to the BBC 's director of music , Adrian Boult . Among its guest conductors in its first years was Arturo Toscanini , who judged it the finest orchestra he had ever conducted . During and after the Second World War , Boult strove to maintain standards , but the senior management of the post @-@ war BBC did not allocate the orchestra the resources to meet competition from new and well @-@ funded rivals . 
 After Boult 's retirement from the BBC in 1950 , the orchestra went through a fallow period . Boult 's successor , Sir Malcolm Sargent , was popular with the public but had poor rapport with his players , and orchestral morale dropped . Sargent 's successor , Rudolf Schwarz , made little public impact , and although the BBC appointed high @-@ profile chief conductors in the 1960s and 1970s – Antal Doráti , Colin Davis , Pierre Boulez and Gennady Rozhdestvensky – the BBC SO remained underfunded and could not attract enough good players to rival the leading London orchestras . 
 As a result of initiatives begun in the 1960s by the BBC controller of music William Glock , performing standards gradually began to rise . Under Andrew Davis in the 1990s and Jiří Bělohlávek in the 2000s the orchestra prospered . By the second decade of the 21st century the BBC SO was once again regarded by critics as of first @-@ class status . From the outset the orchestra has been known for pioneering new music , and it continues to do so , at the Proms , in concerts at the Barbican Centre , and in studio concerts from its base at BBC Maida Vale studios . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Almost from its beginning in November 1922 the BBC had started broadcasting from its " 2LO " transmitter with its own musical ensembles . The first such groups were the " 2LO Dance Band " , the " 2LO Military Band " , the " 2LO Light Orchestra " , and the " 2LO <unk> " , all of which began broadcasting in 1923 . No concert promoter would co @-@ operate with the BBC , regarding it as a dangerous competitor , but the British National Opera Company allowed broadcasts of its performances from the Royal Opera House . John Reith , the General Manager of the BBC , invited the opera company 's musical director , Percy Pitt , to become the BBC 's part @-@ time musical adviser from May 1923 . Later in the same year Pitt conducted the BBC 's first broadcast symphony concert , which included Dvořák 's New World Symphony and works by Saint @-@ Saëns , Elgar and Weber . 
 Pitt expanded the regular eight @-@ piece studio ensemble to form The Wireless Orchestra of 18 players , augmented to 37 for important broadcasts . There was no thought at this stage that the BBC would maintain a full @-@ scale symphonic orchestra of up to 100 players . With Reith 's approval , Pitt engaged various orchestras for a BBC concert series in 1924 at the Methodist Central Hall Westminster . Pitt and Landon Ronald conducted the Royal Albert Hall Orchestra ; Eugene Goossens conducted the London Symphony Orchestra ; and Hamilton Harty and Sir Edward Elgar conducted the orchestra of the Royal Philharmonic Society . 
 In 1924 the Wireless Orchestra , by then comprising 22 players , was contracted for six concerts a week . The following year , Pitt , by now working full @-@ time for the BBC , as its director of music , augmented the ensemble to form the " Wireless Symphony Orchestra " for a new series of concerts broadcast from Covent Garden , conducted by Bruno Walter , Ernest Ansermet and Pierre Monteux . In 1927 the BBC and Covent Garden collaborated in a series of public concerts with an orchestra of 150 players under conductors including Richard Strauss and Siegfried Wagner . Although the orchestra was large , it was not good . The BBC attempted to stop its contracted players sending deputies to rehearsals and even to concerts , but was unsuccessful . In January 1928 The Musical Times protested : 
 The B.B.C. has been blamed for devoting too much time to the classics , and also for not giving them all that is due to them ; it has been held responsible for the inferiority of the apparatus of the listener @-@ in ; it has been censured on a variety of trifling points , but never for the one heinous offence it has committed , and goes on committing : for this corporation , with all its assured and conspicuous wealth , has given and is giving us the worst orchestral performances ever heard in London . … This year at Queen 's Hall they have assembled an orchestra which sounds as if it were composed in great part of " substitutes . " 
 In 1927 the BBC took over the responsibility for the Promenade Concerts , widely known as " the Proms " . At first Henry Wood , the founding conductor , persuaded the corporation to engage his Queen 's Hall Orchestra for each Prom season ; from 1930 onwards , the BBC provided the orchestra . 
 The inadequacy of the BBC 's players , and also of the established London orchestras , was shown up by the Berlin Philharmonic , under Wilhelm Furtwängler , in two concerts in 1927 . A historian of the Queen 's Hall , Robert Elkin , writes , " At this period the standard of orchestral playing in London was distinctly low , and the well @-@ drilled efficiency of the Berliners under their dynamic conductor came as something of a revelation . " These , and later concerts by the same orchestra , gained plaudits from the public and music critics at the expense of the London orchestras . The chief music critic of The Times , Frank Howes , later commented , " the British public ... was electrified when it heard the disciplined precision of the Berlin Philharmonic ... This apparently was how an orchestra could , and , therefore , ought to sound " . After the Berliners , London heard a succession of major foreign orchestras , including the Amsterdam Concertgebouw Orchestra under Willem Mengelberg and the Philharmonic @-@ Symphony Orchestra of New York under Arturo Toscanini . 
 Among those determined that London should have a permanent orchestra of similar excellence were Reith and the conductor Sir Thomas Beecham . The latter aimed at setting up a first rate ensemble for opera and concert performances and , though no admirer of broadcasting , he was willing to negotiate with the BBC if this gave him what he sought . Reith 's concern was that the BBC should have a first @-@ rate radio orchestra . The critic Richard Morrison writes : 
 Reith 's BBC of the 1920s was ... imbued with an almost religious zeal for " enlightening " the public through the magical medium of the wireless . An orchestra , and particularly one that was unencumbered by commercial constraints and thus free to deliver the highest of highbrow programmes , would fit very well into that idealistic philosophy . 
 Landon Ronald brought Reith and Beecham together in April 1928 ; negotiations and preliminary arrangements continued for more than 18 months until it became clear that the corporation and the conductor had irreconcilable priorities for the proposed new ensemble . Beecham withdrew and , as described by Nicholas Kenyon : 
 With the collapse of the Beecham scheme , the way was open for the BBC 's music department to design an orchestral scheme truly suited to broadcasting needs – a plan for a 114 @-@ piece orchestra that could split into four different smaller groups , which had been devised in the autumn of 1929 by Edward Clark and Julian Herbage – and to place that orchestra 's fortunes under the direction of the man who was to guide it with the utmost distinction for the next 20 years , the BBC 's new director of music , Adrian Boult . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 By the time Adrian Boult succeeded Pitt as director of music for the BBC , the violinist Albert Sammons and the violist Lionel Tertis had scouted for new talent around the country on behalf of the corporation . Twenty @-@ seven players had been offered positions in the new orchestra . Among those who joined were Aubrey Brain , Arthur Catterall , Eugene Cruft , <unk> Goossens , Lauri Kennedy and Frederick Thurston . Although many of the principals were stars recruited from the LSO , the Hallé and other orchestras , a high proportion of the rank and file members were fresh from music colleges . Boult wrote , " a brilliant group of young and inexperienced players came to sit behind the well @-@ known old <unk> . " 
 A substantial number of the players performed at the 1930 Promenade Concerts under Sir Henry Wood , and the full BBC Symphony Orchestra gave its first concert on 22 October 1930 , conducted by Boult at the Queen 's Hall . The programme consisted of music by Wagner , Brahms , Saint @-@ Saëns and Ravel . Of the 21 programmes in the orchestra 's first season , Boult conducted nine and Wood five . 
 The reviews of the new orchestra were enthusiastic . The Times wrote of its " virtuosity " and of Boult 's " superb " conducting . The Musical Times commented , " The boast of the B.B.C. that it intended to get together a first @-@ class orchestra was not an idle one " , spoke of " exhilaration at the playing " , and called another concert later in the season " an occasion for national pride " . The Observer called the playing " altogether magnificent " . After the initial concerts Reith was told by his advisers that the orchestra had played better for Boult than anyone else . Reith asked him if he wished to take on the chief conductorship , and if so whether he would resign as director of music or occupy both posts simultaneously . Boult opted for the latter . 
 During the 1930s , the orchestra became renowned for its high standard of playing and for performing new and unfamiliar music . The pioneering work of Boult and the BBC SO included an early performance of Schoenberg 's Variations , Op. 31 , British premieres , including Berg 's Wozzeck and Three Movements from the Lyric Suite , and world premieres , including Vaughan Williams 's Symphony No. 4 in F minor . Anton Webern conducted eight BBC SO concerts between 1931 and 1936 . 
 During the 1930s the orchestra presented rarely heard large @-@ scale works from the past , including Berlioz 's Grande Messe des morts and Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale . Mahler 's Eighth and Ninth Symphonies , and Purcell 's King Arthur . 
 The excellence of the orchestra attracted leading international conductors . In its second season guest conductors included Richard Strauss , Felix Weingartner and Bruno Walter , followed , in later seasons , by Serge Koussevitzky , Beecham and Mengelberg . Arturo Toscanini , widely regarded at the time as the world 's leading conductor , conducted the BBC SO in 1935 and later said that it was the finest he had ever directed . He returned to conduct the orchestra in 1937 , 1938 and 1939 , and declared , " This is the orchestra I would like to take round the world . " 
 = = = Second World War and postwar = = = 
 On the outbreak of war in September 1939 the BBC put into effect its contingency plans to minimise disruption of broadcasting . The corporation withdrew from responsibility for the Proms , with which Wood went ahead , backed by the Royal Philharmonic Society , with the LSO replacing the BBC SO . The BBC SO was relocated from London to Bristol . More than 40 players were released for active service , including the 30 youngest members ; the orchestra was reduced to a complement of 70 , although it was increased to 90 later in the war . During 1940 and 1941 Bristol suffered devastation from German air @-@ raids , and the BBC decided to move the orchestra again . In September 1941 the BBC SO took up residence in Bedford , where it remained , giving live broadcasts and making recordings until it returned permanently to its London base at the BBC 's BBC Maida Vale studios in 1945 . The BBC resumed its support for the Proms in 1942 , with the BBC SO returning temporarily to London during the Proms seasons of 1942 – 45 . For the rest of the year , the orchestra played in the hall of Bedford School , and after the launch of the V @-@ 1 raids in 1944 the remaining broadcast concerts of that year 's Proms season were performed at the Bedford Corn Exchange . 
 Boult had striven to maintain the orchestra 's standards and prestige during the war ; as an instance of its prowess in the 1940s Kennedy cites an HMV recording of Elgar 's Second Symphony released in January 1945 : " a performance that blazed with excitement and passion and is documentary evidence of the excellence of the orchestra in 1944 " . With Reith long gone from the post of director @-@ general , Boult found that the top management of the BBC was less concerned for the status of its Symphony Orchestra . The new director @-@ general , Sir William Haley , was unwilling to approve the funding needed to keep the orchestra competitive with new rivals – Walter Legge 's Philharmonia and Beecham 's Royal Philharmonic . Some younger players felt that many BBC SO principals were past their best . There were even a few members of the BBC 's staff who were not sorry when Steuart Wilson , a BBC executive with a private grudge against Boult , engineered Boult 's retirement in 1950 , though many profoundly regretted it . Wilson had neglected to secure a successor of similar eminence to take over the orchestra . His efforts to recruit Sir John Barbirolli and Rafael Kubelík were unsuccessful , and he was obliged to offer the post to his third choice , Sir Malcolm Sargent , on whatever terms Sargent demanded . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 Sargent , an immensely popular figure with the public , was not at all popular with orchestral players , because of what a historian of the Proms has called his " autocratic and prima @-@ donna attitude towards orchestral players " . He offended the BBC SO players by demanding that they all stand up when he came on to the platform – which they firmly declined to do . He rapidly became equally unpopular with the BBC music department , ignoring its agenda and pursuing his own . He refused to join the staff of the BBC , and insisted on remaining a freelance , taking numerous external engagements to the detriment of his work with the BBC SO . A senior BBC manager wrote , : 
 Except when a Barbirolli or a Kletzki has been in charge for a few days , the Orchestra is inferior , as an artistic instrument , to the Hallé or Philharmonia ... [ Sargent ] is indifferent to the morale and welfare of the Orchestra and to the individual temperaments of his players as artists or as human beings . 
 It did not help that Sargent was universally acknowledged to be at his finest in choral music . His reputation in big works for chorus and orchestra such as The Dream of Gerontius , Hiawatha 's Wedding Feast and Belshazzar 's Feast was unrivalled , and his large @-@ scale performances of Handel oratorios were assured packed houses . However , his regular programming of such works did nothing to lift the spirits of the BBC SO : orchestral musicians regarded playing the instrumental accompaniment for large choirs as drudgery . 
 In the 1950s the BBC SO , in common with the rest of the BBC 's musical organisation , suffered from stagnation . In the words of the critic Peter Heyworth , " the Corporation 's music department had become a byword for its narrow @-@ mindedness and lassitude " . Boult had been followed as director of music by a series of successors between 1944 and 1959 who either lacked his commitment to modern music or were actively hostile to it . Richard Howgill , who held the post from 1952 to 1959 , took the view that although Webern " might have been a small composer of some significance , Schoenberg wasn 't really a composer at all . " In addition to working under a conductor it disliked , the BBC SO found its role as a pioneer of progressive music gone , and its performances of the standard classics criticised as under @-@ rehearsed ( particularly during Proms seasons ) compared with those given by Legge 's Philharmonia and others . Sargent 's contract was not renewed in 1957 , although he continued with undiminished popularity as chief conductor of the Proms until his death ten years later . Howgill appointed Rudolf Schwarz as chief conductor of the BBC SO . Schwarz failed to restore orchestral standards to pre @-@ war levels , and lacked Sargent 's box @-@ office appeal . Under Schwarz , BBC SO concerts other than the Proms drew poor houses – as low as 29 per cent of capacity in the 1959 – 60 season . The manager of the Royal Festival Hall , Ernest Bean , spoke of " an inherited aura of mediocrity about BBC concerts which keeps people away " . Schwarz 's five @-@ year contract was not renewed when it expired . 
 = = = 1960s to 1980s = = = 
 In 1959 William Glock was appointed controller of music for the BBC , and the profile and fortunes of the BBC SO began to rise . For the post of principal conductor Glock engaged Antal Doráti , who , in Heyworth 's judgment , raised standards of playing and brought new vigour to the programmes in his four years in charge ( 1962 – 66 ) . Doráti was convinced that the orchestra was <unk> by concentrating on studio broadcasts , as it did except during the Proms season . He strove to free players from " slavery to the microphone " , and Glock promoted a regular series of concerts at the Festival Hall . The music critic Tom Sutcliffe later wrote that Doráti and his successors , Colin Davis ( 1967 – 71 ) , Pierre Boulez ( 1971 – 75 ) and Gennady Rozhdestvensky ( 1978 – 81 ) had been partly successful in improving playing standards , but had not brought the orchestra up to its original level of distinction . 
 By 1962 Glock had persuaded the management of the BBC to increase the orchestra 's budget to allow for joint principals in the string sections , to attract top musicians who could play in the BBC SO without having to give up their solo or chamber careers . The following season he was able to engage joint principals for the wind section ; he recruited such star players as Jack Brymer and Terence MacDonagh , formerly members of Beecham 's celebrated " Royal Family " in the RPO . The problem remained that recruiting rank @-@ and @-@ file string players was difficult : although the BBC offered secure employment and a pension , it did not pay as well as its London rivals . After 1964 the BBC SO was the only one of the five London symphony orchestras that was not self @-@ governed , and some musicians felt that the BBC SO 's constitution as a body of salaried employees , with no say in the management or repertory of the orchestra , attracted an unadventurous type of player . A former member of the BBC SO said in 1979 @,@ 
 I felt I was getting too secure ... [ in ] the BBC Symphony you can be a poor player , but if you 're on time and never moan at the conductor … you 'll have no trouble ... I think the BBC Symphony lost some good young players because the management got their priorities wrong . 
 Glock was well known as a proponent of music of the Second Viennese School and their successors ; earlier in his career he had been dismissed as music critic of The Observer for such views as " no great composer has ever cared how ' pleasant ' his music sounds " . Under his administration , the BBC SO gave world premieres of works by composers including Roberto Gerhard , Peter Maxwell Davies and Michael Tippett , and UK premieres of works by , among others , Luciano Berio , Boulez and Edgard Varèse . The policy of commissioning works , and giving UK premieres of new compositions was continued under Glock 's successors . World or UK premieres in the 1970s included works by Elliott Carter , György Ligeti , Witold Lutosławski , Olivier Messiaen , Luigi Nono , Arvo Pärt and Karlheinz Stockhausen . BBC commissions premiered by the BBC SO in the 1980s included Alfred Schnittke 's Second Symphony , Harrison Birtwistle 's Earth Dances , and John Tavener 's The Protecting Veil . 
 Although Glock restored the orchestra 's reputation as Britain 's leading modern music ensemble , the balance of programming affected the players ' capacity in the mainstream repertoire . The principal horn , Alan Civil , recalled , " We did about eighty percent modern and twenty percent classical . The awful tragedy , for the orchestra , was that eventually we were not able to play the standard classics . We could sight @-@ read the most fearsome contemporary piece , but a Brahms symphony – embarrassing ! " The bassoon player William Waterhouse who joined the BBC SO from the LSO found the BBC 's repertory refreshing , but the music making less impressive : " There were no potboilers , but also , I 'm afraid , no world @-@ ranking soloists either . " 
 John Pritchard was principal conductor from 1982 to 1989 . In The Times , Paul Griffiths wrote , " Sir John 's seven @-@ year period with the orchestra has been marked by growing orchestral confidence and many memorable performances . " Principal guest conductors in the 1970s and 1980s included Sir Charles Mackerras ( 1977 – 79 ) , Michael Gielen ( 1978 – 81 ) , Günter Wand , Mark Elder ( 1982 – 85 ) and Péter Eötvös ( 1985 – 88 ) . 
 = = = 1990s and 21st century = = = 
 Pritchard 's successor was Andrew Davis , who ( 1989 – 2000 ) was the longest @-@ serving chief conductor since Boult . He was at the helm for what John Allison in The Times called " the valuable Barbican weekends that each January investigate another major but not fully understood 20th @-@ century composer . " Noting that modern music was central to the work of Davis and the orchestra , Allison added that under Davis the orchestra took part in " once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime projects such as Anthony Payne 's completion of Elgar 's Third Symphony . " Such was Davis 's contribution to the orchestra that when he resigned he was appointed its first conductor laureate . 
 In 2000 , Davis was succeeded by Leonard Slatkin , whose relationship with the players was uneasy , and whose repertoire was not generally liked by the orchestra or the audiences ; he was felt to emphasise twentieth century American music at the expense of cutting @-@ edge modern works and the central European classics . When his departure was announced in 2004 the BBC had not found a replacement . There was speculation that the successor would be Jukka @-@ Pekka <unk> , Donald <unk> or David Robertson , but the post went to Jiří Bělohlávek . He was well known to the players , having been the orchestra 's principal guest conductor in the 1990s . The classical repertory was regarded as one of Bělohlávek 's strengths , but he had no reputation for conducting new works , which remained a core part of the orchestra 's remit . He welcomed the fact that the orchestra 's new principal guest conductor was David Robertson , a new @-@ music expert and a protégé of Boulez . The orchestra was seen by some as " a <unk> lot " and " grumpy " , but its relations with Bělohlávek were harmonious . Under Bělohlávek the orchestra won glowing reviews : The Times referred to its " superb musicians " , Michael Kennedy in The Sunday Telegraph referred to a " rich and opulent [ score ] magnificently played by the BBC Symphony Orchestra " under Bělohlávek , and another Telegraph critic praised the BBC SO 's " virtuoso form " . 
 Principal guest conductors during these years were Alexander Lazarev ( 1992 – 95 ) , Bělohlávek ( 1995 – 2000 ) and Jukka @-@ Pekka <unk> ( 2002 – 05 ) . It was announced in 2012 that Sakari <unk> would take over as chief conductor in 2013 . In 2012 , Semyon <unk> assumed a newly created position in the orchestra , the Günter Wand Conducting Chair . 
 = = = Function in the 21st century = = = 
 The BBC SO is the associate orchestra of the Barbican Centre in London , where it gives an annual season of concerts . These seasons include series of concerts devoted to individual modern composers , who have included John Cage , James MacMillan , Elliott Carter , Sofia <unk> and Michael Tippett . 
 The orchestra remains the principal orchestra of the Proms , giving about a dozen concerts each season , including the first and last nights . Most of its concerts are broadcast on BBC Radio 3 , streamed online and available as podcasts for a month after broadcast , and a number are televised : the orchestra 's website claims that this gives the BBC " the highest broadcast profile of any UK orchestra " . The orchestra continues to make studio recordings for Radio 3 at the Maida Vale studios ; some recording sessions are free for the public to attend . 
 In common with other orchestras , the BBC SO engages in educational work . According to the orchestra 's website : " Among ongoing projects are the BBC SO Family Music Intro scheme , introducing families to live classical music , BBC SO Student Zone and the highly successful BBC SO Family Orchestra , alongside work in local schools . Total Immersion composer events also provide rich material for education work . " 
 In 2000 , the orchestra appointed its first associate composer , Mark @-@ Anthony Turnage . John Adams became the BBC Symphony Orchestra 's artist in association in June 2003 . The composer and conductor Oliver Knussen took up the post of artist @-@ in @-@ association in July 2009 . The orchestra 's commitment to new music continues . In 2013 , the music journalist Tom Service wrote , " I 've heard the BBC Symphony give concerts that I don 't think any other orchestra in the world could do as brilliantly … That supreme virtuosity in new music makes them unique among London 's big orchestras . " 
 = = Recordings = = 
 From its first years the BBC SO was active in commercial recording studios . Under Boult it recorded a wide range of music from Bach to Mozart and Beethoven , Brahms , Wagner and Elgar . In the 1950s and 1960s it recorded a range of music with Sargent , mostly British but with several Sibelius discs in addition . With Doráti the orchestra made recordings of works by Bartók , Gerhard and <unk> . Under Colin Davis it made its first opera sets : Mozart 's Idomeneo and The Marriage of Figaro , and Berlioz 's Benvenuto Cellini , as well as works by Beethoven and Tippett . Under Boulez the orchestra recorded mostly twentieth century music – works by Bartók , Berg , Schoenberg and Boulez himself – and also Berlioz . Andrew Davis has recorded extensively with the orchestra for the Teldec label and others . Under Bělohlávek the orchestra has recorded Martinů 's complete symphonies , and also his The Epic of Gilgamesh . 
 With guest conductors the BBC SO has recorded Elgar and Vaughan Williams under the composers , Beethoven under Toscanini , Bruno Walter and Barbirolli , and Sibelius under Beecham and Koussevitsky . 
 = 1903 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1903 Atlantic hurricane season featured seven hurricanes , the most in a season since 1893 . The first tropical cyclone was initially observed in the western Atlantic Ocean near Puerto Rico on July 21 . The tenth and final system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone well northwest of the Azores on November 25 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . Six of the ten tropical cyclones existed simultaneously . 
 Of the season 's ten tropical storms , seven of those strengthened into a hurricane . One of the seven hurricanes deepened further into a major hurricane , which are tropical cyclones that reach at least Category 3 on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The second , third , and fourth systems left the most significant impacts during this season . The second storm , which struck Jamaica in August , devastated Martinique , Jamaica , and the Cayman Islands . At least 149 deaths were attributed to this storm , while it also caused $ 10 million ( 1903 USD ) in damage in Jamaica alone . The third cyclone made landfall in Florida twice in mid @-@ August , leaving 14 fatalities and about $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage . Only a few days later , the fourth cyclone struck New Jersey . The storm impacted many areas in the Mid @-@ Atlantic region of the United States and caused 57 deaths and about $ 8 million in damage . Additionally , the remnants of the eighth tropical cyclone caused severe flooding in the Mid @-@ Atlantic . 
 The Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project also indicated but could not confirm the presence of four additional tropical depressions throughout the season . However , the reanalysis added a previously undetected tropical storm in late October to the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) . Reanalysis also resulted in the eighth cyclone being downgraded from a hurricane to a tropical storm . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began with the development of the first system on July 21 in the western Atlantic near Puerto Rico . This was the only storm in the month of July . Likewise , August also featured one storm . The second system was the most intense tropical cyclone of the season , peaking as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) . This was also the first major hurricane in the Atlantic basin since the second storm of 1900 and the first in the Caribbean Sea since the 1899 San Ciriaco hurricane . September was the most active month of the season , with four systems developing , three of which intensified into a hurricane . In October , there were three tropical storms , with one intensifying into a hurricane . The only November tropical cyclone , as well as the final system of the season , developed on November 17 and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while northwest of the Azores on November 25 . 
 The season had a total of 10 tropical storms , 7 of which intensified into a hurricane . This marked the most hurricanes in a season since the total of eight in 1893 . There may have been an additional four tropical depressions throughout the season , but the data obtained by the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project was inconclusive . The reanalysis added a previously undetected tropical storm in late October to the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) . Reanalysis also resulted in the eighth cyclone being downgraded from a Category 2 hurricane to a tropical storm . Nearly all of the season 's 10 tropical cyclones impacted land . Collectively , the storms caused over $ 18 @.@ 5 million in damage and at least 222 fatalities . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 102 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 According to historical weather maps , an area of disturbed weather developed a closed circulation early on July 21 while located about 100 mi ( 160 km ) northeast of the Samaná Peninsula of Dominican Republic , becoming the first tropical cyclone of the season . The storm moved northwestward until about 12 : 00 UTC on July 22 , at which time it curved northward , before turning northeastward about 24 hours later . Early on July 24 , it intensified into a Category 1 hurricane . The hurricane strengthened slightly further , peaking with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) six hours later . The system began weakening early on July 24 , falling to tropical storm intensity around 12 : 00 UTC . Accelerating to the east @-@ northeast , the storm also began to lose tropical characteristics and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 06 : 00 UTC on July 26 , while situated about 430 mi ( 690 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Shortly before , a ship recorded a barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) , the lowest in relation to the storm . The extratropical remnants continued east @-@ northeastward and dissipated late on July 26 . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed about 1 @,@ 160 mi ( 1 @,@ 870 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados , early on August 6 . The system moved generally west @-@ northwestward and strengthened into a hurricane about 24 hours later . Early on August 9 , it struck Martinique as either a strong Category 1 or a weak Category 2 hurricane . The storm entered the Caribbean Sea shortly thereafter . Around 12 : 00 UTC , the cyclone intensified into a Category 3 hurricane . Between 06 : 00 UTC and 12 : 00 UTC on August 11 , it struck Jamaica near Morant Point with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . At 06 : 00 UTC on August 12 , while brushing Grand Cayman , the hurricane peaked with maximum sustained winds of the same intensity and a minimum barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) , observed by the Governor Blake . The system weakened to a Category 2 around the time of landfall near Playa del Carmen , Quintana Roo , early on August 13 , with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . By 12 : 00 UTC , the storm further weakened to a Category 1 . After crossing the Yucatán Peninsula and emerging into the Gulf of Mexico early on August 14 , the hurricane failed to re @-@ strengthen . Around 00 : 00 UTC on August 16 , it made landfall north of Tampico , Tamaulipas , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The hurricane soon weakened to a tropical storm and dissipated over San Luis Potosí late on August 16 . 
 In Martinique , hundreds of homes were deroofed in Fort @-@ de @-@ France , while about 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the villages of Fond , Fourniols , La Haye , Recluce , and Tivoli , all of which were established after the eruption of Mount Pelée in 1902 . The hurricane also left extensive damage to crops and eight fatalities . In Jamaica , several communities were completely or nearly destroyed , including Manchioneal , Port Antonio , and Port Maria . Thousands of homes also suffered damage in the capital city of Kingston . Banana crops were devastated so severely that many growers were forced into bankruptcy . Numerous ships were wrecked , particularly on the north coast of the island . There were at least 65 deaths and about $ 10 million in damage . At the Cayman Islands , more than 200 houses and seven of eight churches on Grand Cayman were destroyed or heavily damaged . Of the 23 ships in the harbor , only the Governor Blake survived . Most of the crews on board those ships were reported killed , but loss of life on shore was minimal . The storm also caused heavy damage on the Yucatán Peninsula . Many ships were wrecked and communications were cutoff in several places . In the Tampico area , there was considerable damage to the port and many ships being sunk or driven ashore . Much of the land between Tampico and Cárdenas in San Luis Potosí was submerged due to flooding . In all , the storm is believed to have killed at least 149 people . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 Reanalysis indicates that a 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) tropical storm originated near Mayaguana in the Bahamas around 06 : 00 UTC on September 9 , though lack of data suggests that this system likely developed earlier . Moving northwestward , the cyclone became a Category 1 hurricane around 12 : 00 UTC on the following day . Late on September 10 and early on September 11 , the storm passed near Nassau . The hurricane then turned to the west @-@ northwest on September 11 and moved just north of the Bimini Islands . As it crossed the Bahamas , the system produced hurricane @-@ force winds on some islands , with an estimated wind speed as high as 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) in Nassau . Damage to crops and buildings occurred , but no deaths were reported over the island chain . 
 Late on September 11 , the storm made landfall near Fort Lauderdale , Florida , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The Inchulva capsized near Delray Beach , drowning nine of her crew members . The cyclone caused severe wind damage in present @-@ day Broward and Palm Beach counties , although most of the losses were to crops such as sugarcane . The hurricane weakened to a tropical storm while crossing Florida , but re @-@ intensified into a hurricane over the Gulf of Mexico on September 12 . Peaking with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) , the storm made landfall near Panama City around 23 : 00 UTC on September 13 . In Northwest Florida , Alabama , and Georgia , the cyclone produced widespread rainfall , causing some crop damage . Additionally , a storm surge caused boats to be blown ashore in the Florida Panhandle . In all , the storm killed 14 people in Florida and produced $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage . After falling to tropical storm intensity early on September 14 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression on September 16 , several hours before dissipating over South Carolina . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 A 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) tropical storm was first observed about 550 mi ( 885 km ) northeast of Antigua early on September 12 . The storm moved relatively quickly to the northwest . Late on September 14 , it strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane . On the following day , the storm began curving to the north @-@ northwest . Intensifying further , the cyclone became a Category 2 hurricane late on September 15 , peaking with maximum sustained winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . At the time , it was situated about 110 mi ( 190 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The storm weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane at 00 : 00 UTC on September 16 . About 11 hours later , the hurricane made landfall near Avalon , New Jersey , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . In 1992 , Jerry Jarrell , later director of the National Hurricane Center , estimated a barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) at landfall , which would be the lowest in association with the hurricane . After moving inland , the system quickly weakened to a tropical storm late on September 16 . The storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over New York near Lake Ontario at 12 : 00 UTC on September 17 . The extratropical remnants soon dissipated over Ontario . 
 In North Carolina and Virginia , the storm brought near @-@ hurricane force winds and rough surf . Some boats were beached along the coast of Virginia . Near Chincoteague , the schooner Beatrice capsized , drowning 28 people . Hundreds of birds were killed and fell to the ground near Old Point Comfort , many stripped of their feathers . The outer rainbands of the storm produced heavy rainfall near Washington , D.C. , canceling a Major League Baseball game between the Detroit Tigers and the Washington Senators after the field was flooded . Along the Delaware coast , the schooner Hattie A. Marsh was smashed against the rocks , killing five people . The hurricane caused severe damage in New Jersey , especially in Atlantic City . Throughout the coastal regions , strong winds downed all telephone and telegraph wires . Additionally , the winds destroyed the roofs of an estimated 50 to 60 cottages . Several streets were flooded , with severe transportation delays reported . One indirect death occurred in Cape May when a man , unable to see owing to the hurricane , drove into a train . Damage in New Jersey was approximately $ 8 million . In New York City , high winds swayed buildings , spires , and bridges , overturning wagons on the Brooklyn Bridge . At least a few buildings were deroofed and many homes were flooded or damaged , especially in Brooklyn . One death occurred in the city . On Long Island , President Theodore Roosevelt directly experienced the effects of the hurricane while on a yacht . The life of the president was briefly threatened due to the rough conditions , though none on board of the yacht suffered any problems from the hurricane . Overall , the storm caused 57 fatalities . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 Historical weather maps indicated that a tropical depression developed just south of the Turks and Caicos Islands early on September 19 . The depression trekked generally northward and remained weak for the next few days . By September 22 , the system intensified into a tropical storm . Turning east @-@ northeastward on September 24 , the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 003 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) , which was observed by a ship . Thereafter , it accelerated and slowly weakened , falling to tropical depression intensity early on September 26 . The system dissipated by 18 : 00 UTC while situated about 450 mi ( 720 km ) southeast of Sable Island . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 Historical weather maps note that a tropical storm was first observed about 415 mi ( 670 km ) northeast of Anguilla early on September 26 . Initially , the storm moved west @-@ northwestward , but curved northwestward late the following day . At 00 : 00 UTC on September 28 , the cyclone intensified into a Category 1 hurricane and then a Category 2 hurricane 12 hours later while curving to the northeast . While passing near Bermuda late on September 28 , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 988 mbar ( 29 @.@ 2 inHg ) , which was observed in Hamilton . The system then began to accelerate and weaken , falling to Category 1 intensity at 00 : 00 UTC on September 30 . Six hours later , the hurricane transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located about 495 mi ( 700 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The remnants moved continued rapidly northeastward and dissipated later that day . 
 In Bermuda , the strongest observed wind speed was 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) . The winds uprooted a number of cedar trees and broke off large palmettos off palm trees . Several buildings and homes were damaged . A newly constructed extension on the Princess Hotel " collapsed like a pack of cards " . In St. George 's , a wall that collapsed near the Royal Engineers quarters killed a former soldier . Heavy rainfall on the island washed out many roads . A landslide occurred , shearing off a portion of the cliff at Deep Bay . The resulting earth trembling and noise created from the slide resembled an earthquake . Along the coast , rough seas wrecked a number of boats , while several stone docks and seawalls were severely damaged or destroyed . Another death occurred after an engineer on Ireland Island was swept out to sea and drowned . 
 = = = Hurricane Seven = = = 
 A strong tropical storm was first observed about 300 mi ( 480 km ) east of Barbuda early on October 1 , according to historical weather maps and ship data . Moving northwestward , it intensified into a Category 1 hurricane about 24 hours later . The storm then curved north @-@ northeastward late on October 2 . Strengthening into a Category 2 hurricane around 12 : 00 UTC on October 4 , the cyclone peaked with maximum sustained winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . It then briefly turned east @-@ northeastward , before recurving east @-@ southeastward . Late on October 5 , the hurricane weakened back to the Category 1 . The storm began to decelerate and execute a cyclonic loop late on October 6 . After about 24 hours , it began moving east @-@ northeastward to northeastward . Early on October 9 , the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm . Late that day , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while situated 680 mi ( 1 @,@ 090 km ) south @-@ southwest of Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed by ships early on October 5 , while situated about 160 mi ( 260 km ) northeast of San Salvador Island in the Bahamas . The storm nearly drifted northeastward while strengthening slowly over the next few days . Early on October 8 , the cyclone curved north @-@ northeastward . The storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 997 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) on October 9 while passing west of Bermuda ; both were based observations from a ship . Reanalysis also resulted in the eighth cyclone being downgraded from a Category 2 hurricane to a tropical storm Thereafter , the system began weakening and transitioned into extratropical cyclone around 12 : 00 UTC on October 10 , while located about 255 mi ( 410 km ) north of Bermuda . 
 Although the remnant system became indistinguishable by late on October 10 , the remnants contributed to severe flooding along the East Coast of the United States . In North Carolina , poor weather conditions in Kitty Hawk prevented the Wright brothers from flying their glider or assembling the untested airplane . In Virginia , strong winds toppled trees and knocked out communications in cities such as Richmond and Norfolk , where a tree brought from Napoleon Bonaparte 's grave in Paris , France , was uprooted . Wires were downed , completely disrupting communication . One death occurred inland when a man in Leesburg drowned while walk across a log on the Little River . Rough seas capsized nine vessels offshore Virginia , resulting in three deaths . Waves lashing the Back River Light caused the stones on its structure to move out of place . 
 The storm caused severe flooding states such as New Jersey , New York , and Pennsylvania . In New Jersey , some areas experienced rainfall totals of about 14 in ( 360 mm ) over the course of four days . In Paterson , seven bridges were destroyed and two others were severely damaged . Approximately 10 @.@ 3 mi ( 16 @.@ 6 km ) of streets in the city were inundated . About 1 @,@ 200 people fled their homes and took refuge at Paterson Armory . About 20 % and 20 % of the land in Passaic and Wallington were inundated , respectively . Damage in New Jersey reached about $ 7 million . Twenty deaths occurred , with two from drowning incidents , one from a heart attack , and seventeen others from a flood @-@ related train crash near Trenton . Along the Delaware River , nine bridges connecting New Jersey and Pennsylvania were destroyed . In Pennsylvania , houses in Easton were swept into the river and destroyed after colliding with bridges . The Lehigh River overflowed into West Easton , damaging all businesses in the city . In New York , about 10 in ( 250 mm ) fell in New York City over a 48 @-@ hour period . A number of businesses and homes were flooded , while some areas of the city were inundated with 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water . Transportation by ferry , trolley , and railroad were also disrupted . A flooded conduit damaged 70 telegraph lines . In Poughkeepsie , two deaths occurred due to a landslide . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 A westward moving disturbance was first noted between Barbados and Grenada on October 19 and later Hispaniola . By early October 21 , the system developed into a tropical depression near Turks and Caicos Islands . The depression initially moved north @-@ northwestward across the eastern Bahamas , remaining weak during its passage . After reaching the open Atlantic , the cyclone intensified into a tropical storm by 12 : 00 UTC on October 23 . Strengthening continued , and by early on October 24 , the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) , both of which were observed by ships . However , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone by 18 : 00 UTC while situated about 190 mi ( 310 km ) southeast of Cape Lookout in North Carolina . The remnants accelerated ahead of a cold front and later struck Newfoundland , before dissipating over the Labrador Sea on October 27 . 
 = = = Hurricane Ten = = = 
 Historical weather maps indicated the final storm on the season beginning early on November 17 , while located about 780 mi ( 1 @,@ 260 km ) west @-@ northwest of Santo Antão island in Cape Verde . The storm strengthened slowly and moved northwestward for the next few days , until curving northeastward late on November 19 . At 06 : 00 UTC on the following day , the cyclone intensified into a Category 1 hurricane . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane turned eastward and then north @-@ northeastward by November 22 . On the following day , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , which was observed by a ship . The hurricane continued moving north @-@ northeastward for a few days , until transitioning into an extratropical cyclone while located about 480 mi ( 770 km ) northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores late on November 25 . 
 = = = Printed Media = = = 
 Terry Tucker . Beware the Hurricane ! Hamilton Press : Bermuda , 1966 . 
 = Guillain – Barré syndrome = 
 Guillain – Barré syndrome ( GBS ) is a rapid @-@ onset muscle weakness caused by the immune system damaging the peripheral nervous system . Many experience changes in sensation or develop pain , followed by muscle weakness beginning in the feet and hands . The symptoms develop over half a day to two weeks . During the acute phase , the disorder can be life @-@ threatening with about a quarter developing weakness of the breathing muscles and requiring mechanical ventilation . Some are affected by changes in the function of the autonomic nervous system , which can lead to dangerous abnormalities in heart rate and blood pressure . 
 This autoimmune disease is caused by the body 's immune system mistakenly attacking the peripheral nerves and damaging their myelin insulation . Sometimes this immune dysfunction is triggered by an infection . The diagnosis is usually made based on the signs and symptoms , through the exclusion of alternative causes , and supported by tests such as nerve conduction studies and examination of the cerebrospinal fluid . Various classifications exist , depending on the areas of weakness , results of nerve conduction studies , and the presence of antiganglioside antibodies . It is classified as an acute polyneuropathy . 
 In those with severe weakness , prompt treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins or plasmapheresis , together with supportive care , will lead to good recovery in the majority . Some may experience ongoing difficulty with walking , painful symptoms , and some require long @-@ term breathing support . Guillain – Barré syndrome is rare , at one or two cases per 100 @,@ 000 people every year . The syndrome is named after the French neurologists Georges Guillain and Jean Alexandre Barré , who described it with André Strohl in 1916 . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The first symptoms of Guillain – Barré syndrome are numbness , tingling , and pain , alone or in combination . This is followed by weakness of the legs and arms that affects both sides equally and worsens over time . The weakness can take half a day to over two weeks to reach maximum severity , and then becomes steady . In one in five people , the weakness continues to progress for as long as four weeks . The muscles of the neck may also be affected , and about half experience involvement of the cranial nerves which supply the head and face ; this may lead to weakness of the muscles of the face , swallowing difficulties and sometimes weakness of the eye muscles . In 8 % , the weakness affects only the legs ( paraplegia or <unk> ) . Involvement of the muscles that control the bladder and anus is unusual . In total , about a third of people with Guillain – Barré syndrome continue to be able to walk . Once the weakness has stopped progressing , it persists at a stable level ( " plateau phase " ) before improvement occurs . The plateau phase can take between two days and six months , but the most common duration is a week . Pain @-@ related symptoms affect more than half , and include back pain , painful tingling , muscle pain and pain in the head and neck relating to irritation of the lining of the brain . 
 Many people with Guillain – Barré syndrome have experienced the signs and symptoms of an infection in the 3 – 6 weeks prior to the onset of the neurological symptoms . This may consist of upper respiratory tract infection ( rhinitis , sore throat ) or diarrhea . 
 In children , particularly those younger than six years old , the diagnosis can be difficult and the condition is often initially mistaken ( sometimes for up to two weeks ) for other causes of pains and difficulty walking , such as viral infections , or bone and joint problems . 
 On neurological examination , characteristic features are the reduced power and reduced or absent tendon reflexes ( hypo- or <unk> , respectively ) . However , a small proportion has normal reflexes in affected limbs before developing <unk> , and some may have exaggerated reflexes . In the " Miller Fisher variant " subtype of Guillain – Barré syndrome ( see below ) , weakness of the eye muscles ( ophthalmoplegia ) is more pronounced and may occur together with abnormalities in coordination ( ataxia ) . The level of consciousness is normally unaffected in Guillain – Barré syndrome , but the Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis subtype may feature drowsiness , sleepiness , or coma . 
 = = = Respiratory failure = = = 
 A quarter of all people with Guillain – Barré syndrome develop weakness of the breathing muscles leading to respiratory failure , the inability to breathe adequately to maintain healthy levels of oxygen and / or carbon dioxide in the blood . This life @-@ threatening scenario is complicated by other medical problems such as pneumonia , severe infections , blood clots in the lungs and bleeding in the digestive tract in 60 % of those who require artificial ventilation . 
 = = = Autonomic dysfunction = = = 
 The autonomic or involuntary nervous system , which is involved in the control of body functions such as heart rate and blood pressure , is affected in two thirds of people with Guillain – Barré syndrome , but the impact is variable . Twenty percent may experience severe blood @-@ pressure fluctuations and irregularities in the heart beat , sometimes to the point that the heart beat stops and requiring pacemaker @-@ based treatment . Other associated problems are abnormalities in perspiration and changes in the reactivity of the pupils . Autonomic nervous system involvement can affect even those who do not have severe muscle weakness . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Two thirds of people with Guillain – Barré syndrome have experienced an infection before the onset of the condition . Most commonly these are episodes of gastroenteritis or a respiratory tract infection . In many cases , the exact nature of the infection can be confirmed . Approximately 30 % of cases are provoked by Campylobacter jejuni bacteria , which cause diarrhea . A further 10 % are attributable to cytomegalovirus ( CMV , HHV @-@ 5 ) . Despite this , only very few people with Campylobacter or CMV infections develop Guillain – Barré syndrome ( 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 65 per 1000 and 0 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 2 per 1000 episodes , respectively ) . The strain of Campylobacter involved may determine the risk of GBS ; different forms of the bacteria have different lipopolysaccharides on their surface , and some may induce illness ( see below ) while others will not . 
 Links between other infections and GBS are less certain . Two other herpesviruses ( Epstein – Barr virus / HHV @-@ 4 and varicella zoster virus / HHV @-@ 3 ) and the bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae have been associated with GBS . The tropical viral infection dengue fever and Zika virus have also been associated with episodes of GBS . Previous hepatitis E virus infection has been found to be more common in people with Guillain – Barré syndrome . 
 Some cases may be triggered by the influenza virus and potentially influenza vaccine . An increased incidence of Guillain – Barré syndrome followed influenza immunization that followed the 1976 swine flu outbreak ( H1N1 A / NJ / 76 ) ; 8 @.@ 8 cases per million recipients developed the complication . Since then , close monitoring of cases attributable to vaccination has demonstrated that influenza itself can induce GBS . Small increases in incidence have been observed in subsequent vaccination campaigns , but not to the same extent . The 2009 flu pandemic vaccine ( against pandemic swine flu virus H1N1 / <unk> ) did not cause a significant increase in cases . It is considered that the benefits of vaccination in preventing influenza outweigh the small risks of GBS after vaccination . Even those who have previously experienced Guillain – Barré syndrome are considered safe to receive the vaccine in the future . Other vaccines , such as those against poliomyelitis , tetanus or measles , have not been associated with a risk of GBS . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The nerve dysfunction in Guillain – Barré syndrome is caused by an immune attack on the nerve cells of the peripheral nervous system and their support structures . The nerve cells have their body ( the soma ) in the spinal cord and a long projection ( the axon ) that carries electrical nerve impulses to the neuromuscular junction where the impulse is transferred to the muscle . Axons are wrapped in a sheath of Schwann cells that contain myelin . Between Schwann cells are gaps ( nodes of <unk> ) where the axon is exposed . Different types of Guillain – Barré syndrome feature different types of immune attack . The demyelinating variant ( AIDP , see below ) features damage to the myelin sheath by white blood cells ( T lymphocytes and macrophages ) ; this process is preceded by activation of a group of blood proteins known as complement . In contrast , the axonal variant is mediated by IgG antibodies and complement against the cell membrane covering the axon without direct lymphocyte involvement . 
 Various antibodies directed at nerve cells have been reported in Guillain – Barré syndrome . In the axonal subtype , these antibodies have been shown to bind to gangliosides , a group of substances found in peripheral nerves . A <unk> is a molecule consisting of ceramide bound to a small group of <unk> @-@ type sugars and containing various numbers of N @-@ <unk> acid groups . The key four gangliosides against which antibodies have been described are GM1 , <unk> , <unk> , and GQ1b , with different anti @-@ <unk> antibodies being associated with particular features ; for instance , GQ1b antibodies have been linked with Miller Fisher variant GBS and related forms including Bickerstaff encephalitis . The production of these antibodies after an infection is probably the result of molecular mimicry , where the immune system is reacting to microbial substances but the resultant antibodies also react with substances occurring naturally in the body . After a Campylobacter infection , the body produces antibodies of the IgA class ; only a small proportion of people also produce IgG antibodies against bacterial substance cell wall substances ( e.g. <unk> ) that <unk> with human nerve cell gangliosides . It is not currently known how this process escapes central tolerance to gangliosides , which is meant to suppress the production of antibodies against the body 's own substances . Not all antiganglioside antibodies cause disease , and it has recently been suggested that some antibodies bind to more than one type of epitope simultaneously ( heterodimeric binding ) and that this determines the response . Furthermore , the development of pathogenic antibodies may depend on the presence of other strains of bacteria in the bowel . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of Guillain – Barré syndrome depends on findings such as rapid development of muscle paralysis , absent reflexes , absence of fever , and a likely cause . Cerebrospinal fluid analysis ( through a lumbar spinal puncture ) and nerve conduction studies are supportive investigations commonly performed in the diagnosis of GBS . Testing for antiganglioside antibodies is often performed , but their contribution to diagnosis is usually limited . Blood tests are generally performed to exclude the possibility of another cause for weakness , such as a low level of potassium in the blood . An abnormally low level of sodium in the blood is often encountered in Guillain – Barré syndrome . This has been attributed to the inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone , leading to relative retention of water . 
 In many cases , magnetic resonance imaging of the spinal cord is performed to distinguish between Guillain – Barré syndrome and other conditions causing limb weakness , such as spinal cord compression . If an MRI scan shows enhancement of the nerve roots , this may be indicative of GBS . In children , this feature is present in 95 % of scans , but it is not specific to Guillain – Barré syndrome , so other confirmation is also needed . 
 = = = Spinal fluid = = = 
 Cerebrospinal fluid envelops the brain and the spine , and lumbar puncture or spinal tap is the removal of a small amount of fluid using a needle inserted between the lumbar vertebrae . Characteristic findings in Guillain – Barré syndrome are an elevated protein level , usually greater than 0 @.@ 55 g / L , and fewer than 10 white blood cells per cubic millimeter of fluid ( " <unk> dissociation " ) . This combination distinguishes Guillain – Barré syndrome from other conditions ( such as lymphoma and poliomyelitis ) in which both the protein and the cell count are elevated . Elevated CSF protein levels are found in approximately 50 % of patients in the first 3 days after onset of weakness , which increases to 80 % after the first week . 
 Repeating the lumbar puncture during the disease course is not recommended . The protein levels may rise after treatment has been administered . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Directly assessing nerve conduction of electrical impulses can exclude other causes of acute muscle weakness , as well as distinguish the different types of Guillain – Barré syndrome . Needle electromyography ( EMG ) and nerve conduction studies may be performed . In the first two weeks , these investigations may not show any abnormality . <unk> studies are not required for the diagnosis . 
 Formal criteria exist for each of the main subtypes of Guillain – Barré syndrome ( AIDP and <unk> / <unk> , see below ) , but these may <unk> some cases ( particularly where there is reversible conduction failure ) and therefore changes to these criteria have been proposed . Sometimes , repeated testing may be helpful . 
 = = = Clinical subtypes = = = 
 A number of subtypes of Guillain – Barré syndrome are recognized . Despite this , many people have overlapping symptoms that can make the classification difficult in individual cases . All types have partial forms . For instance , some people experience only isolated eye @-@ movement or coordination problems ; these are thought to be a subtype of Miller Fisher syndrome and have similar antiganglioside antibody patterns . 
 Other diagnostic entities are often included in the spectrum of Guillain – Barré syndrome . Bickerstaff 's brainstem encephalitis , for instance , is part of the group of conditions now regarded as forms of Miller Fisher syndrome ( anti @-@ GQ1b antibody syndrome ) , as well as a related condition labelled " acute ataxic <unk> " where coordination problems and drowsiness are present but no muscle weakness can be detected . <unk> is characterized by the rapid onset of ophthalmoplegia , ataxia , and disturbance of consciousness , and may be associated with absent or decreased tendon reflexes and as well as Babinski 's sign . The course of the disease is usually <unk> , but recurrent episodes have been reported . MRI abnormalities in the brainstem have been reported in 11 % . 
 Whether isolated acute sensory loss can be regarded as a form of Guillain – Barré syndrome is a matter of dispute ; this is a rare occurrence compared to GBS with muscle weakness but no sensory symptoms . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 = = = Immunotherapy = = = 
 Plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulins ( IVIg ) are the two main immunotherapy treatments for GBS . Plasmapheresis attempts to reduce the body 's attack on the nervous system by filtering antibodies out of the bloodstream . Similarly , administration of IVIg neutralizes harmful antibodies and inflammation . These two treatments are equally effective and a combination of the two is not significantly better than either alone . Plasmapheresis speeds recovery when used within four weeks of the onset of symptoms . IVIg works as well as plasmapheresis when started within two weeks of the onset of symptoms , and has fewer complications . IVIg is usually used first because of its ease of administration and safety . Its use is not without risk ; occasionally it causes liver inflammation , or in rare cases , kidney failure . Glucocorticoids alone have not been found to be effective in speeding recovery and could potentially delay recovery . 
 = = = Respiratory failure = = = 
 Respiratory failure may require intubation of the windpipe and breathing support through mechanical ventilation , generally on an intensive care unit . The need for ventilatory support can be anticipated by measurement of two spirometry @-@ based breathing tests : the forced vital capacity ( FVC ) and the negative <unk> force ( NIF ) . An FVC of less than 15 ml per kilogram body weight or an NIF of less than 60 cmH2O are considered markers of severe respiratory failure . 
 = = = Pain = = = 
 While pain is common in people with Guillain – Barré syndrome , studies comparing different types of pain medication are insufficient to make a recommendation as to which should be used . 
 = = = Rehabilitation = = = 
 Following the acute phase , around 40 % of people require intensive rehabilitation with the help of a multidisciplinary team to focus on improving activities of daily living ( ADLs ) . Studies into the subject have been limited , but it is likely that intensive rehabilitation improves long @-@ term symptoms . Teams may include physical therapists , occupational therapists , social workers , psychologists , other allied health professionals and nurses . The team usually works under the supervision of a neurologist or rehabilitation physician directing treatment goals . 
 Physiotherapy interventions include strength , endurance and gait training with graduated increases in mobility , maintenance of posture and alignment as well as joint function . Occupational therapy aims to improve everyday function with domestic and community tasks as well as driving and work . Home modifications , gait aids , orthotics and splints may be provided . Speech @-@ language pathology input may be required in those with speech and swallowing problems , as well as to support communication in those who require ongoing breathing support ( often through a tracheostomy ) . Nutritional support may be provided by the team and by dietitians . Psychologists may provide counseling and support . Psychological interventions may also be required for anxiety , fear and depression . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Guillain – Barré syndrome can lead to death as a result of a number of complications : severe infections , blood clots , and cardiac arrest likely due to autonomic neuropathy . Despite optimum care this occurs in about 5 % of cases . 
 There is a variation in the rate and extent of recovery . The prognosis of Guillain – Barré syndrome is determined mainly by age ( those over 40 may have a poorer outcome ) , and by the severity of symptoms after two weeks . Furthermore , those who experienced diarrhea before the onset of disease have a worse prognosis . On the nerve conduction study , the presence of conduction block predicts poorer outcome at 6 months . In those who have received intravenous immunoglobulins , a smaller increase in IgG in the blood two weeks after administration is associated with poorer mobility outcomes at six months than those whose IgG level increased substantially . If the disease continues to progress beyond four weeks , or there are multiple fluctuations in the severity ( more than two in eight weeks ) , the diagnosis may be chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy which is treated differently . 
 In research studies , the outcome from an episode of Guillain – Barré syndrome is recorded on a scale from 0 – 6 , where 0 denotes completely healthy , 1 very minor symptoms but able to run , 2 able to walk but not to run , 3 requiring a stick or other support , 4 confined to bed or chair , 5 requiring long @-@ term respiratory support , 6 death . 
 The health @-@ related quality of life ( <unk> ) after an attack of Guillain – Barré syndrome can be significantly impaired . About a fifth are unable to walk unaided after six months , and many experience chronic pain , fatigue and difficulty with work , education , hobbies and social activities . <unk> improves significantly in the first year . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 In Western countries , the number of new episodes per year has been estimated to be between 0 @.@ 89 and 1 @.@ 89 cases per 100 @,@ 000 people . Children and young adults are less likely to be affected than the elderly : the risk increases by 20 % for every decade of life . Men are more likely to develop Guillain – Barré syndrome than women ; the relative risk for men is 1 @.@ 78 compared to women . 
 The distribution of subtypes varies between countries . In Europe and the United States , 60 – 80 % of people with Guillain – Barré syndrome have the demyelinating subtype ( AIDP ) , and <unk> affects only a small number ( 6 – 7 % ) . In Asia and Central and South America , that proportion is significantly higher ( 30 – 65 % ) . This may be related to the exposure to different kinds of infection , but also the genetic characteristics of that population . Miller Fisher variant is thought to be more common in Southeast Asia . 
 = = History = = 
 French physician Jean @-@ Baptiste Octave Landry first described the disorder in 1859 . In 1916 , Georges Guillain , Jean Alexandre Barré , and André Strohl diagnosed two soldiers with the illness and described the key diagnostic abnormality — <unk> dissociation — of increased spinal fluid protein concentration but a normal cell count . 
 Canadian neurologist C. Miller Fisher described the variant that bears his name in 1956 . British neurologist Edwin Bickerstaff , based in Birmingham , described the brainstem encephalitis type in 1951 with Philip Cloake , and made further contributions with another paper in 1957 . Guillain had reported on some of these features prior to their full description in 1938 . Further subtypes have been described since then , such as the form featuring pure ataxia and the type causing pharyngeal @-@ cervical @-@ brachial weakness . The axonal subtype was first described in the 1990s . 
 Diagnostic criteria were developed in the late 1970s after the series of cases associated with swine flu vaccination . These were refined in 1990 . The case definition was revised by the Brighton Collaboration for vaccine safety in 2009 , but is mainly intended for research . Plasma exchange was first used in 1978 and its benefit confirmed in larger studies in 1985 . Intravenous immunoglobulins were introduced in 1988 , and its non @-@ inferiority compared to plasma exchange was demonstrated in studies in the early 1990s . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 The understanding of the disease mechanism of Guillain – Barré syndrome has evolved in recent years . Development of new treatments has been limited since immunotherapy was introduced in the 1980s and 1990s . Current research is aimed at demonstrating whether some people who have received IVIg might benefit from a second course if the antibody levels measured in blood after treatment have only shown a small increase . Studies of the immunosuppressive drug <unk> <unk> , brain @-@ derived neurotrophic factor and interferon beta ( IFN @-@ β ) have not demonstrated benefit to support their widespread use . 
 An animal model ( experimental autoimmune neuritis in rats ) is often used for studies , and some agents have shown promise : glatiramer acetate , <unk> , <unk> ( an inhibitor of the Rho @-@ kinase enzyme ) , and the heart drug <unk> . An antibody targeted against the anti @-@ <unk> antiganglioside antibody has shown benefit in laboratory research . Given the role of the complement system in GBS , it has been suggested that complement inhibitors ( such as the drug <unk> ) may be effective . 
 = Penshurst Airfield = 
 Penshurst Airfield was an airfield in operation between 1916 – 36 and 1940 – 46 . Initially a military airfield , after the First World War it was used as an alternate destination to Croydon Airport , with some civil flying taking place . The airfield closed following the crash of a Flying Flea at an air display in 1936 , and was converted to a polo ground . 
 It re @-@ opened during the Second World War as an Emergency Landing Ground , RAF Penshurst . As well as serving in this role , it was mainly used by Air Observation Post ( AOP ) squadrons of the Royal Air Force . The airfield finally closed in May 1946 . 
 = = Location = = 
 The airfield was located south of <unk> , on the western edge of Leigh , and eastern edge of Chiddingstone , at 51 ° 12 ′ N 0 ° 11 ′ E ( TQ 525 468 ) . The parish boundary running through the site . It was named Penshurst as it was considered that name was more up @-@ market than Chiddingstone Causeway or Leigh . The airfield was some 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Penshurst . Nearby Penshurst railway station lies within the parish of Chiddingstone . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1910s = = = 
 An airfield was established at Penshurst in December 1916 . The airfield had a grass runway . The site measured 800 yd ( 730 m ) from north to south and 400 yd ( 370 m ) from east to west . In total it extended to 72 acres ( 29 ha ) . Facilities included two hangars of 130 ft × 60 ft ( 40 m × 18 m ) , and a 2 @,@ 000 ft ( 610 m ) long grass runway , aligned east @-@ west . A large house , Knotley Hall , which stood to the south of the airfield was requisitioned for use as the officer 's accommodation . During 1917 , Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> aircraft of No. 78 Squadron RFC were based at Penshurst . 
 On 8 November 1917 , No. 2 Wireless School was formed at Penshurst . It operated a variety of aircraft , including Airco <unk> , Avro 504K , Avro 504N , Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c and <unk> , Sopwith Camel and Sopwith Snipe . Aircrew attended the school for a one @-@ week @-@ long course in wireless telephony procedures . The school was disbanded on 23 March 1919 . Knotley Hall was offered for sale in May 1919 . In September 1919 , it was announced that Penshurst had been disposed of by the Royal Air Force , and that it could be considered as an emergency landing ground for civil aircraft . 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 In February 1920 , a Notice to Airmen was issued advising pilots that had made emergency landings at Penshurst that they could use the War Office telephone to inform the police of their arrival and to obtain conveyances for their passengers to take them to Penshurst station . On 5 June 1920 , the first air mail flight between the Netherlands and the United Kingdom was made . Bert Hinchcliffe departed from Schiphol in a hired Airco DH.9 with 300 letters on board . Despite the bad weather , Hinchcliffe decided not to land at Lympne and pressed on towards Croydon . He was eventually forced to land at Penshurst due to a combination of the weather and running low on fuel . A taxi was hired to take Hinchcliffe and the letters on to London . A linen windsock was installed at Penshurst in November 1920 . The War Office telephone was notified as having been discontinued in January 1921 . On 24 September 1921 , a de Havilland <unk> aircraft diverted to Penshurst as Croydon was fogbound . 
 From February 1922 the airfield , which was in use as an emergency landing ground , had an illuminated T as part of the illumination of the London @-@ Paris airway . Also at the airfield were coloured lamps connected to an anemometer to indicate wind strength , green for no wind , white for moderate wind and red to indicate strong wind . 
 On 10 June 1922 , Alan Cobham was forced to land his de Havilland DH.9 at Penshurst owing to poor weather conditions at Stag Lane Aerodrome , Edgware . He was attempting a 1 @,@ 200 mi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ) flight from Belgrade , Yugoslavia bringing photographs of the Royal Wedding between King Alexander and Princess Maria for publication by the Daily Mirror . The photographs were taken on to London by road . On 7 July 1922 , two Farman <unk> diverted to Penshurst during a gale . One aircraft belonged to Compagnie des Messageries Aériennes and the other to Compagnie des Grands Express <unk> . Both aircraft were picketed overnight as there was no hangar large enough to accommodate them . A gust of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) was recorded . 
 In 1925 , runway lights were installed at Penshurst . In 1926 , a telephone was again made available to airmen at Penshurst . On 27 August 1927 , Tunbridge Wells Air Pageant was held . The site originally chosen , a field about a mile outside Tunbridge Wells was deemed unsuitable as there were obstacles surrounding it . It was decided to continue the pageant at Penshurst . Five civil de Havilland Moths and three Armstrong Whitworth <unk> from No. 56 Squadron RAF , based at nearby RAF Biggin Hill attended . The pageant was to promote the proposed Tunbridge Wells Flying Club , whose President was to be Sir Robert Gower . It was reported that part of Penshurst Airfield had been rented by the club . Sir Robert entertained Sir Sefton Brancker at Penshurst on 5 December 1927 when Brancker called in on his way to Lympne Aerodrome where he was to visit the East Kent Flying Club . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 In 1930 , Home Counties Aircraft Services were based at Penshurst . A de Havilland DH.60 Gipsy Moth was exhibited at a car showroom in Tunbridge Wells , causing severe traffic congestion due to the number of people visiting the town to see it . Home Counties Aircraft Service Ltd was registered later that year . By October 1930 , Mr Waters , the manager of Home Counties Aircraft Service Ltd had formed the Surrey Aero Club , based at Gatwick Racecourse Aerodrome . 
 The airfield served as an alternative destination for Imperial Airways when Croydon was fogbound . The runway was just long enough for this purpose . Using Penshurst as an alternate destination caused delays to the passengers as there were no Customs facilities . On 18 February 1932 , both Croydon and Penshurst were fogbound , and Handley Page H.P.45 G @-@ <unk> Hengist diverted to Heston Aerodrome . As Customs facilities existed there , passengers were on their way in 10 minutes , as opposed to the three hour or longer delay when using Penshurst . The practice of having a Customs Officer attend Penshurst on a daily basis was instigated , but it was discontinued in February 1935 . On 24 October 1932 , a German and a French airliner diverted to Penshurst due to smog over London . 
 By 1933 , Penshurst was being operated by Air Travel Ltd , who were agents for Brooklands Airways . In 1935 , Air Travel Ltd were employing 25 staff . On 1 March , 15 aircraft and 26 engines were being worked upon . Air Travel Ltd increased its capital from £ 500 to £ 7 @,@ 000 in January 1936 . In that year , Penshurst marked the south eastern corner of Croydon 's controlled zone which came into effect during conditions of bad visibility . 
 On 22 July 1936 , Charles Lindbergh departed Penshurst for Staaken Airfield , Berlin , which was a Luftwaffe airfield closed to civil aircraft . Lindbergh had been invited to Berlin by Hermann Göring . A press blackout was imposed on the orders of Adolf Hitler . Lindbergh made a speech to the Aero Club in Berlin which was reported in Der <unk> Beobachter . 
 As a result of the expiry of the lease on the land , Penshurst Airfield closed on 28 July 1936 . Air Travel Ltd moved to Gatwick . In 1938 , the land was converted for use as a Polo ground by the Eridge Polo Club . Civil aircraft that were based at Penshurst include the Avro Avian III , Avro Avian <unk> , Avro 504K and Avro 504N , de Havilland DH.60 Moth ( various models ) , and Spartan Three @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = From 1940 = = = 
 In 1940 , the airfield was occupied by the Royal Air Force , who erected Nissen huts and cleared the area of obstacles as it was intended to use the area as an Emergency Landing Ground . Three pillboxes were erected around the airfield 's perimeter . Between March and June 1940 the airfield was used by No. 15 Elementary Flying Training School at RAF Redhill as a relief landing ground . Knotley Hall was again requisitioned for use as the officers ' quarters , although the tennis courts were off @-@ limits . 
 During the Battle of Britain , on 27 October 1940 , a Messerschmitt Me 109E flown by Fw Lothar Schieverhofer , of 3 Gruppe , Jagdgeschwader 52 , was damaged in a dogfight with Supermarine Spitfire IIa <unk> of No. 74 Squadron RAF , flown by <unk> Off Peter Chesters . The Messerschmitt made a wheels @-@ up landing at RAF Penshurst , where Chesters also landed a few minutes later as he was short of fuel . Chesters dragged the German from his aircraft . Schieverhofer spat in his face , and a fist @-@ fight developed with both contestants swearing at each other in German . The fight was broken up by the arrival of an ARP Warden , a policeman and a soldier . Chesters was forced to hand back Schieverhofer 's Iron Cross , which he had snatched as a souvenir , and instead took the first aid kit from the Messerschmitt . Schieverhofer was taken away from RAF Penshurst as a Prisoner of War . 
 On 4 August 1941 No. 268 Squadron RAF were deployed to RAF Penshurst from RAF Snailwell . They were based here for four days before they returned to RAF Snailwell on 8 August . At the time , 268 Squadron were operating the Curtiss Tomahawk IIA . On 7 September 1942 , No. 653 Squadron RAF was deployed to RAF Penshurst , bringing their Auster <unk> aircraft with them . The squadron departed on 17 August 1943 but returned again on 17 September . On 13 January 1944 , an Auster was presented to 653 Squadron in memory of Scottish aviation pioneer Bertram Dickson . Another was presented to the squadron that day by a Mrs Law in memory of her son . 653 Squadron departed Penshurst on 27 June 1944 . <unk> , one of 653 Squadron 's Austers which operated from RAF Penshurst , is preserved at the Royal Air Force Museum , Hendon . On 27 June 1944 , 653 Squadron relocated to Normandy . Another Auster squadron , No. 661 Squadron , moved into Penshurst the day 653 Squadron left , like 653 Squadron , 661 followed them to France on 7 August 1944 . 
 On 6 July 1944 , Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress 43 @-@ <unk> N7 @-@ X The Prowler of the <unk> Bombardment Squadron , USAAF made an emergency wheels @-@ up landing at RAF Penshurst . The aircraft was returning to RAF <unk> from a raid on Saint @-@ Omer , France . Eight of the eleven crew bailed out before the aircraft landed . Although a Leigh resident recalled that the aircraft was later repaired and flown out at a light load and taking advantage of favourable winds , official records show that the aircraft was written off . In December 1944 , personnel based at Penshurst numbered 26 officers and 166 other ranks . On 2 February 1945 , No. 664 Squadron RAF was deployed to Penshurst . They also flew Austers . On 23 March 1945 , 664 Squadron were transferred to the Netherlands . On 10 July 1945 Douglas C @-@ 47A Dakota 42 @-@ <unk> of the 23d Fighter Squadron USAAF crashed on landing at RAF Penshurst . The aircraft was written off . RAF Penshurst closed on 13 May 1946 . The control tower was demolished in the 1970s . The <unk> was demolished in 1990 . A hangar survived until 1991 , when it blew down in a storm . 
 = = Civil accidents and incidents = = 
 On 20 August 1922 , an aircraft flown by Thomas Baden Powell of Tunbridge Wells on a flight from Croydon crashed on landing at Penshurst . Baden Powell was subsequently convicted of flying an unregistered aircraft and flying without a valid pilot 's licence . He was fined £ 40 . 
 On 2 October 1926 , Blériot 155 F @-@ <unk> Clement Ader of Air Union crashed at Southwood , Leigh following an in @-@ flight fire , killing all seven people on board . The pilot was trying to make an emergency landing at Penshurst . This was the first in @-@ flight fire on a civil airliner . The Coroner recorded a verdict of " accidental death " against all seven victims . 
 On 2 May 1930 , Farman <unk> Goliath F @-@ <unk> of Air Union crashed in Penshurst after encountering a heavy squall during a flight from Le Bourget to Croydon . 
 On 4 May 1936 , Mignet <unk> " Flying Flea " G @-@ <unk> crashed at an airshow held at Penshurst , killing the pilot . As a result of this accident , Air Commodore <unk> , secretary of the Air League , called for the Flying Flea to be grounded pending an enquiry . 
 = Delaware Route 5 = 
 Delaware Route 5 ( DE 5 ) is a 19 @.@ 48 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 31 @.@ 35 km ) state highway in Sussex County , Delaware . The route runs north from River Road on the Indian River Bay in Oak Orchard north to DE 1 , north of Milton . Along the way , DE 5 passes through rural areas along with the communities of Long Neck , Harbeson , and Milton . The route has concurrencies with DE 23 and DE 24 in the Long Neck area . DE 5 features one alternate route , DE 5 Alternate ( DE 5 Alt . ) , which provides a bypass of Milton . DE 5 was built as a state highway in the 1920s and 1930s , receiving its designation by 1938 . DE 5 Alt. was designated by 2001 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 5 heads northwest on two @-@ lane undivided Oak Orchard Road from the intersection with River Road on the shore of the Indian River Bay , passing through the residential areas of Oak Orchard . The road continues through a mix of farms and woods with some housing developments , coming to an intersection with DE 24 . At this point , DE 5 turns northeast to form a concurrency with DE 24 on John J. Williams Highway . The road heads north through residential and commercial development with some fields as it enters the Long Neck area , where it intersects DE 23 . 
 At the DE 23 intersection , DE 5 splits from DE 24 and turns northwest onto DE 23 , which is called Indian Mission Road . The road heads through a mix of farmland and woodland with some housing subdivisions . In Fairmount , DE 23 branches off to the northeast , and DE 5 continues to the northwest through more rural areas . At the intersection with DE 24 Alt. in Hollyville , the name changes to Harbeson Road . The route turns north and reaches Harbeson . In Harbeson , DE 5 crosses a Delaware Coast Line Railroad line and intersects US 9 / DE 404 near Beaverdam Cemetery . 
 Past this intersection , the road runs north through more rural land before curving northwest . The route turns north again and comes to an intersection with the southern terminus of the DE 5 Alt. bypass to the west of Milton , which heads west on Sand Hill Road . Also at this intersection , the name changes from Harbeson Road to Federal Street . DE 5 continues northeast into Milton , encountering the Milton Rail @-@ Trail and passing several homes . At the intersection with Front Street , the route turns northwest onto Union Street , running through the downtown and crossing the Broadkill River . The road continues through residential areas in the northern part of Milton . At the north end of town , DE 5 intersects DE 16 along with the northern terminus of DE 5 Alt . , which heads west on DE 16 . DE 5 continues north on Union Street Extended , passing through agricultural areas with some woods and homes . The route turns northeast and comes to its northern terminus at DE 1 . 
 DE 5 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 18 @,@ 803 vehicles at the intersection with DE 23 and DE 24 to a low of 2 @,@ 170 vehicles at south end of the DE 24 concurrency . None of DE 5 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 5 existed as an unimproved county road . The road was upgraded to a state highway between Harbeson and Milton by 1924 . The following year , the road was proposed as a state highway north of Milton and from Oak Orchard to the present @-@ day north end of the DE 24 concurrency . The entire length of the present DE 5 was completed as a state highway by 1931 . DE 5 was assigned to its current alignment by 1938 , running between Oak Orchard and DE 14 ( now DE 1 ) north of Milton . By 1994 , DE 23 was designated to run concurrent with a portion of DE 5 in the Long Neck area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 Delaware Route 5 Alternate ( DE 5 Alt . ) is a 3 @.@ 8 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) alternate route of DE 5 that bypasses the town of Milton . The route travels west from DE 5 south of Milton along two @-@ lane undivided Sand Hill Road through areas of farms and woods with some homes . The route turns north to join DE 30 on Gravel Hill Road , crossing an abandoned railroad line just east of the terminus of a Delaware Coast Line Railroad branch . DE 5 Alt. splits from DE 30 by turning east onto DE 16 , following that route through more rural areas on Beach Highway . The route ends at an intersection with DE 5 north of Milton . In some locations , the route is signed as " DE 5 Truck Alt " . The route was designated by 2001 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Milton , Sussex County . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 343 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 343 ( PA 343 ) is an 8 @.@ 16 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 13 km ) route between Lebanon and Fredericksburg in Lebanon County , Pennsylvania . It begins at PA 72 and ends at Exit 6 of Interstate 78 ( I @-@ 78 ) . PA 343 heads mostly through urbanized areas near Lebanon before continuing into rural areas further north . There is a concurrency with U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) near the northern terminus . 
 PA 343 has had a number of different realignments , most of them relating to the northern terminus of the highway . The highway originally terminated at an intersection with PA 443 in Lickdale , moved to end in the community of Bordnersville soon after . The highway was then extended along the local continuation to end at US 22 in Harper Tavern . In 1963 , PA 343 was moved back to Lickdale , and seven years after , moved to its northern terminus , thirteen years after the construction of I @-@ 78 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 343 begins at an intersection with PA 72 , near the Northwest Elementary School , in the city of Lebanon in Lebanon County . PA 343 heads eastward along Maple Street , a two @-@ lane undivided street maintained by the city , past urbanized homes and businesses . The route turns north onto North 7th Street and passes more development . PA 343 leaves Lebanon for North Lebanon Township , where it becomes state @-@ maintained and passes through the residential community of <unk> . The road runs north @-@ northeast past more homes and businesses as it heads through the community of <unk> . The route leaves the urbanized areas and heads into agricultural areas with some trees and homes . PA 343 turns northwest at the Heffelfinger Road intersection and enters Bethel Township , where it heads north as South Pine Grove Street through a patch of woods before running through more farmland . The road runs to the west of Little Swatara Creek and passes to the east of Pine Meadows Golf Course before it crosses the creek . The route continues through rural areas and passes through the residential community of <unk> . PA 343 heads north through more farmland before it comes to an intersection with US 22 ( William Penn Highway ) south of the community of Fredericksburg . 
 At this point , South Pine Grove Street continues to Fredericksburg and PA 343 turns northeast to become concurrent with US 22 on four @-@ lane divided William Penn Highway . The road runs through agricultural areas with some commercial development , passing to the south of a warehouse . PA 343 splits from US 22 by heading north on two @-@ lane undivided Pine Grove Road , passing to the west of a park . The route continues near rural commercial development before it reaches its northern terminus at a partial interchange with I @-@ 78 , with access to westbound I @-@ 78 and access from eastbound I @-@ 78 . Past this interchange , Pine Grove Road continues north as SR 1007 toward the Berks County line . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 343 was assigned in the numbering of state routes in Pennsylvania during 1928 . The highway then ran from the southern terminus in Lebanon , which was at the time , an intersection with US 22 ( now US 422 ) . At Fredericksburg , the route reached an intersection with PA 43 ( now US 22 ) . At Fredericksburg , highway turned to the northwest and headed to Lickdale . There it terminated at an intersection with PA 443 . The highway stayed intact for two years , until 1930 , when the highway was extended a few miles to the community of Bordnersville , where the road then continued as a local highway . 
 The highway was paved from Fredericksburg to an intersection with Lancaster Street and from Lickdale to Bordnersville in 1932 . In 1936 , the Pennsylvania Department of Highways extended PA 343 past Bordnersville and Lickdale , along the local road . This changed the northern terminus to an intersection with US 22 ( formerly the alignment of PA 43 ) in Harper Tavern . This alignment remained intact for more than two decades . In 1963 , even with the construction of I @-@ 78 six years prior , PA 343 was realigned once again by the Department of Highways . This time , the northern terminus was cut back to the PA 72 intersection in Lickdale , with an extended PA 934 replacing the route between Harper Tavern and Lickdale . This change was made to provide the same route number on both sides of the I @-@ 81 interchange north of Harper Tavern . The highway remained intact for another seven years , and in 1970 , PA 343 was realigned for the final time , this time onto its current alignment . The northern terminus is now at a partial interchange with I @-@ 78 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Lebanon County . 
 = Boletus pinophilus = 
 Boletus pinophilus , commonly known as the pine bolete or pinewood king bolete , is a basidiomycete fungus of the genus Boletus found throughout Europe . For many years , Boletus pinophilus was considered a subspecies or form of the porcini mushroom B. edulis . In 2008 , B. pinophilus in western North America were reclassified as a new species , Boletus rex @-@ veris . Boletus pinophilus is edible , and may be preserved and cooked . 
 The fungus grows predominantly in coniferous forests , forming symbiotic ectomycorrhizal associations with living trees by enveloping the tree 's underground roots with sheaths of fungal tissue . The fungus produces spore @-@ bearing fruit bodies above ground in summer and autumn . The large , edible fruiting bodies known as mushrooms appear under pine trees , generally in summer and autumn . It has a matte brown to maroon @-@ coloured cap and its stem is often large and swollen , and the overall colour may have an orange @-@ red tinge . As with other boletes , the size of the fruiting body is variable . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Italian naturalist Carlo <unk> was the first to recognise the pine bolete as a distinct taxon . It was raised to species status by Antonio Venturi in 1863 . For many years , Boletus pinophilus was considered a variety of Boletus edulis , and before that as Boletus pinicola . This species , while no longer treated as a variety of B. edulis , is classified in Boletus section Boletus , and hence , as a close relative of B. edulis . It gained its current name in 1973 , described by Czech mycologists Albert Pilát and Aurel Dermek . Its specific epithet is a mix of Latin <unk> " pine " , and Ancient Greek <unk> " loving " . Boletus pinicola is a synonym subsequently found to be an invalid name . Common names include the pine bolete , and the pinewood king bolete . 
 In 2008 , a taxonomic revision of western North American populations of this species was published , formally establishing them as a distinct species , Boletus rex @-@ veris . Phylogenetic analysis has shown B. pinophilus as a member of a clade , or closely related group , with the North American species B. <unk> , <unk> subalpinus , B. regineus , B. fibrillosus , and B. rex @-@ veris . Despite the diverse appearances , these taxa are close genetically , leading Feng and colleagues to speculate on combining the first four taxa above as a single species . These four diverged from the lineage that gave rise to B. fibrillosus and B. rex @-@ veris around 5 million years ago . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruiting body has a convex @-@ shaped cap , at first small in relation to its stipe , expanding in volume as it matures . The skin of the cap is dry , matte and can be coloured from maroon to chocolate brown with a reddish tint . These characteristics distinguish it visually from relatives such as Boletus edulis , Boletus reticulatus and Boletus aereus . The young , immature cap may have a pale pink colour and a white , powdery flush . Measuring 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 in ) tall by 3 – 8 ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 2 – in ) cm wide , the bulbous stipe is often large , swollen and imposing , bearing a network . The overall colour may have an orange @-@ red tinge which is more obvious in the lowest parts , although this is also common in other species . As with all boletes , the size of the fruiting body can be very variable . The cap diameter can be as much as 30 cm ( 12 in ) and stem height 15 cm ( 6 in ) . 
 Like other boletes , Boletus pinophilus has small pores on the underside of its cap rather than gills . These are coloured white at first , becoming yellow with age and olivaceous @-@ brown at full maturity . The spores are cylindric @-@ ellipsoid , smooth , with oil drops and dimensions 15 @.@ 5 – 20 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . They produce an olive @-@ brown spore print . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 In Europe , Boletus pinophilus is found in Britain , where it is more common in Scotland , and in France , where it is more common in the south . The bolete is considered vulnerable in the Czech Republic . It is sold commercially in Finland . 
 Boletus pinophilus forms ectomycorrhizal relationships with pine ( Pinus ) , fir ( Abies ) and spruce ( Picea ) . It can therefore be located wherever those trees grow , particularly with Scots pine in Britain , preferring the poor , acidic , and sandy soils associated with coniferous forests . It appears to favour Pinus , while the form of the mushroom occurring in association with Abies and Picea has been labeled Boletus pinophilus var. <unk> . However , it is not confined to coniferous trees and may also be found fruiting in deciduous forests , such as under chestnut trees . Fruiting bodies can occur singly , or in small groups throughout the summer and autumn months , although they are known to appear as early as April in Italy . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 The Boletus pinophilus is edible , and may be used fresh , preserved , dried and cooked in a manner similar to that of other edible boletes . It is highly regarded and can be quite expensive in central Mexico , and is often sold dried there . The flesh is white , soft in mature specimens and does not change colour upon bruising . The taste and smell is pleasant . People of La Malinche have likened the flavour to pork and pork crackling . It is easily misidentified as the porcini Boletus edulis , due to the similar habitat and appearance . 
 Boletus pinophilus is known to be a <unk> of the heavy metals mercury , cadmium and selenium . To reduce exposure , authorities recommend avoiding mushrooms from polluted areas such as those near mines , smelters , roadways , incinerators and disposal sites . Furthermore , pores should be removed as they contain the highest concentrations of pollutants . 
 = Priyanka Chopra = 
 Priyanka Chopra ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 18 July 1982 ) is an Indian actress , singer , philanthropist , and the winner of the Miss World pageant of 2000 . One of Bollywood 's highest @-@ paid actresses and one of the nation 's most high @-@ profile celebrities , Chopra has also gained popularity for her sense of style . She has received numerous awards , including a National Film Award , and five Filmfare Awards , and was awarded the Padma Shri , the fourth highest civilian award , by the Government of India in 2016 . That same year , Time named her as one of the 100 most influential people in the world . 
 Although Chopra initially aspired to study engineering or psychiatry , she accepted offers to join the Indian film industry , which came as a result of her pageant wins , making her Hindi film debut in The Hero in 2003 . She played the leading lady in the box @-@ office hits Andaaz ( 2003 ) and Mujhse Shaadi Karogi ( 2004 ) , and earned praise for her breakout role in the 2004 thriller Aitraaz . In 2006 , Chopra established herself as a leading actress of Indian cinema with starring roles in the top @-@ grossing productions Krrish and Don . Following a brief setback , she received critical acclaim for playing a troubled model in the drama Fashion ( 2008 ) , which won her the National Film Award and Filmfare Award for Best Actress . Chopra subsequently gained recognition for her versatility in portraying a range of unconventional characters in the films Kaminey ( 2009 ) , 7 Khoon Maaf ( 2011 ) , Barfi ! ( 2012 ) , Mary Kom ( 2014 ) , Dil Dhadakne Do ( 2015 ) , and Bajirao Mastani ( 2015 ) , all of which garnered her critical acclaim and several accolades . In 2015 , she began starring as Alex Parrish on the ABC drama series Quantico , becoming the first South Asian woman to headline an American network series . 
 In addition to her acting career , Chopra is noted for her philanthropic work , and was appointed as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador for Child Rights in 2010 . She promotes various causes such as environment , health and education , and women 's rights , and is particularly vocal about gender equality , and gender pay gap . Though she is reticent to discuss her personal life in public , her off @-@ screen life is the subject of substantial media coverage . As a singer , she has released three singles . Chopra is also the founder of the production company Purple Pebble Pictures . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Priyanka Chopra was born on 18 July 1982 in Jamshedpur , Bihar ( now in Jharkhand ) , to Ashok and Madhu Chopra , both physicians in the Indian Army . Her father was a Punjabi from Ambala , while her mother is from Jharkhand , the eldest daughter of Ms. Madhu <unk> <unk> , a former member of Bihar Assembly , and Dr. Manohar Kishan <unk> , a former Congress veteran . She has a brother , Siddharth , who is seven years her junior . Actresses Parineeti Chopra , Meera Chopra and <unk> are her cousins . Due to her parents ' occupations the family relocated to a number of places in India , including Delhi , Chandigarh , Ambala , Ladakh , Lucknow , Bareilly , and Pune . Among the schools she attended were La Martiniere Girls ' School in Lucknow and St. Maria Goretti College in Bareilly . In an interview published in Daily News and Analysis , Chopra said that she did not mind travelling regularly and changing schools ; she welcomed it as a new experience and a way to discover India 's multicultural society . Among the many places that she lived , Chopra has fond memories as a child of playing in the valleys of Leh , in the cold northwestern Indian desert region of Jammu and Kashmir . She has said , " I think I was in Class 4 when I was in Leh . My brother was just born . My dad was in the army and was posted there . I stayed in Leh for a year and my memories of that place are tremendous ... We were all army kids there . We weren 't living in houses , we were in bunkers in the valley and there was a stupa right on top of a hill which used to overlook our valley . We used to race up to the top of the stupa " . She now considers Bareilly her home town , and maintains strong connections there . 
 At the age of thirteen , Chopra moved to the United States to study , living with her aunt , and attending schools in Newton , Massachusetts , and Cedar Rapids , Iowa , after a stop in Queens , New York , as her aunt 's family also moved frequently . While in Massachusetts , she participated in several theatre productions and studied Western classical music , choral singing and Kathak dance . During her teenage years in America , Chopra sometimes faced racial issues and was bullied for being Indian . She has said , " I was a gawky kid , had low self @-@ esteem , came from a modest middle @-@ class background , had white marks on my legs ... But I was damn hard working . Today , my legs sell 12 brands . " 
 After three years , Chopra returned to India , finishing the senior year of her high @-@ school education at the Army Public School in Bareilly . During this period , she won the local " May Queen " beauty pageant , after which she was pursued by admirers , leading her family to equip their home with bars for her protection . Her mother then entered her in the Femina Miss India contest of 2000 ; she finished second , winning the Femina Miss India World title . Chopra then went on to the Miss World pageant , where she was crowned Miss World 2000 and Miss World Continental Queen of Beauty — Asia & Oceania at the Millennium Dome in London on 30 November 2000 . Chopra was the fifth Indian contestant to win Miss World , and the fourth to do so in seven years . She had enrolled in college , but left after winning the Miss World pageant . Chopra said that the Miss India and Miss World titles brought her recognition , and she then began receiving offers for film roles . 
 Chopra has maintained a strong relationship with her family , including her younger brother , Siddharth , and lives in an apartment on the same floor as her family . She was especially close to her father , who died in June 2013 ; in 2012 she got a tattoo reading " Daddy 's lil girl " , in his handwriting . Having not come from a film background , she describes herself as a self @-@ made woman . Her mother , a well @-@ established gynaecologist in Bareilly , gave up her practice to support Chopra as she embarked upon a film career . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Debut and breakthrough ( 2002 – 04 ) = = = 
 After winning Miss India World , Chopra was cast as the female lead in Abbas @-@ Mustan 's romantic thriller <unk> ( 2002 ) , in which she was to make her film debut . However , this fell through for various reasons : she stated the production conflicted with her schedule , while the producers said they re @-@ cast because Chopra took on various other commitments . Her screen debut occurred in the 2002 Tamil film Thamizhan as the love interest of the protagonist , played by Vijay . A review published in The Hindu was appreciative of the film for its wit and dialogue , however it felt that Chopra 's role was limited from an acting viewpoint . 
 In 2003 , Chopra made her Bollywood film debut as the second female lead opposite Sunny Deol and Preity Zinta in Anil Sharma 's The Hero : Love Story of a Spy . Set against the backdrop of the Indian Army in Kashmir , the film tells the story of an agent and his fight against terrorism . The Hero was one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films that year , but received mixed reviews from critics . Derek Elley from Variety said that " mega @-@ looker Chopra makes a solid screen debut . " Later that year she appeared in Raj Kanwar 's box @-@ office success Andaaz with Akshay Kumar , again sharing the female lead ( this time with the debuting Lara Dutta ) . Chopra played a vivacious young girl who falls in love with Kumar 's character . The Hindustan Times noted the glamour that she brought to the role ; Kunal Shah of Sify praised her performance and stated she had " all the qualities to be a star . " Her performance earned her the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut ( along with Dutta ) and a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Chopra 's first three releases in 2004 — Plan , Kismat , and <unk> — performed poorly at the box @-@ office . Chopra was typically cast during this earlier period as a " glamour quotient " , in roles that were considered " forgettable " by film critic Joginder Tuteja . Later that year she starred with Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar in David Dhawan 's romantic comedy Mujhse Shaadi Karogi , which became the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year in India and emerged as a major commercial success . 
 In late 2004 , she starred opposite Kumar and Kareena Kapoor in Abbas @-@ Mustan 's thriller Aitraaz . Chopra considers her first role as an antagonist , portraying <unk> Roy , an ambitious woman who accuses her employee of sexual harassment , as the " biggest learning experience of her career . " The film was a critical and commercial success , and Chopra 's performance received critical acclaim . Author <unk> Bhattacharya credited her for bringing back the seductress to the silver screen . The Hindustan Times cited it as the film that changed her career significantly . A reviewer writing for the BBC said , " Aitraaz is Priyanka Chopra 's film . As the deliciously wicked , gold digging , scheming seductress , she chews up every scene she is in with her magnetic screen presence . " She won a Filmfare Award for Best Performance in a Negative Role , becoming the second and final actress to win the award after Kajol ( the category was discontinued in 2008 ) . Chopra also received a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress , and the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role . 
 = = = Early success and setbacks ( 2005 – 08 ) = = = 
 In 2005 , Chopra appeared in six films . Her first two releases — Blackmail , and Karam — were commercially unsuccessful . Shilpa <unk> @-@ Iyer of Rediff.com considered Blackmail to be a very predictable film and believed that her role as a police commissioner 's wife was very limited from an acting point of view . Her performance in Karam was better received , Subhash K. Jha wrote that Chopra " with her poised interpretation of high drama , flies high creating a character whose vulnerability and beauty are endorsed by both the inner and outer worlds created for her character . " Later that year Chopra played the wife of Akshay Kumar in Vipul Amrutlal Shah 's family drama Waqt : The Race Against Time , the story of a small businessman ( played by Amitabh Bachchan ) who , hiding his illness , wants to teach his irresponsible son some lessons before he dies . During production , Chopra revisited Leh , a favourite childhood haunt , for the shooting of the song " Subah <unk> " . She suffered an accident during the filming for the song " Do Me A Favour Let 's Play Holi " when she electrocuted herself , spending a day recovering in hospital . The film was well received by critics , and was a commercial success . 
 She next starred opposite Arjun Rampal in the romantic mystery thriller <unk> , portraying the role of a possessive lover . Critical reaction towards the film was mixed , but her performance received praise . Taran Adarsh wrote that Chopra " is bound to win laurels yet again [ ... ] the actor is emerging as one of the finest talents in these fast @-@ changing times " . Her next release was <unk> Darshan 's romance Barsaat , co @-@ starring Bobby Deol and Bipasha Basu . The film was a critical and commercial failure in India but fared better in the overseas market . Chopra 's performance received mixed reviews , with Bollywood Hungama describing it as " mechanical " . However , Rediff.com considered Chopra to be an " epitome of calm intelligence , who underplayed her role to perfection " . Later that year , Rohan Sippy cast her with Abhishek Bachchan , Ritesh Deshmukh and Nana Patekar in the comedy Bluffmaster ! Chopra played independent working woman Simran Saxena , Bachchan 's love interest . The film proved to be a box @-@ office success . 
 After starting 2006 with special appearances in three films , Chopra starred in Rakesh Roshan 's superhero film Krrish ( a sequel to the 2003 science @-@ fiction film Koi ... Mil Gaya ) . Co @-@ starring with Hrithik Roshan , Rekha and Naseeruddin Shah , Chopra played a young television journalist who schemes to take advantage of an innocent young man with remarkable physical abilities , but eventually falls in love with him . The film was the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year in India and grossed over ₹ 1 @.@ 17 billion ( US $ 17 million ) worldwide attaining a blockbuster status . Her next film was Dharmesh Darshan 's romantic comedy Aap Ki <unk> , co @-@ starring Akshaye Khanna , Ameesha Patel and Dino Morea . Neither the film nor Chopra 's performance were well received . Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com stated that Chopra 's portrayal of Anu was " erratically sketched " and that her character was never consistent : " first flaky , then cool , and later , sensitive " . 
 Chopra 's final release of 2006 was Farhan Akhtar 's action @-@ thriller Don ( a remake of the 1978 film of the same name ) , with Shah Rukh Khan . Chopra portrayed Roma ( played by Zeenat Aman in the original film ) , who joins the underworld to avenge Don for killing her brother . Chopra received martial @-@ arts training for her role in the movie , and performed her own stunts . The film was declared a box @-@ office success in India and overseas , with revenues of ₹ 1 @.@ 05 billion ( US $ 16 million ) . Raja Sen of Rediff.com found Chopra to be film 's " big surprise " ; he believed that Chopra convincingly portrayed Roma , " looking every bit the competent woman of action " and wrote " This is an actress willing to push herself , and has definite potential for screen magic . Not to mention a great smile . " 
 In 2007 , Chopra had two leading roles . Her first film was Nikhil Advani 's Salaam @-@ e @-@ Ishq : A Tribute to Love , a romantic comedy in six chapters with an ensemble cast . She was featured opposite Salman Khan in the first chapter as Kamini , an item girl and aspiring actress who tries to land the lead role in a Karan Johar film with a publicity gimmick . Film critic Sukanya Verma praised her flair for comedy , especially her impressions of Meena Kumari , Nargis and Madhubala . Both Salaam @-@ e @-@ Ishq : A Tribute to Love and her next film , Big Brother , proved unsuccessful at the domestic box @-@ office . 
 In 2008 , Chopra starred opposite Harman <unk> in his father 's Love Story 2050 . Chopra played a double role , so she coloured her hair twice ; once red to portray the girl from the future and then black for the girl of the past . Her performance was poorly received ; Rajeev Masand was unimpressed with Chopra 's chemistry with her co @-@ star , remarking that her character " fails to inspire either affection or sympathy " . She next appeared in the comedy God <unk> Great Ho , portraying a TV anchor opposite Salman Khan , Sohail Khan and Amitabh Bachchan . The film was generally perceived to be plagiarised from the Hollywood comedy Bruce Almighty , although writer and director Rumi Jaffrey claimed it to be " a village folk tale about a Brahmin " . Chopra next starred as a kindergarten teacher in <unk> opposite Bobby Deol and Irrfan Khan , and played the role of Sonia in Goldie Behl 's fantasy superhero film Drona opposite Abhishek Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan . Drona , widely criticised for its extensive use of special effects , marked Chopra 's sixth film in succession which had failed at both the box @-@ office and critically , although Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com stated that Chopra displayed convincing action heroine skills . Critics generally perceived at this time that her career was over . 
 = = = Critical acclaim ( 2008 – 11 ) = = = 
 The string of poorly received films ended when Chopra starred in Madhur Bhandarkar 's Fashion , a drama about the Indian fashion industry which followed the lives and careers of several fashion models . She portrayed the ambitious supermodel Meghna Mathur , a role which she initially thought was out of her depth , but after six months ' consideration she accepted the role , inspired by Bhandarkar 's confidence in her . For the role , Chopra had to gain 6 kilograms ( 13 lb ) and steadily shed the weight during the production as the character progressed in the film . Both the film and her performance received critical acclaim , becoming a major turning point in her career . Rajeev Masand wrote , " Priyanka Chopra turns in a respectable performance , one that will inevitably go down as her best . " Kriti Verma from Headlines India noted " Priyanka Chopra simply rocked . Her transformation from a simple Chandigarh girl to an ambitious super model to an apologizing girl is excellent and beyond imagination . " Her performance won Chopra several awards , including the National Film Award for Best Actress , the Filmfare Award for Best Actress , the IIFA Award for Best Actress , the Screen Award for Best Actress , and the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . With a worldwide revenue of ₹ 600 million ( US $ 9 million ) , Fashion emerged as a commercial success , and was listed by Subhash K. Jha as one of the best films of the decade with women protagonists . It was noted for being commercially successful despite being a women @-@ centric film with no male lead . She said in retrospect , " I think actually Fashion kick started ... the process of female dominated films . Today you have so many other films which have done well with female leads . " 
 Chopra 's final film of the year was Tarun <unk> 's romantic comedy <unk> , with Abhishek Bachchan and John Abraham . Set in Miami , the film tells the story of a friendship between her character and two men who pretend to be gay to share an apartment with her . Chopra played a stylish young fashion @-@ magazine editor Neha , who is trying to deal with professional pressures in her life . Produced by Dharma Productions , the film was a financial success with worldwide revenues of over ₹ 860 million ( US $ 13 million ) . Chopra 's performance and look in the film were praised . 
 The following year Chopra played a feisty Marathi woman named Sweety in Vishal Bhardwaj 's caper thriller Kaminey ( co @-@ starring Shahid Kapoor ) , about twin brothers and the journey in their life linked with the underworld . The film received critical acclaim and became successful at the box @-@ office with the worldwide gross earnings of ₹ 710 million ( US $ 11 million ) . Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India thought that Chopra 's role completely reinvented her , and Rajeev Masand wrote : " Springing a delightful surprise in a smaller part is [ Chopra ] , who sprinkles her lines with a smattering of fluent Marathi and emerges one of the film 's most lovable characters . " Raja Sen of Rediff.com named Chopra 's performance as the best by an actress that year . Her role earned her several awards and nominations , including a second consecutive Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role after Fashion and Best Actress nominations at the Filmfare , Screen and IIFA awards . Chopra subsequently appeared in Ashutosh Gowariker 's romantic comedy What 's Your <unk> ? , based on the novel Kimball Ravenswood by Madhu Rye . The film depicts the story of a US @-@ based <unk> NRI in search of his soulmate among 12 girls ( all played by Chopra ) associated with the 12 zodiac signs . She received the Screen Best Actress Award nomination for her performance in the film . She was also considered for inclusion in the Guinness World Records book for being the first film actress to portray 12 distinct characters in one film . Chopra 's heavy workload — filming for several productions , travelling for endorsements and performing at live shows ( including the Miss India pageant ) — took its toll ; she fainted during filming , and was admitted to hospital . 
 In 2010 , Chopra starred with Uday Chopra in Jugal Hansraj 's unremarkable romantic comedy Pyaar Impossible ! as Alisha , a beautiful college girl ( and later a working mother ) who falls in love with a nerdy boy . Later that year , she co @-@ starred with Ranbir Kapoor in Siddharth Anand 's romantic comedy Anjaana Anjaani . The film , set in New York and Las Vegas , follows the story of two strangers , both trying to commit suicide , who eventually fall in love with each other . The film was a moderate commercial success , and her performance received mixed reviews from critics . Sarita Tanwar of Mid Day wrote , " Priyanka Chopra is at her casual and spontaneous best . She embraces the character completely and makes it totally believable " , while Anupama Chopra dismissed her acting as " artificial " . 
 She starred as a femme fatale in her first film of 2011 , Vishal Bhardwaj 's black comedy 7 Khoon Maaf . Based on the short story " Susanna 's Seven Husbands " by Ruskin Bond , 7 Khoon Maaf centres on Susanna Anna @-@ Marie Johannes , an Anglo @-@ Indian woman ( played by Chopra ) who murders her seven husbands in an unending quest for love . The film and her performance received acclaim from critics . Nikhat Kazmi remarked , " 7 Khoon Maaf would undoubtedly end up as a milestone in Priyanka Chopra 's career graph . The actor displays exquisite command over a complex character that is definitely a first in Indian cinema . " Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis wrote : " Priyanka Chopra takes on a character that most of her contemporaries would shy away from and enacts it in a way that only she possibly can . For a woman with as many shades as Susanna , Chopra gets a crack at a role of a lifetime and she sparkles like never before . " Chopra 's performance earned her the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress and a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress , the IIFA Award for Best Actress , the Screen Award for Best Actress , and the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . 
 = = = Commercial success ( 2011 – 13 ) = = = 
 Chopra 's final release of the year saw her reprising her role as Roma in the second installment of the Don franchise , Don 2 . Although the film received mixed reviews , Chopra 's performance earned positive feedback from critics . According to The Express Tribune , " Chopra ... seems to be the perfect choice for an action heroine . As you watch her effortlessly beat up some thugs in the movie , you come to the realisation that she may be the first proper female action hero in Bollywood . " Don 2 was a major success in India and overseas , earning over ₹ 2 @.@ 06 billion ( US $ 31 million ) worldwide . Don 2 was showcased at the 62nd Berlin International Film Festival and ( with Don ) at the 2012 International Film Festival of Marrakech , in Morocco . 
 Chopra 's first film of 2012 was Karan Malhotra 's action drama Agneepath , in which she starred with Hrithik Roshan , Sanjay Dutt and Rishi Kapoor . Produced by Karan Johar , the film is a remake of his father 's 1990 production of the same name . In one of several accidents to happen during production , Chopra 's <unk> ( a traditional skirt ) caught fire while filming a sequence for an elaborate Ganpati festival song . She featured as Kaali Gawde , Roshan 's loquacious love interest in the film . Mayank Shekhar noted how much Chopra stood out in the male @-@ dominated film . Agneepath broke Bollywood 's highest opening @-@ day earnings record , and had a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 93 billion ( US $ 29 million ) . Chopra next co @-@ starred with Shahid Kapoor in Kunal Kohli 's romance , Teri Meri Kahaani . The film relates the stories of three unconnected couples ( each played by Kapoor and Chopra ) , born in different eras . The film opened to mixed reactions from critics , but Chopra 's performance was generally well received . 
 Anurag Basu 's Barfi ! , with Ranbir Kapoor and Ileana D 'Cruz , was her final appearance of 2012 . Set in the 1970s , the film tells the story of three people , two of whom are physically disabled . Chopra played Jhilmil Chatterjee , an autistic woman who falls in love with a deaf , mute man ( Kapoor ) . Rituparno Ghosh , an acclaimed director , considered it a " very , very brave " role to accept given how demanding it is for an actor to convincingly portray a woman with autism . To prepare for the role , Chopra visited several mental institutions and spent time with autistic people . The film received rave reviews from film critics and was a major commercial success , earning ₹ 1 @.@ 75 billion ( US $ 26 million ) worldwide . Chopra received unanimous praise for her portrayal , which several reviewers regarded as her best performance at that time . The Indo @-@ Asian News Service review said , " Priyanka Chopra as the autistic Jhilmil steals the show from Ranbir , if that 's possible . Her inherent glamorous personality simply disappears into her character . We don 't see the actress on screen at all ! We see only Jhilmil who reminds us in a very pleasant way of Sridevi in Sadma . This is one of the most flawless interpretations of a physical @-@ psychological disability seen on celluloid . " Pratim D. Gupta of The Telegraph noted Ranbir and Priyanka turn in two of the finest performances seen on the Indian screen . Chopra received Best Actress nominations at the Filmfare , Screen , IIFA and Producers Guild Film Awards . The film was screened at the Busan and Marrakech International Film Festivals , and was chosen as India 's entry for the 85th Academy Awards . Don 2 , Agneepath and Barfi ! rank among the highest grossing Bollywood films of all time . 
 In 2013 , she lent her voice to the character of <unk> , the reigning Pan @-@ Asian champion from India and the love interest of the main protagonist in the Disney Animation Studios 's film Planes , a spinoff of Pixar 's Cars franchise . Chopra , a fan of Disney films , had fun voicing the character saying " The closest I could come to being a Disney princess , I think , was <unk> " . The film was a commercial success , grossing approximately US $ 240 million worldwide . She played an NRI girl in the Apoorva Lakhia 's bilingual action drama Zanjeer ( <unk> in Telugu ) , a remake of the 1973 Hindi film of the same name , which met with poor reactions from critics and was unsuccessful at the box office . Chopra next reprised her role of Priya in Rakesh Roshan 's Krrish 3 — a sequel to the 2006 superhero film Krrish — with Hrithik Roshan , Vivek Oberoi and Kangana Ranaut . The film earned positive reviews though critics opined that Chopra 's role in the film was small . Writing for Daily News and Analysis , Sarita A Tanwar commented that " Priyanka is saddled with a role that doesn 't do her justice . She deserved a meatier role . " The feature became a box office success , earning over ₹ 3 billion ( US $ 45 million ) worldwide , to become Chopra 's biggest commercial success till date and her fourth major hit in the last two years . She also appeared in an item number titled " Ram <unk> Leela " for Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's Goliyon Ki <unk> Ram @-@ Leela . The song , which took four days to rehearse , saw Chopra execute a contemporary <unk> , that incorporated complicated dance steps . 
 = = = Recent work ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 In 2014 , Chopra played the lead female role in Yash Raj Films 's romantic action drama Gunday directed by Ali Abbas Zafar , alongside Ranveer Singh , Arjun Kapoor and Irrfan Khan . She portrayed Nandita , a cabaret dancer in Calcutta . Set in the 1970s , the film tells the story of two best friends , who fall in love with Chopra 's character . Gunday proved to be a box @-@ office success , grossing over ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) worldwide . She next featured in Mary Kom , a biographical film of the five time world boxing champion and Olympic bronze medalist Mary Kom . To prepare for the role , she spent time with Kom and received four months of boxing training . The film premiered at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival , received positive reviews from critics , and her performance received critical acclaim . Namrata Joshi from Outlook felt that Chopra 's sincere and earnest performance brings out Kom 's " determination as well as her vulnerabilities , and insecurities " , and Indo @-@ Asian News Service wrote " Priyanka expresses every shade of her character with a pitch @-@ perfect bravado . The actress controls curbs and quantifies every component of her character 's personality without losing that basic element of spontaneity . " Mary Kom emerged as a major commercial success , with revenues of ₹ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( US $ 15 million ) at the box @-@ office . Chopra won the Screen Award for Best Actress , the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role , and received another nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress for the film . 
 The following year , Chopra starred in Zoya Akhtar 's Dil Dhadakne Do , an ensemble comedy @-@ drama alongside Anil Kapoor , Shefali Shah , Ranveer Singh , Anushka Sharma and Farhan Akhtar . The film tells the story of a dysfunctional Punjabi family ( the <unk> ) , who invite their family and friends on a cruise trip to celebrate the parents ' 30th wedding anniversary . She portrayed the role of Ayesha Mehra , a successful entrepreneur and the eldest child . Pratim D. Gupta from The Telegraph considered Chopra to be one of the winners of the film and wrote " From the <unk> body language to the measured speech [ ... ] shows the kind of depth she is able to bring to her lines and characters these days . Rajiv <unk> of India @-@ West wrote " Dil Dhadakne Do happily boasts stellar performances . Topping the list is the nuanced , magnificent work of Priyanka Chopra as Ayesha . Her tiny expressions and nuances , as well as her vocal inflections truly bring her character alive . " The film was a critical and commercial success , grossing ₹ 1 @.@ 47 billion ( US $ 22 million ) worldwide within seventeen days of release . Chopra won the Screen Award for Best Ensemble Cast , and was nominated for the Screen Award for Best Actress , and the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . 
 Chopra signed a talent holding deal with ABC Studios and in February 2015 was cast in the television pilot Quantico , which was picked to series . The series premiered on 27 September 2015 on ABC , making Chopra the first South Asian to headline an American network drama series . Based at the FBI Academy , the season one of Quantico follows a group of young FBI recruits , each having a specific reason for joining , one of whom will be responsible for blowing the Grand Central Terminal in the future . She plays the role of an FBI recruit , Alex Parrish , who is suspected of engineering the most devastating terrorist attack on American soil since the September 11 attacks . The series received positive reviews from television critics and Chopra was praised for her performance . James Poniewozik of The New York Times described Chopra as the " strongest human asset " of the show , and added that " she is immediately charismatic and commanding . " She received the People 's Choice Award for " Favourite Actress In A New TV Series " for her role in Quantico , becoming the first South Asian actress to win a People 's Choice Award . 
 Chopra next starred alongside Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's epic historical romance drama Bajirao Mastani . She portrayed <unk> , the first wife of the <unk> general Peshwa Bajirao I. The film opened to major critical acclaim , and Chopra received praise for her portrayal which several reviewers regarded as her best performance to date . Rajeev Masand wrote " the film benefits from a nice touch of playfulness and humor in Priyanka Chopra ’ s <unk> . Chopra brings grace to the character , and practically steals the film . " Film critic Raja Sen thought Chopra , who , while not in the title , owned the film , and wrote " Chopra 's terrific in the part , her intelligently expressive eyes speaking volumes and her no @-@ nonsense Marathi rhythm bang @-@ on . " A major commercial success , Bajirao Mastani grossed ₹ 3 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 52 million ) at the box @-@ office , becoming one of the highest @-@ grossing Indian films of all time . For her performance , she won the Screen Award for Best Supporting Actress and the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress . She also received a nomination for the Producers Guild Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . In 2016 , she starred as a police officer in Prakash Jha 's social drama Jai <unk> . 
 = = = = Upcoming projects = = = = 
 Chopra has several projects at the various stages of production . She is currently filming the second season of Quantico in the New York City . Chopra has completed her work on the action comedy Baywatch , directed by Seth Gordon , co @-@ starring Dwayne Johnson , Zac Efron , and Alexandra Daddario , in which she plays the main antagonist . In addition , she is producing two regional language films under her production company Purple Pebble Pictures — the Marathi film Ventilator , and untitled Punjabi film , both of which are scheduled to release in 2016 . 
 = = Music career = = 
 Chopra 's main vocal influence was her father , who she said was " an incredible singer " , and helped develop her interest in singing . She used her vocal talent early in her pageantry career . Her first recording , the song " <unk> <unk> " in the Tamil film Thamizhan ( 2002 ) , was made at the urging of her director and co @-@ star , Vijay ( who had noticed her singing on the set ) . She declined to sing playback for " <unk> <unk> " in her film Karam ( 2005 ) , preferring to concentrate on her acting career , but later sang the song live on the television programme Sa Re Ga Ma Pa . Chopra recorded an unreleased song for Bluffmaster ! ( 2005 ) . In August 2011 , Universal Music Group signed Chopra to a worldwide recording agreement with DesiHits . The deal indicated that her first studio album would be released by Interscope Records in North America and by Island Records elsewhere . Her first song as a playback singer in Bollywood was " Chaoro " from Mary Kom ( 2014 ) . 
 In July 2012 , Chopra became the first Bollywood star signed by Creative Artists Agency , an entertainment and sports agency based in Los Angeles . Travelling to the United States to work on her album , Chopra collaborated with Sam Watters , Matthew Koma and Jay Sean . The album will be produced by RedOne . Her first single , " In My City " , debuted in the US on 13 September 2012 in a TV spot for the NFL Network 's Thursday Night Football , 12 hours after the full song debuted in India ; a shortened version of the song was used to open each show of the season . " In My City " features rapper will.i.am ; according to Chopra , a co @-@ writer , the song was inspired by her unsettled childhood and her journey from a small @-@ town girl to a celebrity . " In My City " trended at number one on Twitter several minutes after release . The song received mixed reviews from critics , and was a commercial success in India ; it sold more than 130 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , topped the Hindi pop chart and was certified triple platinum . In the United States the single was unsuccessful , with 5 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week according to Nielsen SoundScan , and did not receive radio play . In October 2012 , the single won her the Best International Debut award at the People 's Choice Awards India . In December 2012 , she received three nominations : Best Female Artist , Best Song and Best Video ( for " In My City " ) at the World Music Awards . She also received the Trailblazer Award from the South Asian Media , Marketing and Entertainment Association for becoming the first Bollywood actor to win a major record deal in the U.S. Chopra was also a featured artist on " Erase " , an EDM song produced by the American DJ and producer duo The <unk> . 
 In July 2013 , Chopra released her second single " Exotic " featuring American rapper Pitbull , along with its music video . " Exotic " debuted at number 16 on the Billboard Dance / Electronic Songs and number 11 on the Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart in the 27 July 2013 issue . The single also entered at number 74 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . " Exotic " debuted at number 44 on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart and peaked at number 12 . Her third single , a cover of Bonnie Raitt 's " I Can 't Make You Love Me " was released in April 2014 . The song 's accompanying video was released around the same time . The song peaked at number 28 on the Billboard Hot Dance / Electronic Songs chart . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Chopra supports various causes related to the girl child through her foundation " The Priyanka Chopra Foundation for Health and Education " , which works towards providing support to unprivileged girls across the country in the areas Education and Health . She donates ten percent of her earnings to fund the foundation ’ s operations , and pays for educational and medical expenses for seventy children in India , fifty among whom are girls . 
 She often speaks out on women 's issues : against female infanticide and <unk> , and in support of education for girls . A believer in feminism , Chopra also speaks about women 's rights , gender equality , and gender pay inequality . In 2006 , a " day with Chopra " was auctioned on eBay ; the proceeds were donated to an NGO , <unk> Kali , which helps educate girls in India . She has made appearances in support of other charities , such as the 2005 HELP ! Telethon Concert to raise funds for the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . In 2009 , she shot a documentary for the organisation Alert India to increase understanding of leprosy . She modelled for designer Manish Malhotra and Shaina NC 's charity fashion show to raise funds for the Cancer Patients Aid Association ( <unk> ) NGO . In 2010 Chopra was one of several celebrities who created promotional messages for Pearls Wave Trust , which campaigns against violence and abuse of women and girls . Chopra also launched the " Save the Girl Child " campaign , which aims to change the attitudes of Indians towards girls . 
 She has worked with UNICEF since 2008 , recording public @-@ service announcements and participating in media panel discussions promoting children 's rights and the education of girls , and also participated in celebrating the 20th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child . She was appointed a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador for Child Rights on 10 August 2010 . UNICEF Representative Karin <unk> said of the appointment : " She is equally passionate about her work on behalf of children and adolescents . We are proud of the work she has done with us so far on child rights , and , we are thrilled about all what we will be doing together so that no child gets left behind . " In 2012 Chopra spoke at the launch of Awakening Youth , an anti @-@ addiction programme . 
 Chopra is a supporter of environmental charities and is brand ambassador for NDTV Greenathon , an initiative to support eco @-@ friendliness and provide solar power to rural villages without electricity supplies . She appeared with children in an animated video to support the cause , and removed rubbish from the banks of the Yamuna river in Agra to increase awareness of environmental issues . During the third and fourth editions of Greenathon , She adopted up to seven villages to provide with a regular supply of electricity . She adopted a tigress in 2011 and a lioness in 2012 at the <unk> biological park , paying for both animals ' upkeep for a year . To promote organ donation , Chopra pledged to donate her own organs after death and was co @-@ keynote speaker at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center 's Bollywood @-@ themed 20th @-@ anniversary celebration of its liver @-@ transplant programme in 2012 . 
 She donated ₹ 5 million ( US $ 74 @,@ 000 ) to Nanavati hospital to build a cancer ward . The ward , which is named after her late father , was inaugurated by her in 2013 . The same year , she provided voice @-@ over in English and Hindi for the documentary film Girl Rising for the organisation of the same name . She was invited as one of the speakers alongside Gordon Brown , Steve Wozniak , Bill Clinton , and Charlie Baker for the 50th anniversary of the World Leaders Conference at the Hynes Convention Center , Boston . She spoke about women empowerment through education , discussing inequality and the challenges of education for women , and received a standing ovation for her speech . Chopra also lent her voice to a music video of John Lennon 's " Imagine " . The video featuring her along with other singers , including Katy Perry , and The Black Eyed Peas was created as part of a global campaign by UNICEF to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
 Indian prime minister Narendra Modi selected Chopra as one of his nine nominees called " <unk> " in 2014 for the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan , a national cleanliness campaign by the Government of India . She lent her support to the campaign by cleaning and rehabilitating a garbage @-@ laden neighbourhood in Mumbai , and urged people to maintain the cleanliness . In 2015 , she voiced People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA 's ) life @-@ size robotic elephant named " Ellie " , who visited schools across the United States and Europe to educate kids about elephants and captivity , and to urge people to boycott circuses . 
 = = Other works = = 
 = = = Television presenting and stage performances = = = 
 In 2007 , Chopra was on the judges ' panel of the Miss India pageant . She stated , " Miss India will always remain special . That 's where it all started for me . And maybe that 's where it would 've ended if I hadn 't won the crown . " She also served as a judge at Miss World 2009 . In 2010 , she hosted the third season of the reality show Fear Factor : <unk> Ke Khiladi on the Colors channel , taking over from previous host Akshay Kumar . According to contestants , in hosting the series , Chopra had " transformed into quite a whip @-@ wielding dictator " , relentlessly pushing the contestants to work . She performed most of her own stunts , adamant to prove that she could rival Akshay Kumar , who had hosted the previous two seasons . The opening ratings of the show topped those of the two previous seasons . The show was praised by critics , and earned her the Indian Telly Award for Most <unk> Debut on Television . She visited Jawan troops in <unk> , in eastern India , for a special episode of the NDTV show Jai Jawan celebrating the 60th anniversary of India 's independence . In February 2016 , Chopra presented the award for Best Film Editing at the 88th Academy Awards . 
 Chopra has participated in a number of world tours and concerts . She took part in a world concert tour , " Temptations 2004 " , and performed with other Bollywood actors ( including Shah Rukh Khan , Saif Ali Khan , Rani Mukerji , Preity Zinta and Arjun Rampal ) in 19 stage shows . In 2011 , she participated ( with Shahid Kapoor and Shah Rukh Khan ) in a concert in Durban , South Africa celebrating 150 years of India – South Africa friendship . In 2012 , she performed at M. A. Chidambaram Stadium , Chennai in the opening ceremony of the fifth season of cricket 's Indian Premier League with Amitabh Bachchan , Salman Khan , Kareena Kapoor and Katy Perry . The same year , she performed at Dubai Festival City 's <unk> Bollywood Concert with other Bollywood stars such as Salman Khan and Sophie Choudry . 
 = = = Column writing = = = 
 Chopra began writing an opinion column , " The Priyanka Chopra Column " , for the Hindustan Times in 2009 . She wrote a total of fifty columns for the newspaper . She said after her first year of writing : " I 'm a private person and never thought that I could express my feelings . But strangely enough , whenever I sat down to write this column , my inner most thoughts came to the fore . " In March 2009 , she met several readers who had submitted feedback on her weekly column . She continued to write sporadically for newspapers . In August 2012 she wrote a column published in The Times of India titled " No woman in Mumbai feels safe any longer " , discussing the murder of 25 @-@ year @-@ old Pallavi <unk> , whom she met while working on Don . In the article , Chopra expressed her views about the safety of women in cities . She wrote : " The magnitude of this crime can perhaps only truly be understood by a woman . It has much larger ramifications . We can 't allow this to happen . We have to , in whichever way we can , ensure that what happened with Pallavi does not happen again . We need to remind ourselves that we women today are a vital contributor to the growth of the new India . " 
 In a July 2014 article published in The Guardian , she criticised female genital mutilation and child marriage . She wrote : " These practices violate the fundamental rights of girls and women , and hold back social and economic development that would benefit children , communities and countries . Child marriage and FGM destroy childhoods , disrupt schooling , leave girls at higher risk of dying from pregnancy @-@ related causes , and contribute to a cycle of poverty . " In December 2014 , Chopra wrote an op @-@ ed for The New York Times titled " What Jane Austen Knew " about the importance of education for girls . She praised and quoted Nobel Peace Prize winners Malala Yousafzai and Kailash Satyarthi , and described how her desire to help others was triggered when , at just nine years old , she joined her parents while they volunteered their spare time to offer modern health care to the rural poor . In late 2014 , Chopra began writing a monthly column , " Pret @-@ a @-@ Priyanka " , for " <unk> " . In an article published in January 2015 , she expressed her views on diversity and being a global citizen . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Chopra has been described by the critics as one of the most talented actresses in Bollywood . Analysing Chopra 's career highlights , Bollywood Hungama noted : " Despite a career that has seen a constant flip @-@ flop [ ... ] the performer in her has seen a constant growth with every passing year . " After playing strong characters in a series of films , she gained recognition for her versatility in portraying a range of unconventional roles , leading CNN @-@ IBN to describe her " as one of the most powerful actresses in the current lot and someone who doesn 't shy away from experimenting with roles within the realms of popular cinema " . The Times of India called her a " game changer " and added that she " made the age @-@ old demarcation between a hero and heroine redundant and one can easily describe her as a Shero " . In 2012 , film critic Subhash K. Jha labelled her " the best actress in the post @-@ Sridevi generation " and listed her character in Barfi ! as being " one of the finest inwardly ravaged characters in Bollywood . " Chopra has often featured on Rediff.com 's annual listing of " Bollywood 's Best Actresses " , and was featured in their list of " Top 10 Actresses of 2000 – 2010 " . 
 Chopra is one of Bollywood 's highest @-@ paid actresses , and considered one of the most popular and high @-@ profile celebrities in India . She is described as a sex symbol and a style icon . Her body , figure , eye , lips and exotic looks have been cited by the media as her distinctive physical features . Designers Falguni and Shane Peacock wrote , " She is comfortable in her own skin and looks ravishing in whatever she wears , be it a bikini , short or long dress or even a sari . " She ranks high on lists of the most influential , powerful , popular and attractive Indian celebrities . In 2006 , 2012 , 2014 and 2015 , the UK magazine Eastern Eye ranked her first on their " World 's Sexiest Asian Women " list , and she was featured on Verve 's list of most powerful women in 2009 and 2010 . She was named " India 's Best @-@ Dressed Woman of the Year " by People in 2011 , and Maxim selected her twice ( 2011 and 2013 ) as " Hottest Girl of the Year " . In 2012 , she was declared the most influential Indian on the social @-@ media circuit in a survey conducted by <unk> . In 2015 , People featured her as one of the " Most Intriguing People of the Year " . In 2016 , Time named her one of the " 100 Most Influential People in the World " and also featured on the cover of the issue . 
 Chopra was declared queen of brand endorsements in India , ranking second in on the list of brand ambassadors of 2008 ( only after Shah Rukh Khan ) in a survey conducted by TAM <unk> . The following year , she was named " India 's top brand endorser " by the same agency , becoming the first woman to top the endorsement charts in India . Manish <unk> of Alchemist Talent Solutions said in 2012 that Chopra was a stable and dependable brand endorser , and many brands renewed their contract with her . Chopra has represented many brands , including TAG Heuer , Pepsi , Nokia , Garnier and Nestlé ; she was the first female representative of Hero Honda . She and three other Bollywood actors ( Shah Rukh Khan , Kajol and Hrithik Roshan ) had their likenesses made into a series of miniature dolls for Hasbro and the UK @-@ based Bollywood Legends Corporation . In 2009 , Chopra became the first Indian actress to cast a foot impression at the Salvatore Ferragamo Museum in Florence , Italy , and she received custom @-@ designed shoes from the Ferragamo house . In 2013 , she became the first Indian model to represent Guess , whose CEO Paul Marciano called her " the young Sophia Loren " . The actress became the first Indian actress to feature in a school textbook . Her life is described in a chapter of Roving Families , Shifting Homes , a book taught at <unk> School . The book also includes pictures of her family and the moment she was crowned Miss World in 2000 . 
 Chopra is particularly known in the Indian media and film industry for her professionalism and is often referred to as " Piggy Chops " , a nickname given her by co @-@ stars on the set of Bluffmaster ! in 2005 . She is popularly referred to by the media and the film industry as " <unk> " or simply " PC " . Although she is known for her media @-@ friendly attitude , Chopra is reticent to discuss details of her personal life in public . She has had a Twitter account since January 2009 , and has the greatest number of followers of any Indian actress . In 2015 , Chopra appeared in The Huffington Post 's " 100 Most Influential Women on Twitter " list , where she was named the most influential Indian woman on Twitter . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Quantico ( 2015 – present ; ABC ) 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Among Chopra 's film awards are a National Film Award for Best Actress for Fashion ( 2008 ) and five Filmfare Awards : Best Female Debut for Andaaz ( 2003 ) , Best Performance in a Negative Role for Aitraaz ( 2004 ) , Best Actress for Fashion ( 2008 ) , Critics Award for Best Actress for 7 Khoon Maaf ( 2011 ) , and Best Supporting Actress for Bajirao Mastani ( 2015 ) . In 2016 , she received the People 's Choice Award for " Favourite Actress In A New TV Series " for Quantico , making her the first South Asian actress to win a People 's Choice Award . The same year , she was awarded the Padma Shri , the fourth highest civilian award , by the Government of India . 
 = = Discography = = 
 As lead artist 
 As featured artist 
 Other appearances 
 = Destruction of Syria 's chemical weapons = 
 The destruction of Syria 's chemical weapons began with several international agreements that were arrived at with Syria , with an initial destruction deadline of 30 June 2014 . United Nations Security Council Resolution 2118 imposed on Syria responsibilities and a timeline for the destruction of its chemical weapons and chemical weapons production facilities . The Security Council resolution incorporated and bound Syria to an implementation plan enacted in an Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons ( OPCW ) Executive Council Decision . On 23 June 2014 , the last declared chemical weapons were shipped out of Syria for destruction . The destruction of the most dangerous chemical weapons began at sea aboard the Maritime Administration Ready Reserve Force vessel CAPE <unk> crewed with U.S. civilian merchant mariners . It took 42 days aboard ship to destroy 600 metric tons of chemical agents that would have been used to make deadly Sarin and Mustard Gas . 
 The chemical weapons agreements arose at a time when the U.S. and France headed a coalition of countries on the verge of carrying out air strikes on Syria in response to the 21 August 2013 Ghouta chemical @-@ weapon attacks . The impetus toward peaceful destruction of the chemical weapons began on 9 September 2013 , when U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry — asked by a reporter if there was anything Assad could do avert attack — replied , " Sure , he could turn over every single bit of his chemical weapons " in the next week . " But he isn ’ t about to do it , and it can ’ t be done " . But the suggestion received a positive response from Russia and Syria , and U.S. – Russian negotiations led to the 14 September 2013 " Framework for Elimination of Syrian Chemical Weapons , " which called for the elimination of Syria 's chemical weapon stockpiles by mid @-@ 2014 . Following the agreement , Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention and agreed to apply that convention provisionally until its entry into force on 14 October 2013 . On 21 September , Syria ostensibly provided a list of its chemical weapons to the OPCW , before the deadline set by the framework . 
 On 27 September , the Executive Council of the OPCW adopted a decision , " Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons , " a detailed implementation plan based on the U.S. / Russian agreement . Later on 27 September , the UN Security Council unanimously passed United Nations Security Council Resolution 2118 , incorporating the OPCW plan and making it binding on Syria . A joint OPCW @-@ UN mission will supervise the destruction or removal of Syria 's chemical arms , while its Director @-@ General is charged with notifying the Executive Council regarding any delay in implementation . The Executive Council would decide whether the non @-@ compliance should be reported to the Security Council , which is responsible for making certain Syria fulfills its commitments under Resolution 2118 . 
 OPCW began preliminary inspections of Syria 's chemical weapons arsenal on 1 October 2013 , and actual destruction began on 6 October . Under OPCW supervision Syrian military personnel began " destroying munitions such as missile warheads and aerial bombs and disabling mobile and static mixing and filling units . " The destruction of Syria 's declared chemical weapons production , mixing , and filling equipment was successfully completed by 31 October deadline . The destruction of the chemical weapons fell well behind schedule . The entire chemical weapons stockpile had been scheduled to be completely removed from the country by 6 February 2014 . Only on 23 June 2014 , had Syria finished shipping the remaining declared chemicals . On 18 August 2014 , all of the most toxic chemicals had been destroyed offshore . Western officials such as British Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant have expressed concerns about the completeness of Syria 's disclosures , and believe the OPCW mission should remain in place following the removal of chemical weapons until verification tasks can be completed . 
 Chlorine , a common industrial chemical , is outside the scope of the disarmament agreement ; however , its use as a poison gas would violate the Chemical Weapons Convention , which Syria joined in 2013 . Various parties , including Western governments , have accused Assad of conducting illegal chlorine attacks in 2014 and 2015 . A late disclosure in 2014 regarding Syria 's ricin program raised doubts about completeness of the government 's declaration of its chemical weapons stockpile , and in early May 2015 , OPCW announced that inspectors had found traces of sarin and VX nerve agent at a military research site in Syria that had not been declared previously by the Assad regime . 
 = = Background = = 
 Syria has been in a state of civil war since 2011 . 
 More than 300 people died and thousands were injured in the 21 August 2013 Ghouta attacks , in which rockets containing the chemical agent sarin struck several opposition @-@ controlled or disputed areas of the Ghouta suburbs of Damascus . The United States and other Western countries blamed the Syrian government for the attacks , while Syria blamed civil war opposition forces . In response to Ghouta , a coalition of countries led by the United States and France , which support the rebels , threatened air strikes on Syria . Russia , a key ally of Syria , along with China had earlier blocked efforts by the United States , France , and the UK to secure United Nations Security Council approval for military intervention . 
 During the G20 summit on 6 September , Russian President Vladimir Putin and U.S. President Barack Obama discussed the idea of putting Syria 's chemical weapons under international control . On 9 September 2013 , U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry stated in response to a question from a journalist that the air strikes could be averted if Syria turned over " every single bit " of its chemical weapons stockpiles within a week , but Syria " isn 't about to do it and it can 't be done . " State Department officials stressed that Kerry 's statement and its one @-@ week deadline were rhetorical in light of the unlikelihood of Syria turning over its chemical weapons . Hours after Kerry 's statement , Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov announced that Russia had suggested to Syria that it relinquish its chemical weapons , and Syrian foreign minister Walid al @-@ <unk> immediately welcomed the proposal . 
 = = Framework for elimination of Syrian chemical weapons = = 
 = = = Negotiations and agreement = = = 
 From 12 to 14 September , details of the Framework were negotiated at the InterContinental Hotel in Geneva , Switzerland . High @-@ level negotiations were held between Kerry and Lavrov , with large teams of experts simultaneously working on technical details . A key breakthrough was reported to occur when the U.S. and Russia agreed on their approximations of the Syrian chemical weapon stockpile ( estimated at 1 @,@ 000 tons of sarin , mustard gas and VX nerve gas ) . On 14 September the Framework was agreed and signed . 
 On the same day , after the signing , Syria announced that it was acceding to the Chemical Weapons Convention ( provisionally applying it directly , but formally taking effect 14 October ) , and in doing so becoming a member of the OPCW . This committed Syria not to use chemical weapons , to destroy its chemical weapons within 10 years , and to convert or destroy all of its chemical weapons production facilities . 
 = = = Overview and enforcement = = = 
 In the Framework , Russia and the United States agreed to the following target dates : 
 Syria to provide a comprehensive listing of its weapons to the OPCW by 21 September 2013 
 Initial OPCW on @-@ site inspections of declared sites to be completed by November 2013 
 Equipment for producing , mixing , and filling chemical weapons to be destroyed by November 2013 
 All chemical weapons material and equipment to be eliminated in the first half of 2014 
 The Framework states that , in the event of noncompliance , the UN Security Council should impose measures under Chapter VII of the UN Charter . The Framework does not state how Syria 's compliance would be measured , or what the penalties would be if it did not comply . Under the UN Charter , Chapter VII measures range from " demonstrations " to sanctions or military action and could be vetoed by any of the five permanent members of the Security Council . Russia and China had previously vetoed three resolutions attempting to condemn or sanction Syria , and were considered likely to block any future Security Council sanctioned military action against Syria . The U.S. indicated it might resort to military action outside the UN if Syria failed to comply with the Security Council resolution requiring it to eliminate its chemical weapons . 
 Chlorine , a common industrial chemical which would later allegedly be used in poison @-@ gas attacks inside Syria in 2014 , is not on the list of prohibited chemicals covered by the disarmament agreement . 
 = = = Reactions to the Framework = = = 
 The " Framework for the Elimination of Syrian Chemical Weapons " was received positively by France , Germany , the UK , the European Union , China , and the Arab League . Israel expressed cautious optimism , but was skeptical that Syria would comply . 
 Ali Haidar , Syria 's Minister of National Reconciliation , praised the agreement as " a victory for Syria that was achieved thanks to our Russian friends . " He described the agreement as removing a pretext for a U.S. attack on the country . Iran also stated that the agreement had deprived the U.S. of a pretext for attacking Syria . 
 Leaders of the main rebel coalition , the Syrian National Coalition , were angered by the agreement . The U.S. , without consulting the coalition , had changed its mind about striking Syria . Rebels furthermore worried the agreement might be a considered a de facto admission of the Bashar al @-@ Assad government 's legitimacy . 
 = = OPCW Executive Council decision = = 
 The Executive Council of the OPCW met on 27 September and adopted a decision , " Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons " , that is a detailed and accelerated plan for the elimination of Syria 's chemical weapons . The Executive Council also approved Syria 's provisional application of the Chemical Weapons Convention pending entry into force on 14 October . The plan adds detail to but does not vary from the basic deadlines in the U.S. – Russian Framework . The OPCW stated that the Executive Council had agreed on " an accelerated programme for achieving the complete elimination of Syria 's chemical weapons by mid @-@ 2014 . The decision requires inspections in Syria to commence from 1 October 2013 . " 
 Inspectors were given unusually broad authority , because Syria was required under the plan to provide inspectors unobstructed access to any suspected chemical weapons site , even if the Syrian government had not identified the location in its list of chemical weapons sites , and without the special procedures normally required for " Challenge Inspections " under Article IX of the convention . 
 The decision also stipulates that if the OPCW Director @-@ General determined there had been a delay in implementation of the decision , the matter should be discussed within 24 hours , when it should be decided whether the matter should be submitted to the UN Security Council . 
 The Executive Council 's decision further calls , " on an urgent basis " , for funding by member states of the Syrian chemical weapons elimination process . 
 = = = Requirements for Syria = = = 
 Under the Decision , which was incorporated into Security Council Resolution 2118 , Syria is required to take the following actions : 
 submit to the Secretariat by 4 October further information ( to that provided on 19 September 2013 ) on its chemical weapons , in particular : " ( i ) the chemical name and military designator of each chemical in its chemical weapons stockpile , including precursors and toxins , and quantities thereof ; ( ii ) the specific type of munitions , sub @-@ munitions and devices in its chemical weapons stockpile , including specific quantities of each type that are filled and unfilled ; and ( iii ) the location of all of its chemical weapons , chemical weapons storage facilities , chemical weapons production facilities , including mixing and filling facilities , and chemical weapons research and development facilities , providing specific geographic coordinates , " 
 submit the declaration required by Article III of the Chemical Weapons Convention to the OPCW Secretariat no later than 27 October , 
 complete elimination of all its chemical weapons material and equipment during the first half of 2014 , " subject to the detailed requirements , including intermediate destruction milestones , to be decided by the [ Executive ] Council not later than 15 November 2013 , " 
 complete destruction of its chemical weapons mixing / filling and production equipment by 1 November , 
 cooperate fully with Decision implementation , to include providing OPCW personnel with " immediate and unfettered right to inspect any and all sites in the Syrian Arab Republic , " and 
 designate one official as the OPCW Secretariat 's main point of contact , and provide that person with authority to ensure that the Decision is fully implemented . 
 = = Security Council Resolution 2118 = = 
 Negotiations over the Security Council resolution were initially contentious , as the U.S. , the UK , and France submitted a draft resolution that included automatic invocation of Chapter VII , sanctioning use of military force if Syria did not fulfill its commitments under the agreement . Russia and China were opposed to any resolution that authorized enforcement under Chapter VII without a second vote of the Security Council . After further negotiations , on 26 September the five permanent members of the UN Security Council reached agreement on an implementation and enforcement draft resolution . On the following day , just hours after the OPCW Executive Council approved a detailed implementation plan for the U.S. / Russian Framework , Security Council Resolution 2118 was unanimously passed , making the OPCW plan binding on the Syrians . 
 The resolution requires that Syria eliminate its chemical stockpile and allow complete access to UN and OPCW chemical weapons inspectors . If it does not comply with either demand , the Security Council would need to adopt a second resolution regarding imposition of military or other actions against Syria under the UN Charter 's Chapter VII . The vote on the resolution was delayed until 27 September because the OPCW needed to vote first on its detailed implementation plan . Syria vowed to abide by the resolution . 
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has stressed that the Western and Arab @-@ backed rebels in the Syrian civil war must also comply with the UN resolution , and must ensure that extremists do not acquire chemical weapons . " The responsibility is not only on the Syrian government , " he stated , " but also on the opposition and all the states in this sphere should of course not allow these weapons to fall into the hands of non @-@ state actors . " 
 = = = Reactions to Security Council Resolution 2118 = = = 
 = = Implementation = = 
 = = = Preparations and preliminary inspections = = = 
 On 21 September 2013 , Syria ostensibly met the Framework 's first deadline , for comprehensive chemical weapons disclosure . The OPCW stated it had received and was reviewing the " expected disclosure " concerning Syria 's chemical weapons stockpiles , 24 hours after stating it had received an " initial declaration " document from Syrian authorities . The OPCW stated that it would use on @-@ site inspections to verify the accuracy of the disclosure by Syria . It would also " assist in putting into place arrangements to keep the warfare materials and the relevant facilities secure until their destruction . " 
 OPCW began preliminary inspections of Syria 's chemical weapons arsenal on 1 October 2013 , and actual destruction of Syrian equipment began on 6 October 2013 , with Syrian personnel under OPCW supervision applying angle grinders and cutting torches to " a wide range of items . " Specifically , under OPCW supervision Syrian military personnel had begun " destroying munitions such as missile warheads and aerial bombs and disabling mobile and static mixing and filling units . " The U.S. and Russia announced themselves " very pleased " with the rapid pace of Syria 's chemical arms disarmament . The Economist commented that the demanding timeline may mean the OPCW will deploy ad @-@ hoc destruction methods such as sledgehammers , tanks , or concrete fills . 
 On Monday , 7 October , UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon stated that the UN @-@ OPCW joint mission would eventually have about 100 personnel in Syria , with a support base in Cyprus . In a letter to the Security Council , Ban set out the mission 's three phases : establish an initial presence and verify Syria 's stockpiles declaration ; oversee chemical weapons destruction ; and verify destruction of all chemical arms related materials and programs . On 13 October Ban announced that veteran UN diplomat Sigrid <unk> would head the joint UN @-@ OPCW mission . 
