 Because titanium is non @-@ ferromagnetic , patients with titanium implants can be safely examined with magnetic resonance imaging ( convenient for long @-@ term implants ) . Preparing titanium for implantation in the body involves subjecting it to a high @-@ temperature plasma arc which removes the surface atoms , exposing fresh titanium that is instantly oxidized . 
 Titanium is also used for the surgical instruments used in image @-@ guided surgery , as well as wheelchairs , crutches , and any other products where high strength and low weight are desirable . 
 Titanium dioxide nanoparticles are widely used in electronics and the delivery of pharmaceuticals and cosmetics . 
 = = = Nuclear waste storage = = = 
 Because of its excellent corrosion resistance , titanium containers have been studied for the long @-@ term storage of nuclear waste . Containers lasting more than 100 @,@ 000 years are possible with manufacturing conditions that minimize material defects . A titanium " drip shield " could also be installed over containers of other types to enhance their longevity . 
 = = Bioremediation = = 
 The fungal species Marasmius oreades and Hypholoma <unk> can bio convert titanium in titanium polluted soils . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Titanium is non @-@ toxic even in large doses and does not play any natural role inside the human body . An estimated quantity of 0 @.@ 8 milligrams of titanium is ingested by humans each day , but most passes through without being absorbed in the tissues . It does , however , sometimes bio @-@ accumulate in tissues that contain silica . One study indicates a possible connection between titanium and yellow nail syndrome . An unknown mechanism in plants may use titanium to stimulate the production of carbohydrates and encourage growth . This may explain why most plants contain about 1 part per million ( ppm ) of titanium , food plants have about 2 ppm , and <unk> and nettle contain up to 80 ppm . 
 As a powder or in the form of metal shavings , titanium metal poses a significant fire hazard and , when heated in air , an explosion hazard . Water and carbon dioxide are ineffective for extinguishing a titanium fire ; Class D dry powder agents must be used instead . 
 When used in the production or handling of chlorine , titanium should not be exposed to dry chlorine gas because it may result in a titanium / chlorine fire . Even wet chlorine presents a fire hazard when extreme weather conditions cause unexpected drying . 
 Titanium can catch fire when a fresh , non @-@ oxidized surface comes in contact with liquid oxygen . Fresh metal may be exposed when the oxidized surface is struck or scratched with a hard object , or when mechanical strain causes a crack . This poses a limitation to its use in liquid oxygen systems , such as those in the aerospace industry . Because titanium tubing impurities can cause fires when exposed to oxygen , titanium is prohibited in gaseous oxygen respiration systems . Steel tubing is used for high pressure systems ( 3 @,@ 000 <unk> ) and aluminium tubing for low pressure systems . 
 = British Engineerium = 
 The British Engineerium ( originally named Goldstone Pumping Station , then Brighton and Hove Engineerium , before taking its present name in 1981 ) is an engineering and steam power museum in the West Blatchington area of Hove , part of the English city of Brighton and Hove , located just north of the Brighton & Hove Greyhound Stadium . It is housed in a 19th @-@ century High Victorian Gothic complex of brick buildings which were erected in 1866 as a pumping station for the local water supply company . The Goldstone Pumping Station supplied water to the local area for more than a century before it was converted to its present use . 
 At its greatest extent , between 1884 and 1952 , the complex consisted of two boiler houses with condensing engines , a chimney , coal cellars , workshop , cooling pond , leat and underground reservoir . Situated on top of a naturally fissured chalk hollow , it provided vast quantities of water to the rapidly growing towns of Hove and its larger neighbour , the fashionable seaside resort of Brighton , for more than a century . As new sources of water were found elsewhere and more modern equipment installed to exploit them , the pumping station 's importance declined , and by 1971 the Brighton Water Department had closed it and threatened the complex with demolition . An industrial archaeologist offered to restore the buildings and machinery in return for a lease from the Brighton Water Corporation , and a charitable trust was formed to enable this . <unk> developed by the Engineerium 's employees and volunteers was exploited across the world : they founded museums , undertook restoration projects and trained young people in engineering heritage conservation . Another enthusiast subsequently bought the complex , and as of 2016 it is closed to the public while more restoration and extension work takes place . 
 The High Victorian Gothic buildings are a landmark in Hove , and are a good example of the 19th @-@ century ethos that " utility definitely does not equal dullness " in industrial buildings . Polychrome brickwork , moulded dressings and facings , decorative gables and elaborate windows characterise all the structures – even the 95 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) chimney , which stands apart from the main buildings like a campanile . English Heritage has listed the complex for its architectural and historical importance , giving its structures five separate listings : the former boiler house and the chimney are both listed at Grade II * – the second @-@ highest designation – and the former coal shed , the cooling pond and leat and the tall flint and brick wall surrounding the site each have the lower Grade II status . 
 As well as the restored pumping station equipment , the complex has a wide range of exhibits : more than 1 @,@ 500 were in place less than a year after it opened . These include a 19th @-@ century horse @-@ drawn fire engine , traction engines , veteran motorcycles , Victorian household equipment and old tools . A French @-@ built horizontal steam engine dating from 1859 is the principal exhibit . The Engineerium has always used its exhibits to educate and promote the study of industrial history : it has been called " the world 's only centre for the teaching of engineering conservation " , and was central to the activities of the English Industrial Heritage Year in 1993 . For many years , the larger and indigenous exhibits were fully operational and in steam at weekends . 
 = = History = = 
 Brighton and neighbouring Hove , on the English Channel coast between the South Downs and the sea , were built on top of a vast aquifer of chalk . A regular supply of naturally pure water was always available from this natural reservoir , and in the settlements ' early days many wells were sunk to exploit it . The rapid growth of Brighton in the 18th and early 19th century , followed by similar expansion in Hove , put pressure on the local authorities to provide more sources and a better supply system , though : wells became increasingly contaminated by sewage from cesspits , and some had to be blocked because they were so polluted , reducing the two towns ' water supply further . The first local water company — the Brighton , Hove and Preston Waterworks Company — was founded on 16 June 1834 by means of an Act of Parliament ; it built a waterworks on the road to Lewes and provided piped water for two hours per day to a few wealthy customers . This facility had two 20 @-@ horsepower beam engines . 
 By the 1850s , more water was needed for the continually expanding population : the intermittent supply from the Lewes Road waterworks was the only alternative to wells and boreholes . In 1853 , a new company was formed with the aim of introducing a large @-@ scale , consistent supply to Brighton , Hove and surrounding villages . The Brighton , Hove and Preston Constant Water Service Company bought its predecessor , the Waterworks Company , in 1854 . By the time it was in turn acquired by Brighton Corporation in 1872 ( by means of another Act of Parliament ) , it was pumping 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 l ) per day to 18 @,@ 000 houses in Brighton , Hove and the surrounding villages of Falmer , <unk> , Ovingdean , Patcham , Preston and Rottingdean . 
 The company employed eminent civil engineer Thomas Hawksley to find a suitable site for a new pumping station . Hawksley built more waterworks than any of his Victorian counterparts : he oversaw more than 150 schemes in Britain and abroad . In 1858 , he advised the company that the shallow chalk valley at Goldstone Bottom , at the south end of West Blatchington village just outside Hove , would be a good candidate for exploratory drilling . Test wells were sunk , and confirmed his impression . The company bought the 3 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 4 ha ) of land in 1862 , and in 1865 it was granted permission to build a pumping station on the site . By this stage , the Lewes Road facility was suffering from pollution , and the opening of another pumping station at Falmer and the building of more reservoirs had not been sufficient to satisfy demand . 
 Work took place during 1866 , and the facility opened in that year with the name Goldstone Pumping Station . The Brighton , Hove and Preston Constant Water Service Company operated it until their acquisition by Brighton Corporation . In its original form , the complex consisted of a boiler house and adjacent engine room , coal cellars and a chimney described by one historian as " truly monumental " , all built of polychrome brick . The engine room housed a 120 @-@ horsepower beam engine made by Charles Amos of London @-@ based manufacturer Easton and Amos . It was a compound engine of the type patented by engineer Arthur Woolf . Water was drawn from a 160 @-@ foot ( 49 m ) well which started immediately below the engine , which was known as the " Number 1 Engine " . It was driven by three Lancashire boilers with twin furnaces , which were fed by two coal cellars . Up to 130 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 590 @,@ 000 l ) of water could be pumped per hour . 
 In 1872 , ownership of Goldstone Pumping Station and all other water facilities in the Brighton area passed to Brighton Corporation , who formed a new committee called the Brighton Water Corporation to operate them . Demand for water continued to rise , so in 1876 the Corporation undertook a major expansion of the pumping station . A second engine room was added , and a separate coal storage shed was built in the grounds . Workshop facilities were also provided , with a range of machine tools , forge , lathe and <unk> and a separate Easton and Amos steam engine ( apparently left over from The Great Exhibition ) . The new engine house was equipped with the " Number 2 Engine " — a 250 @-@ horsepower Woolf compound unit built by the firm of Easton and Anderson and with a pumping capacity of 150 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 680 @,@ 000 l ) per hour . It was powered by three more Lancashire boilers . Mayor of Brighton Henry Abbey fired up the engine for the first time on 26 October 1876 ; his visit , with members of the Water Corporation committee , was recorded on a plaque in the engine room . A network of arched tunnels were built to link the new coal shed , the workshop and the firing platform of the boiler room . The subterranean passages were used by coal trucks . 
 The next extension took place in 1884 . A cooling pond and a leat ( an artificial waterway ) were built on land behind the pumping station , and a new 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 6 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 l ) underground reservoir was built by J.T. Chappell . It ran for 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) westwards from the complex . Brighton Water Corporation spent £ 11 @,@ 000 on this work and on the building of two other reservoirs in Brighton , at Dyke Road and Race Hill . All three were built of tile , brick and Portland cement . They were constantly replenished by a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 4 @,@ 500 l ) <unk> @-@ minute inflow from numerous natural fissures in the chalk . 
 Because the surrounding area became substantially urbanised in the interwar period , the water was treated with ozone from 1937 to disinfect it . Meanwhile in 1934 , the boilers powering the Number 2 Engine were replaced by four new models of the same type , built by the Blackburn @-@ based Yates and Thom company . Their capacity was greater : they could each generate 6 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 27 @,@ 000 N ) of steam per hour . The pumping station soon went into decline , though . Electric pumps became available in the 1940s , and one was installed in the Number 1 Engine room ; the engine itself was decommissioned at that time . The four new Lancashire boilers were in full @-@ time use for only 18 years : Number 2 Engine was taken out of service in 1952 , although it was maintained for a further two years in case it was required . Several pumping stations had been newly built or rebuilt since World War II — at <unk> , Falmer , Mile Oak , Newmarket Down ( near Lewes ) , Patcham and <unk> — and the old Lewes Road source , closed in 1903 because of pollution , came back into use . The Corporation increased its supplies further by acquiring waterworks in <unk> and Lewes in the 1950s . The Goldstone Pumping Station was considered outdated and no longer required , and in 1971 the Corporation announced plans to build a small electric pumphouse on the site , demolish the 19th @-@ century buildings and scrap the steam @-@ era equipment . 
 Jonathan Minns , a London @-@ based steam and engineering expert , immediately set about trying to save the buildings and their contents . He applied to the Historic Buildings Council for England ( the forerunner of the present English Heritage body ) for listed status to be granted to the buildings in the complex . This was granted on 17 June 1971 , and in the following year the Department of the Environment issued a preservation order preventing demolition or significant alteration of the buildings . Minns acquired the lease of the complex in 1974 , and planned to restore it from its derelict state and establish an industrial museum and educational centre . He also set up a trust to run it . By this time , the complex had a new owner : the Water Act 1973 restructured the water industry in England and Wales , transferring ownership of water infrastructure from local authorities to ten government @-@ controlled regional companies . Brighton Water Corporation became part of the Southern Water Authority . It was this entity which granted the lease to Minns . 
 Minns had only £ 350 when he started work on the Engineerium , but more money soon arrived in the form of grants and donations . The Southern Water Authority gave the Trust £ 22 @,@ 000 , the Department of the Environment granted £ 40 @,@ 000 , and the Trust received the largest historic buildings grant awarded in Sussex up to that point in 1975 . In October of that year , Minns and eight volunteers began to restore the complex and its machinery , which were in a state of disrepair . The boiler house and Number 2 Engine were the priority , but before they could be started the workshop had to be repaired so that its equipment could be used to carry out the necessary work elsewhere . 
 The boiler house and Number 2 Engine were in a particularly bad condition : the roof was wrecked , the metal fixtures were corroded , moss was growing on exposed surfaces and the boilers were not operational . Number 2 Engine had not been steamed since 1954 , and had to be taken apart and rebuilt while the building was restored around it . Every moving part was cleaned by hand , and the exterior was repainted in its correct colour after the original paintwork was discovered under layers of mould and rust . The eight men worked for about six months on these tasks ; Number 2 Engine was successfully fired up again on 14 March 1976 after the two renovated Lancashire boilers were tested and inspected by safety officials ( the other two were left in their unrestored state ) . 
 The complex was first opened to the public on Good Friday 1976 . The official reopening , on 26 October 1976 ( exactly 100 years after Number 2 Engine was first fired up ) , came after the coal store was converted into an exhibition and educational area . At this time , it was named the Brighton and Hove Engineerium ; the complex was given its present name on 30 May 1981 . By this time , about 1 @,@ 500 exhibits were on display , and the boilers and Number 2 Engine were fired up every weekend . The cost of running the Engineerium and employing 18 people ( including six professional engineers ) was running at about £ 250 @,@ 000 per year . Although the Southern Water Authority , which still owned the site , paid for improvements in 1983 , and grants came in from East Sussex County Council and Hove Borough Council , there was no financial backing from central government — although the Engineerium was acknowledged as a national and international leader in industrial heritage and " the world 's only centre for the teaching of engineering conservation " . ( Employees of the Engineerium have helped to set up or renovate more than 20 similar institutions across the world , and it was designated as England 's South East Regional Centre during Industrial Heritage Year in 1993 . ) The centre 's second royal visit , by the Duke of Kent in 1993 , coincided with a fundraising plea for £ 4 million , to be spent on extensions to the exhibition space and workshop ; Minns also applied unsuccessfully for a National Lottery grant . Vodafone paid for the right to attach a mobile phone mast to the chimney , though . 
 Ongoing funding problems caused the Engineerium to close in 2006 , and the complex and its contents were put up for auction by Bonhams . The inventory was split into hundreds of separate lots , and the buildings themselves were valued at £ 1 @.@ 25 million . Just before the auction was due to begin , a local businessman and enthusiast offered £ 2 million for the buildings and more than £ 1 million for the contents conditional on his being donated half of the Minns Collection . This was accepted , and on 10 May 2006 the Engineerium Trust assets passed into Mike Holland 's ownership . 
 The Engineerium stayed shut while its new owner invested in improvements and extensions . In February 2010 , he stated that he expected the Engineerium to reopen within a year . On 10 October 2010 , it was opened for a day to raise money for charity ; the Number 2 Engine was demonstrated and many steam engines and other exhibits from the museum 's own collection and from outside were on display . In August 2011 , Brighton and Hove City Council approved a planning application for some renovation and remodelling work , including an extension . Structural engineers found that part of the building was in poor condition , and in January 2012 a further application was submitted to seek permission to demolish and rebuild part of the machine room . General restoration work began in October 2012 , supported by a second open day . 
 Jonathan Minns died on 13 October 2013 , aged 75 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Engineerium has been described by Brighton historian Clifford Musgrave as an " unusually fine asset " for Brighton and Hove and by fellow historian Ken Fines " a splendid example of Victorian industrial engineering " . The buildings have intricately patterned polychrome brickwork , and the 95 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) chimney to the south is also finely detailed and is a landmark in Hove . Both the buildings and the machinery inside demonstrate the widespread belief among Victorian designers and architects that every object and building , no matter how commonplace or humble , should be elaborately and expansively embellished . 
 On the main buildings , the walls consist of bands of red , yellow and purplish @-@ blue brick with moulded layers and coping . The ground floor has red brickwork with a rusticated appearance . The cast @-@ iron windows are set in round @-@ arched openings below a string course which runs around the whole building and consists of alternate patterns of red and black brick . The slate roof has flat @-@ topped gables set above pediments at the top of each engine room . The two engine rooms are two @-@ storey and have a three @-@ bay , three @-@ window range ; they flank the single @-@ storey boiler room which also has three bays . The left- and right @-@ hand bays are recessed ; all have windows that are similar to those of the engine rooms . 
 The chimney stands about 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) south of the engine rooms and boiler house . The rectangular , campanile @-@ style structure stands on a rusticated base with a tapering plinth below it . Above this is a moulded cornice . The chimney itself tapers slightly and has tall arched panels on each face , forming slight recesses . An entablature runs all the way round , linking these . The brickwork is of the same colours and detailing as the other buildings . 
 The former coal shed ( now the exhibition hall ) and its attached workshops are of red and brown brick with coping on the walls and a shallow slate roof . The workshops , which do not contribute to the architectural interest of the building , are a perpendicular adjunct to the rear of the coal shed , so the building has an overall L @-@ shape . Sloping land gives the building a single storey at the front ( north ) end and a second lower storey towards the rear . The three @-@ bay north façade has three arched entrances ; the smaller flanking pair have replacement doors . 
 Standing in the grounds behind the complex , the cooling pond measures 1 @,@ 100 square feet ( 100 m2 ) and has a leat around three sides ; it opens out on the southwest side . It is surrounded by small walls of red brick and terracotta . <unk> connects the leat to the boiler house , from which hot water flows ; heat exchange takes place in the cooling pond ; and cold water is returned to be used in the boilers . 
 Tall flint and brick walls , dating from 1866 , surround the complex on all sides . Small flints laid in courses form the main building material on three sides . Other parts have red brickwork with inset flints , and the main entrance has red @-@ brick piers with knapped flintwork . There are also iron railings and gates with the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis emblem . The walls have recesses on the inside and outside at irregular intervals ; one on the outside of the south wall contains a drinking fountain with a panel imploring users to commit no nuisance . <unk> are prevalent in this downland area ; so many were found when the pumping station was built that the contractors fashioned them into a deliberately ancient @-@ looking folly on the southwest corner of the engine rooms . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 The Engineerium has hundreds of exhibits relating to the history of engineering and steam power . Many are on display in the exhibition hall , which occupies the former coal storage shed . The central feature of the hall is a Corliss steam engine built in France in 1859 . American inventor George Henry Corliss patented the design in 1849 and became president of The Corliss Steam Engine Company . The valve gear he invented improved the efficiency of horizontal reciprocating engines more than any other innovation . The Engineerium 's example was assembled in 1859 by the Lille @-@ based company <unk> & Grand . It was shown at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1889 , where it won first prize . It was then used for more than 50 years at L 'Hôpital Émile @-@ Roux in <unk> @-@ <unk> . It was bought by Jonathan Minns , taken apart , brought to the Engineerium and reassembled in 1975 . The engine can generate 91 horsepower ; its 13 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) , 4 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 4 @.@ 1 t ) flywheel turns 80 times a minute ; and the whole machine weighs 16 long tons ( 16 @.@ 3 t ) . 
 The Engineerium also has a horse @-@ drawn fire engine dating from 1890 . Originally owned by the local authority in Barnstaple , Devon , the Shand Mason & Company vehicle was bought and restored by the museum 's employees . It is a vertical steam engine with two cylinders and a pair of pistons flanking a central crank . A steam traction engine built in 1886 by Marshall , Sons & Company has also been restored . A range of veteran motorcycles are on display ; the oldest is an Ariel Motorcycles vehicle built in 1915 . 
 Elsewhere in the complex , smaller steam engines are on display , alongside Victorian tools and domestic equipment such as stoves . Much of the equipment in the workshop is also original , such as the main forge and a heavy @-@ duty metal lathe . The single @-@ cylinder Easton and Amos steam engine used to power the belts which drive the machine tools in the workshop was already several years old when the Goldstone Pumping Station acquired it in 1875 . 
 From the beginning , the overriding purpose of the collection of exhibits was to portray and explain the history and development of civil and mechanical engineering and British industry , through both the restoration of the pumping station 's original equipment and the acquisition of other pieces associated with industrial pioneers such as James Watt , Michael Faraday and George Stephenson . An example is a model of Stephenson 's Locomotion No 1 engine , which was valued at £ 75 @,@ 000 by Bonhams when the Engineerium was up for auction in 2006 . 
 = = Heritage status = = 
 When Jonathan Minns , who later bought the complex , found in 1971 that it was threatened with demolition , he successfully sought to get it listed by the Historic Buildings Council for England ( the predecessor of English Heritage ) . The organisation granted listed status in five separate parts on 7 June 1971 , covering the pumping station 's five main structures . The boiler rooms and engine house were jointly listed at Grade II * , as was its free @-@ standing chimney . Three more structures were listed at Grade II : the cooling pond and leat , the coal storage shed and the flint and brick walls surrounding the complex . Grade II * is the second highest of the three designations awarded to listed buildings ; such buildings are defined as being " particularly important ... [ and ] of more than special interest " . As of February 2001 , the boiler house and chimney represented two of the 70 Grade II * -listed buildings and structures , and 1 @,@ 218 listed buildings of all grades , in the city of Brighton and Hove . Grade II is the lowest status , given to " nationally important buildings of special interest " . In February 2001 , there were 1 @,@ 124 such buildings in the city . 
 In 1982 , an 8 @.@ 89 @-@ acre ( 3 @.@ 60 ha ) zone incorporating the whole Engineerium complex became a conservation area — one of 34 such areas in the city of Brighton and Hove . 
 = 1995 – 96 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1995 – 96 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was a moderately active season that included Cyclone Bonita , which was the first known tropical cyclone to cross from the southern Indian Ocean into the southern Atlantic Ocean . Tropical activity lasted for about six months from the middle of November 1995 to early May 1996 . The first storm , Intense Tropical Cyclone Agnielle , formed in the adjacent Australian basin on November 16 and later reached peak winds in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . The next named storm after Agnielle was Bonita , which formed in early January and killed 42 people . The basin was most active in February , with two tropical cyclones , or the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , as well as a severe tropical storm . The first of these three was Doloresse , which killed 67 people due to a shipwreck in the Comoros . The next storm was Cyclone Edwige , which caused heavy crop damage on Mauritius before looping along the east coast of Madagascar . In March , both Cyclone Flossy and Tropical Storm Guylianne passed near the Mascarene Islands , producing heavy rainfall and gusty winds . 
 Tropical activity continued through April and May , with two tropical cyclones in the former month . In early April , Tropical Cyclone Hansella moved over the island of Rodrigues , dropping more rainfall in 24 hours than the average monthly total . Later , Itelle became a rare April intense tropical cyclone , but weakened before it approached St. Brandon island . The final storm of the season , Jenna , formed in the Australian region , briefly intensified into a minimal tropical storm in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , and proceeded to exit the basin on May 4 to end the season . In addition to the named storms , several tropical depressions were tracked , one of which in December dropped heavy rainfall on Réunion . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin . The agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , and warned on tropical cyclones in the region from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force , also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the southwestern Indian Ocean . 
 The season was fairly active with ten tropical storms , one greater than average , although most storms were short @-@ lived . Six of the storms reached tropical cyclone status , or maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , which is two more than average . Most cyclones dissipated within the tropics , in contrast to the norm of storms accelerating into higher latitudes . Throughout the season there were 82 days in which there was tropical activity . Based on a list contributed by the nation of Seychelles , the storms were named in sequential order , starting with Agnielle . The rest of the names on the list were Jenna , Ketty , Lucia , Molly , <unk> , Odette , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Vivienne , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 In addition to the named storms , the MFR tracked 11 tropical depressions or disturbances that did not intensify into a tropical storm . The agency did not issue any bulletins on eight of them . Of the remaining three , two formed in late December , and the other formed in mid @-@ February . Tropical Depression B2 , the longest @-@ lasting of the depressions , formed after a month of activity . An area of convection developed in the Mozambique Channel , and the MFR believed it to be connected to the depression that formed on December 28 east of Madagascar . With a ridge to the east , the system tracked southward , but failed to intensify due to strong wind shear . While passing west of Réunion , the depression dropped heavy rainfall , totaling 350 mm ( 14 in ) along the northern coast and about twice that amount in the mountainous interior . On December 31 , the depression dissipated to the southwest of Réunion . On February 10 , the JTWC tracked Tropical Cyclone 12S into the basin as a weakening tropical depression , which quickly dissipated . A few days later , the JTWC also tracked Tropical Cyclone 15S from February 14 – 17 , which briefly intensified into a minimal tropical storm in the eastern portion of the basin . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Daryl @-@ Agnielle = = = 
 In the middle of November 1995 , the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) spawned an area of convection to the southwest of the Indonesian island of Sumatra . Located within the Australian region in an area of low wind shear , a tropical low developed west of Sumatra on November 16 . It gradually intensified while moving southward , before turning sharply westward on November 18 due to a ridge to the south . That day , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) office in Perth upgraded the low to Tropical Cyclone Daryl , or to minimal tropical storm status . Designated Tropical Cyclone 01S by the JTWC , Daryl continued to intensify , and the BoM upgraded it to winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The system crossed into the basin on November 19 , and was renamed Daryl as Agnielle at that time . 
 On November 20 , the ridge to the south weakened , allowing Agnielle to turn to the southwest . A well @-@ defined eye developed , which persisted for about three days . Late on November 20 , Agnielle attained peak 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , making it an intense tropical cyclone , a rarity for November storms . On November 21 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) , the strongest storm estimated by the agency in the Indian Ocean , tied with Cyclone Fantala . Although the eye briefly became less organized , accompanied by a decrease in winds , Agnielle re @-@ intensified despite moving over colder waters . The ridge to the south rebuilt , forcing the cyclone to slow and turn to the west . Increasing wind shear caused rapid weakening ; within 30 hours , the winds decreased from tropical cyclone to tropical depression status on November 25 . That day , the JTWC discontinued advisories , although the MFR continued tracking the circulation until Agnielle 's dissipation on November 27 . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Bonita = = = 
 As Tropical Depression B2 was dissipating near Réunion , another tropical depression formed east of the Chagos Archipelago on January 3 . It moved southwestward , initially without development , but conditions gradually became more favorable . On January 5 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Bonita , and three days later reached tropical cyclone status as it developed a well @-@ defined eye . Later that day , Bonita quickly intensified to its 10 ‑ minute peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , making it the strongest storm of the season . A ridge to the south turned the cyclone more to the west . On January 9 , the JTWC estimated Bonita attained peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , and the next day , the cyclone made landfall about 50 km ( 30 mi ) north of Foulpointe in eastern Madagascar . Bonita quickly weakened into a tropical storm while crossing the country , but re @-@ intensified slightly after reaching the Mozambique Channel on January 12 . Late on January 13 , Bonita made a second landfall in eastern Mozambique between Pebane and Quelimane . Although the MFR ceased issuing advisories on January 15 , the remnants of Bonita continued across Africa , and emerging into the southern Atlantic Ocean on January 19 and dissipating the next day . Bonita was considered by the Zambia Meteorological Department to have been the first tropical cyclone known to have traversed southern Africa from the South @-@ West Indian Ocean to the South Atlantic . 
 In eastern Madagascar , 24 ‑ hour rainfall totals included 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) at Toamasina , while gusts exceeded 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) on the offshore island of Île Sainte @-@ Marie . Bonita caused widespread flooding of rice crops , as well as heavy infrastructure and crop damage along the northeastern coastline . The cyclone killed 25 people in Madagascar and left 5 @,@ 000 people homeless . In Mozambique , Bonita dropped heavy rainfall and produced flooding , killing as many as 17 people . Floodwaters destroyed 2 @,@ 500 ha ( 6 @,@ 200 acres ) of crops and demolished many buildings , including about 12 schools . The remnants of Bonita dropped the heaviest rainfall in 80 years in eastern Zimbabwe , and heavy rainfall also spread into Zambia . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Hubert @-@ Coryna = = = 
 In the Australian basin , the monsoon trough spawned a tropical disturbance near Christmas Island on January 3 . With a ridge to the south , the system tracked to the west @-@ southwest , developing into a tropical low on January 6 and being named Hubert the next day by the BoM . It quickly intensified to reach peak 10 ‑ minutes winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) on January 9 to the north of the Cocos Islands , but later that day began weakening due to increasing wind shear . At around 1800 UTC on January 9 , Hubert crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean with 10 ‑ minute winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , and at that time , was renamed the cyclone Coryna . The wind shear quickly tore the convection away from the center , leaving the circulation exposed by January 10 . The next day , Coryna weakened to tropical depression status , and on January 12 the circulation dissipated in the central Indian Ocean . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Doloresse = = = 
 After about a month in which there were no named storms in the basin , a tropical disturbance formed within the ITCZ to the southwest of Seychelles on February 12 . It moved slowly to the southwest with a well @-@ defined center and a broad area of convection . For several days , the system remained weak until reaching more favorable conditions on February 16 , and the next day it intensified into Tropical Storm Doloresse . The storm slowed while reaching the western extent of a ridge , drifting for nearly 24 hours about 160 km ( 99 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Grande Comore . On February 17 , an approaching trough turned Doloresse to the south @-@ southeast , bringing the storm about 55 km ( 35 mi ) southwest of Grande Comore ; this made it the first cyclone to directly affect the nation since Cyclone Elinah 13 years prior . On February 17 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , and on the next day , the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Increasing shear caused Doloresse to rapidly weaken to tropical depression status on February 19 . Although the JTWC assessed the storm as continuing to the southeast and striking northwestern Madagascar , the MFR estimated the system turned to a southwest drift and dissipated on February 20 . 
 In the Comoros , Doloresse produced strong wind gusts , damaging crops and houses on Grande Comore . Heavy rainfall caused landslides , and the cyclone caused a shipwreck , killing 67 people on the island of Mohéli . The western periphery of the circulation dropped heavy rainfall in Tanzania . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Edwige = = = 
 On February 18 , a tropical disturbance began forming about 700 km ( 430 mi ) southwest of Diego Garcia , becoming a tropical depression the next day . A trough steered the new system to the southeast , but also prevented significant strengthening due to wind shear . Late on February 21 , the MFR upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Edwige , and the next day the JTWC began tracking it as Tropical Cyclone 16S . When the trough weakened , Edwige turned to the south and later southwest , reaching an initial peak of 75 km / h ( 50 mph ) on February 23 . That day , increasing wind shear caused the storm to weaken to minimal tropical storm status , and the JTWC briefly discontinued advisories on February 24 . The strengthening ridge caused Edwige to accelerate to the west , bringing it south of Rodrigues without any effects on February 24 . On the next day , the storm passed north of Mauritius and Réunion , where it produced wind gusts of 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) and 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , respectively , as well as heavy rainfall . Due to crop damage caused by Edwige , as well as a drought later in the year , Mauritius failed to reach its quota for sugar outputs . 
 After passing north of Réunion , Edwige began reintensifying due to decreasing wind shear , and the JTWC reissued advisories on February 25 . With warm waters , the storm developed increasing outflow as well as an eye . On February 26 , Edwige intensified into a tropical cyclone and reached peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) while approaching eastern Madagascar . On the same day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . For unknown reasons , Edwige executed a counterclockwise loop along the Malagasy coast near Mananjary . Due to land interaction , the cyclone rapidly weakened and turned to the north @-@ northeast off the coast , although the JTWC assessed the storm as turning inland again . On February 29 , Edwige dissipated just off the coast of Toamasina . The storm dropped 369 mm ( 14 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall in Mananjary , with wind gusts of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) , but damage was limited . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Flossy = = = 
 On February 25 , a tropical disturbance developed along a cold front about 500 km ( 310 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia . With a ridge to the south , the system tracked southwestward and intensified into Tropical Storm Flossy on February 27 . That day , the JTWC began issuing advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 17S . The storm quickly developed an eye , intensifying to tropical cyclone status on February 28 . That day , the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , while the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Late on February 29 , Flossy passed about 80 km ( 50 mi ) northwest of Rodrigues , producing wind gusts of 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) there . Increased wind shear weakened Flossy , beginning on March 1 , although the storm restrengthened slightly on March 2 . That day , the cyclone rounded the ridge and turned to the south and southeast , and weakened again due to an approaching cold front . On March 4 , Flossy became extratropical after all of the convection was sheared away from the circulation . Two days later , the front absorbed the remnants of Flossy . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Guylianne = = = 
 The ITCZ spawned a tropical disturbance on March 17 about 500 km ( 310 mi ) south of Diego Garcia . Due to ongoing wind shear , the system initially failed to intensify while moving westward . An approaching cold front turned the disturbance southward on March 20 into an area of low wind shear , allowing the convection to increase and for the system to be upgraded to tropical depression status . While the system was moving toward Mauritius on March 22 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Guylianne . Later that night , the storm passed about 50 km ( 31 mi ) east of Mauritius , bringing beneficial rainfall . Both MFR and JTWC only estimated peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , and Guylianne began weakening on March 23 due to increased wind shear . The storm turned to a southwest drift , dissipating on March 25 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Hansella = = = 
 Toward the end of March , the ITCZ was active with several low pressure areas , and an area of convection consolidated south of the Chagos Archipelago in early April . On April 2 , a large tropical disturbance formed , and the next day , it was named Hansella despite only being a tropical depression . The system moved westward initially , but curved southward on April 4 due to a trough , by which time it had intensified into a tropical storm . After developing a 50 km ( 31 mi ) wide eye , Hansella intensified to tropical cyclone status on April 6 and moved over Rodrigues . Gusts on the island reached 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) , which caused heavy damage to crops and houses . Hansella dropped 182 mm ( 7 @.@ 2 in ) of rainfall on Rodrigues in a 24 ‑ hour period , greater than the island 's monthly average total . 
 According to the MFR , Hansella failed to intensify beyond 10 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , although the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . The cyclone looped to the west after passing over Rodrigues , influenced by a building ridge to the south . Due to upwelling after moving slowly over the same waters , Hansella weakened quickly and passed about 100 km ( 62 mi ) south of Rodrigues as a minimal tropical storm . On April 9 , the storm passed just south of Mauritius , and the next day spawned a large area of convection over Réunion , dropping heavy rainfall . On April 10 , Hansella dissipated just northwest of Réunion . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Itelle = = = 
 A low @-@ pressure area persisted east @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia on April 6 , developing into a tropical disturbance that day . With a ridge to the south , the system moved generally westward , slowly intensifying . Convection gradually increased , and the system intensified into Tropical Storm Itelle on April 9 . An eye developed the next day , signaling that the storm had strengthened into a tropical cyclone as it turned more to the west @-@ southwest . Developing a large 90 km ( 56 mi ) wide eye , Itelle intensified further , and the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) on April 12 . This made it an unusual April intense tropical cyclone . On April 14 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 5 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . That day , increasing wind shear weakened Itelle , and the cyclone was downgraded to severe tropical storm status by April 15 when it passed about 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) south of St. Brandon . Wind gusts on the island reached 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) . Itelle slowed on April 16 while passing about 400 km ( 250 mi ) north of Réunion , which was followed by increased shear and weakening . On April 19 , Itelle dissipated about 100 km ( 62 mi ) east of the eastern Madagascar coastline . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Jenna = = = 
 In early May , a westerly wind burst associated with the Madden – Julian oscillation produced disturbances on both sides of the equator in the eastern Indian Ocean . The BoM estimated that a tropical low formed west of Sumatra at the low latitude of 4 @.@ 8 ° S , near the boundary between the Australian and the south @-@ west Indian basins ; this caused difficulty with regard to tropical cyclone warnings . On May 3 , the JTWC upgraded the system to tropical storm status . On the next day , the low crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , intensifying into Tropical Storm Jenna . The MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) on May 5 . Soon after , an approaching trough turned the storm to the southeast , bringing Jenna back into the Australian region , and absorbing the storm on May 6 . 
 = Barfi ! = 
 Barfi ! is a 2012 Indian period film co @-@ produced , written and directed by Anurag Basu . Set in the 1970s , the film depicts the story of Murphy " Barfi " Johnson ( a mute and deaf Nepali boy from Darjeeling ) and his relationships with two women , Shruti and Jhilmil ( who is autistic ) . The film stars Ranbir Kapoor , Priyanka Chopra , and Ileana D 'Cruz in the lead roles , with Saurabh Shukla , Ashish Vidyarthi , Jisshu Sengupta and Roopa Ganguly in supporting roles . 
 Made on a budget of approximately ₹ 30 crore ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 million ) , Barfi ! opened worldwide on 14 September 2012 . The film was a box office success , becoming one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of 2012 in India and overseas . The film went on to gross ₹ 1 @.@ 75 billion ( US $ 26 million ) worldwide . 
 The film was selected as India 's official entry for the Best Foreign Language Film nomination for the 85th Academy Awards . Barfi won several awards and nominations at various award ceremonies across India . At the 58th Filmfare Awards , the film received thirteen nominations including Best Actress for Chopra and won seven ( more than any other film ) including Best Film , Best Actor for Kapoor and Best Music Director for Pritam . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Murphy " Barfi " Johnson ( Ranbir Kapoor ) is an optimistic , street @-@ wise , charming young man who was born deaf @-@ mute to a Nepali couple in Darjeeling . His mother died when he was a baby and his father raised him alone , while working as a chauffeur . Barfi is known as a troublemaker – he cuts lampposts , plays practical jokes on innocent people , and is chased by Sudhanshu Dutta ( Saurabh Shukla ) , a local police officer . Barfi meets Shruti Ghosh ( Ileana D 'Cruz ) , who has just arrived in Darjeeling ; she is engaged to Ranjit Sengupta ( Jisshu Sengupta ) , and is due to get married in three months , and Barfi is immediately smitten with Shruti . She also falls in love with Barfi but her mother dissuades her from pursuing him because he could not take care of her with his disabilities and lack of money . Shruti takes her mother 's advice , gets married , and moves to Kolkata , breaking all contact with Barfi . 
 Meanwhile , Barfi 's father falls ill and Barfi must somehow raise the money for his treatment . After an unsuccessful attempt to rob a local bank , he tries to kidnap Jhilmil Chatterjee ( Priyanka Chopra ) – Barfi 's autistic childhood friend and wealthy heiress of her grandfather 's fortune – for a ransom . Upon arriving , Barfi finds she has already been kidnapped . He sees her in a van , sneaks inside and drives Jhilmil away from the ransom delivery . He hides her in his apartment with the police in pursuit . Barfi collects the ransom but finds that his father has died just as he makes the payment . Dejected , Barfi tries to leave Jhilmil at the village of her caretaker , but she refuses to leave him and they soon move to Kolkata , where Barfi assumes responsibility for Jhilmil and takes care of her . 
 Six years later , Barfi and Shruti meet by chance . Shruti is unhappy with her marriage and she and Barfi rekindle their friendship , much to the chagrin of the lovestruck Jhilmil , who then goes missing . Shruti files a missing person report for Jhilmil . The Darjeeling police learn about the report , resume their pursuit of Barfi and arrest him . As he is being interrogated , another ransom demand for Jhilmil is made and she is apparently killed in the process of the exchange , though her body is never found . In order to conclude the case , the police try to frame Barfi for Jhilmil 's murder . Policeman Sudhanshu Dutta , who grew fond of Barfi after investigating him for his nuisances , asks Shruti to take him away , offering him a second chance at life . She agrees and hopes that now Jhilmil is gone , she can finally be with Barfi . 
 Barfi is deeply affected by Jhilmil 's loss and finds living with Shruti unfulfilling . He finds the location of Jhilmil 's childhood home and takes Shruti to look for her . They find that Jhilmil is still alive , and that both kidnappings were fabricated by her father so he could embezzle money from Jhilmil 's trust fund . In the second attempt , second time , they faked her death so that she could return to her special @-@ care home , away from her alcoholic mother . Barfi has a happy reunion with Jhilmil and the two are married , while Shruti spends the rest of her days alone , regretting the loss of her chance to be with Barfi . 
 Several years later , Barfi is shown to be gravely ill in a hospital and is close to death . Jhilmil arrives and lies with Barfi in his hospital bed as Shruti narrates that the two died peacefully together , not wanting to leave each other behind in life or death . The film closes showing the happy days of Barfi and Jhilmil as credits roll . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ranbir Kapoor as Murphy Johnson 
 Priyanka Chopra as Jhilmil Chatterjee 
 Ileana D 'Cruz as Shruti Ghosh Sengupta 
 Saurabh Shukla as <unk> Sub @-@ Inspector Sudhanshu Dutta 
 Akash Khurana as Jung Bahadur , Barfi 's father 
 Ashish Vidyarthi as Mr. Chatterjee 
 Roopa Ganguly as Shruti 's mother 
 <unk> Bandopadhyay as <unk> 
 Uday <unk> as Shruti 's father 
 Arun Bali as Jhilmil 's grandfather 
 <unk> <unk> as Barfi 's friend . 
 Jisshu Sengupta in a special appearance as Ranjit Sengupta 
 <unk> Chakravarti as Shruti 's friend 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the production of his previous directorial venture Kites ( 2010 ) , the director Anurag Basu wrote a two @-@ page short story which was later developed to the script of Barfi ! . The film script that Basu wrote alternated between two time periods , and he retained the nonlinear narrative structure . He said that the script required a 30 @-@ year time span for the characters ' love to grow and thus set the backdrop of the film in the 1970s . 
 In June 2010 , Anurag Basu confirmed that his film would feature three lead roles , a deaf and mute man , a mentally challenged girl , and a narrator . With former titles like <unk> or Silence , media reports said the story was grim or dark . However , Basu stated that on the contrary , the film was happy . According to Basu , he paid homage to Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin by adding scenes inspired by the era of silent cinema and using physical comedy in the film , involving silent portions . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Ranbir Kapoor was the first choice of director Anurag Basu and Katrina Kaif was the first choice for the role of the narrator . In March 2010 , The Times of India reported that Ranbir Kapoor and Katrina Kaif were signed to play lead roles in the film , then titled <unk> and later Silence , which Basu confirmed . Basu wanted to cast a new girl from Kolkata for the autistic character . Basu 's wife , Tani suggested Chopra 's name for the role . However , Basu feared that audience would see " the Priyanka Chopra " and not the character due to Chopra 's stardom . Basu explained " I had the fear that I would see Priyanka Chopra in the character and Jhilmil wouldn ’ t work . This has happened in many films where known faces have harmed the character . " Priyanka Chopra was cast to play the part but , the development was not announced as Basu wanted to workshop first and see how it goes . After three days of workshop , Basu was convinced that Chopra could play the autistic part and reflected that he was glad that he chose Chopra for the role . Later , Basu revealed that he did not approach any actress other than Chopra for the autistic part . After Chopra was cast in the film , Kaif left the project for unknown reasons . Media reported that she may have opted out of the film because Chopra had been given a stronger role . Later , media reported that Asin was approached to play the role of the narrator , replacing Kaif . However , Asin was never signed to the project . Media reported that no other actress wanted to sign for the film because according to them , the autistic part was stronger . In July 2010 , Mumbai Mirror reported that Chopra was ready to play the role of narrator and leave the autistic role , so that another actress could be cast in the film ; Chopra did not want the film to stall . Basu confirmed this development and said , " It ’ s true we ’ ve been unable to cast the other part . " After facing several casting problems , Basu chose to cast a completely new fresh face to play the second female role . In early December 2010 , Ileana D 'Cruz from south Indian films , was finalised for the second female lead , featuring as narrator and Kapoor 's first love interest in the film . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Ranbir Kapoor played the role of a deaf and mute man in the film . According to Kapoor , he took inspiration from screen legends such as the Academy Award winning actor , Roberto Benigni , Charlie Chaplin and his grandfather Raj Kapoor . Due to the protagonist 's physical disability , Basu did not want to use any sign @-@ language but , some behavioral patterns in the film . Kapoor described his character as a regular , happy @-@ go @-@ lucky and good hearted guy . 
 Priyanka Chopra played the role of Jhilmil . Basu described Chopra 's role as the " toughest " in the film . In order to prepare for the role , Chopra visited several mental institutions and spent time with autistic people . She said she had to research a little for the role because in India awareness about autism is very low . Chopra told that she had to let go of every inhibition probably that she had as a Hindi film heroine and play Jhilmil without thinking of it . She explained that she needed two moments to become Jhilmil because she didn 't identify with her character due to difference between her thought and behavior . 
 D <unk> , who portrayed the narrator and first love interest of the protagonist said " Shruti , is such a sensitive role to play as she goes to different phases in the film . " According to Basu , after Kapoor , Chopra and D <unk> 's character Saurabh Shukla 's character as Inspector Dutta was the most important . Basu described the role as " amazing " character , who makes others cry when he laughs . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography commenced in March 2011 . Barfi ! was shot between June 2011 and February 2012 , mostly in Darjeeling . In March 2011 , Basu visited Kolkata to finalize the locations within the city . Filming in Mumbai began on 20 March 2011 and continued until May 2011 . In June 2011 , the cast and crew shot in Darjeeling . In December 2011 , some scenes were filmed on the outskirts of Coimbatore , especially Pollachi and Ooty . The scenes in which Kapoor 's character is chased by policemen over the roof tops were shot in Kolkata at the end of January 2012 . Shooting was completed by April 2012 , except for some scenes featuring Chopra . The producers postponed the release from 13 July to 31 August 2012 as the September 2011 shooting schedule was cancelled and was waiting to be shot . However , Basu began working on Ileana 's dubbing portions by end of April 2012 , because D 'Cruz was unfamiliar with the Hindi language and wanted to learn it whilst filming . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Pritam composed the music and background score of the film , and Swanand Kirkire , Ashish Pandit , <unk> Misra and Sayeed Quadri wrote the lyrics . The soundtrack album has six original songs . The soundtrack was influenced by Brazilian Bossa nova . Priyanka Chopra was supposed to sing a track for the film , but her contract with Universal Music prevented her from taking the offer . The soundtrack album also contains a song titled Fatafati , sung by Pritam , which was not be used in the film , but was released as a promotional single on YouTube on 10 September 2012 with a video containing behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . Some additional vocals are sung by Ranbir Kapoor . " Fatafati " also has some Bengali lyrics written by Amitabh Bhattacharya . 
 Barfi ! ' s soundtrack received positive reviews by critics . Hindustan Times rated the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated , " [ o ] verall , the soundtrack is a joyride sans flaws . Pritam has given many hits , but like his tunes in Life in a ... Metro , this one will be remembered for breaking the monotony in his sound . There are no foot @-@ tapping numbers or remixes here , but the simplicity that makes this album a winner . " Koimoi gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated , " In simple words , Barfi ! is excellent music on all counts . Very rarely does one get to hear an album where you can hear a complete soundtrack without skipping tracks ; this is one of them . So , just play , enjoy the music and the world of Barfi ! " . Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama rated the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated " Barfi ! ' s soundtrack is quite good and is easily one of the best quality creations by Pritam . He has totally reinvented himself with this album which defies Bollywood norms and boasts of a sound of its own . " 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 The official trailer of the film was launched on 2 July 2012 featuring all the actors . It included no dialogue , portraying comedy through gestures and actions , and was well received by critics and audiences . Chopra 's character was kept under wraps in the trailers as the makers were not willing to reveal much about her character to increase curiosity among the audiences and was only revealed around the release of the film . Shikha Kapur , the executive director ( marketing ) of UTV explained " Priyanka plays a very special character in <unk> , so we want to keep her mystery intact . In the first trailer , Barfi – played by Ranbir – will be unveiled . We don ’ t plan to reveal Priyanka until the film releases . " 
 UTV Motion Pictures created a YouTube application called The Flavour of Barfi , designed for the marketing the film . The application features Ranbir Kapoor as his character from the movie and allows users to type actions , which Kapoor acts out . The application features two zones : one asks users to change Barfi 's mood and the other gives users the chance to watch him flirt . The film was promoted in various cities across India . While promoting the film at the Phoenix Mall , Bangalore , the crowds broke through the barricades . 
 Barfi ! was released on 14 September 2012 on 1300 screens in 700 theatres in India . Reliance Home Entertainment released Barfi ! on DVD and Blu @-@ Ray in mid @-@ November 2012 across all regions in a one @-@ disc pack complying with the NTSC format . The DVD and the Blu @-@ Ray discs contained bonus content , including Making of the film , " Fatafati – Behind The Scenes " and Deleted Scenes . The Video CD version was released at the same time . The exclusive right to broadcast the film was bought by Zee Network and UTV Movies . The deal includes premiere rights of the film along with the several other UTV productions . The rights are for a period of seven @-@ year , consisting the premiere ( for both channels ) of the film . Zee Network will have selected runs while UTV Movies will have multiple runs rights . The price of the deal was not revealed by the production company . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 On 12 September 2012 , British manufacturer Murphy Radio claimed that its trademark Murphy baby logo from its 1970s print advertisements has been used in Barfi ! without permission . Producer Siddharth Roy Kapur said that he had received a legal notice from Murphy but said that there is nothing wrong in the intention , as the brand in question has been shown in a " very positive light " . 
 After the film 's release , several blogs and users of social media websites Twitter , Facebook and YouTube accused the director of plagiarism . Media further alleged that Basu had not tried to credit the original sources . Several videos were uploaded to YouTube showing side @-@ by @-@ side comparisons with Hollywood films like Cops , The Adventurer , City Lights , Singin ' in the Rain , Project A , The Notebook and Benny & Joon . They also accused Barfi ! ' s music director Pritam of copying the background music from the French film Amélie . 
 Basu defended the film by saying that he was inspired by these works and that Barfi ! contains an original plot , screenplay , characters and situations . He said that he was paying homages to Keaton and Chaplin . Barfi ! ' s Oscar selection for Best Foreign Language Film was criticised because of plagiarism , but Oscar selection committee chief Manju Borah defended the film by saying , " Barfi ! deserves to be sent outside . The selection was a very open process with three to four rounds of severe discussions and came down to the best film of the final three . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = India = = = 
 The film received critical acclaim , with critics praising the performances , the direction , the screenplay , the cinematography , the music and the positive portrayal of physically disabled people . Zee News gave the film 5 out of 5 stars and said , " [ a ] ll in all , Anurag Basu ’ s Barfi ! is a perfect sweet treat for his audience . Like it has been discussed , those film makers who have been portraying the handicapped as dull and boring in their films must take a lesson from Barfi ! . Madhureeta Mukherjee of The Times of India gave the film a 4 / 5 rating and said , " Ranbir , in the most challenging performance of his career leaves us ' dumbstruck ' . Without use of conventional crutches of cool @-@ catchphrases , <unk> @-@ <unk> , bare @-@ bodies , and other ' items ' ; he stuns you in every single frame . For Priyanka , there 's only one word – Bravo ! In a role where she needs to under @-@ emote , she does so brilliantly ( delivering an incredible performance ) . " 
 Roshni Devi of Koimoi said , " Barfi ! leaves you with that warm , cuddly , magical feeling with a few tears to match . It ’ s really worth a watch " and gave it an overall score of 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said , " Barfi is akin to a whiff of fresh air . Its foremost triumph is that it leaves you with a powerful emotion : Happiness ! " Indo @-@ Asian News Service gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said , " Barfi ! comes as close to being a modern masterpiece as cinematically possible . To miss it would be a crime . To embrace it is to serenade the sublime " . Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis rated the film 4 out of 5 and remarked that movie " engages you at a personal level " , and further added that , " Barfi cannot be missed . It demands patience , but the payoff is incredible " . 
 Pratim D. Gupta of The Telegraph said , " The brilliance of Barfi ! is that it ’ s no story and all storytelling . It ’ s about a director at the top of his game orchestrating terrific talent into a bravura crescendo . Only someone who has showed death the door can open windows to life like this . " Filmfare gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and stated , " Barfi ! is that rare film that can make you smile and make you cry in the same scene . Its technical brilliance is only outdone by its emotional complexity and depth . Pritam 's music adds a nice silent @-@ era charm to this already fantastic story , making it an occasion when words simply aren ’ t enough . " Raja Sen of Rediff.com has given 3 @.@ 5 / 5 stars and wrote , " Barfi ! is a well @-@ crafted script with an intriguing back @-@ and @-@ forth narrative but it all goes south towards the end . " 
 Anupama Chopra writing for Hindustan Times gave it 3 out 5 stars and wrote , " [ t ] his is a film made with love , bolstered by wonderfully etched vignettes , Ranbir Kapoor 's stupendous performance and a gorgeous soundtrack by Pritam . And yet , for me , Barfi was a singularly frustrating experience there was so much to like , but the film never became more than the sum of its parts " . Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN gave 3 out of 5 stars and said , " Barfi had the potential to be great cinema , but as it stands it 's a respectable film that 's still better than a lot else you 're likely to see . " On the contrary , Namrata Joshi of Outlook felt that " The flashback within flashback narrative gets way too clumsy and turgid , the thriller twist absolutely pointless [ .... ] appears much too crafted and self @-@ consciously gorgeous , and feels eminently facile and plastic " . 
 = = = Overseas = = = 
 The movie received critical acclaim overseas as well . It holds an 83 % fresh rating on review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes . Rachel Saltz of the New York Times said , " Bollywood isn ’ t afraid to be mawkish . “ Barfi ! ” is at times , though not noticeably more so than most Hindi movies , despite its premise of special lovers with a special lesson to teach . " Lisa Tsering The Hollywood Reporter called the movie " a refreshingly non @-@ commercial exercise " and added that " poignant Bollywood romantic comedy " . On the performances of the cast she wrote , " [ ... ] Basu has guided Kapoor and especially Chopra to turn in exceptionally restrained , organic performances . " " Ronnie Scheib of Variety wrote , " Unlike Michel <unk> ’ black @-@ and @-@ white silent homage “ The Artist , ” Basu ’ s film bursts with sound and color ; only the <unk> and hearing @-@ impaired Basu is condemned to silence . " Gary Goldstein of the Los Angeles Times was more critical of the film , despite praising aspect including " the hard @-@ working cast , a lush score , exotic location shooting and scattered warmth " called it as " more endurance test than entertainment . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Barfi ! has received various awards and nominations in categories ranging mostly from recognition of the film itself , to its cinematography , direction , screenplay , and music , to the cast 's performance . The film was selected as India 's official entry for the Best Foreign Language Film nomination for the 85th Academy Awards . The film received thirteen nominations at the 58th Filmfare Awards , winning seven , including Best Film , Best Actor for Kapoor and Best Music Director for Pritam . Barfi ! received twenty @-@ three nominations on the 19th Screen Awards , winning nine , including Best Actor for Kapoor , Best Director for Basu and Jodi No. 1 ( Best Pair ) for Kapoor and Chopra . At the 14th Zee Cine Awards , Barfi ! received nine nominations , and swept eight awards , including Best Film , Best Director for Basu and Best Actress for Chopra . 
 = = Box office = = 
 Upon its release , Barfi ! started strongly at multiplexes throughout India , with around 80 @-@ 90 % occupancy , but had lower opening takings because of a limited release . The film grossed ₹ 85 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) on its opening day . Its second day saw an increase of around 35 % occupancy and collected ₹ 115 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) . In its opening weekend , the film grossed ₹ 340 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) . In its first week , Barfi ! collected ₹ 565 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 4 million ) nett , and by its eighth day had earned ₹ 32 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 480 @,@ 000 ) despite the release of Heroine . Barfi ! earned ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) in its second weekend . Barfi ! had a good second week where it has collected ₹ 242 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 6 million ) nett . In the third week , the film 's takings rose to ₹ 158 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 3 million ) <unk> and it took ₹ 61 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 910 @,@ 000 ) in its fourth week . During its cinematic release period , Barfi ! earned a gross total of ₹ 1 @.@ 06 billion ( US $ 16 million ) in India . The all @-@ India distributor share of the film was ₹ 500 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) . The film became one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of 2012 in India , and was declared a " Super Hit " after its three @-@ week run by Box Office India . The film went on to gross ₹ 1 @.@ 75 billion ( US $ 26 million ) worldwide . Internationally , Barfi earned around ₹ 124 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 8 million ) in its opening weekend , slightly exceeding Raajneeti – which had collected ₹ 116 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) – as Ranbir Kapoor 's biggest opener overseas . By the end of its run , Barfi ! had grossed $ 6 @.@ 25 million outside India , and it became one of the highest overseas grossing Bollywood films of 2012 . 
 = Manzanar = 
 Manzanar is most widely known as the site of one of ten camps where over 110 @,@ 000 Japanese Americans were incarcerated during World War II . Located at the foot of the Sierra Nevada in California 's Owens Valley between the towns of Lone Pine to the south and Independence to the north , it is approximately 230 miles ( 370 km ) northeast of Los Angeles . Manzanar ( which means " apple orchard " in Spanish ) was identified by the United States National Park Service as the best @-@ preserved of the former camp sites , and is now the Manzanar National Historic Site , which preserves and interprets the legacy of Japanese American incarceration in the United States . 
 Long before the first incarcerees arrived in March 1942 , Manzanar was home to Native Americans , who mostly lived in villages near several creeks in the area . Ranchers and miners formally established the town of Manzanar in 1910 , but abandoned the town by 1929 after the City of Los Angeles purchased the water rights to virtually the entire area . As different as these groups were , their histories displayed a common thread of forced relocation . 
 Since the last incarcerees left in 1945 , former incarcerees and others have worked to protect Manzanar and to establish it as a National Historic Site to ensure that the history of the site , along with the stories of those who were unjustly incarcerated there , are remembered by current and future generations . The primary focus is the Japanese American incarceration era , as specified in the legislation that created the Manzanar National Historic Site . The site also interprets the former town of Manzanar , the ranch days , the settlement by the Owens Valley Paiute , and the role that water played in shaping the history of the Owens Valley . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 Since the end of World War II , there has been debate over the terminology used to refer to Manzanar , and the other camps in which Americans of Japanese ancestry and their immigrant parents , were incarcerated by the United States Government during the war . Manzanar has been referred to as a " War Relocation Center , " " relocation camp , " " relocation center , " " internment camp " , and " concentration camp " , and the controversy over which term is the most accurate and appropriate continues to the present day . 
 Dr. James Hirabayashi , Professor Emeritus and former Dean of Ethnic Studies at San Francisco State University , wrote an article in 1994 in which he stated that he wonders why euphemistic terms used to describe camps such as Manzanar are still being used . 
 Let us review the main points of the debate . Over 120 @,@ 000 residents of the U.S.A. , two thirds of whom were American citizens , were incarcerated under armed guard . There were no crimes committed , no trials , and no convictions : the Japanese Americans were political incarcerees . To detain American citizens in a site under armed guard surely constitutes a " concentration camp . " But what were the terms used by the government officials who were involved in the process and who had to justify these actions ? Raymond Okamura provides us with a detailed list of terms . Let 's consider three such euphemisms : " evacuation , " " relocation , " and " non @-@ aliens . " Earthquake and flood victims are evacuated and relocated . The words refer to moving people in order to rescue and protect them from danger . The official government policy makers consistently used " evacuation " to refer to the forced removal of the Japanese Americans and the sites were called " relocation centers . " These are euphemisms ( Webster : " the substitution of an inoffensive term for one considered offensively explicit " ) as the terms do not imply forced removal nor incarceration in enclosures patrolled by armed guards . The masking was intentional . 
 Hirabayashi went on to describe the harm done by the use of such euphemisms and also addressed the issue of whether or not only the Nazi camps can be called " concentration camps . " 
 The harm in continuing to use the government 's euphemisms is that it disguises or softens the reality which subsequently has been legally recognized as a grave error . The actions abrogated some fundamental principles underlying the Constitution , the very document under which we govern ourselves . This erosion of fundamental rights has consequences for all citizens of our society and we must see that it is never repeated . Some have argued that the Nazi Germany camps during the Holocaust were concentration camps and to refer to the Japanese American camps likewise would be an affront to the Jews . It is certainly true that the Japanese Americans did not suffer the harsh fate of the Jews in the terrible concentration camps or death camps where Nazi Germany practiced a policy of genocide . Although the loss of life was minimal in America 's concentration camps , it does not negate the reality of the unconstitutional incarceration of Japanese American citizens . Michi and Walter <unk> 's research concerning Nazi Germany 's euphemisms for their concentration camps revealed such phrases as " protective custody camps , " " reception centers , " and " transit camps . " Ironically , two Nazi euphemisms were identical to our government 's usage : " assembly centers " and " relocation centers . " It might be well to point out , also , that the Nazis were not operating under the U.S. Constitution . Comparisons usually neglect to point out that Hitler was operating under the rules of the Third Reich . In America all three branches of the U.S. government , ostensibly operating under the U.S. Constitution , ignored the Bill of Rights in order to incarcerate Japanese Americans . 
 In 1998 , use of the term " concentration camps " gained greater credibility prior to the opening of an exhibit about the American camps at Ellis Island . Initially , the American Jewish Committee ( AJC ) and the National Park Service , which manages Ellis Island , objected to the use of the term in the exhibit . However , during a subsequent meeting held at the offices of the AJC in New York City , leaders representing Japanese Americans and Jewish Americans reached an understanding about the use of the term . After the meeting , the Japanese American National Museum and the AJC issued a joint statement ( which was included in the exhibit ) that read in part : 
 A concentration camp is a place where people are imprisoned not because of any crimes they have committed , but simply because of who they are . Although many groups have been singled out for such persecution throughout history , the term ' concentration camp ' was first used at the turn of the [ 20th ] century in the Spanish American and Boer Wars . During World War II , America 's concentration camps were clearly distinguishable from Nazi Germany 's . Nazi camps were places of torture , barbarous medical experiments and summary executions ; some were extermination centers with gas chambers . Six million Jews were slaughtered in the Holocaust . Many others , including Gypsies , Poles , homosexuals and political dissidents were also victims of the Nazi concentration camps . In recent years , concentration camps have existed in the former Soviet Union , Cambodia and Bosnia . Despite differences , all had one thing in common : the people in power removed a minority group from the general population and the rest of society let it happen . 
 The New York Times published an unsigned editorial supporting the use of " concentration camp " in the exhibit . An article quoted Jonathan Mark , a columnist for The Jewish Week , who wrote , " Can no one else speak of slavery , gas , trains , camps ? It 's Jewish malpractice to monopolize pain and minimize victims . " AJC Executive Director David A. Harris stated during the controversy , " We have not claimed Jewish exclusivity for the term ' concentration camps . ' " 
 On July 7 , 2012 , at their annual convention , the National Council of the Japanese American Citizens League unanimously ratified the Power of Words Handbook , calling for the use of " ... truthful and accurate terms , and retiring the misleading euphemisms created by the government to cover up the denial of Constitutional and human rights , the force , oppressive conditions , and racism against 120 @,@ 000 innocent people of Japanese ancestry locked up in America 's World War II concentration camps . " 
 According to the Power Of Words Handbook : 
 From government documents and propaganda , to public discourse and newspapers , many euphemisms have been used to describe the experiences of Japanese Americans who were forced from their homes and communities during World War II . Words like evacuation , relocation , and assembly centers imply that the United States Government was trying to rescue Japanese Americans from a disastrous environment on the West Coast and simply help them move to a new gathering place . These terms strategically mask the fact that thousands of Japanese Americans were denied their rights as US citizens , and forcibly ordered to live in poorly constructed barracks on sites that were surrounded by barbed wire and guard towers . Although the use of euphemisms was commonplace during World War II , and in many subsequent years , we realize that the continued use of these inaccurate terms is highly problematic . 
 = = Before World War II = = 
 = = = Owens Valley Paiute = = = 
 Manzanar was first inhabited by Native Americans nearly 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 years ago , the area was settled by the Owens Valley Paiute , who ranged across the Owens Valley from Long Valley on the north to Owens Lake on the south , and from the crest of the Sierra Nevada on the west to the Inyo Mountains on the east . Other Native American nations in the region included the Miwok , Western Mono , and <unk> to the west , the Shoshone to the south and east , and the Mono Lake Paiute to the north . The Owens Valley Paiute hunted and fished , collected pine nuts , and raised crops utilizing irrigation in the Manzanar area . They also traded brown @-@ ware pottery for salt from the Saline Valley , and traded other wares and goods across the Sierra Nevada during the summer and fall . 
 The Owens Valley had received scant attention from European Americans before the early 1860s , as it was little more than a crossroads of the routes through the area . When gold and silver were discovered in the Sierra Nevada and the Inyo Mountains , the resulting sudden influx of miners , farmers , cattlemen and their hungry herds brought conflict with the Owens Valley Paiute , whose crops were being destroyed . The Owens Valley Indian War of 1861 – 1863 ensued ; at the end , the Owens Valley Paiute , along with other native peoples in the region , were forced at gunpoint by the United States Army to walk almost 200 miles ( 320 km ) to Fort Tejon , in one of the many forced relocations or " Trails of Tears " inflicted upon Native Americans in the United States . 
 Approximately one @-@ third of the Native Americans in the Owens Valley were forcibly relocated to Fort Tejon . After 1863 , many returned to their permanent villages that had been established along creeks flowing down from the Sierra Nevada mountains . In the Manzanar area , the Owens Valley Paiute had established villages along <unk> , Georges , Shepherds , and Symmes creeks . Evidence of Paiute settlement in the area is still present . 
 = = = Ranchers = = = 
 When European American white settlers first arrived in the Owens Valley in the mid – 19th century , they found a number of large Paiute villages in the Manzanar area . John Shepherd , one of the first of the new settlers , homesteaded 160 acres ( 65 ha ) of land 3 miles ( 5 km ) north of Georges Creek in 1864 . With the help of Owens Valley Paiute field workers and laborers , he expanded his ranch to 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 ha ) . 
 In 1905 , George Chaffey , an agricultural developer from Southern California , purchased Shepherd 's ranch and subdivided it , along with other adjacent ranches . He founded the town of Manzanar in 1910 . Chaffey 's Owens Valley Improvement Company built an irrigation system and planted thousands of fruit trees . By 1920 , the town had more than twenty @-@ five homes , a two @-@ room school , a town hall , and a general store . Also at that time , nearly 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) of apple , pear , and peach trees were under cultivation ; along with crops of grapes , prunes , potatoes , corn and alfalfa ; and large vegetable and flower gardens . 
 " Manzanar was a very happy place and a pleasant place to live during those years , with its peach , pear , and apple orchards , alfalfa fields , tree @-@ lined country lanes , meadows and corn fields , " said Martha Mills , who lived at Manzanar from 1916 to 1920 . 
 Some of the early orchards , along with remnants of the town and ranches , are still present at Manzanar today . 
 = = = <unk> Los Angeles ' thirst = = = 
 As early as March 1905 , the City of Los Angeles began secretly acquiring water rights in the Owens Valley . In 1913 , it completed construction of its 233 @-@ mile ( 375 km ) Los Angeles Aqueduct , But it did not take long for Los Angeles water officials to realize that Owens River water was not enough to supply the rapidly growing metropolis . In 1920 , they began to purchase more of the water rights on the Owens Valley floor . As the decade went on , the City of Los Angeles bought out one Owens Valley farmer after another , and extended its reach northward into Mono County , including Long Valley . By 1933 , the City owned 85 % of all town property and 95 % of all ranch and farm land in the Owens Valley , including Manzanar . 
 Although some residents sold their land for prices that made them financially independent and relocated , a significant number chose to stay . In dry years , Los Angeles pumped ground water and drained all surface water , diverting all of it into its aqueduct and leaving Owens Valley ranchers without water . Without water for irrigation , the holdout ranchers were forced off their ranches and out of their communities ; that included the town of Manzanar , which was abandoned by 1929 . 
 'There was so much water during those early years , that when a horse pulled a buggy , the water frequently came up to the horse 's knees , ' said Lucille DeBoer , who lived on a ranch at Manzanar . ' When this happened , the children took off their shoes and socks to walk home . In the early 1900s the City of Los Angeles started to purchase ranches in the Owens Valley for the sole purpose of supplying water to the people in Los Angeles . People started to sell their land to the City ; the City put in wells to drain the water out of the ground ; the trees began to die ; and the land finally turned to vacant dirt . This ended the Land of the Big Red <unk> 
 Manzanar remained uninhabited until the United States Army leased 6 @,@ 200 acres ( 2 @,@ 500 ha ) from the City of Los Angeles for the Manzanar War Relocation Center . 
 = = Wartime : 1942 – 45 = = 
 After the December 7 , 1941 , attack on Pearl Harbor , the United States Government swiftly moved to begin solving the " Japanese Problem " on the West Coast of the United States . In the evening hours of that same day , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) arrested selected " enemy " aliens , including 2 @,@ 192 who were of Japanese descent . The California government pressed for action by the national government , as many citizens were alarmed about potential activities by people of Japanese descent . 
 On February 19 , 1942 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 , which authorized the Secretary of War to designate military commanders to prescribe military areas and to exclude " any or all persons " from such areas . The order also authorized the construction of what would later be called " relocation centers " by the War Relocation Authority ( WRA ) to house those who were to be excluded . This order resulted in the forced relocation of over 120 @,@ 000 Japanese Americans , two @-@ thirds of whom were native @-@ born American citizens . The rest had been prevented from becoming citizens by federal law . Over 110 @,@ 000 were incarcerated in the ten concentration camps located far inland and away from the coast . 
 Manzanar was the first of the ten concentration camps to be established . Initially , it was a temporary " reception center " , known as the Owens Valley Reception Center from March 21 , 1942 , to May 31 , 1942 . At that time , it was operated by the US Army 's Wartime Civilian Control Administration ( <unk> ) . 
 The Owens Valley Reception Center was transferred to the WRA on June 1 , 1942 , and officially became the " Manzanar War Relocation Center . " The first Japanese American incarcerees to arrive at Manzanar were volunteers who helped build the camp . By mid – April , up to 1 @,@ 000 Japanese Americans were arriving daily , and by July , the population of the camp neared 10 @,@ 000 . Over 90 percent of the incarcerees were from the Los Angeles area , with the rest coming from Stockton , California ; and Bainbridge Island , Washington . Many were farmers and fishermen . Manzanar held 10 @,@ 046 incarcerees at its peak , and a total of 11 @,@ 070 people were incarcerated there . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The weather at Manzanar caused suffering for the incarcerees , few of whom were accustomed to the extremes of the area 's climate . The temporary buildings were not adequate to shield people from the weather . The Owens Valley lies at an elevation of about 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) . Summers on the desert floor of the Owens Valley are generally hot , with temperatures exceeding 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) not uncommon . Winters bring occasional snowfall and daytime temperatures that often drop into the 40 ° F ( 4 ° C ) range . At night , temperatures are generally 30 to 40 ° F ( -1 to 4 ° C ) lower than the daytime highs , and high winds are common day or night . The area 's mean annual precipitation is barely five inches ( 12 @.@ 7 cm ) . The ever @-@ present dust was a continual problem due to the frequent high winds ; so much so that incarcerees usually woke up in the morning covered from head to toe with a fine layer of dust , and they constantly had to sweep dirt out of the barracks . 
 " In the summer , the heat was unbearable , " said former Manzanar incarceree Ralph Lazo ( see Notable Manzanar incarcerees section , below ) . " In the winter , the sparsely rationed oil didn 't adequately heat the tar paper @-@ covered pine barracks with knotholes in the floor . The wind would blow so hard , it would toss rocks around . " 
 = = = Camp layout and facilities = = = 
 The camp site was situated on 6 @,@ 200 acres ( 2 @,@ 500 ha ) at Manzanar , leased from the City of Los Angeles , with the developed portion covering approximately 540 acres ( 220 ha ) . The residential area was about one square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) , and consisted of 36 blocks of hastily constructed , 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) tarpaper barracks , with each incarceree family living in a single 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) " apartment " in the barracks . These apartments consisted of partitions with no ceilings , eliminating any chance of privacy . Lack of privacy was a major problem for the incarcerees , especially since the camp had communal men 's and women 's latrines . 
 " ... One of the hardest things to endure was the communal latrines , with no partitions ; and showers with no stalls , " said former Manzanar incarceree Rosie <unk> . 
 Each residential block also had a communal mess hall , a laundry room , a recreation hall , an ironing room , and a heating oil storage tank , although Block 33 lacked a recreation hall . In addition to the residential blocks , Manzanar had 34 additional blocks that had staff housing , camp administration offices , two warehouses , a garage , a camp hospital , and 24 firebreaks . The camp also had school facilities , a high school auditorium , staff housing , chicken and hog farms , churches , a cemetery , a post office , a cooperative store , other shops , a camp newspaper , and other necessary amenities that one would expect to find in most American cities . 
 Manzanar also had a camouflage net factory , an experimental plantation for producing natural rubber from the <unk> plant , and an orphanage called Children 's Village , which housed 101 Japanese American orphans . The camp perimeter had eight watchtowers manned by armed Military Police , and it was enclosed by five @-@ strand barbed wire . There were sentry posts at the main entrance . 
 = = = Life behind the barbed wire = = = 
 After being uprooted from their homes and communities , the incarcerees found themselves having to endure primitive , sub @-@ standard conditions , and lack of privacy . They had to wait in one line after another for meals , at latrines , and at the laundry room . Each camp was intended to be self @-@ sufficient , and Manzanar was no exception . Cooperatives operated various services , such as the camp newspaper , beauty and barber shops , shoe repair , and more . In addition , incarcerees raised chickens , hogs , and vegetables , and cultivated the existing orchards for fruit . <unk> made their own soy sauce and tofu . 
 Food at Manzanar was based on military requirements . Meals usually consisted of hot rice and vegetables , since meat was scarce due to rationing . In early 1944 , a chicken ranch began operation , and in late April of the same year , the camp opened a hog farm . Both operations provided welcome meat supplements to the incarcerees ' diet . 
 Most incarcerees were employed at Manzanar to keep the camp running . <unk> workers earned US $ 8 per month ( $ 115 @.@ 9 per month as of 2016 ) , semi @-@ skilled workers earned $ 12 per month ( $ 174 per month as of 2016 ) , skilled workers made $ 16 per month ( $ 232 per month as of 2016 ) , and professionals earned $ 19 per month ( $ 275 per month as of 2016 ) . In addition , all incarcerees received $ 3 @.@ 60 per month ( $ 52 per month as of 2016 ) as a clothing allowance . 
 The incarcerees made Manzanar more livable through recreation . They participated in sports , including baseball and football , and martial arts . They also personalized and beautified their barren surroundings by building elaborate gardens , which often included pools , waterfalls , and rock ornaments . There was even a nine @-@ hole golf course . Remnants of some of the gardens , pools , and rock ornaments are still present at Manzanar . 
 = = = Resistance = = = 
 Although most incarcerees quietly accepted their fate during World War II , there was some resistance in the camps . Poston , Heart Mountain , Topaz , and Tule Lake each had civil disturbances about wage differences , black marketing of sugar , intergenerational friction , rumors of " informers " reporting to the camp administration or the FBI , and other issues . However , the most serious incident occurred at Manzanar on December 5 – 6 , 1942 , and became known as the Manzanar Riot . 
 After several months of tension between incarcerees who supported the Japanese American Citizens League ( JACL ) and a group of <unk> ( Japanese Americans educated in Japan ) , rumors spread that sugar and meat shortages were the result of black marketing by camp administrators . To make matters worse , incarceree and JACL leader Fred Tayama was beaten by six masked men . Harry Ueno , the leader of the Kitchen Workers Union , was suspected of involvement and was arrested and removed from Manzanar . Soon after , 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 incarcerees gathered and marched to the administration area , protesting Ueno 's arrest . After Ueno 's supporters negotiated with the camp administration , he was returned to the Manzanar jail . A crowd of several hundred returned to protest , and when the people surged forward , military police threw tear gas to disperse them . As people ran to avoid the tear gas , some in the crowd pushed a driverless truck toward the jail . At that moment , the military police fired into the crowd , killing a 17 @-@ year – old boy instantly . A 21 @-@ year – old man who was shot in the abdomen died days later . Nine other prisoners were wounded , and a military police corporal was wounded by a ricocheting bullet . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 On November 21 , 1945 , the WRA closed Manzanar , the sixth camp to be closed . Although the incarcerees had been brought to the Owens Valley by the United States Government , they had to leave the camp and travel to their next destinations on their own . The WRA gave each person $ 25 ( $ 329 today ) , one @-@ way train or bus fare , and meals to those who had less than $ 600 ( $ 7 @,@ 887 today ) . While many left the camp voluntarily , a significant number refused to leave because they had no place to go after having lost everything when they were forcibly uprooted and removed from their homes . As such , they had to be forcibly removed once again , this time from Manzanar . Indeed , those who refused to leave were generally removed from their barracks , sometimes by force , even if they had no place to go . 
 146 incarcerees died at Manzanar . Fifteen incarcerees were buried there , but only five graves remain , as most were later reburied elsewhere by their families . 
 The Manzanar cemetery site is marked by a monument that was built by incarceree stonemason <unk> <unk> in 1943 . An inscription in Japanese on the front of the monument reads , <unk> ( Soul <unk> Tower ) . The inscription on the back reads " Erected by the Manzanar Japanese " on the left , and " August 1943 " on the right . Today , the monument is often draped in strings of origami , and sometimes survivors and other visitors leave offerings of personal items as mementos . The National Park Service periodically collects and catalogues such items . 
 After the camp was closed , the site eventually returned to its original state . Within a couple of years , all the structures had been removed , with the exception of the two sentry posts at the entrance , the cemetery monument , and the former Manzanar High School auditorium , which was purchased by the County of Inyo . The County leased the auditorium to the Independence Veterans of Foreign Wars , who used it as a meeting facility and community theater until 1951 . After that , the building was used as a maintenance facility by the Inyo County Road Department . 
 As of 2007 , the site also retains numerous building foundations , portions of the water and sewer systems , the outline of the road grid , remains of the landscaping constructed by incarcerees , and much more . Despite four years of use by the incarcerees , the site also retains evidence of the ranches and of the town of Manzanar , as well as artifacts from the days of the Owens Valley Paiute settlement . 
 = = = Notable incarcerees = = = 
 Sue Kunitomi Embrey , born on January 6 , 1923 , was an editor of the Manzanar Free Press , the camp newspaper , and wove camouflage nets to support the war effort . She left Manzanar in late 1943 for Madison , Wisconsin and one year later moved to Chicago , Illinois . Returning to California in 1948 , she went on to become a schoolteacher and a labor and community activist . In 1969 , Embrey was one of approximately 150 people who attended the first organized Manzanar Pilgrimage ( see Manzanar Pilgrimage section , below ) and was one of the founders of the annual event . She also went on to become the primary force behind the preservation of the site and its gaining National Historic Site status until her death in May , 2006 . 
 <unk> took her pain and anger from the unjust internment and turned it into a life dedicated to making certain that would never happen again , ' said Rose <unk> , legal counsel for the Manzanar Committee , after Embrey died on May 15 , 2006 . ' She was just tireless and as a teacher she was making certain that our history books did talk about the tragic <unk> 
 'The reason [ that the Manzanar National Historic Site has ] been accepted by Japanese Americans , local Owens Valley residents and general visitors is in large part because of [ Embrey 's ] knowledge and her personal experience , ' said Alisa Lynch , Chief of Interpretation , Manzanar National Historic Site . ' She had the insight to help us be able to be truthful , to be accurate . She was a historian and an internee , she could wear many different <unk> 
 Aiko Herzig @-@ Yoshinaga , born in 1925 in Los Angeles , was 17 years old when she was incarcerated at Manzanar . Later , she was incarcerated at Jerome and Rohwer , Arkansas . Yoshinaga @-@ Herzig later moved to New York , where she became a community activist in the 1960s and was a member of Asian Americans for Action ( AAA ) , the first Asian American political organization on the East Coast . It included Asian American activists Bill and Yuri <unk> . Although she was not trained to be an archival researcher , Yoshinaga @-@ Herzig decided to find out what historical documents about her and her family might exist at the National Archives . 
 Herzig @-@ Yoshinaga and her husband , John " Jack " Herzig , pored over mountains of documents from the War Relocation Authority , a task that " was roughly equivalent to indexing all the information in a library , working from a card catalog that only gave a subject description by shelf , without giving individual book titles or authors . " Their efforts resulted in the discovery of evidence that the US Government perjured itself before the United States Supreme Court in the 1944 cases Korematsu v. United States , Hirabayashi v. United States , and Yasui v. United States which challenged the constitutionality of the relocation and incarceration . The government had presented falsified evidence to the Court , destroyed evidence , and had withheld other vital information . This evidence provided the legal basis Japanese Americans needed to seek redress and reparations for their wartime imprisonment . The <unk> ' research was also valuable in their work with the National Coalition for Japanese American Redress ( NCJAR ) , which filed a class @-@ action lawsuit against the US Government on behalf of the incarcerees . The US Supreme Court ruled against the plaintiff . 
 Henry Fukuhara , who was born in Fruitland , California , in 1913 , was incarcerated with his family in April 1942 . An artist and <unk> , Fukuhara would later teach a series of annual artistic workshops at Manzanar beginning in 1998 . His workshops , which usually had about 80 students a year , including Milford <unk> , used outdoor structures at Manzanar to teach water color painting . 
 William <unk> ( 1927 – 2010 ) , was incarcerated at Manzanar when he was 15 years old . His family entered Manzanar on April 3 , 1942 , and remained behind the barbed wire until August 25 , 1945 . <unk> became a civil rights and anti @-@ war activist after World War II . In the late 1970s he became the chair of the National Coalition for Japanese American Redress ( NCJAR ) , which brought a class action lawsuit against the US Government on March 16 , 1983 , asserting that it had unjustly incarcerated Japanese Americans during World War II . The lawsuit stated 22 causes of action , including fifteen alleged violations of constitutional rights , and sought $ 27 billion in damages . Despite the fact the US Supreme Court eventually ruled against the class action plaintiffs , the lawsuit helped bring the Japanese American case for redress and reparations to public awareness . It showed the Congress and the Executive Branch that the US Government would have far greater exposure in the still @-@ pending lawsuit than by legislation under consideration in Congress for reparations . The proposed bill called for $ 20 @,@ 000 reparations payments to each former incarceree or their immediate relatives , along with money for a civil liberties education fund ( see Civil Liberties Act of 1988 ) . 
 ... ( The class action lawsuit ) remained active until after Congress had passed the redress legislation . While it remained alive , it played a significant part in publicizing the issues . The NCJAR lawsuit demanded $ 220 @,@ 000 for each individual whose liberties had been denied . This was more than 20 times greater than the $ 20 @,@ 000 per surviving incarcerated person that the redress bills proposed , allowing proponents to portray the legislative solution as a moderate alternative . 
 Ralph Lazo , born in 1924 in Los Angeles , was of Mexican American and Irish American descent , but when at age 16 he learned that his Japanese American friends and neighbors were being forcibly removed and incarcerated at Manzanar , he was outraged . Lazo was so incensed that he joined friends on a train that took hundreds to Manzanar in May 1942 . Manzanar officials never asked him about his ancestry . 
 " Internment was immoral , " Lazo told the Los Angeles Times . " It was wrong , and I couldn 't accept it . " " These people hadn 't done anything that I hadn 't done except to go to Japanese language school . " 
 In 1944 , Lazo was elected president of his class at Manzanar High School . He remained at Manzanar until August of that year , when he was inducted into the US Army . He served as a Staff Sergeant in the South Pacific until 1946 , helping liberate the Philippines . Lazo was awarded the Bronze Star for heroism in combat . After the war , he was a strong supporter of redress and reparations for Japanese Americans incarcerated during the war . The film , Stand Up for Justice : The Ralph Lazo Story , documents his life story , particularly his stand against the incarceration . 
 Toyo Miyatake , who was born in Kagawa , Shikoku , Japan , in 1896 , immigrated to the United States in 1909 . He settled in the Little Tokyo section of Los Angeles , and was incarcerated at Manzanar along with his family . A photographer , Miyatake smuggled a lens and film holder into Manzanar and later had a craftsman construct a wooden box with a door that hid the lens . He took many now @-@ famous photos of life and the conditions at Manzanar . His contraband camera was eventually discovered by the camp administration and confiscated . However , camp director Ralph Merritt later allowed Miyatake to photograph freely within the camp , even though he was not allowed to actually press the shutter button , requiring a guard or camp official to perform this simple task . Merritt finally saw no point to this technicality , and allowed Miyatake to take photos . 
 Togo Tanaka ( 1916 – 2009 ) , editor of the <unk> <unk> newspaper , was sent to the Manzanar , where he used his journalism experience to document conditions in the camp . A supporter of cooperation with the authorities , he was labeled a collaborator and was transferred to Death Valley after being the target of riots before the first anniversary of Pearl Harbor . 
 Harry Ueno , born in Hawaii in 1907 , was a <unk> ( native @-@ born Japanese American educated in Japan ) who was incarcerated at Manzanar with his wife and children . After volunteering for mess hall work , Ueno discovered that Manzanar camp staff were stealing rationed sugar and meat and selling them on the black market . Ueno exposed the thefts , and worked to organize incarcerees to deal with them . This led to his arrest , which resulted in Ueno becoming the focal point of the Manzanar Riot . Ueno was one of the incarcerees featured in Emiko Omori 's Emmy Award @-@ winning film Rabbit in the Moon . 
 " Ueno made us aware there was opposition in the camps , " said Omori . " He made us feel that people did fight back and made us realize that one person can make a difference . " 
 Karl Yoneda was born in Glendale , California , on July 15 , 1906 , but his family moved back to Japan in 1913 . He became an activist early in his life . With Japan on a path towards war , Yoneda returned to the United States rather than be drafted into the Japanese Army . He arrived in San Francisco on December 14 , 1926 . He was taken to the Immigration Detention House on Angel Island , where he was detained for two months , despite having his California birth certificate . Yoneda later moved to Los Angeles , where he found work organizing with the Trade Union Educational League , and later the Japanese Workers ' Association . Yoneda arrived at Manzanar on March 22 , 1942 , one of the first Japanese Americans to arrive as a volunteer to build the camp . Yoneda later distinguished himself in service to the US , volunteering to serve in the Military Intelligence Service . After the war , Yoneda continued to support progressive causes and civil and human rights issues . 
 Other notable Manzanar incarcerees are : Koji Ariyoshi , Jeanne Wakatsuki Houston , Isao Kikuchi , Tura <unk> , Gordon H. Sato , Tak Shindo , Larry Shinoda , Iwao <unk> , <unk> Yamashita and Wendy Yoshimura . 
 = = Preservation and remembrance = = 
 = = = Manzanar Pilgrimage = = = 
 On December 21 , 1969 , about 150 people departed Los Angeles by car and bus , headed for Manzanar . It was the " first " annual Manzanar Pilgrimage . But as it turned out , two ministers , the Reverend <unk> Mayeda and the Reverend Shoichi <unk> , had been making annual pilgrimages to Manzanar since the camp closed in 1945 . 
 The non @-@ profit Manzanar Committee , formerly led by Sue Kunitomi Embrey , has sponsored the Pilgrimage since 1969 . The event is held annually on the last Saturday of April with hundreds of visitors of all ages and backgrounds , including some former incarcerees , gathering at the Manzanar cemetery to remember the incarceration . The hope is that participants can learn about it and help ensure that what is generally accepted to be a tragic chapter in American History is neither forgotten nor repeated . The program traditionally consists of speakers , cultural performances , an interfaith service to memorialize those who died at Manzanar , and <unk> dancing . 
 " My mother was a very staunch Buddhist and she would always say , ' Those poor people that are buried over there at Manzanar in the hot sun — they must be so dry . Be sure to take some water [ as offerings ] , ' " said Embrey . " She always thought it was important to go back and remember the people who had died . " 
 In 1997 , the Manzanar At Dusk program became a part of the Pilgrimage . The program attracts local area residents , as well as descendants of Manzanar 's ranch days and the town of Manzanar . Through small group discussions , the event gives participants the opportunity to hear directly about the experiences of former incarcerees first @-@ hand , to share their experiences and feelings about what they learned , and talk about the relevance of what happened at Manzanar to their own lives . 
 Since the September 11 attacks , American Muslims have participated in the Pilgrimage to promote and increase awareness of civil rights protections in the wake of widespread suspicions harbored against them post @-@ 9 / 11 . 
 = = = California Historical Landmark and Los Angeles Historic @-@ Cultural Monument = = = 
 The Manzanar Committee 's efforts resulted in the State of California naming Manzanar as California Historical Landmark # 850 in 1972 , with an historical marker being placed at the sentry post on April 14 , 1973 . 
 Manzanar , which had been historically owned by the City of Los Angeles , was registered as a Los Angeles Historic @-@ Cultural Monument in 1976 . 
 = = = National Historic Landmark and National Historic Site = = = 
 The Manzanar Committee also spearheaded efforts for Manzanar to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places , and in February 1985 , Manzanar was designated a National Historic Landmark . Embrey and the Committee also led the effort to have Manzanar designated a National Historic Site , and on March 3 , 1992 , President George H. W. Bush signed House Resolution 543 into law ( Pub.L. 102 – 248 ; 106 Stat . 40 ) . This act of Congress established the Manzanar National Historic Site " to provide for the protection and interpretation of the historical , cultural , and natural resources associated with the relocation of Japanese Americans during World War II . " Five years later , the National Park Service acquired 814 acres ( 329 ha ) of land at Manzanar from the City of Los Angeles . 
 The site features an Interpretive Center housed in the historically restored Manzanar High School Auditorium , which has a permanent exhibit that tells the stories of the incarcerees at Manzanar , the Owens Valley Paiute , the ranchers , the town of Manzanar , and water in the Owens Valley . 
 ' ... Stories like this need to be told , and too many of us have died without telling our stories , ' Embrey said during her remarks at the Grand Opening ceremonies for the Manzanar National Historic Site Interpretive Center on April 24 , 2004 . ' The Interpretive Center is important because it needs to show to the world that America is strong as it makes amends for the wrongs it has committed , and that we will always remember Manzanar because of that.' 
 The site , which has seen 1 @,@ 144 @,@ 316 people visit from 2000 through August 2015 , features restored sentry posts at the camp entrance , a replica of a camp guard tower built in 2005 , a self @-@ guided tour road , and informational markers . Staff offer guided tours and other educational programs , including a Junior Ranger educational program for children between four and fifteen years of age . 
 The National Park Service is reconstructing one of the 36 residential blocks as a demonstration block . One barrack appears as it would have when Japanese Americans first arrived at Manzanar in 1942 , while another has been reconstructed to represent barracks life in 1945 . Exhibits in these barracks opened on April 16 , 2015 . A restored World War II mess hall , moved to the site from Bishop Airport in 2002 , was opened to visitors in late 2010 . 
 In late 2008 , historically appropriate vegetation was planted near the Interpretive Center . The Manzanar National Historic Site also unveiled its virtual museum on May 17 , 2010 and continues to collect oral histories of former incarcerees and others from all periods of Manzanar 's history . 
 = = = Opposition to the creation of the Manzanar National Historic Site = = = 
 After Congress named Manzanar a National Historic Site and gave the National Park Service the job of restoring the site in 1992 , protests against its creation emerged . Letters flooded the National Park Service , demanding that Manzanar be portrayed as a guest housing center for the Japanese Americans . William Hastings , of Bishop , California , wrote to the National Park Service , saying that the portrayal of Manzanar as a concentration camp amounts to " treason . " Protesters threatened to start dismissal campaigns against Bill Michael , a member of the Manzanar Advisory Commission who was the Director of the Eastern California Museum in Independence , California , and Superintendent Ross Hopkins , the National Park Service employee assigned to the site . They also threatened to destroy any buildings erected or restored at Manzanar . Further , Lillian Baker , and others in California , objected to the words , " concentration camp " on the California State historical marker , which has been hacked and stained , with the first " C " of " concentration camp " having been ground off . Further , a man , who described himself as a World War II veteran , called Hopkins to say that he had driven 200 miles to urinate on the marker . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 A made @-@ for @-@ television movie , Farewell to Manzanar , directed by John <unk> , aired on March 11 , 1976 , on NBC . It was based on the 1973 memoir of the same name , written by Jeanne Wakatsuki Houston , who was incarcerated at Manzanar as a child , and her husband James D. Houston . The book and the movie tell the story of the Wakatsuki family and their experiences behind the barbed wire through young Jeanne 's eyes . On October 7 , 2011 , the Japanese American National Museum ( <unk> ) announced that they had negotiated the rights to the movie , and that they would make it available for purchase on DVD . 
 Come See The Paradise was a feature film about how forced relocation and imprisonment at Manzanar affected a Japanese American family from Los Angeles and a European American union organizer . The film , released in 1990 , starred Dennis Quaid and Tamlyn Tomita , and was written and directed by Alan Parker . 
 Folk / country musician Tom Russell wrote " Manzanar " , a song about the Japanese American internment , that was released on his album Box of Visions ( 1993 ) . Laurie Lewis covered the song on her album Seeing Things ( 1998 ) , adding the Japanese string instrument , the koto , to her performance . 
 The 1994 award @-@ winning novel , Snow Falling on Cedars by David Guterson , contains many scenes and details relating to Japanese Americans from the Puget Sound , Washington , area and their incarceration experiences at Manzanar . The 2000 film based on the book also details that connection . 
 The Asian American jazz fusion band Hiroshima has a song entitled " Manzanar " on its album The Bridge ( 2003 ) . It is an instrumental song inspired by Manzanar and the Japanese American incarceration . Also , its song " Living In America " , on its album titled East ( 1990 ) , contains the phrase " I still remember Manzanar . " 
 Fort Minor 's song " Kenji " , from the album The Rising Tied ( 2005 ) , tells the true story of Mike Shinoda 's family and their experiences before , during , and after World War II , including their imprisonment at Manzanar . 
 Channel 3 's song titled " Manzanar " is about the incarceration . 
 In the 1984 movie The Karate Kid , <unk> Miyagi 's wife and new @-@ born son die during child birth on November 2 , 1944 while in the Manzanar Relocation Camp . Mr. Miyagi is fighting for the US against the Germans in Europe when he received the news . 
 A 2007 episode of the CBS television crime drama Cold Case , titled " Family 8108 " , dealt with the 1945 murder of a Japanese American man in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania after he and his family were released from Manzanar . The episode originally aired on December 9 , 2007 . 
 = = = Owens Valley resources = = = 
 Burton , Jeff ( 1998 ) . The Archeology of Somewhere : Archeological Testing Along U.S. Highway 395 , Manzanar National Historic Site . Western Archeological Center , National Park Service , United States Department of the Interior . Publications in Anthropology 72 ( Covers archeological finds at Manzanar from the pre @-@ World War II , wartime and post @-@ war periods ) . 
 Chalfant , William A. ( 1980 ) . Story Of Inyo . Chalfant Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 34 @-@ 4 . 
 Ewan , Rebecca Fish ( 2000 ) . A Land Between : Owens Valley , California . The Johns Hopkins University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Hoffman , Abraham ( 1992 ) . Vision or Villainy : Origins of the Owens Valley @-@ Los Angeles Water Controversy . Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 509 @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , William L. ( 1983 ) . Water and Power : The Conflict Over Los Angeles Water Supply in the Owens Valley . University of California Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Nadeau , Remi A. ( 1997 ) . The Water Seekers . Crest Publishers . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 @-@ 8 . 
 Steward , Julian ( 1933 ) . " Ethnography of the Owens Valley Paiute " . University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 33 ( 3 ) : 233 – 250 . 
 Steward , Julian ( 2007 ) [ 1934 ] . Myths of the Owens Valley Paiute . Kessinger Publishing , LLC . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Wehrey , Jane ( 2006 ) . Voices From This Long Brown Land : Oral Recollections of Owens Valley Lives and Manzanar Pasts . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Wartime @-@ related resources = = = 
 Armor , John and Wright , Peter . ( 1989 ) . Manzanar ; Photographs by Ansel Adams . Vintage Books . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Adams Ansel , <unk> , Wynne ( ed . ) , Embrey , Sue Kunitomi ( contributor ) , Michael , William H. ( contributor ) . ( 2001 ) . Born Free And Equal : The Story of Loyal Japanese Americans . Spotted Dog Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 05 @-@ 7 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Bunting , Eve , <unk> , Chris K. ( 1998 ) . So Far from the Sea . Clarion Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Cooper , Michael . ( 2002 ) . Remembering Manzanar : Life In A Japanese Relocation Camp . Clarion Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Barry . ( 1999 ) . The Journal of Ben Uchida : Citizen <unk> , Mirror Lake Internment Camp , California , 1942 . Scholastic . ISBN 0 @-@ 590 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Embrey , Sue Kunitomi . ( 1972 ) . The Lost Years : 1942 – 1946 . Moonlight Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 07 @-@ 2 . 
 Garrett , Jessie A. , Larson , Ronald C. ( ed ) . ( 1977 ) . Camp and Community : Manzanar and the Owens Valley . Japanese American Oral History Program : California State University , Fullerton . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 00 @-@ 5 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Howser , Huell ( 2002 @-@ 01 @-@ 08 ) . " Manzanar ( 4012 ) " . California 's Gold ( Chapman University Huell Howser Archive ) . Retrieved 2013 @-@ 06 @-@ 16 . 
 <unk> , Lawson <unk> ( ed . ) ( 2000 ) . Only What We Could Carry : The Japanese American Internment Experience . Heyday Books and the California Historical Society . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 30 @-@ 9 . 
 Peterson , Robert ( November – December 1999 ) . " Scouting in World War II Detention Camps " . Scouting Magazine : the Way It Was ( Boy Scouts of America ) . Retrieved September 28 , 2007 . 
 <unk> , Michi ( 1996 ) [ 1976 ] . Years Of Infamy : The Untold Story Of America 's Concentration Camps . University of Washington Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 295 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = = = Post @-@ War @-@ related resources = = = 
 Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians . ( 1997 ) . Personal Justice Denied : Report of the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians . Civil Liberties Public Education Fund and University of Washington Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 295 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Bahr , Diana Myers ( 2007 ) . The Unquiet Nisei : An Oral History Of The Life Of Sue Kunitomi Embrey . Palgrave MacMillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 230 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Daniels , Roger , Kitano , Harry H.L. , Taylor , Sandra C ( 1986 ) . Japanese Americans From Relocation To Redress . University of Utah Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 258 @-@ X. CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Irons , Peter ( 1983 ) . Justice At War . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Japanese American Historical Society of Southern California ( 1998 ) . <unk> Nikkei Voices : Resettlement Years , 1945 – 1955 . Japanese American Historical Society of Southern California . 
 Maki , Mitchell T. , Kitano , Harry H.L. , Berthold , S. Megan ( 1999 ) . Achieving The Impossible Dream : How Japanese Americans Obtained Redress . University of Illinois Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Silber , Rebecca R ( March 15 , 1998 ) . " Lexicon of Genocide ( Letter to the Editor ) " . New York Times . Retrieved January 1 , 2008 . 
 Takei , Barbara , Tachibana , Julie ( 2001 ) . Tule Lake Revisited . T & T Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 5 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Tse , Joyce ( May 2 , 2007 ) . " Manzanar Pilgrimage Begins A New Era " . The <unk> <unk> . Retrieved January 19 , 2009 . 
 = Douglas Bruce = 
 Douglas Edward Bruce ( born August 26 , 1949 ) is a conservative activist and former legislator in the U.S. state of Colorado . He is also known for being the author of Colorado 's Taxpayer Bill of Rights ( TABOR ) . 
 A strict advocate for limited government , Bruce wrote and promoted TABOR , a spending limitation measure approved by Colorado voters in 1992 ; his name is so associated with the measure that attempts to bypass its restrictions are known as " de @-@ Brucing . " After two unsuccessful campaigns for the Colorado State Senate in 1996 and 2000 , Bruce was eventually elected to the El Paso County , Colorado county commission in 2004 . While a county commissioner , Bruce was noted for frequently falling on the losing sides of 4 @-@ 1 votes , and for disputes with county staff and fellow commissioners on numerous occasions . 
 Bruce was appointed to a vacant seat in the Colorado House of Representatives in December 2007 and represented House District 15 , which encompasses eastern Colorado Springs . After kicking a Rocky Mountain News photographer on the day he was sworn in , Bruce became the first legislator in Colorado history to be formally censured ; he was later removed from a House committee overseeing veterans affairs after refusing to sponsor a ceremonial resolution honoring veterans . Although defeated for election to a full term in the August 2008 Republican Party primary , Bruce has continued his activism to reduce government expenditures and taxes in Colorado and in Colorado Springs in particular before being indicted for a decades @-@ worth of criminal activity for " cheating " Colorado out of millions under the guise of charity and anti @-@ tax activism . In 2011 , Douglas Bruce was convicted of all counts in the indictment , including four counts of felony criminal activity including money laundering , attempted improper influence of a public official , and tax fraud after he was discovered to be using a small @-@ government charity he founded to hide millions of dollars from the state department of revenue . He was sentenced on February 13 , 2012 to a total of 180 days in jail , ordered to pay a total of $ 49 @,@ 000 in fines , and subject to six months of probation which includes extensive disclosure requirements . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Los Angeles , California , Bruce graduated from Hollywood High School , at the age of 16 and then from Pomona College with a double major in history and government . He completed a law degree from the University of Southern California 's Gould School of Law in 1973 , and worked as a Los Angeles County deputy district attorney from 1973 to 1979 , resigning amid frustration with the court system . 
 In 1980 , Bruce ran a largely self @-@ financed campaign for the California State Assembly , running in the Democratic Primary for the 38th Assembly district , which , at that time , centered on Pacific Palisades and Malibu . Running with the campaign slogan " Specifics , Not Safe <unk> , " Bruce ran what a local newspaper described as " something of an anomaly — a law and order primary campaign by a Democrat . " Bruce lost by five percentage points in a high @-@ turnout primary ; his opponent , Steven <unk> , narrowly lost the general election to Republican Marian la Follette . 
 = = = Move to Colorado and rental properties = = = 
 During the late 1970s , Bruce acquired a number of rental properties in the Los Angeles area , which he managed full @-@ time after leaving the district attorney 's office . During the late 1970s and early 1980s , Bruce was embroiled in several protracted tax disputes with the Internal Revenue Service . In 1986 , Bruce acquired several properties in Colorado Springs and moved to Colorado permanently . Shortly before moving to Colorado , Bruce changed his political party affiliation from Democrat to Republican . 
 In addition to his Colorado Springs properties , Bruce acquired rental properties in Denver and Pueblo , Colorado . He has been cited repeatedly by law and code enforcement officials regarding the upkeep of his properties , although most of the dozens of citations brought against him have been overturned . In connection with charge of operating an unsafe building , Bruce spent eight days in jail in 1995 on a contempt of court citation . In response to the numerous complaints filed against him , Bruce has questioned the constitutionality of city code provisions , and accused city officials of selective prosecution and carrying out a " vendetta " against him personally . 
 In 2003 , Bruce announced that he intended to sell his rental properties in order to devote more time to political activism , but was cited by Colorado Springs for keeping dilapidated properties as recently as 2007 . In 2008 , Bruce was cited by Colorado Springs for two properties they considered " dilapidated , " in part because of windows boarded up under orders from the city , but the charges were ultimately dropped when Bruce sold the buildings . Shortly before his August 2008 legislative primary , Colorado Springs declared a four @-@ <unk> owned by Bruce as " dilapidated ; " Bruce responded that he had put money into repairing the building and readying it for sale . In early 2010 , Colorado Springs told Bruce that it would charge him $ 40 @,@ 000 to restart water service at seven of his rental properties , a charge that Bruce said amounted to political retaliation , but that city staff justified by noting of the properties had been abandoned . 
 = = = Taxpayer 's Bill of Rights = = = 
 Although similar tax @-@ limitation measures had been rejected by voters over the previous decades , in 1988 , Bruce authored and led the campaign that was eventually successful in enacting TABOR , a " Taxpayer Bill of Rights , " in Colorado . Among other provisions , TABOR mandated voter approval of any tax increases and constrained state government spending to grow at a rate no greater than the rates of population growth and inflation . Although TABOR did not pass in 1988 , garnering only 42 % of the vote in a statewide reference , Bruce revised the measure and it was placed on the ballot again in 1990 , when it received 49 % support . A third attempt in 1992 was successful , and TABOR was passed with 54 % of the vote and became part of Colorado 's constitution . In 1997 , TABOR 's restrictions on state spending were triggered for the first time , resulting in refunds to taxpayers . 
 During these campaigns , Bruce was the primary spokesperson for TABOR , often trading barbs with TABOR opponent and Colorado governor Roy Romer . In one frequently @-@ cited incident , Romer likened the TABOR proposal to " economic terrorism ; " in response , Bruce printed personal business cards reading " Douglas Bruce : Terrorist . " The passage of TABOR was Bruce 's most prominent political accomplishment ; years later , Bruce 's personalized license plate read " <unk> . " Bruce also wrote and successfully passed a similar spending limitation measure in Colorado Springs in 1991 . The statewide and local effects of TABOR on government finances led Colorado College political science professor Bob <unk> , in 2009 , to call Bruce " the most influential Colorado politician of his time . " 
 Since the passage of TABOR in 1992 , hundreds of local jurisdictions in Colorado have sought voter approval to temporarily or permanently exceed the spending limitations of TABOR , measures which became known as " de @-@ Brucing , " in reference to TABOR 's author . By 2007 , over half of Colorado 's school district and counties had " de @-@ <unk> , " as had many municipalities . TABOR 's budget restrictions were frequently cited by officials in Bruce 's native El Paso County as resulting in deficiencies in health , law enforcement , and administrative services , and on the state level , creating financial difficulties for higher education . 
 In 2005 , after several years of tight budgets brought about by recession , the spending limitations of TABOR , and other budgetary obligations , the Colorado General Assembly referred Referendum C , a statewide " de @-@ Brucing " measure , to Colorado voters . Bruce was a vocal opponent of Referendum C , facing off against supporters including Gov. Bill Owens , who had supported the original passage of TABOR . Referendum C , which was ultimately passed by voters , authorized a five @-@ year " time @-@ out " from some of TABOR 's spending restrictions . Although Bruce threatened a lawsuit against the state of Colorado if the referendum passed , the measure was ultimately enacted into law , raising state revenue by several billion dollars . 
 In 2008 , following his term in the state legislature , Bruce argued against a measure to reverse some of the spending restrictions of the Taxpayer 's Bill of Rights . The initiative , known as the Savings Account for Education , would divert refunds given to taxpayers under TABOR to a special fund for K @-@ 12 education . Bruce opposed the measure in legislative hearings and then filed a legal challenge once House Speaker Andrew Romanoff , its primary proponent , sought to place the measure on the Colorado ballot as a citizen initiative . The measure was ultimately placed on the November 2008 statewide ballot as Amendment 59 , and Bruce launched a website opposing it . 
 = = = State Senate campaigns = = = 
 Bruce 's first attempt to seek elected office in Colorado came in 1996 , when Bruce challenged incumbent Republican state senator Ray Powers in the Republican Party primary . Bruce lost to Powers , who went on to become the Colorado State Senate President . Because of the negativity of Bruce 's campaign against Powers , Bruce was the only person banned from Powers ' ranch , a frequent site for Colorado Springs Republican fundraisers . 
 Bruce also ran unsuccessfully for the Colorado State Senate in 2000 , losing a hotly contested Republican party primary to Ron May in the solidly Republican district . Running with the slogan " Ron May , but Bruce will , " Bruce faced institutional opposition from statewide Republican leaders , including Governor Bill Owens , who had once supported Bruce 's TABOR initiatives . May ultimately won by only 112 votes . 
 = = = El Paso County Commissioner = = = 
 = = = = 2004 election = = = = 
 Bruce sought election to the El Paso County , Colorado , county commission in 2004 , winning the Republican Party nomination by defeating Colorado Springs councilwoman <unk> Radford in the party primary . In the general election , Bruce defeated Democrat Stanley <unk> and two Republicans who ran as write @-@ in candidates with the backing of some party leaders . Bruce won the general election with 58 % of the vote . Bruce self @-@ funded his campaign , refusing to accept outside donations . 
 = = = = Policy positions = = = = 
 While serving on the El Paso County Commission , Bruce was frequently the only opposition to measures supported by the other four county commissioners . He cast the only vote against implementing mail ballot elections , against county interference in the proposed incorporation of Falcon , Colorado ( although he also opposed the incorporation ) , against a package of road improvement projects recommended by the Colorado Department of Transportation , against the appointment of County Administrator Jeff Greene , against stricter building codes for mobile homes , and against awarding a county grant to an anti @-@ poverty agency , calling it handouts for " <unk> . " 
 He was unsuccessful in attempting to reduce the number of paid holidays taken by county employees , but was instrumental in lowering property tax rates and in negotiating the expansion of a gravel pit operation . He also spoke in favor of turning over management of the county fair to a volunteer organization and called for the number of volunteer boards and commissions to be reduced . Bruce was also outspoken in support of deportation for illegal immigrants , and went against his normal practice of refusing to support ceremonial resolutions to support a resolution in favor of the creation of an Immigration and Customs Enforcement office in El Paso County . 
 = = = = Conflicts with county staff and commissioners = = = = 
 When Bruce joined the commission , he sought to have his salary of over $ 60 @,@ 000 per year directed to charity , per a campaign promise . Designating Active Citizens Together , an educational non @-@ profit he helped found , as the recipient , Bruce sought to have the county not withhold income tax from his checks , as the money would go directly to charity and he would receive no direct personal benefit . After ten months of disputing arrangements with county staff , Bruce agreed to accept checks with taxes and deductions withheld . In 2007 , Bruce attempted to use the non @-@ profit group to donate copies of the U.S. Constitution for local school districts to distribute to graduating seniors ; several districts refused his donation on logistical grounds or policies forbidding distribution of external material . The nonprofit group has purchased tens of thousands of copies of the constitution , with the goal of giving one to every graduating high school senior in Colorado . 
 He also refused to accept a VIP pass from the Colorado Springs Airport , characterizing it as a " bribe ; " he also objected to the introduction of public prayer during county commission meetings . Bruce also objected to the inclusion of his name ( alongside other county commissioners ) on a plaque marking county support of a new courthouse expansion , threatening to physically remove his name from the plaque ; his opposition to financing methods for the courthouse had been a driving factor behind his 2004 county commission campaign . 
 Bruce 's debating and speaking style during county commission meetings led to occasional conflicts with county staff and other commissioners . During his first year , an escalating series of disputes with Commissioner Sallie Clark led to her ruling , at a meeting which she chaired , that Bruce was not allowed to discuss Colorado Springs city politics . In 2006 , Bruce was also accused of intervening in a county bidding process for a copying contract in favor of a campaign supporter . 
 In 2006 , El Paso County Attorney Bill Louis denounced Bruce as a " narcissist , sociopath and crackpot enabler " for supporting Colorado 's Amendment 38 , a referendum designed to ease rules for petitioning measures onto election ballots . Bruce and Louis verbally tangled after Louis called Bruce 's tactics " guerrilla " and Louis announced : " I plan to do everything in my limited power to make sure that [ Bruce 's tenure in elected office ] comes to an end at some point for the good not only of this community but for all of Colorado and the nation . " 
 Tensions also rose during Bruce 's final weeks on the county commission , as he sought a vacancy committee 's appointment to the state legislature . Bruce criticized county staff for being unresponsive to his inquiries , and Sheriff Terry <unk> responded by accusing Bruce of harming the morale of county staff , and told Bruce that he supported his bid for the legislature in order " to put you in an environment that will match your ineffectiveness , " a statement applauded by other county staff . During his final commission meetings , Bruce was also repeatedly cut off by other commissioners during his comments ; other members of the commission described his behavior as an increase in " grandstanding " prior to the vacancy committee 's meeting . 
 = = = Activism in Colorado Springs = = = 
 In June 2000 , Bruce was called to appear as a potential juror for a sexual assault trial in Colorado Springs . During the jury selection process , Bruce distributed leaflets written by the Fully Informed Jury Association in support of jury nullification . After defense attorneys objected to Bruce 's actions , the presiding judge dismissed Bruce and 50 other potential jurors who had received the fliers , resulting in a two @-@ week delay for the trial . 
 Bruce authored two measures , Issues 200 and 201 , which appeared on the November 2006 Colorado Springs election ballot , and would have reduced the city 's sales tax rate , eliminated its property tax , and restricted the city 's ability to borrow money . The legality of the measures was challenged by city officials ; the dispute rose to the Colorado Court of Appeals , which ruled in favor of the measures ' placement on the ballot . Bruce also unsuccessfully contested both the editing of statements of support for the measures in ballot summaries mailed to voters , and what he claimed was deceptive wording in other taxation measures that election . 
 Bruce was also the subject of several criminal citations — first in May 2006 , stemming from charges that he campaigned against a tax increase for the Falcon Fire Protection District at a polling place closer than the legal 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) limit , and then in August 2009 , when he and another man were charged with trespassing after being asked by police to stop soliciting signatures outside a Costco for the second time in a year . Bruce alleged that the City of Colorado Springs attempted to " bully " him and violate his First Amendment rights , a charge city officials denied . A trial was eventually held after paperwork errors , a tainted jury pool , and claims by Bruce of selective prosecution ; after a three @-@ day trial , both were acquitted . Bruce later filed an unsuccessful complaint alleging professional misconduct by the case 's prosecutor and judge . 
 = = Colorado House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Appointment , swearing @-@ in , and censure = = = 
 In October 2007 , Bruce was chosen over two other Republican contenders for the state house seat vacated by Rep. Bill Cadman , following a short but contentious battle for the appointment . Bruce received two @-@ thirds of the votes from the 66 @-@ member vacancy committee . Although eligible to be sworn in immediately after his appointment was certified , Bruce postponed the oath of office in order to be eligible to serve a full four terms beyond the partial term under Colorado 's term limits rules , an action which was criticized by both Republican and Democratic lawmakers . His delay led to the enactment of legislation requiring legislators to be sworn in within 14 days of their selection . Bruce cast the only dissenting vote on the measure . 
 Bruce also demanded to be sworn in in front of the full house , a request denied by both Republican and Democratic leadership . He acquiesced to an individual swearing @-@ in ceremony on January 14 after House Republicans voted 22 @-@ 1 to call for a representative to be named for District 15 if Bruce did not take the oath of office by the end of the day . 
 On the morning before he was sworn in , Bruce kicked a Rocky Mountain News photographer who took Bruce 's picture during the prayer ; Bruce accused the photographer of " violating the order and decorum " of the house , and refused to apologize , describing his action instead as a " nudge or a tap . " A six @-@ member legislative panel recommended 6 @-@ 0 that Bruce be censured by the House for his actions . On January 24 , the full House of Representatives voted 62 @-@ 1 to censure Bruce . He became the first representative in the recorded history of the state house to be formally censured . 
 = = = Legislative agenda = = = 
 For the 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Bruce was named to seats on the House Finance Committee and the House State , Veterans , and Military Affairs Committee . Before the session began , Bruce denounced much of the House Republican caucus ' legislative agenda as " streamlining socialism . " Bruce was similarly critical of the proposed state budget debated during the 2008 legislative session ; however , his budget amendment proposals were unsuccessful . 
 All of the legislation introduced by Bruce died in House committees , including proposals to distribute copies and require instruction on the Declaration of Independence and U.S. Constitution to high school seniors , to prohibit counties from assessing any charges other than property taxes on property tax bills , to raise legislative pay and index pay to inflation , and to create a bipartisan panel to draw up Colorado 's congressional and legislative districts . 
 Bruce routinely objected to the practice of attaching a " safety clause " to bills , the inclusion of which declares the bill an " necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace , health or safety , " enacting it into law sooner and prohibiting challenges to the legislation via the petition process . He offered amendments to a number of bills to remove the safety clause , which often failed on account of legislators ' personal hostility towards him ; however , in 2008 , 41 % of bills passed had no safety clause , up from 25 % the previous year . Bruce also opposed proposals to raise signature requirements for citizen @-@ initiated constitutional amendments , and opposed a bill to impose new requirements on landlords , despite criticism that voting on the measure constituted a conflict of interest . 
 = = = Removal from committee = = = 
 Consistent with Bruce 's practice as a county commissioner , Bruce opposed ceremonial resolutions in the legislature , and on February 13 , was the lone legislator who refused to sign on as a cosponsor to a resolution recognizing Military and Veterans Appreciation Day . Other Republican legislators denounced Bruce in a public letter for " callous indifference " towards veterans , and Republican Minority Leader Mike May removed Bruce from the House State , Veterans and Military Affairs Committee . Bruce offered as evidence of his support for veterans his successful amendment to a house bill to include interest in a state repayment to the Colorado Veterans Trust Fund , a move which resulted in an additional $ 636 @,@ 000 repaid to the fund . Bruce would later cite this as one of his major accomplishments during the 2008 session . 
 = = = " Illiterate peasants " comments = = = 
 On April 21 , 2008 , Bruce voiced opposition during house debate on a bill sponsored by Rep. Marsha Looper to create a guest worker program to facilitate temporary employment visas for agricultural workers from Mexico . After speaking against illegal immigration and being advised to restrict comments to the bill by debate chair Rep. Kathleen Curry , Bruce took the floor a second time and commented : 
 Bruce was immediately <unk> to order by Rep. Kathleen Curry , who ruled that he would no longer be recognized during debate on the bill . Bruce 's comments were denounced by legislators on both sides of the aisle , as well the Mexican consulate in Denver . Bruce proudly defended his remarks as being factually accurate , citing dictionary definitions of " illiterate " and " peasant . " Legislators responded to Bruce 's propensity for generating controversy by declaring that they would " start ignoring him . " The following weekend , Bruce 's comments were the target of a local protest in Colorado Springs . 
 = = = 2008 election = = = 
 Bruce announced in November 2007 that he would stand in the 2008 general election for the House District 15 seat . He faced a challenge for the Republican nomination from attorney and Iraq War veteran Mark Waller . Bruce funded his own campaign with over $ 30 @,@ 000 of personal funds , refusing to accept private campaign donations ; Waller , however , received endorsements or contributions from at least five sitting state representatives , and Colorado Attorney General John Suthers . Waller received 57 % of the vote at the Republican assembly in March , claiming the top line on the August Republican primary ballot ; he did not differ publicly with Bruce on political positions , but argued that Bruce 's temperament caused him to be an ineffective legislator . 
 Both Bruce and Waller accused each other of inappropriate conduct while campaigning ; Bruce was accused of inappropriately distributing campaign flyers to Republican representatives on the House floor , of mailing flyers promoting his charity shortly before the primary , and of inappropriately listing endorsements on his web site . In turn , Bruce filed several campaign finance complaints against Waller , one of which resulted in Waller 's campaign being fined for failing to properly disclose a campaign contribution . Ultimately , Bruce was defeated for the Republican nomination in the August 12 party primary , taking 48 percent of the vote to Waller 's 52 percent . 
 = = Post @-@ legislative activism = = 
 = = = Colorado Springs = = = 
 In 2007 , Bruce began a series of challenges to the City of Colorado Springs ' creation of a Stormwater Enterprise Fee , which he contended amounted to an illegal tax collected by a government entity . After his first attempt at a ballot measure to end the fee was held to violate Colorado 's single subject rule , Bruce gained permission for a second petition following a year @-@ long battle over wording , and placed the measure on the November 2008 ballot following struggles to collect the necessary number of signatures but were rejected by voters . 
 Bruce was again successful at placing a measure targeting the Stormwater Enterprise on the ballot in 2009 , despite challenges from the city that signatures were not submitted in time , but not after Bruce lost disputes over the wording of the ballot measures . Bruce 's Issue 300 was passed by voters with about 55 percent of the vote , and mandated that enterprise payments to Colorado Springs be phased out over eight years . Bruce and city officials disputed , even before the election , as to whether his measure would apply to the city 's Stormwater Enterprise Fee ; and after threatening to launch a ballot initiative to cut property taxes after an initial 5 @-@ 4 vote by the city council over two years , the city council then voted 5 @-@ 4 to phase out the authority immediately . Bruce , however , objected to the city council 's proposed implementation of the initiative , which would allow the city to collect payments from the authority in exchange for services rendered . Bruce claimed that this would " undo the plain meaning of issue 300 , " and made similar claims regarding a local government restructuring proposal made by Colorado Springs mayor Lionel Rivera . 
 In March 2010 , Bruce filed suit against the city of Colorado Springs and its city council , charging that they had illegally hired outside legal counsel . He also accused the council members of receiving benefits greater than that authorized by law . 
 In June 2010 , Bruce filed a ballot measure to dramatically expand the powers of the city 's mayor , including eliminating the positions of city manager , chief financial officer , and communications staff , as well as giving the mayor power to veto ordinances , lower taxes , and excuse city code violations . 
 = = = Statewide ballot measures = = = 
 Although Bruce attempted to distance himself from three statewide ballot measures aimed at limiting Colorado governments ' power to raise and borrow money , several petitioners for the measures were linked to Bruce through records showing that they temporarily resided at one of his Colorado Springs apartment buildings , and through their past work on TABOR initiatives in other states and petitioning for Bruce 's Issue 300 in Colorado Springs . The three measures — Amendment 60 , Amendment 61 and Proposition 101 — would impose restrictions or tax cuts , eliminate governments ' ability to borrow money without voter approval , cut the state income tax from 4 @.@ 63 to 3 @.@ 5 percent , and eliminate vehicle ownership taxes . 
 Opponents of the ballot measures filed a complaint alleging the backers violated Colorado campaign finance laws by failing to disclose contributions and expenditures . Bruce was subpoenaed to testify in a hearing related to the case in March , but contested the summons unsuccessfully . During the month of May 2010 , the state attempted 29 times to serve a notice of a court order testify to Bruce at his Colorado Springs residence ; Bruce stated that he was out of town at the time , although both notices and delivered newspapers were removed during that period . 
 At a hearing in late May , one of the ballot measures ' sponsors , Michelle Northrup , testified that she had met with Bruce before the measures were filed and that he provided advice on submitting the initiates and other legal matters . In early June , an administrative law judge ruled that the evidence showed Bruce was behind the three measures and imposed fines on their proponents , and state attorney general John Suthers ' office stated that they would seek a contempt citation against Bruce in district court . 
 = = Crime , trial , conviction and sentence = = 
 In 2010 , Douglas Bruce was charged with money laundering , attempted bribery of a public official , and tax fraud after he was discovered to be using a small @-@ government charity he founded to hide millions of dollars from the state <unk> , pocketing interest and using the funds to further his political agenda . The case went to trial during which Bruce acted as his own attorney and , after eight days of trail , on Dec 22 , 2011 , after only four hours of deliberation , jurors convicted Bruce on four counts . On 13 February 2012 he was sentenced to two consecutive 90 @-@ day jail terms and six months of probation , during which he will have to make extensive financial disclosures to the court aimed to ensure he does not become a repeat offender . This was less than the two years of prison the District Attorney had asked for . He was also ordered to pay around $ 21 @,@ 000 to cover the cost of prosecution and about $ 29 @,@ 000 to cover the taxes that were owed . 
 State Assistant Attorney General Robert Shapiro said , " Mr. Bruce , for personal , selfish and narcissistic reasons , took advantage of our charitable @-@ giving process . He was able to cheat Colorado for the better part of a decade . " Douglas Bruce defiantly denounced the trial , saying without contrition , " This was the dirtiest trial I have seen in 38 years , regardless of the outcome . " On February 13 , 2012 , Denver District Judge Anne Mansfield sentenced Bruce to six months in jail and six years on probation , imposing strict conditions that will require him to disclose in detail his financial life , even allowing the government access to his personal computers . Mansfield said she doubts Bruce will successfully complete his probation as Bruce himself would show up tardy to trial and introduced evidence by throwing documents onto the floor , the judge said . “ The defendant has absolutely no regard for the rule of law . His behavior during trial was reprehensible , ” Manfield said . Assistant Attorney General Robert Shapiro said the outcome was fair , “ Mr. Bruce ’ s life is going to be extremely transparent . That ’ s all we ever wanted , ” he said . Bruce remained defiant , saying , “ They will be able to have my body , but they cannot have my soul , ” he said . Bruce began serving his sentence 17 February 2012 . Bruce spent 104 days in jail , and was paroled with 20 terms and conditions required for his release . After a year , the probation department of the Denver District Court brought two complaints against Bruce , claiming that he failed to submit financial disclosures and tax filings , didn 't disclose a financial deal with Colorado Springs Councilwoman Helen Collins and didn 't report code violations and court cases related to six properties he owns in Ohio , Wisconsin and Illinois nor nearly $ 22 @,@ 000 in delinquent taxes on three Ohio properties . On March 11 , 2016 , Douglas Bruce was found in violation of his probation and sentenced to two years . He is currently serving his sentence in the Colorado Territorial Correctional Facility in Cañon City , Colorado . 
 = Architecture of Scotland = 
 The architecture of Scotland includes all human building within the modern borders of Scotland , from the Neolithic era to the present day . The earliest surviving houses go back around 9500 years , and the first villages 6000 years : Skara Brae on the Mainland of Orkney being the earliest preserved example in Europe . <unk> , roundhouses , each built on an artificial island , date from the Bronze Age and stone buildings called Atlantic roundhouses and larger earthwork hill forts from the Iron Age . The arrival of the Romans from about 71 AD led to the creation of forts like that at Trimontium , and a continuous fortification between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde known as the Antonine Wall , built in the second century AD . Beyond Roman influence , there is evidence of wheelhouses and underground souterrains . After the departure of the Romans there were a series of nucleated hill forts , often utilising major geographical features , as at Dunadd and Dunbarton . 
 Castles arrived in Scotland with the introduction of feudalism in the twelfth century . Initially these were wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , but many were replaced by stone castles with a high curtain wall . In the late Middle Ages new castles were built , some on a grander scale , and others , particularly in the borders , simpler tower houses . Gunpowder weaponry led to the use of gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls adapted to resist bombardment . Medieval parish church architecture was typically simpler than in England , but there were grander ecclesiastical buildings in the Gothic style . From the early fifteenth century the introduction of Renaissance styles included the selective use of Romanesque forms in church architecture , as in the nave of Dunkeld Cathedral , followed more directly influenced Renaissance palace building from the late fifteenth century , beginning at Linlithgow . The private houses of aristocrats adopted some of these features and incorporated features of Medieval castles and tower houses into plans based on the French Château to produce the Scots Baronial style . From about 1560 , the Reformation led to the widespread destruction of church furnishings , ornaments and decoration and in post @-@ Reformation period a unique form of church emerged based on the " T " -shaped plan . 
 After the Restoration in 1660 , there was a fashion for grand private houses influenced by the Palladian style and associated with the architects Sir William Bruce and James Smith . Scotland produced some of the most significant British architects of the eighteenth century , including : Colen Campbell , James Gibbs , William Chambers and particularly Robert Adam . They looked to classical models and Edinburgh 's New Town was the focus of a classical building boom . The Industrial Revolution transformed Scottish towns , leading to urban sprawl , exemplified by tenements like those of the Gorbals in Glasgow . New towns , of designed communities like New Lanark , developed from 1800 by Robert Owen , were one solution . Sociologist Patrick Geddes ( 1854 – 1932 ) preferred " conservative surgery " : retaining the best buildings in an area and removing the worst . There was a revival of the baronial style , particularly after the rebuilding of Abbotsford House for Walter Scott from 1816 , and a parallel revival of the Gothic in church architecture . Neoclassicism was pursued by William Henry Playfair , Alexander ' Greek ' Thomson and David Rhind . The late nineteenth century saw some major engineering projects including the Forth Bridge , a cantilever bridge and one of the first major all steel constructions in the world . 
 The most significant Scottish architect of the early twentieth century , Charles Rennie Mackintosh , developed a unique and internationally influential " Glasgow style " . Architects who continued to employ styles informed by the past included James Robert Rhind and James Miller . From the mid @-@ twentieth century , architecture in Scotland became increasingly utilitarian and influenced by modernism . Key Scottish architects in this movement included Thomas S. Tait , James Stirling and James Gowan . The introduction of brutalism led to urban clearances and extensive use of the tower block . The style was also used in new towns like Glenrothes and Cumbernauld , but has received considerable criticism . More recent major architectural projects include the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre , Glasgow , the many striking modern buildings along the side of the River Clyde and the Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh . 
 = = Prehistoric era = = 
 Groups of settlers began building the first known permanent houses on what is now Scottish soil around 9500 years ago , and the first villages around 6000 years ago . The stone building at Knap of Howar at Papa Westray , Orkney is one of the oldest surviving houses in north @-@ west Europe , making use of locally gathered rubble in a dry @-@ stone construction . Skara Brae on the Mainland of Orkney also dates from this period and is Europe 's most complete Neolithic village . Neolithic habitation , burial and ritual sites are particularly common and well @-@ preserved in the Northern Isles and Western Isles , where a lack of trees led to most structures being built of local stone . From the Early and Middle Bronze Age we have evidence of the occupation of crannogs , roundhouses partially or entirely built on an artificial island , usually in lakes , rivers and estuarine waters . The peoples of early Iron Age Scotland , particularly in the north and west , lived in substantial stone buildings called Atlantic roundhouses . The remains of hundreds of these houses exist throughout the country , some merely piles of rubble , others with impressive towers and outbuildings . They date from about 800 BC to AD 300 with the most imposing structures having been created circa 200 – 100 BC . In the south and east larger earthwork hill forts survive . There is evidence for about 1 @,@ 000 Iron Age hillforts in Scotland , most located below the Clyde @-@ Forth line . They appear to have been largely abandoned in the Roman period , but some seem to have been reoccupied after their departure . Most are circular , with a single palisade around an enclosure . 
 = = Roman and post @-@ Roman constructions = = 
 The Romans began military expeditions into what is now Scotland from about 71 AD . In the summer of AD 78 Gnaeus Julius Agricola arrived in Britain to take up his appointment as the new governor and began a series of expeditions to Scotland . Two years later his legions constructed a substantial fort at Trimontium near Melrose . He is said to have pushed his armies to the estuary of the " River Taus " ( usually assumed to be the River Tay ) and established forts there , including a legionary fortress at Inchtuthil . Agricola 's successors were unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north . The fortress at Inchtuthil was dismantled before its completion and the other fortifications of the Gask Ridge were abandoned within the space of a few years . By AD 87 the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands and by the end of the first century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth . Elginhaugh fort , in Midlothian , dates to about this period as may Castle Greg in West Lothian . The Romans eventually withdrew to a line in what is now northern England , building the fortification known as Hadrian 's Wall from coast to coast . Around 141 A.D. the Romans undertook a reoccupation of southern Scotland , moving up to construct a new limes between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde . The Antonine Wall is the largest Roman construction inside Scotland . It is a sward @-@ covered wall made of turf circa 7 metres ( 20 ft ) high , with nineteen forts . It extended for 60 km ( 37 mi ) . Having taken twelve years to build , the wall was overrun and abandoned soon after AD 160 . The Romans retreated to the line of Hadrian 's Wall , with occasional expeditions that involved the building and reoccupation of forts , until their departure in the fifth century . 
 Beyond the area of Roman occupation , wheelhouses , a round house with a characteristic outer wall within which a circle of stone piers ( bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel ) were constructed , with over sixty sites identified in the west and north . Over 400 souterrains , small underground constructions , have been discovered in Scotland , many of them in the south @-@ east , and although few have been dated those that have suggest a construction date in the 2nd or 3rd centuries AD . They are usually found close to settlements ( whose timber frames are much less well @-@ preserved ) and may have been for storing perishable agricultural products . After the departure of the Romans we have evidence of a series of forts , often smaller " nucleated " constructions compared with Iron Age constructions , sometimes utilising major geographical features , as at Dunadd and Dumbarton . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 Medieval vernacular architecture made use of local materials and styles . As in England , cruck construction was used , employing pairs of curved timbers to support the roof , however they were usually hidden from view . In rural areas there was extensive use of turf to fill in the walls , sometimes on a stone base , but they were not long lasting and had to be rebuilt perhaps as often as every two or three years . In some regions , including the south @-@ west and around Dundee , solid clay walls were used , or combinations of clay , turf and stray , rendered with clay or lime to make them weatherproof . With a lack of long span structural timber , the most common building material was stone , employed in both mortared and dry stone construction . Different regions used broom , heather , straw , turfs or reeds for roofing . 
 The introduction of Christianity into Scotland from Ireland , from the sixth century , led to the construction of basic masonry @-@ built churches beginning on the west coast and islands . Medieval parish church architecture in Scotland was typically much less elaborate than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . In the Highlands they were often even simpler , many built of rubble masonry and sometimes indistinguishable from the outside from houses or farm buildings . However , from the eighth century , more sophisticated buildings emerged . Early Romanesque ashlar masonry produced block @-@ built stone buildings , like the eleventh century round tower at Brechin Cathedral and the square towers of Dunblane Cathedral and The Church of St Rule . After the eleventh century , as masonry techniques advanced , ashlar blocks became more rectangular , resulting in structurally more stable walls that could incorporate more refined architectural moulding and detailing that can be seen in corbelling , buttressing , lintels and arching . At the same time there was increasing influences from English and continental European designs , such as the Romanesque chevron pattern detailing on the piers in the nave of Dunfermline Abbey ( 1130 – 40 ) , which were modelled on details from Durham Cathedral , and the thirteenth century East @-@ end of Elgin Cathedral , which incorporated typical European Gothic mouldings and tracery . In the fifteenth century continental builders are known to have been working in Scotland . French master @-@ mason John Morrow was employed at the building of Glasgow Cathedral and the rebuilding of Melrose Abbey , both considered fine examples of Gothic architecture . The interiors of churches were often elaborate before the Reformation , with highly decorated sacrament houses , like the ones surviving at Deskford and Kinkell . The carvings at Rosslyn Chapel , created in the mid @-@ fifteenth century , elaborately depicting the progression of the seven deadly sins , are considered some of the finest in the Gothic style . Late Medieval Scottish churches also often contained elaborate burial monuments , like the Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas . The early sixteenth century saw crown steeples built on churches with royal connections , symbolising imperial monarchy , as at St. Giles Cathedral , Edinburgh . 
 Scotland is known for its dramatically placed castles , many of which date from the late medieval era . Castles , in the sense of a fortified residence of a lord or noble , arrived in Scotland as part of David I 's encouragement of Norman and French nobles to settle with feudal tenures , particularly in the south and east , and were a way of controlling the contested lowlands . These were primarily wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , of a raised mount or motte , surmounted by a wooden tower and a larger adjacent enclosure or bailey , both usually surrounded by a fosse ( a ditch ) and palisade , and connected by a wooden bridge . They varied in size from the very large such as the Bass of Inverurie , to more modest designs like Balmaclellan . In England many of these constructions were converted into stone " keep @-@ and @-@ bailey " castles in the twelfth century , but in Scotland most of those that were in continued occupation became stone castles of " enceinte " , with a high embattled curtain wall . The need for thick and high walls for defence forced the use of economic building methods , often continuing the tradition of dry @-@ stone rubble building , which were then covered with a lime render , or harled for weatherproofing and a uniform appearance . In addition to the baronial castles there were royal castles , often larger and providing defence , lodging for the itinerant Scottish court and a local administrative centre . By 1200 these included fortifications at Ayr and Berwick . In the wars of Scottish Independence Robert I adopted a policy of castle destruction , rather than allow fortresses to be easily retaken and then held by the English , beginning with his own castles at Ayr and Dumfries , and including Roxburgh and Edinburgh . 
 After the Wars of Independence , new castles began to be built , often on a grander scale as " livery and maintenance " castles , to house retained troops , like Tantallon , Lothian and Doune near Stirling , rebuilt for Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany in the fourteenth century . The largest number of late medieval fortifications in Scotland built by nobles , about 800 , were of the tower house design . Smaller versions of tower houses in southern Scotland were known as peel towers , or pele houses . The defences of tower houses were primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties and were not intended to put up significant opposition to an organised military assault , leading historian Stuart Reid to characterise them as " defensible rather than defensive " . They were typically a tall , square , stone @-@ built , crenelated building ; often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn , a walled courtyard designed to hold valuable animals securely , but not necessarily intended for serious defence . They were built extensively on both sides of the border with England and James IV 's forfeiture of the Lordship of the Isles in 1494 led to an immediate burst of castle building across the region . Gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture , with existing castles being adapted to allow the use of gunpowder weapons by the incorporation of " keyhole " gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls being adapted to resist bombardment . Ravenscraig , Kirkcaldy , begun about 1460 , is probably the first castle in the British Isles to be built as an Artillery fort , incorporating " D @-@ shape " bastions that would better resist cannon fire and on which artillery could be mounted . 
 = = Early modern = = 
 = = = Renaissance = = = 
 The impact of the Renaissance on Scottish architecture has been seen as occurring in two distinct phases . First , from the early fifteenth century the selective use of Romanesque forms in church architecture , to be followed by a second phase of more directly influenced Renaissance palace building from the late fifteenth century . The re @-@ adoption of low @-@ massive church building with round arches and pillars , in contrast to the Gothic perpendicular style that was particularly dominant in England in the late Medieval era , may have been influenced by close contacts with Rome and the Netherlands , and may have been a conscious reaction to English forms in favour of continental ones . It can be seen in the nave of Dunkeld Cathedral , begun in 1406 , the facade of St Mary 's , Haddington from the 1460s and in the chapel of Bishop Elphinstone 's Kings College , Aberdeen ( 1500 – 9 ) . About forty collegiate churches were established in Scotland in late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries . Many , like Trinity College , Edinburgh , showed a combination of Gothic and Renaissance styles . 
 The extensive building and rebuilding of royal palaces probably began under James III , accelerated under James IV , reaching its peak under James V. These works have been seen as directly reflecting the influence of Renaissance styles . Linlithgow was first constructed under James I , under the direction of master of work John de Waltoun and was referred to as a palace , apparently the first use of this term in the country , from 1429 . This was extended under James III and began to correspond to a fashionable quadrangular , corner @-@ towered Italian signorial palace of a palatium ad moden castri ( a castle @-@ style palace ) , combining classical symmetry with neo @-@ chivalric imagery . There is evidence of Italian masons working for James IV , in whose reign Linlithgow was completed and other palaces were rebuilt with Italianate proportions . James V encountered the French version of Renaissance building while visiting for his marriage to Madeleine of Valois in 1536 and his second marriage to Mary of Guise may have resulted in longer term connections and influences . Work from his reign largely disregarded the insular style adopted in England under Henry VIII and adopted forms that were recognisably European , beginning with the extensive work at Linlithgow . This was followed by re @-@ buildings at Holyrood , Falkland , Stirling and Edinburgh , described as " some of the finest examples of Renaissance architecture in Britain " . Rather than slavishly copying continental forms , most Scottish architecture incorporated elements of these styles into traditional local patterns , adapting them to Scottish idioms and materials ( particularly stone and harl ) . Work undertaken for James VI demonstrated continued Renaissance influences , with the Chapel Royal at Stirling having a classical entrance built in 1594 and the North Wing of Linlithgow , built in 1618 , using classical pediments . Similar themes can be seen in the private houses of aristocrats , as in Mar 's Wark , Stirling ( c . 1570 ) and Crichton Castle , built for the Earl of Bothwell in 1580s . 
 = = = Reformation = = = 
 From about 1560 , the Reformation revolutionised church architecture in Scotland . Calvinists rejected ornamentation in places of worship , with no need for elaborate buildings divided up by ritual , resulting in the widespread destruction of Medieval church furnishings , ornaments and decoration . There was a need to adapt and build new churches suitable for reformed services , particularly putting the pulpit and preaching at the centre of worship . Many of the earliest buildings were simple gabled rectangles , a style that continued to be built into the seventeenth century , as at Dunnottar Castle in the 1580s , Greenock ( 1591 ) and Durness ( 1619 ) , but often with windows on the south wall ( and none on the north ) , which became a unique feature of Reformation kirks . There were continuities with pre @-@ Reformation materials , with some churches using rubble , as at Kemback in Fife ( 1582 ) . Others employed stone and a few added wooden steeples , as at Burntisland ( 1592 ) . The church of Greyfriars , Edinburgh , built between 1602 and 1620 , used a rectangular layout with a largely Gothic form , but that at Dirleton ( 1612 ) , had a more sophisticated classical style . A variation of the rectangular church that developed in post @-@ Reformation Scotland was the " T " -shaped plan , often used when adapting existing churches , which allowed the maximum number of parishioners to be near the pulpit . They can be seen at Kemback and Prestonpans after 1595 . It continued to be used into the seventeenth century as at Weem ( 1600 ) , Anstruther Easter , Fife ( 1634 – 44 ) and New Cumnock ( 1657 ) . In the seventeenth century a Greek cross plan was used for churches such as Cawdor ( 1619 ) and Fenwick ( 1643 ) . In most of these cases one arm of the cross would have been closed off as a laird 's aisle , meaning that they were in effect " T " -plan churches . 
 The unique style of great private house in Scotland , later known as Scots baronial , has been located in origin to the period of the 1560s . It kept many of the features of the high walled Medieval castles that had been largely made obsolete by gunpowder weapons and may have been influenced by the French masons brought to Scotland to work on royal palaces . It drew on the tower houses and peel towers , retaining many of their external features , but with a larger ground plan , classically a stone built " Z @-@ plan " of a rectangular block with towers , as at Colliston Castle ( 1583 ) and Claypotts Castle ( 1569 – 88 ) . Particularly influential was the work of William Wallace , the king 's master mason from 1617 until his death in 1631 . He worked on the rebuilding of the collapsed North Range of Linlithgow from 1618 , Winton House for George Seton , 3rd Earl of Winton and began work on Heriot 's Hospital , Edinburgh . He adopted a distinctive style that applied elements of Scottish fortification and Flemish influences to a Renaissance plan like that used at Château d 'Ancy @-@ le @-@ Franc . This style can be seen in lords houses built at Caerlaverlock ( 1620 ) , Moray House , Edinburgh ( 1628 ) and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1675 – 89 ) , and was highly influential until the baronial style gave way to the grander English forms associated with Inigo Jones in the later seventeenth century . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 During the turbulent era of Civil Wars and the English occupation of Scotland , significant building in Scotland was largely confined to military architecture , with polygonal fortresses with triangular bastions at Ayr , Inverness and Leith in the style of the trace italienne . After the Restoration in 1660 , large scale building began again , often incorporating more comprehensive ideas of reviving classicism . Sir William Bruce ( 1630 – 1710 ) , considered " the effective founder of classical architecture in Scotland " , was the key figure in introducing the Palladian style into Scotland , following the principles of the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio ( 1508 – 80 ) . Palladio 's ideas were strongly based on the symmetry , perspective and values of the formal classical temple architecture of the Ancient Greeks and Romans , and associated in England with the designs of Inigo Jones . Bruce popularised a style of country house amongst the nobility that encouraging the move towards a more continental , leisure @-@ oriented architecture . He built and remodelled country houses , including Thirlestane Castle and Prestonfield House . Among his most significant work was his own Palladian mansion at Kinross , built on the Loch Leven estate which he had purchased in 1675 . As the Surveyor and Overseer of the Royal Works he undertook the rebuilding of the Royal Palace of Holyroodhouse in the 1670s , which gave the palace its present appearance . After the death of Charles II , Bruce lost political favour , and later , following the Glorious Revolution , he was imprisoned more than once as a suspected Jacobite . These houses were predominantly built using well @-@ cut ashlar masonry on the façades , while rubble stonework was used only for internal walls . 
 James Smith worked as a mason on the Bruce 's rebuilding of Holyrood Palace . In 1683 he was appointed to be Surveyor and Overseer of the Royal Works , and was responsible for maintenance of Holyrood Palace , and refurbished the former Holyrood Abbey as a chapel royal for King James VII . With his father @-@ in @-@ law , the master mason Robert Mylne , Smith worked on Caroline Park in Edinburgh ( 1685 ) , and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1680s ) . Smith 's country houses followed the pattern established by William Bruce , with hipped roofs and pedimented fronts , in a plain but handsome Palladian style . His Canongate Kirk ( 1688 – 90 ) is a basilica @-@ plan , with a baroque facade . In 1691 Smith designed the mausoleum of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh , in Greyfriars Kirkyard , a circular structure modelled on the Tempietto di San Pietro , designed by Donato Bramante ( 1444 – 1514 ) . Hamilton Palace ( 1695 ) was fronted by giant Corinthian columns , and a pedimented entrance , although was otherwise restrained . Dalkeith Palace ( 1702 – 10 ) was modelled after William of Orange 's palace at Het Loo in the Netherlands . 
 = = Industrial revolution = = 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 After the Act of Union , growing prosperity in Scotland led to a spate of new building , both public and private . The threat of Jacobite insurrection or invasion meant that Scotland also saw more military building than England in this period , relying on the strength of inclined and angled engineered masonry work combined with the ability of earthen toppings that could deflect and absorb artillery fire . This culminated in the construction of Fort George , near Inverness ( 1748 – 69 ) , with its projecting bastions and redoubts . Scotland produced some of the most significant architects of this era , including : Colen Campbell ( 1676 – 1729 ) , James Gibbs ( 1682 – 1754 ) , James ( 1732 – 94 ) , John ( 1721 – 92 ) and Robert Adam ( 1728 – 92 ) and William Chambers ( 1723 – 96 ) , who all created work that to some degree looked to classical models . Edinburgh 's New Town was the focus of this classical building boom in Scotland . From the mid @-@ eighteenth century it was laid out according to a plan of rectangular blocks with open squares , drawn up by James Craig and built in strong Craigleith sandstone which could be precisely cut by masons . Most residences were built as tenement flats , where , in contrast to contemporary building in England where buildings were divided vertically into different houses , they were divided horizontally , with different occupants sharing a common staircase . The smallest might have only one room , the largest several bedrooms and drawing rooms . This classicism , together with its reputation as a major centre of the Enlightenment , resulted in the city being nicknamed " The Athens of the North " . The gridiron plan , building forms and the architectural detailing would be copied by many smaller towns , although rendered in locally quarried materials . Despite this building boom , the centralisation of much of the government administration , including the king 's works , in London , meant that a number of Scottish architects spent most of all of their careers in England , where they had a major impact on Georgian architecture . 
 Colen Campbell was influenced by the Palladian style and has been credited with founding Georgian architecture . Architectural historian Howard Colvin has speculated that he was associated with James Smith and that Campbell may even have been his pupil . He spent most of his career in Italy and England and developed a rivalry with fellow Scot James Gibbs . Gibbs trained in Rome and also practised mainly in England . His architectural style did incorporate Palladian elements , as well as forms from Italian baroque and Inigo Jones , but was most strongly influenced by the interpretation of the Baroque by Sir Christopher Wren . 
 William Adam , was the foremost architect of his time in Scotland , designing and building numerous country houses and public buildings . Among his best known works are Hopetoun House near Edinburgh , and Duff House in Banff . His individual , exuberant , style was built on the Palladian style , but with Baroque details inspired by Vanbrugh and Continental architecture . After his death , his sons Robert and John took on the family business , which included lucrative work for the Board of Ordnance . Robert emerged as leader of the first phase of the neo @-@ classical revival in England and Scotland from around 1760 until his death . He rejected the Palladian style as " ponderous " and " <unk> " . However , he continued their tradition of drawing inspiration directly from classical antiquity , influenced by his four @-@ year stay in Europe . An interior designer as well as an architect , with his brothers developing the Adam style , he influenced the development of architecture , not just in Britain , but in Western Europe , North America and in Russia , where his patterns were taken by Scottish architect Charles Cameron . Adam 's main rival was William Chambers , another Scot , but born in Sweden . He did most of his work in London , with a small number of houses in Scotland . He was appointed architectural tutor to the Prince of Wales , later George III , and in 1766 , with Robert Adam , as Architect to the King . More international in outlook than Adam , he combined Neoclassicism and Palladian conventions and his influence was mediated through his large number of pupils . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 = = = = Urban growth and planning = = = = 
 Vernacular architecture of this period continued to depend on local materials and styles , increasing making use of locally mined stone . While Edinburgh made extensive use of yellow sandstone , the commercial centre and tenements of Glasgow were built in distinctive red sandstone . After a major fire in the largely wooden Aberdeen in the 1740s , the city fathers decreed that major buildings should be in the locally abundant granite , beginning a new phase in large scale mining and leading to the " granite city " , as a port , becoming a centre of a major industry in the nineteenth century , which supplied Scotland and England with faced stone , pavement slabs and pillars . 
 Often built by groups of friends and family , the homes of the poor were usually of very simple construction . Contemporaries noted that cottages in the Highlands and Islands tended to be cruder , with single rooms , slit windows and earthen floors , often shared by a large family . In contrast many Lowland cottages had distinct rooms and chambers , were clad with plaster or paint and even had glazed windows . Urban settings also included traditional thatched houses , beside the larger , stone and slate roofed town houses of merchants and urban gentry . The Industrial Revolution transformed the scale of Scottish towns , making Glasgow the " second city of the Empire " . The other side of growing wealth and planned architecture for the aristocracy and middle classes was the growth of urban sprawl , exemplified by sub @-@ urban tenements like those of the Gorbals in Glasgow , where overcrowding , lack of sanitation and general poverty contributed to disease , crime , and very low life expediency . 
 The sometimes utopian concept of the new town , aimed at improving society through the foundation of architecturally designed communities , was an important part of Scottish thinking from the mid @-@ eighteenth to the twentieth century . In addition to the New Town of Edinburgh these included the complete rebuilding of Inverary for John Campbell , 5th Duke of Argyll by John Adam and Robert Mylne , between 1772 and 1800 . From 1800 , Robert Owen 's New Lanark , designed as a self @-@ contained community , combining industry with ordered and improved living conditions , was an important milestone in the historical development of urban planning . Scotland also produced one of the major figures in urban planning in sociologist Patrick Geddes ( 1854 – 1932 ) , who developed the concept of conurbation , and discarded the idea of " sweeping clearances " to remove existing housing and the imposition of the gridiron plan , in favour of " conservative surgery " : retaining the best buildings in an area and removing the worst . He put this into practice , purchasing and improving slum tenements in James Court , and in new developments at Ramsay Garden , Edinburgh . 
 = = = = Gothic revival = = = = 
 The Gothic revival in architecture has been seen as an expression of Romanticism and according to Alvin Jackson , the Scots baronial style was " a Caledonian reading of the gothic " . Some of the earliest evidence of a revival in Gothic architecture is from Scotland . Inveraray Castle , constructed from 1746 with design input from William Adam displays the incorporation of turrets . These were largely conventional Palladian style houses that incorporated some external features of the Scots baronial style . Robert Adam 's houses in this style include Mellerstain and Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton House in East Lothian , but it is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , remodelled by Adam from 1777 . 
 Important for the adoption of the style in the early nineteenth century was Abbotsford House , the residence the novelist and poet , Sir Walter Scott . Re @-@ built for him from 1816 , it became a model for the modern revival of the baronial style . Common features borrowed from sixteenth- and seventeenth @-@ century houses included battlemented gateways , crow @-@ stepped gables , pointed turrets and machicolations . The style was popular across Scotland and was applied to many relatively modest dwellings by architects such as William Burn ( 1789 – 1870 ) , David Bryce ( 1803 – 76 ) , Edward Blore ( 1787 – 1879 ) , Edward Calvert ( c . 1847 – 1914 ) and Robert Stodart Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) and in urban contexts , including the building of Cockburn Street in Edinburgh ( from the 1850s ) as well as the National Wallace Monument at Stirling ( 1859 – 69 ) . The rebuilding of Balmoral Castle as a baronial palace and its adoption as a royal retreat from 1855 – 8 confirmed the popularity of the style . 
 In ecclesiastical architecture , a style with more in common to that in England was adopted . Important figures included Frederick Thomas Pilkington ( 1832 – 98 ) , who developed a new style of church building which accorded with the fashionable High Gothic , but which adapted it for the worship needs of the Free Church of Scotland , as at Barclay Viewforth Church , Edinburgh ( 1862 – 4 ) . Robert Rowand Anderson ( 1834 – 1921 ) , who trained in the office of George Gilbert Scott in London before returning to Edinburgh , worked mainly on small churches in the ' First Pointed ' ( or Early English ) style that is characteristic of Scott 's former assistants . By 1880 his practice was designing some of the most prestigious public and private buildings in Scotland , such as the Scottish National Portrait Gallery ; the Dome of Old College , Medical Faculty and McEwan Hall , Edinburgh University ; the Central Hotel at Glasgow Central station , the Catholic Apostolic Church in Edinburgh and Mount Stuart House on the Isle of Bute . 
 = = = = Neo @-@ classicism = = = = 
 Neoclassicism continued to be a major style into the nineteenth century . William Henry Playfair ( 1790 – 1857 ) was the designer of many of Edinburgh 's neoclassical landmarks in the New Town . Two of his finest works are the National Gallery of Scotland and the Royal Scottish Academy , which are situated in the centre of Edinburgh . However , the figure most associated with the classical style was Alexander ' Greek ' Thomson ( 1817 – 75 ) . Working mainly in Glasgow , he turned away from the Gothic style toward that of the ancient Greeks and Egyptians , as can be seen in the temple and columns that were part of the Caledonia Road Church ( 1856 ) . 
 David Rhind ( 1808 – 83 ) employed both neoclassical and Baronial styles and his work included many branches of the Commercial Bank of Scotland , including their headquarters in Edinburgh . He also designed a number of churches , local government buildings , and houses . One of his grandest schemes was Daniel Stewart 's Hospital , now Stewart 's Melville College , Edinburgh . In 1849 , he was commissioned to design the lay @-@ out of the <unk> area of Glasgow , in what until then had been farmland 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of the city centre . Rhind formed a partnership with Robert Hamilton Paterson ( 1843 – 1911 ) who executed major works for brewers , <unk> and warehouse @-@ men ( for which Edinburgh was a centre ) , including design of the Abbey , James Calder & Co . , Castle , Holyrood , Drybrough 's , Caledonian and Clydesdale Breweries ; and also work for McVitie and Price . The partnership was to execute important projects such as the Queen Victoria Memorial at Liverpool and the Royal Scots War Memorial in St Giles ' Cathedral , Edinburgh . 
 = = = = New engineering = = = = 
 The nineteenth century saw some major engineering projects including Thomas Telford 's stone Dean Bridge and iron Craigellachie Bridge . The most important was the Forth Bridge , a cantilever railway bridge over the Firth of Forth in the east of Scotland , 14 kilometres ( 9 mi ) west of central Edinburgh . Construction of a suspension bridge designed by Thomas Bouch , was stopped after the collapse of another of his works , the Tay Bridge . The project was taken over by John Fowler and Benjamin Baker , who designed a structure that was built by Glasgow @-@ based company Sir William Arrol & Co. from 1883 . It was opened on 4 March 1890 , and spans a total length of 2 @,@ 528 @.@ 7 metres ( 8 @,@ 296 ft ) . It was the first major structure in Britain to be constructed of steel ; its contemporary , the Eiffel Tower was built of wrought iron . 
 = = Twentieth century to the present = = 
 The most significant Scottish architect of the early twentieth century , having a considerable influence on European architecture , was Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1868 – 1928 ) . He mixed elements of the Scots baronial , Arts and Crafts Movement and the Art Nouveau to produce elegant modern buildings . His major work included The Willow Tearooms in Sauchiehall Street , Glasgow ( 1903 ) , Glasgow School of Art ( 1897 – 1909 ) and Hill House , Helensburgh ( 1902 – 04 ) . The influence of Mackintosh 's Glasgow style can be seen in the work of architects like James Salmon ( 1873 – 1924 ) , whose designs included the heavily glass @-@ fronted , Art Nouveau " <unk> " ( 1899 – 1902 ) on Vincent Street and the Lion Chambers , Hope Street ( 1904 – 05 ) , an early example of reinforced concrete construction . 
 In the twentieth century the distinctive Scottish use of stone architecture declined as it was replaced by cheaper alternatives such as Portland cement , concrete , and mass @-@ production brick . Stone would however be retained as a material for some housing stock in Edinburgh , Aberdeen and Dumfries , and would undergo revivals . In the twentieth century private architecture was increasingly client driven . James Robert Rhind ( 1854 – 1918 ) , the son of David Rhind , was successful in the competition for new libraries to be constructed in Glasgow following Andrew Carnegie 's gift of £ 100 @,@ 000 to the city in 1901 . His designs were selected for seven libraries , allowing him to demonstrate his individual interpretation of Edwardian Baroque architecture . Rhind 's libraries were all built with locally quarried sandstone , which blended in with the existing tenement neighbourhoods . His landmark buildings were greatly enhanced by his liberal use of columns , domes and sculpted features . James Miller ( 1860 – 1947 ) is noted for his Scottish railway stations , such as his 1901 – 05 extensions to Glasgow Central railway station , and the spectacular Wemyss Bay railway station on the Firth of Clyde . 
 After the First World War , Miller and his chief designer Richard Gunn ( 1889 – 1933 ) along with others , adapted to the growing needs of the office block . In Glasgow , with its central gridiron plan , this followed the practice in the United States of filling up entire blocks and building steel framed buildings as high as the fire marshal would allow , as in the heavily American @-@ influenced Union Bank building ( 1924 ) at St Vincent Street . From the mid @-@ twentieth century , public architecture became more utilitarian , as part of the impulse to produce a comprehensive welfare state . Thomas S. Tait ( 1882 – 1954 ) was among the most important modernist architects of the era , using pyramidal stepped designs for buildings like the St Andrew 's House , Edinburgh ( 1935 – 9 ) built for the Scottish Office , and the 1939 " Tower of Empire " for the Empire Exhibition , Scotland 1938 , held in <unk> Park . 
 During World War I the government became increasingly aware of Scotland 's housing problems , particularly after the Glasgow rent strike of 1915 . A royal commission of 1917 reported on the " unspeakably filthy privy @-@ middens in many of the mining areas , badly constructed incurably damp labourers ' cottages on farms , whole townships unfit for human occupation in the crofting counties and islands ... groups of lightless and unventilated houses in the older burghs , clotted masses of slums in the great cities " . The result was a massive programme of council house building . Many early council houses were built on greenfield sites away from the pollution of the city , often constructed of semi @-@ detached homes or terraced cottages . Knightswood , north @-@ west of Glasgow , was built as a show piece from 1923 – 9 , with a library , social centre and seven shopping " parades " . In the 1930s schemes tended to be more cheaply built , like Blackhill , Glasgow , with a thousand houses built as two and three story tenements . These building schemes were designed to rehouse those displaced by urban slum clearance , by which thousands of tenements were demolished . However , often crammed into poor land near railways or gasworks , they soon became notorious . A survey of 1936 found that almost half of Scotland 's houses were still inadequate . 
 In the post @-@ war period Scotland continued to produce important architects , including James Stirling ( 1926 – 92 ) , who with James Gowan ( 1923 – ) designed the Flats at Ham Common , London ( 1955 – 8 ) , considered a landmark in the development of modernist , brutalist residential planning , which would have a profound impact in Scotland . Their later work , almost all of it outside Scotland , would be highly influential on an international scale . The post @-@ war desire for urban regeneration would focus on the tower block , championed in Glasgow by David Gibson , convener of the city housing committee . Projects like the brutalist Red Road Flats originally offered hope of a new beginning and an escape from the overcrowded nineteenth @-@ century tenements of the city , but lacked a sufficient infrastructure and soon deteriorated . Robert Matthew ( 1906 – 75 ) and Basil Spence ( 1907 – 76 ) were responsible for redeveloping the Gorbals in Glasgow , for demolitions at the University of Edinburgh and the stark rebuilding typified by the David Hume Tower ( 1960 – 63 ) . Another solution adopted in Scotland was the building of new towns like Glenrothes ( 1948 ) and Cumbernauld ( 1956 ) , designed to take excess population from the cities . Cumbernauld was praised for its architecture when first built , but the uncompleted centre and the layout of the town in general , were receiving heavy criticism by the twenty @-@ first century : its modernist architecture described by one resident as " the lego fantasy of an unhappy child " . 
 From the 1980s Scottish architecture began to recover its reputation with works such as the building to house the Burrell Collection in Glasgow ( 1981 ) . Recent major public buildings include the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre , Glasgow ( 1997 ) , designed by Norman Foster ( 1935 – ) and known for its segmented , curving roof as " the Armadillo " , and the many striking modern buildings along the side of the River Clyde , including the Glasgow Science Centre , IMAX Cinema and Glasgow Tower ( 2001 ) , which is the highest in Scotland . The most important building of the early twentieth century is the Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh , designed by Enric Miralles ( 1955 – 2000 ) and opened in 2004 , with a design that recalls upturned fishing boats . There have been increasing attempts to preserve much of what survives from Scotland 's architectural heritage , including the great buildings and monuments , but also the classically influenced houses of towns like Edinburgh and Glasgow and the surviving tenements , many of which have been renovated , restored to their original pink and honeyed sandstone from the black fronts created by pollution and brought up to modern standards of accommodation . Urban regeneration has also been attempted in areas of post @-@ industrial decline , like the Merchant City in Glasgow , which was returned to housing from the 1980s , with warehouse loft conversions and more recently the waterfront in Edinburgh , resulting in a return of populations to major urban centres . 
 = = List of Scottish architects = = 
 Robert Adam ( 1728 – 92 ) 
 William Adam ( 1689 – 1748 ) Father of Robert and architect and builder 
 Robert Rowand Anderson ( 1834 – 1921 ) 
 Sir William Bruce ( c . 1630 – 1710 ) 
 Edward Calvert ( c . 1847 – 1914 ) 
 Charles Cameron ( 1743 – 1812 ) 
 Colen Campbell ( 1676 – 1729 ) 
 Alan Dunlop ( 1958 – ) 
 James Leslie Findlay ( 1868 – 1952 ) 
 James Gibbs ( 1682 – 1754 ) 
 Ian G Lindsay ( 1906 – 66 ) 
 Robert Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) 
 Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1868 – 1928 ) , architect , designer and watercolourist , husband of Margaret Macdonald ( 1864 – 1933 ) , artist and designer 
 Robert Matthew ( 1906 – 75 ) 
 James Miller ( 1860 – 1947 ) 
 Gordon Murray ( 1954 – ) 
 Robert Hamilton Paterson ( 1843 – 1911 ) 
 James Playfair ( 1755 – 94 ) , father of William Henry 
 William Henry Playfair ( 1790 – 1857 ) 
 David Rhind ( 1808 – 83 ) 
 James Robert Rhind ( 1854 – 1918 ) 
 Archibald Simpson ( 1790 – 1847 ) 
 John Smith ( 1781 – 1852 ) 
 William Smith ( 1817 – 1891 ) 
 Basil Spence ( 1907 – 76 ) 
 James Stirling ( 1926 – 92 ) 
 Thomas S. Tait ( 1882 – 1954 ) 
 Alexander ' Greek ' Thomson ( 1817 – 75 ) 
 Frederick Thomas Pilkington ( 1832 – 98 ) 
 = Operation Peppermint = 
 Operation Peppermint was the codename given during World War II to preparations by the Manhattan Project and the European Theater of Operations United States Army ( ETOUSA ) to counter the danger that the Germans might disrupt the June 1944 Normandy landings with radioactive poisons . 
 In response , the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and the <unk> Instrument Company in Cleveland developed portable radiation detection devices suitable for use in the field . In 1944 , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , director of the Manhattan Project , sent Major Arthur V. Peterson to brief General Dwight D. Eisenhower and his senior staff officers at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) . 
 In response , ETOUSA initiated Operation Peppermint . Special equipment was prepared . Eleven survey meters and a Geiger counter were shipped to England in early 1944 , along with 1 @,@ 500 film packets , which were used to measure radiation exposure . Another 25 survey meters , 5 Geiger counters and 1 @,@ 500 film packets were held in storage in the United States , but in readiness to be shipped by air with the highest priority . Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use , and Signal Corps personnel in its maintenance . The equipment was held in readiness , but the preparations were not needed , because the Germans had not developed such weapons . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the Manhattan Project assumed responsibility for the development of nuclear weapons in September 1942 , it also assumed responsibility for the development of suitable countermeasures . At the time , the threat posed by the German nuclear energy project was taken very seriously . Consideration was given to issuing a public warning of the danger of a German nuclear attack on the United States , but the director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , considered the likelihood of this to be sufficiently remote that he rejected the notion of taking so drastic a step . 
 A subcommittee of the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee , chaired by James B. Conant , and consisting of himself , Arthur Compton and Harold Urey , was appointed to look into the issue , and it similarly assessed the danger as low , but still sufficient to warrant taking some precautions . A program was initiated by the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and the <unk> Instrument Company in Cleveland to develop radiation detection devices suitable for use in the field . Some 48 portable detection meters were built in 1943 , half of which were capable of detecting 0 to 10 roentgens per day , while the other half could detect from 0 to 100 roentgens per day . Instruments sets were stored at Manhattan District offices in Boston , Chicago , New York , San Francisco and Washington , D.C. , and the area engineer and some other officers were instructed in their use . A special team of scientists was created at the Metallurgical Laboratory who could respond to any reports of the use of nuclear weapons or radioactive poisons . 
 It was considered more likely that Germany might employ such weapons against the United Kingdom , so four officers from the European Theater of Operations United States Army ( ETOUSA ) were summoned to Chicago where they were given a top secret briefing by the Manhattan District 's Chicago area engineer , Major Arthur V. Peterson . They were told about possible forms such an attack might take , and what the effects and symptoms of them were , and they were given survey instruments and shown how to use them . They were enjoined to tell other officers in the theater to report unexplained fogging of film or illnesses with symptoms corresponding to the effects of radiation sickness . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As the date for the Normandy landings ( codenamed Operation Overlord ) drew near in early 1944 , Groves considered that risk was sufficient to send an officer to brief the Supreme Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower of the possible use of radioactive poisons , particularly plutonium and fission products that might be created in their nuclear reactors . On 8 April 1944 , Peterson reported to the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) and met with Eisenhower , his Chief of Staff , Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith , Assistant Chief of Staff ( G @-@ 2 ) ( Intelligence ) , Major General John Whiteley , and his Assistant Chief of Staff ( G @-@ 3 ) ( Operations ) , Major General Harold R. Bull . 
 They considered creating an Allied plan to counter the danger , but Whiteley said that he would have to consult with the British command before this could be approved . Colonel G. S. <unk> from G @-@ 3 was then ordered to prepare an American plan , under the codename Operation Peppermint . Further briefings were given to Admiral Harold Stark , and Lieutenant Generals Carl Spaatz and John C. H. Lee , and Eisenhower also wrote to Lieutenant General Hastings Ismay , the Chief of Staff of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Winston Churchill to inform the British Chiefs of Staff , but no British or American commanders actually participating in Operation Overlord were informed . The British subsequently adopted a similar plan to Operation Peppermint , and SHAEF assumed responsibility for coordinating the British and American efforts . Scientific assistance was provided by the Cavendish Laboratory . 
 Operation Peppermint provided for : 
 Centralization of all detection equipment and knowledge of its operation under ETOUSA ; 
 Establishment of a means of detecting the use of radioactive substances ; and 
 Channels for the reporting of such incidents to G @-@ 3 ETOUSA for immediate action . 
 Under Operation Peppermint , orders went out for medical personnel to report the details of any fogging or blackening of photographic or X @-@ ray film , and medical officers were ordered to report diseases of unknown etiology involving fatigue , nausea , leukopenia or erythema . Eleven survey meters and a Geiger counter were shipped to England in early 1944 , along with 1 @,@ 500 film packets , which were used to measure radiation exposure . Another 25 survey meters , 5 Geiger counters and 1 @,@ 500 film packets were held in storage in the United States , but in readiness to be shipped by air with the highest priority . Peterson instructed Chemical Warfare Service personnel in the use of the equipment , and Signal Corps personnel in its maintenance . 
 In the weeks leading up to D @-@ Day , full @-@ scale rehearsals of Operation Peppermint were carried out in order to test the plan and the equipment . Ground and aerial surveys were also carried out to detect the presence of radioactive substances in troop concentration areas , and at sites in the United Kingdom that had been bombed , but none were detected . 
 = = Outcome = = 
 The Germans had not developed , and did not employ radioactive poisons , so Operation Peppermint was never put into effect . After VE @-@ Day , the equipment and all the documents relating to Operation Peppermint were collected , returned to the United States , and handed over to the Manhattan Project . However , the effort put into developing portable radiation detection equipment was not wasted . Survey teams from the Manhattan Project used the equipment to assess the fallout from the Trinity nuclear test , the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , and Operation Crossroads , during which 10 @,@ 000 film badges were used . 
 = Thored = 
 Thored ( Old English : <unk> or <unk> ; fl . 979 – 992 ) was a 10th @-@ century ealdorman of York , ruler of the southern half of the old Kingdom of Northumbria on behalf of the king of England . He was the son of either Gunnar or Oslac , northern ealdormen . If he was the former , he may have attained adulthood by the 960s , when a man of his name raided Westmorland . Other potential appearances in the records are likewise uncertain until 979 , the point from which Thored 's period as ealdorman can be accurately dated . 
 Although historians differ in their opinions about his relationship , if any , to Kings Edgar the Peaceable and Edward the Martyr , it is generally thought that he enjoyed a good relationship with King Æthelred II . His daughter Ælfgifu married Æthelred . Thored was ealdorman in Northumbria for much of his reign , disappearing from the sources in 992 after being appointed by Æthelred to lead an expedition against the Vikings . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Thored appears to have been of at least partially Scandinavian origin , suggested by the title applied to him in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle entry for 992 . Here , the ealdorman of Hampshire is called by the English title " ealdorman " , while Thored himself is styled by the Scandinavian word eorl ( i.e. Earl ) . 
 Two accounts of Thored 's origins have been offered by modern historians . The first is that he was a son of Oslac , ealdorman of York from 966 until his exile in 975 . This argument is partly based on the assertion by the Historia Eliensis , that Oslac had a son named Thorth ( i.e. " Thored " ) . The other suggestion , favoured by most historians , is that he was the son of a man named Gunnar . This Gunnar is known to have held land in the East and North Ridings of Yorkshire . 
 If the latter suggestion is correct , then Thored 's first appearance in history is the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recension D ( EF ) ' s entry for 966 , which recorded the accession of Oslac to the ealdormanry of southern Northumbria : 
 In this year , Thored , Gunnar 's son , harried <unk> land , and , in this same year , Oslac succeeded to the office of ealdorman . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon scholar Frank Stenton believed that this was an act of regional faction @-@ fighting , rather than , as had been suggested by others , Thored carrying out the orders of King Edgar the Peaceable . This entry is , incidentally , the first mention of <unk> land , that is , Westmorland . Gunnar seems to have been ealdorman earlier in the decade , for in one charter ( surviving only in a later cartulary ) dated to 963 and three Abingdon charters dated to 965 , an ealdorman ( dux ) called Gunnar is mentioned . 
 Thored may be the Thored who appears for the first time in charter attestations during the reign of King Edgar ( 959 – 75 ) , his earliest possible appearance being in 964 , witnessing a grant of land in Kent by King Edgar to St Peter 's , Ghent . This is uncertain because the authenticity of this particular charter is unclear . A charter issued by Edgar in 966 , granting land in Oxfordshire to a woman named Ælfgifu , has an illegible ealdorman witness signature beginning with Þ , which may be Thored . 
 = = Ealdorman = = 
 Thored 's governorship as ealdorman , based on charter attestations , cannot be securely dated before 979 . He did attest royal charters during the reign of Æthelred II , the first in 979 , six in 983 , one in 984 , three in 985 , one in 988 , appearing in such attestations for the last time in 989 . It is possible that such appearances represent more than one Thored , though that is not a generally accepted theory . His definite predecessor , Oslac , was expelled from England in 975 . The historian Richard Fletcher thought that Oslac 's downfall may have been the result of opposing the succession of Edward the Martyr , enemy and brother of Æthelred II . What is known about Thored 's time as ealdorman is that he did not have a good relationship with Oswald , Archbishop of York ( 971 – 92 ) . In a memorandum written by Oswald , a group of estates belonging to the archdiocese of York was listed , and Oswald noted that " I held them all until Thored came to power ; then was St Peter [ to whom York was dedicated ] robbed " . One of the estates allegedly lost was Newbald , an estate given by King Edgar to a man named Gunnar , suggesting to historian Dorothy Whitelock that Thored may just have been reclaiming land " wrongly alienated from his family " . 
 His relationship with King Edgar is unclear , particularly given the uncertainty of Thored 's paternity , Oslac being banished from England in 975 , the year of Edgar 's death . Richard Fletcher , who thought Thored was the son of Gunnar , argued that Thored 's raid on Westmorland was caused by resentment derived from losing out on the ealdormanry to Oslac , and that Edgar thereafter confiscated various territories as punishment . The evidence for this is that Newbald , granted by Edgar to Gunnar circa 963 , was bought by Archbishop <unk> from the king sometime before 971 , implying that the king had seized the land . 
 Thored 's relationship with the English monarchy under Æthelred II seems to have been good . Ælfgifu , the first wife of King Æthelred II , was probably Thored 's daughter . Evidence for this is that in the 1150s Ailred of Rievaulx in his De <unk> regum Anglorum wrote that the wife of Æthelred II was the daughter of an ealdorman ( comes ) called Thored ( Thorth ) . Historian Pauline Stafford argued that this marriage was evidence that Thored had been a local rather than royal appointment to the ealdormanry of York , and that Æthelred II 's marriage was an attempt to woo Thored . Stafford was supported in this argument by Richard Fletcher . 
 = = Death = = 
 The date of Thored 's death is uncertain , but his last historical appearance came in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , recension C ( D , E ) , under the year 992 , which reported the death of Archbishop Oswald and an expedition against a marauding Scandinavian fleet : 
 In this year the holy Archbishop Oswald left this life and attained the heavenly life , and Ealdorman Æthelwine [ of East Anglia ] died in the same year . Then the king and all his counsellors decreed that all the ships that were any use should be assembled at London . And the king then entrusted the expedition to the leadership of Ealdorman Ælfric ( of Hampshire ) , Earl Thored and Bishop <unk> [ <unk> London or of Rochester . ] and Bishop <unk> [ of Dorchester ] , and they were to try if they could entrap the Danish army anywhere at sea . Then Ealdorman Ælfric sent someone to warn the enemy , and then in the night before the day on which they were to have joined battle , he absconded by night from the army , to his own disgrace , and then the enemy escaped , except that the crew of one ship was slain . And then the Danish army encountered the ships from East Anglia and from London , and they made a great slaughter there and captured the ship , all armed and equipped , on which the ealdorman was . 
 Scandinavians led by Óláfr Tryggvason had been raiding England 's coast since the previous year , when they killed Ealdorman <unk> of Essex at the Battle of Maldon . 
 Historians think that Thored was either killed fighting these Scandinavians , or else survived , but became disgraced through defeat or treachery . Fletcher speculated that Thored was removed from office and replaced by the Mercian Ælfhelm as a result of his failure against the Scandinavians . Another historian , William Kapelle , believed Thored was removed because of his Scandinavian descent , an argument based on the Worcester Chronicle 's claim , added to the text borrowed from the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , that Fræna , Godwine and Frythegyst fled a battle against the Danes in the following year because " they were Danish on their father 's side " . 
 A man named Æthelstan who died at the Battle of <unk> in 1010 , " the king 's <unk> " , was probably Thored 's son . The term <unk> means either " son @-@ in @-@ law " or " brother @-@ in @-@ law " , so this Æthelstan could also have been Thored 's grandson by an unknown intermediary . Thored 's immediate successor was Ælfhelm , who appears witnessing charters as ealdorman from 994 . 
 = Bombing of Yawata ( June 1944 ) = 
 The Bombing of Yawata on the night of 15 / 16 June 1944 was the first air raid on the Japanese home islands conducted by United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) strategic bombers during World War II . The raid was undertaken by 75 B @-@ 29 Superfortress heavy bombers staging from bases in China . Only 47 of these aircraft bombed the raid 's primary target , the Imperial Iron and Steel Works at Yawata in northern Kyūshū , and little damage was caused . Five B @-@ 29s were lost in accidents during the operation and two were destroyed by Japanese aircraft . 
 While the raid did not achieve its aims , it had other effects . It raised Japanese civilians ' awareness that their country was being defeated and received unduly positive media coverage in the United States . Intelligence gathered by the B @-@ 29s also revealed weaknesses in Japan 's air defenses and the raid was the first of many on Japan . Yawata was attacked again by B @-@ 29s operating from China on 20 August 1944 and much of the city was destroyed in a fire bombing raid conducted by B @-@ 29s based in the Mariana Islands on 8 August 1945 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) raid on Japan took place on 18 April 1942 when 16 B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers flying from an aircraft carrier attacked several cities during the Doolittle Raid . Although this raid caused little damage , it boosted morale in the United States . The Japanese government responded to the attack by both increasing the number of fighter units based in the home islands and conducting an offensive in the Pacific Ocean which ended in defeat during the Battle of Midway . The USAAF was not able to mount further attacks on the Japanese home islands after this raid , however , as none of its combat aircraft had sufficient range to reach this area from bases in China or the Pacific until the B @-@ 29 Superfortress heavy bomber was ready for combat . 
 The B @-@ 29 Superfortress had a difficult introduction into service . Work began on designing the bomber in early 1940 and the first prototype flew on 21 September 1942 . The Superfortress was the largest combat aircraft of World War II and boasted a heavy maximum bomb load , long range and powerful defensive armament . The B @-@ 29 also incorporated a number of new features such as a pressurized cabin and remote @-@ controlled turrets . While 1 @,@ 664 B @-@ 29s had been ordered by the USAAF before the aircraft first flew , its development was set back by several months after the second prototype crashed on 18 February 1943 and problems with the design were gradually solved . The 58th Bombardment Wing was formed in June 1943 to operate the USAAF 's first B @-@ 29s but it did not begin receiving these aircraft until October . The slow delivery of B @-@ 29s and mechanical problems with the aircraft meant that the wing lagged behind its training schedule , and only became capable of deployment in March 1944 after the so @-@ called " Battle of Kansas " program began to produce combat @-@ ready aircraft . 
 In late 1943 the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff approved a proposal to begin the strategic air campaign against the Japanese home islands and East Asia by basing B @-@ 29s in India and establishing forward airfields in areas of China . This strategy , which was designated Operation Matterhorn , required the construction of large airstrips near Chengdu in inland China which would be supplied by Allied cargo aircraft and be used to refuel B @-@ 29s traveling from bases in Bengal en route to bombing targets in Japan . XX Bomber Command was assigned responsibility for this effort and its ground crew began to leave the United States for India by sea in December 1943 . The Twentieth Air Force was formed in April 1944 to oversee all B @-@ 29 operations . In an unprecedented move , the commander of the USAAF , General Henry H. Arnold , took personal command of this unit and ran it from the Pentagon . The 58th Bombardment Wing was XX Bomber Command 's main combat unit , and its movement from Kansas to India took place from April to mid @-@ May . While the wing had not completed training at the time it left for India , its combat groups were more experienced than most newly deployed USAAF bomber units . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 After establishing itself in India , XX Bomber Command under the command of Brigadier General Kenneth Wolfe undertook various tasks to prepare for raids against Japan . Foremost among these was stockpiling fuel at the airfields in China . Until late 1944 , USAAF Air Transport Command aircraft did not transport fuel for XX Bomber Command , and this task was instead undertaken by the B @-@ 29s . This arrangement proved inefficient , however , as 12 B @-@ 29 sorties between India and China were needed to transport enough fuel and other supplies to enable one of the heavy bombers to fly a round trip between China and Japan . As a result , it took longer than expected to build up sufficient stockpiles in China to allow B @-@ 29 operations to commence . Moreover , continued technical problems with the Superfortress , and particularly their Wright R @-@ 3350 engines , resulted in many of XX Bomber Command 's aircraft being unserviceable and in need of modification at all times . 
 XX Bomber Command conducted its first combat operation on 5 June 1944 . On this day 98 B @-@ 29s were dispatched from bases in India to attack targets in Bangkok , Thailand , as a ' dress rehearsal ' for more ambitious operations against Japan and targets in South East Asia . Although little damage was done and five B @-@ 29s were lost due to flying accidents and technical faults , the operation was rated a success by XX Bomber Command as it provided useful combat experience for the bomber crews as well as data on how the B @-@ 29 performed in action . 
 On 6 June , Wolfe received a message from Arnold informing him that the Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted a raid to be conducted against Japan as soon as possible . The goals of this operation were to relieve pressure on Chinese forces which were being attacked by the Japanese and to support the invasion of Saipan . Arnold 's message also asked how many B @-@ 29s could be dispatched on 15 and 20 June . At the time , the first raid on Japan was tentatively scheduled for 23 June , when sufficient supplies were expected to be available in China to support 100 B @-@ 29 sorties . Wolfe replied stating that 50 B @-@ 29s could be used on 15 June and 55 if the operation was conducted on the 20th of the month . Arnold regarded these numbers as too low , and directed that a raid by at least 70 B @-@ 29s be conducted against Japan on 15 June . Following this order , XX Bomber Command 's B @-@ 29s and transport aircraft embarked on an intensive effort to move fuel to China . Further fuel supplies were made available to the heavy bombers by reducing the activities of USAAF fighter units based in China . During the same period the command 's ground crews reconditioned as many B @-@ 29s as possible to improve their reliability . 
 The target selected for the first raid on Japan was the Imperial Iron and Steel Works at Yawata , an industrial city about 1 @,@ 600 miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) from Chengdu . This was the single most important facility in Japan 's steel industry as it produced 24 percent of the country 's total output of rolled steel . The facility was dependent on three coke plants and the largest of these was selected as the designated aiming point for the B @-@ 29s . Nearby <unk> harbor , which was an important industrial port , was designated as the raid 's secondary target . The selection of Yawata 's steel works as the first target to be attacked was in accordance with a decision made by the Twentieth Air Force on 1 April 1944 which assigned the highest priority to attacking Japan 's steel and coke industry . It was decided to conduct the raid at night with each B @-@ 29 bombing individually as the aircraft lacked the range needed to conduct a more fuel @-@ intensive formation flight between the forward air bases and Yawata . 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 Despite an elaborate deception plan , which included planted news stories claiming that B @-@ 29s would be deployed as bombers in Europe but only be used as armed transports in the China Burma India Theater , the Japanese military detected the preparation of B @-@ 29 bases in India and China . Moreover , Japanese agents in China reported on all B @-@ 29 movements , giving hours of warning time before raids on the home islands . Japanese intelligence services deduced that once logistical preparations were complete the heavy bombers would attack factories in northern Kyūshū and that the first raid would be made at night . On 26 April Japanese fighters encountered a B @-@ 29 for the first time when two Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 " Oscars " attacked and damaged a lone B @-@ 29 flying near the China – India border . 
 The Japanese military began transferring fighter aircraft from China and the Pacific to the home islands in early 1944 in anticipation of B @-@ 29 raids . In June 1944 Yawata lay within the Western District of Japan 's four regional defense commands . The 19th Air Brigade was formed in June 1944 to command fighter units in the Western District , and comprised the 4th and 59th Air Regiments . The 4th Air Regiment was stationed at <unk> Airfield and was equipped with 35 Kawasaki Ki @-@ 45 Toryu twin @-@ engined heavy fighters , of which 25 were operational in mid @-@ June , and had the brigade 's best trained pilots . The inexperienced 59th Air Regiment was based at Ashiya Fukuoka Airfield and operated 25 Kawasaki Ki @-@ 61 Hien single @-@ engined fighters , though only about seven or eight were operational . ( I ) In addition , Yawata and northern Kyūshū were defended by anti @-@ aircraft artillery units and barrage balloons . Radar stations and a network of lookout posts provided early warning of raids . 
 The 19th Air Brigade 's primary mission was to defend the industrial facilities in northern Kyūshū , and particularly the iron works at Yawata . The brigade 's plans for the defense of the Western District called for its interceptor aircraft to be concentrated over Yawata and not move far from the area . While this inflexible deployment was considered unsatisfactory by the 19th Air Brigade , it was deemed necessary as few aircraft were available , the only searchlight units needed to facilitate night operations were stationed near Yawata and northern Kyūshū was regarded by the Army as being the most important region in the Western District . Prior to the raid on Yawata the 19th Air Brigade undertook joint planning with anti @-@ aircraft units and implemented a training program which included practice in responding to alerts and night flying . 
 = = Raid = = 
 The 58th Bombardment Wing 's B @-@ 29s began moving from India to the forward bases in China on 13 June . By 15 June , 83 Superfortresses had reached the four forward airfields around Chengdu , though at least 12 turned back before reaching China and another crashed causing the death of its entire crew . Each of the aircraft had departed India carrying the 2 short tons ( 1 @,@ 800 kg ) of 500 @-@ pound bombs they would use in the raid . A large number of staff officers , including eight generals , also traveled to Chengdu to observe the operation but were not allowed to participate in the raid . The bomber crews were joined by eight journalists and three news photographers , however . At the time the USAAF had few recent photos of Japanese industrial areas and the bomber crews were briefed on Yawata using maps and photos from the late 1920s and early 1930s . 
 The Superfortresses began to depart their bases at 16 : 16 local time on 15 June . The raiding force was led by the 58th Bombardment Wing 's commander , Brigadier General Laverne G. Saunders . Of the 75 aircraft dispatched one crashed immediately after taking off with no casualties and a further four turned back suffering mechanical problems . The remaining aircraft proceeded on a direct course to Okino Island where they turned for the run @-@ in to Yawata . Each of the 58th Bombardment Wing 's four groups sent two aircraft ahead to mark the target and the other aircraft flew in a long bomber stream ; both of these tactics had been adopted from those used by the British Royal Air Force 's Bomber Command in Europe . The raiders were detected by Japanese Army and Army Air Force units in China . These reports were passed onto the 19th Air Brigade , which estimated that the bombers were bound for northern Kyūshū and would arrive there at about midnight local time . A radar station and lookout posts on Cheju @-@ Do subsequently detected the bombers from 23 : 31 to 00 : 30 local time . An air raid alarm was issued at 00 : 24 and 24 aircraft of the 4th Air Regiment began to take off three minutes later to patrol over northern Kyūshū . The 59th Air Regiment was not scrambled as its pilots had not worked with those of the 4th Air Regiment in night operations , its aircraft were suffering from mechanical problems and it was feared that the B @-@ 29s would sight and attack the base at Ashiya . 
 B @-@ 29s began to arrive over Yawata at 00 : 38 local time and the attack on the city lasted almost two hours . Only 15 of the American aircraft were able to aim their bombs visually as the city was blacked out and obscured by smoke or haze ; the other 32 bombed by radar . Two further B @-@ 29s bombed <unk> harbor and another five struck targets of opportunity ; overall 107 tons of bombs were dropped during the raid . After the first bombs were released regular updates on the operation were transmitted to the Twentieth Air Force 's headquarters in Washington , from where they were relayed to Arnold who was in London at the time . The raiders were met with heavy but inaccurate anti @-@ aircraft fire and the searchlights stationed around Yawata were not effective . The 4th Air Regiment achieved the only kill of the night when one of its fighters shot down a B @-@ 29 . The Regiment 's other aircraft struggled to make contact with the bombers and achieved few interceptions . 
 The B @-@ 29s ' return flight to China was largely uneventful . One of the Superfortresses was strafed and destroyed by Japanese aircraft after landing at <unk> with engine trouble and a further two aircraft crashed with the loss of their entire crews and a correspondent from the magazine Newsweek . Overall American losses in the raid were seven B @-@ 29s destroyed and a further six damaged by anti @-@ aircraft guns ; 57 airmen and one journalist were killed aboard these aircraft . Many of the B @-@ 29s were stranded in China for several days after the raid due to fuel shortages there , and only returned to India after Wolfe borrowed 15 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 57 @,@ 000 l ) of fuel from the 312th Fighter Wing 's supplies . During this period the bombers were highly vulnerable to Japanese retaliatory raids , but none came about . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Little damage was caused by the raid on Yawata . On 18 June a USAAF Fourteenth Air Force aircraft overflew the city and photographed the target area . These photos showed that only a single bomb had landed within the Imperial Iron and Steel Works complex , and it had hit a power house 3 @,@ 700 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) from the nearest coke oven . Light damage had also been inflicted on Kokura Arsenal and other industrial and civilian buildings in the area . Despite a USAAF policy of encouraging factual reportage of B @-@ 29 operations , the raid 's results were overstated in the U.S. media . The light combat losses suffered by the raiders and electronic intelligence collected by the B @-@ 29s revealed the ineffectiveness of Japanese radar and air defenses . As a result , the USAAF dispatched a single photo reconnaissance B @-@ 29 to overfly much of Japan and Korea on 21 June . This sortie was successful , and greatly improved U.S. intelligence holdings on these areas . 
 The Yawata raid revealed serious shortcomings in Japan 's air defenses . While the 19th Air Brigade initially claimed to have shot down eight B @-@ 29s and damaged a further four , it was soon determined that only two of the bombers had been destroyed . This loss ratio was considered too low to defeat attacks on the home islands . The raid demonstrated that Japan had too few air bases and not enough aircraft were available for night operations . It was also found that the Toryu fighter was not well suited to intercepting B @-@ 29s as it was slower than the bombers , too lightly armed and most aircraft lacked radar . While the air raid alert system had proved successful in this instance , the radars which detected the American aircraft had been unable to determine their altitude and it was decided that there was a need to further expand radar coverage . The performance of the 131st Anti Aircraft Regiment during the raid was judged to be so poor that its commander was transferred to Manchuria . News reports of the Yawata raid and successful U.S. landing at Saipan on the same day also indicated to Japanese civilians that the war was not going well . In response to the raid Japanese Government ministers urged families living the country 's four major cities to evacuate their children to rural areas . 
 The 15 / 16 June 1944 raid on Yawata marked the beginning of the USAAF 's strategic bombing campaign against Japan . The city was struck again by B @-@ 29s during daylight and night raids on 20 August , but no serious damage was caused . XX Bomber Command conducted 49 raids from its bases in China and India between June 1944 and March 1945 , of which nine were made on targets in the Japanese home islands , but Operation Matterhorn did not achieve its goals . Despite initial problems , XXI Bomber Command 's operations from the Mariana Islands , which began on 28 October 1944 , proved much more effective . As a result , XX Bomber Command was transferred to the Mariana Islands in early 1945 . Yawata was targeted again by B @-@ 29s on 8 August 1945 , two days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima . On this day the city was attacked by 221 B @-@ 29s escorted by three groups of P @-@ <unk> Thunderbolt fighters including the 318th fighter group based on Ie Shima off the coast of Okinawa . The bombers were armed with incendiary bombs and the resulting firestorm destroyed 21 percent of Yawata 's urban area . 
 = PJ Haarsma = 
 Philip @-@ Jon Haarsma / <unk> / , more commonly known as PJ Haarsma , is a Canadian born science fiction author best known for his creation of the Rings of Orbis universe , which encompasses The Softwire series of books . Haarsma created a free , online role @-@ playing game , also called the Rings of Orbis , set in the same universe . Both the book @-@ series and the game target young , often reluctant readers in an attempt to encourage them by rewarding them for reading . 
 Haarsma developed a school presentation program in which he discusses The Softwire books , astronomy , and other science fiction and science fact topics . He is also one of the co @-@ founders of Kids Need to Read , a United States Internal Revenue Code 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) tax exempt public charity that purchases books to donate to underfunded schools and libraries . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Philip @-@ Jon Haarsma was born on June 5 , 1964 , in Georgetown , Ontario . Though he was named after his grandfathers , Philip and Jon , he went simply by " Jon " while growing up . Later , while attending McMaster University in Hamilton , Ontario , where he received a Bachelor of Science degree , he began to use his initials , " PJ " , and his books are published under the name " PJ Haarsma " . 
 After he moved to the United States in 1989 , Haarsma worked as a fashion and commercial photographer in New York City and Miami . He received many photography awards , including an honorable mention at the Cannes Lion Awards in 1996 . Haarsma owned a small production company called <unk> Films , Inc . The company produced one movie ( Devious Beings , 2002 ) , and a digital series called Con Man starring Alan Tudyk and Nathan Fillion and several corporate ads for clients such as Hewlett Packard and Nokia . For 15 years , <unk> Films focused on the production of advertisements . 
 Haarsma lives in Los Angeles with his wife , sci @-@ fi fantasy artist Marisa Grieco , and their daughters Skylar and Zoe . 
 = = Con Man ( web series ) = = 
 PJ Haarsma is the producer of the Con Man created by Alan Tudyk and co @-@ produced by Nathan Fillion . 
 = = Rings of Orbis = = 
 At the age of 38 , Haarsma was not satisfied with his professional life . He began to keep a daily journal , writing about anything ( and everything ) that came to his mind — until eventually " Johnny T came onto [ his ] page . " Johnny T is the main character , Johnny Turnbull , of Haarsma 's The Softwire series . Haarsma chose to give The Softwire a sci @-@ fi setting due to a love of science fiction , and to target a young adult audience with his novels so that children could discover and learn to enjoy the genre . 
 The Softwire is actually a story that Haarsma began imagining in his childhood . As a teenager , he worked at his parents ' ceramic factory during the summers , hauling fifty pound molds around in the extreme heat of a kiln room . To Haarsma , it felt similar to what the children of his books might feel as slaves . In addition to these experiences , there is a more prominent influence on the premise of The Softwire — that is , there is a mystery of a journey to a new , unknown place to start a new life . Growing up , Haarsma dreamed of moving to the United States ; and in his twenties , he actually did . While there , living in New York , Miami , San Francisco and Los Angeles , Haarsma witnessed immigrants struggling to get by . He tried to imagine what caused them to risk everything , and to move to another country , and to have a chance at something better . It is this journey ( and struggle ) that is prevalent in The Softwire . 
 In The Softwire , a group of human children are orphaned in outer space . They are forced into indentured servitude on the Rings of Orbis , four planet @-@ like rings around a wormhole . They must spend four years as slaves or <unk> before they are eligible to become Citizens . Each year they are the property of a new owner on a separate ring : Orbis 1 , Orbis 2 , Orbis 3 , and Orbis 4 . They are forced into labor to do whatever task their new owner requires . 
 When the children arrive , they soon discover that thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Johnny Turnbull ( JT ) , is the first human <unk> , a boy who has the ability to enter any computer with just his mind . To the older Citizens , a slave who can enter at will the massive computer which controls the Rings of Orbis makes JT very valuable and drives the Rings to the brink of war . As the central computer begins to malfunction , the Citizens connive , conspire , and even kill to own JT and his sister . 
 While there are other humans besides the children on the Rings , the majority of the inhabitants are of alien species . The Keepers are an intelligent species of two @-@ headed beings who act as the overseers . Other species encountered include <unk> , Choi , <unk> , and <unk> , all of which become interesting roles for young players to choose from in the game , Rings of Orbis . 
 = = = Rings of Orbis game = = = 
 Haarsma 's novels are accompanied by a free , online , role @-@ playing game called Rings of Orbis which acts as a visual companion to the books and is set in the same universe . Players are sometimes required to use information from the books in order to solve puzzles and to unlock areas within the game . Pairing a video game with a novel for young readers , Haarsma says , “ brings the book into their world , as opposed to going the other way around . ” 
 Haarsma and a team of artists also created many different alien races specifically for the game . The team includes Haarsma 's wife Marisa Grieco , Igor <unk> , Stephan <unk> , Dwayne Harris , and Neil Blevins . 
 The game works to encourage reluctant readers , especially boys , by giving them an interactive game through which to relate to the mysteries found within the books themselves . Players complete quests and earn in @-@ game currency which they can then spend on in @-@ game items designed by Haarsma , all the while they compete to become the best Citizen of the Rings of Orbis . In 2008 , the game was featured in a front page New York Times article about encouraging reluctant readers with video games . 
 = = Promotion of literacy = = 
 = = = Kids Need to Read = = = 
 While speaking at schools across the United States , Haarsma noticed how some school librarians were having trouble finding funds to purchase The Softwire books after a demand had been created by Haarsma 's visit . Many of the librarians were struggling to fill their shelves with books . In June 2007 , Haarsma and a friend , actor Nathan Fillion , approached a group of Fillion 's fans with the idea for a project that would work to purchase books for underfunded schools , as well as nonprofit institutions which gave books directly to children . The group took to the idea and focused their energies into getting the project off the ground . The Kids Need to Read project went public in August 2007 . 
 In January 2008 , the process to transform the project into a legal foundation began , and the fan group was separated from the developing organization . On May 22 , 2008 , The Kids Need to Read Foundation ( KNTR ) was incorporated in the state of California . KNTR became an Internal Revenue Code 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) tax exempt public charity on September 18 , 2008 , with a retroactive exemption date of May 22 , 2008 . The organization is supported by a global volunteer base . 
 Funds were initially raised through eBay auctions of Firefly and Serenity autographed memorabilia , and The Softwire books and items , and other science fiction and literary themed items . Fundraising efforts have since expanded and all funds are used to purchase books from the foundation 's official book list , a list which is continually updated by a professional children 's book buyer . The titles chosen are well @-@ reviewed and many are recommended for children who are reluctant readers . 
 KNTR has made book donations to forty @-@ one schools and libraries in addition to three multiple library systems . KNTR facilitated a substantial donation of three thousand books by the Phoenix Book Company to the Friends of the New Orleans Public Library , to help with recuperation after Hurricane Katrina . The Odessa Brown Children 's Clinic in Seattle was the recipient of a donation amounting to four hundred forty books in February 2008 . This clinic , as well as the North Public Health Clinic in Seattle , have received recurring donations from KNTR . 
 Haarsma remains on the KNTR Advisory Board as founder and consultant for literacy @-@ based activities . By using his position as a young @-@ adult fiction author , Haarsma helps bring attention , support , and funds to the organization . 
 = = = School visits = = = 
 PJ captures any audience with his energy . He begins a presentation on Earth and everyone in the audience lands on Orbis with him . Students and teachers continue to ask questions long afterwards . Priceless reading motivation ! 
 Haarsma takes part in school visits to promote his book and encourage imagination and reading in the school children . His presentation lasts fifty minutes , and discussions center around space travel , exploration , The Rings of Orbis universe , and other interactive topics , thus allowing for questions from the students at the conclusion . To help illustrate the scientific topics , NASA supplied Haarsma with space related information to present . " PJ Haarsma was inspirational . He visited my school and made my imagination soar . I 've already filled up a couple notebooks of stories thanks to him ! " Says one child whose school Haarsma visited . 
 During his presentation , Haarsma involves the children in various interactive activities . These include a Hollywood @-@ style acting audition , an alien ghost story , and a demonstration of the vast distances in space . The activities are designed to engage the children 's imaginations and to make them feel a part of the presentation . 
 The responses to his visits from both students and teachers are positive . The majority of the feedback involves praise and thanks . Haarsma has received many stories of previously reluctant readers being observed reading The Softwire books during school recess . 
 The author visit by PJ Haarsma was a lot of fun . He knows astronomy , technology , and how to get young adults interested in what he ’ s talking about . Librarians , a warning — you ’ ll need to order more books . Mine are all checked out and on hold . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The Softwire series : ABC ( Association of Booksellers for Children ) New Voices in Children 's Literature Award 2008 
 Virus on Orbis 1 : 2006 Cybil Award nominee , <unk> Top Choice Award , <unk> Junior Book Award nominee , ALA ( American Library Association ) Quick Picks for Reluctant Young Adult Readers Nomination 2008 , Great Stone Face Children ’ s Book Award Nomination ( Children 's Librarians of New Hampshire ) 2008 @-@ 2009 , Hal Clement Award for Young Adult Finalist 2007 
 Betrayal on Orbis 2 : 2008 Cybil Award nominee , ALA ( American Library Association ) Quick Picks for Reluctant Young Adult Readers Nomination 2009 
 = = Works = = 
 Books in The Softwire series scheduled for publication by Candlewick Press ( Each book corresponds to one year on each ring that the children must endure as slaves ) . 
 The Softwire Series 
 Virus on Orbis 1 , Candlewick Press , 2006 hardcover ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7636 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 paperback ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7636 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Betrayal on Orbis 2 , Candlewick Press , 2008 hardcover ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7636 @-@ 2710 @-@ 2 
 Wormhole Pirates on Orbis 3 , Candlewick Press , 2009 hardcover ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7636 @-@ 2711 @-@ 9 
 Awakening on Orbis 4 , Candlewick Press , March 2010 hardcover ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7636 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 = Suleiman the Magnificent = 
 Suleiman I ( Ottoman Turkish : سلطان سليمان <unk> ; Turkish : I. Süleyman , <unk> Sultan Süleyman or <unk> Süleyman ) or simply Solomon as a Biblical name ; 6 November 1494 – 7 September 1566 ) , commonly known as Suleiman the Magnificent in the West and " <unk> " ( the Lawgiver ) in the East , was the tenth and longest @-@ reigning Great Sultan of the Ottoman Empire , from 1520 to his death in 1566 . Under his administration , the Ottoman state ruled over 20 to 30 million people . 
 Suleiman became a prominent monarch of 16th @-@ century Europe , presiding over the apex of the Ottoman Empire 's economic , military and political power . Suleiman personally led Ottoman armies in conquering the Christian strongholds of Belgrade and Rhodes as well as most of Hungary before his conquests were checked at the Siege of Vienna in 1529 . He annexed much of the Middle East in his conflict with the Persian Safavids and large areas of North Africa as far west as Algeria . Under his rule , the Ottoman fleet dominated the seas from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea and through the Persian Gulf . 
 At the helm of an expanding empire , Suleiman personally instituted major legislative changes relating to society , education , taxation and criminal law . His canonical law ( or the <unk> ) fixed the form of the empire for centuries after his death . He was a distinguished poet and goldsmith ; he also became a great patron of culture , overseeing the " Golden " age of the Ottoman Empire in its artistic , literary and architectural development . 
 Breaking with Ottoman tradition , Suleiman married Roxelana , a former Christian girl converted to Islam from his harem , who became subsequently known and influential as Hürrem Sultan . Their son Selim II succeeded Suleiman following his death in 1566 after 46 years of rule , thus beginning a long state of stagnation and decline during Selim II 's reign . Suleiman 's previous heirs apparent Mehmed and Mustafa had died , the former from smallpox and the latter had been strangled to death 13 years previously at the sultan 's order . His other son Bayezid was executed in 1561 on the Sultan 's orders , along with his four sons , after a rebellion . 
 = = Alternative names and titles = = 
 Suleiman the Magnificent ( <unk> سليمان <unk> Süleymān ) , as he was known in the West , was also called Suleiman the First ( سلطان سليمان <unk> <unk> Süleymān @-@ ı Evvel ) , and Suleiman the Lawgiver ( <unk> سلطان سليمان <unk> <unk> Süleymān ) for his complete reconstruction of the Ottoman legal system . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Suleiman was born in Trabzon along the east coast of the Black Sea , probably on 6 November 1494 . His mother was <unk> Hafsa Sultan ( she was possibly the daughter of Meñli I Giray , a descendant of Genghis Khan , through Jochi ) ; little is known of her other than that she died in 1534 . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 At the age of seven , Suleiman was sent to study science , history , literature , theology and military tactics in the schools of the imperial Topkapı Palace in Constantinople ( modern Istanbul ) . As a young man , he befriended Pargalı Ibrahim , a slave who later became one of his most trusted advisers . 
 = = = Viceroy in Anatolia = = = 
 From the age of seventeen , he was appointed as the governor of first Kaffa ( Theodosia ) , then <unk> ( <unk> ) with a brief tenure at Adrianople ( now Edirne ) . 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 Upon the death of his father , Selim I ( 1465 – 1520 ) , Suleiman entered Constantinople and ascended to the throne as the tenth Ottoman Sultan . An early description of Suleiman , a few weeks following his accession , was provided by the Venetian envoy Bartolomeo Contarini : " He is twenty @-@ six years of age , tall , but wiry , and of a delicate complexion . His neck is a little too long , his face thin , and his nose aquiline . He has a shade of a mustache and a small beard ; nevertheless he has a pleasant mien , though his skin tends to be a light pallor . He is said to be a wise Lord , fond of study , and all men hope for good from his rule . " Some historians claim that in his youth Suleiman had an admiration for Alexander the Great . He was influenced by Alexander 's vision of building a world empire that would encompass the east and the west , and this created a drive for his subsequent military campaigns in Asia and in Africa , as well as in Europe . 
 = = Military campaigns = = 
 = = = Conquests in Europe = = = 
 Upon succeeding his father , Suleiman began a series of military conquests , eventually suppressing a revolt led by the Ottoman @-@ appointed governor of Damascus in 1521 . Suleiman soon made preparations for the conquest of Belgrade from the Kingdom of Hungary — something his great @-@ grandfather Mehmed II had failed to achieve because of John Hunyadi 's strong defense in the region . Its capture was vital in removing the Hungarians and Croats who , following the defeats of the Serbs , Bulgarians , Albanians and the Byzantines , remained the only formidable force who could block further Ottoman gains in Europe . Suleiman encircled Belgrade and began a series of heavy bombardments from an island in the Danube . Belgrade , with a garrison of only 700 men , and receiving no aid from Hungary , fell in August 1521 . 
 The fall of Christendom 's major strongholds spread fear across Europe . As the ambassador of the Holy Roman Empire to Constantinople was to note , " The capture of Belgrade was at the origin of the dramatic events which engulfed Hungary . It led to the death of King Louis , the capture of Buda , the occupation of Transylvania , the ruin of a flourishing kingdom and the fear of neighboring nations that they would suffer the same fate ... " 
 The road to Hungary and Austria lay open , but Suleiman turned his attention instead to the Eastern Mediterranean island of Rhodes , the home base of the Knights Hospitaller . In the summer of 1522 , taking advantage of the large navy he inherited from his father , Suleiman dispatched an armada of some 400 ships towards Rhodes , while personally leading an army of 100 @,@ 000 across Asia Minor to a point opposite the island itself . Here Suleiman built a large fortification , Marmaris Castle , that served as a base for the Ottoman Navy . Following the brutal five @-@ month Siege of Rhodes ( 1522 ) , Rhodes capitulated and Suleiman allowed the Knights of Rhodes to depart . ( The Knights of Rhodes eventually formed a new base in Malta , becoming known as Knights of Malta , even now . ) 
 As relations between Hungary and the Ottoman Empire deteriorated , Suleiman resumed his campaign in Central Europe and on 29 August 1526 , he defeated Louis II of Hungary ( 1506 – 26 ) at the Battle of Mohács . In its wake , Hungarian resistance collapsed and the Ottoman Empire became the preeminent power in Central Europe . Upon encountering the lifeless body of King Louis , Suleiman is said to have lamented : " I came indeed in arms against him ; but it was not my wish that he should be thus cut off before he scarcely tasted the sweets of life and royalty . " While Suleiman was campaigning in Hungary , Turkmen tribes in central Anatolia revolted under the leadership of Kalender Çelebi . 
 Some Hungarian nobles proposed that Ferdinand , who was ruler of neighboring Austria and tied to Louis II 's family by marriage , be King of Hungary , citing previous agreements that the Habsburgs would take the Hungarian throne if Louis died without heirs . However , other nobles turned to the nobleman John Zápolya , who was being supported by Suleiman . Under Charles V and his brother Ferdinand I , the Habsburgs reoccupied Buda and took possession of Hungary . Reacting in 1529 , Suleiman marched through the valley of the Danube and regained control of Buda ; in the following autumn his forces laid siege to Vienna . This was to be the Ottoman Empire 's most ambitious expedition and the apogee of its drive to the West . With a reinforced garrison of 16 @,@ 000 men , the Austrians inflicted the first defeat on Suleiman , sowing the seeds of a bitter Ottoman @-@ Habsburg rivalry , which lasted until the 20th century . His second attempt to conquer Vienna failed in 1532 , with Ottoman forces delayed by the siege of Güns , failing to reach Vienna . In both cases , the Ottoman army was plagued by bad weather ( forcing them to leave behind essential siege equipment ) and was hobbled by overstretched supply lines . 
 By the 1540s a renewal of the conflict in Hungary presented Suleiman with the opportunity to avenge the defeat suffered at Vienna . 
 In 1541 the Habsburgs once again engaged in conflict with the Ottomans , by attempting to lay siege to Buda . With their efforts repulsed and more Habsburg fortresses captured by the Ottomans in two consecutive campaigns in 1541 and in 1544 as a result , Ferdinand and his brother Charles V were forced to conclude a humiliating five @-@ year treaty with Suleiman . Ferdinand renounced his claim to the Kingdom of Hungary and was forced to pay a fixed yearly sum to the Sultan for the Hungarian lands he continued to control . Of more symbolic importance , the treaty referred to Charles V not as ' Emperor ' , but as the ' King of Spain ' , leading Suleiman to identify as the true ' Caesar ' . 
 With his main European rivals subdued , Suleiman ensured that the Ottoman Empire had a powerful role in the political landscape of Europe for some years to come . 
 = = = Ottoman – Safavid War = = = 
 As Suleiman stabilized his European frontiers , he now turned his attention to the ever present threat posed by the Shi 'a Safavid dynasty of Persia . Two events in particular were to precipitate a recurrence of tensions . First , Shah Tahmasp had the Baghdad governor loyal to Suleiman killed and replaced with an adherent of the Shah , and second , the governor of Bitlis had defected and sworn allegiance to the Safavids . As a result , in 1533 , Suleiman ordered his Grand Vizier Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha to lead an army into eastern Asia Minor where he retook Bitlis and occupied Tabriz without resistance . Having joined Ibrahim in 1534 , Suleiman made a push towards Persia , only to find the Shah sacrificing territory instead of facing a pitched battle , resorting to harassment of the Ottoman army as it proceeded along the harsh interior . When in the following year Suleiman and Ibrahim made a grand entrance into Baghdad , its commander surrendered the city , thereby confirming Suleiman as the leader of the Sunni Islamic world and the legitimate successor to the Sunni Abbasid Caliphs . Moreover , the fact Suleiman restored the grave of Sunni imam Abu Hanifa also strengthened his credentials and claim to the caliphate . 
 Attempting to defeat the Shah once and for all , Suleiman embarked upon a second campaign in 1548 – 1549 . As in the previous attempt , Tahmasp avoided confrontation with the Ottoman army and instead chose to retreat , using scorched earth tactics in the process and exposing the Ottoman army to the harsh winter of the Caucasus . Suleiman abandoned the campaign with temporary Ottoman gains in Tabriz and the Urmia region , a lasting presence in the province of Van , control of the western half of Azerbaijan and some forts in Georgia . 
 In 1553 Suleiman began his third and final campaign against the Shah . Having initially lost territories in Erzurum to the Shah 's son , Suleiman retaliated by recapturing Erzurum , crossing the Upper Euphrates and laying waste to parts of Persia . The Shah 's army continued its strategy of avoiding the Ottomans , leading to a stalemate from which neither army made any significant gain . In 1554 , a settlement was signed which was to conclude Suleiman 's Asian campaigns . Part of the treaty included and confirmed the return of Tabriz , but secured Baghdad , lower Mesopotamia , the mouths of the river Euphrates and Tigris , as well as part of the Persian Gulf . The Shah also promised to cease all raids into Ottoman territory . 
 = = = Campaigns in the Indian Ocean = = = 
 Ottoman ships had been sailing in the Indian Ocean since the year 1518 . Ottoman Admirals such as Hadim Suleiman Pasha , <unk> Ali Reis and <unk> <unk> Reis are known to have voyaged to the Mughal imperial ports of Thatta , Surat and <unk> . The Mughal Emperor Akbar himself is known to have exchanged six documents with Suleiman the Magnificent . 
 In the Indian Ocean , Suleiman led several naval campaigns against the Portuguese in an attempt to remove them and reestablish trade with India . Aden in Yemen was captured by the Ottomans in 1538 , in order to provide an Ottoman base for raids against Portuguese possessions on the western coast of modern India and Pakistan . Sailing on to India , the Ottomans failed against the Portuguese at the Siege of Diu in September 1538 , but then returned to Aden , where they fortified the city with 100 pieces of artillery . From this base , Sulayman Pasha managed to take control of the whole country of Yemen , also taking Sana 'a . Aden rose against the Ottomans however and invited the Portuguese instead , so that the Portuguese were in control of the city until its seizure by Piri Reis in the Capture of Aden ( 1548 ) . 
 With its strong control of the Red Sea , Suleiman successfully managed to dispute control of the Indian trade routes to the Portuguese and maintained a significant level of trade with the Mughal Empire of South Asia throughout the 16th century . His admiral Piri Reis led an Ottoman fleet in the Indian Ocean , achieving the Capture of Muscat in 1552 . 
 From 1526 till 1543 , <unk> stationed over 900 Turkish soldiers to fight alongside the Somali Adal Sultanate led by Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al @-@ Ghazi during the Conquest of Abyssinia . After the first Ajuran @-@ Portuguese war , the Ottoman Empire would in 1559 absorb the weakened Adal Sultanate into its domain . This expansion fathered Ottoman rule in Somalia and the Horn of Africa . This also increased its influence in the Indian Ocean to compete with the Portuguese Empire with its close ally the Ajuran Empire . 
 In 1564 , Suleiman received an embassy from Aceh ( a sultanate on Sumatra , in modern Indonesia ) , requesting Ottoman support against the Portuguese . As a result , an Ottoman expedition to Aceh was launched , which was able to provide extensive military support to the Acehnese . 
 The discovery of new maritime trade routes by Western European states allowed them to avoid the Ottoman trade monopoly . The Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 initiated a series of Ottoman @-@ Portuguese naval wars in the Indian Ocean throughout the 16th century . The Ajuran Sultanate allied with the Ottomans defied the Portuguese economic monopoly in the Indian Ocean by employing a new coinage which followed the Ottoman pattern , thus proclaiming an attitude of economic independence in regard to the Portuguese . 
 = = = Mediterranean and North Africa = = = 
 Having consolidated his conquests on land , Suleiman was greeted with the news that the fortress of Koroni in Morea ( the modern Peloponnese , peninsular Greece ) had been lost to Charles V 's admiral , Andrea Doria . The presence of the Spanish in the Eastern Mediterranean concerned Suleiman , who saw it as an early indication of Charles V 's intention to rival Ottoman dominance in the region . Recognizing the need to reassert naval preeminence in the Mediterranean , Suleiman appointed an exceptional naval commander in the form of <unk> ad Din , known to Europeans as Barbarossa . Once appointed admiral @-@ in @-@ chief , Barbarossa was charged with rebuilding the Ottoman fleet , to such an extent that the Ottoman navy equaled in number those of all other Mediterranean countries put together . 
 In 1535 , Charles V won an important victory against the Ottomans at Tunis , which together with the war against Venice the following year , led Suleiman to accept proposals from Francis I of France to form an alliance against Charles . In 1538 , the Spanish fleet was defeated by Barbarossa at the Battle of Preveza , securing the eastern Mediterranean for the Turks for 33 years , until the defeat at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 . 
 East of Morocco , huge Muslim territories in North Africa were annexed . The Barbary States of Tripolitania , Tunisia and Algeria became autonomous provinces of the Empire , serving as the leading edge of Suleiman 's conflict with Charles V , whose attempt to drive out the Turks failed in 1541 . The piracy carried on thereafter by the Barbary pirates of North Africa can be seen in the context of the wars against Spain . For a short period Ottoman expansion secured naval dominance in the Mediterranean . 
 In 1542 , facing a common Habsburg enemy , Francis I sought to renew the Franco @-@ Ottoman alliance . As a result , Suleiman dispatched 100 galleys under Barbarossa to assist the French in the western Mediterranean . Barbarossa pillaged the coast of Naples and Sicily before reaching France , where Francis made Toulon the Ottoman admiral 's naval headquarters . The same campaign saw Barbarossa attack and capture Nice in 1543 . By 1544 , a peace between Francis I and Charles V had put a temporary end to the alliance between France and the Ottoman Empire . 
 Elsewhere in the Mediterranean , when the Knights Hospitallers were re @-@ established as the Knights of Malta in 1530 , their actions against Muslim navies quickly drew the ire of the Ottomans , who assembled another massive army in order to dislodge the Knights from Malta . The Ottomans invaded Malta in 1565 , undertaking the Great Siege of Malta , which began on 18 May and lasted until 8 September , and is portrayed vividly in the frescoes of Matteo Perez d <unk> in the Hall of St. Michael and St. George . At first it seemed that this would be a repeat of the battle on Rhodes , with most of Malta 's cities destroyed and half the Knights killed in battle ; but a relief force from Spain entered the battle , resulting in the loss of 10 @,@ 000 Ottoman troops and the victory of the local Maltese citizenry . 
 = = Administrative reforms = = 
 While Sultan Suleiman was known as " the Magnificent " in the West , he was always <unk> Suleiman or " The Lawgiver " ( <unk> ) to his own Ottoman subjects . As the historian Lord Kinross notes , " Not only was he a great military campaigner , a man of the sword , as his father and great @-@ grandfather had been before him . He differed from them in the extent to which he was also a man of the pen . He was a great legislator , standing out in the eyes of his people as a high @-@ minded sovereign and a magnanimous exponent of justice " . The overriding law of the empire was the Shari 'ah , or Sacred Law , which as the divine law of Islam was outside of the Sultan 's powers to change . Yet an area of distinct law known as the <unk> ( <unk> , canonical legislation ) was dependent on Suleiman 's will alone , covering areas such as criminal law , land tenure and taxation . He collected all the judgments that had been issued by the nine Ottoman Sultans who preceded him . After eliminating duplications and choosing between contradictory statements , he issued a single legal code , all the while being careful not to violate the basic laws of Islam . It was within this framework that Suleiman , supported by his Grand Mufti <unk> , sought to reform the legislation to adapt to a rapidly changing empire . When the Kanun laws attained their final form , the code of laws became known as the <unk> ‐ i Osmani ( <unk> <unk> ) , or the " Ottoman laws " . Suleiman 's legal code was to last more than three hundred years . 
 Suleiman gave particular attention to the plight of the <unk> , Christian subjects who worked the land of the <unk> . His <unk> Raya , or " Code of the <unk> " , reformed the law governing levies and taxes to be paid by the <unk> , raising their status above serfdom to the extent that Christian serfs would migrate to Turkish territories to benefit from the reforms . The Sultan also played a role in protecting the Jewish subjects of his empire for centuries to come . In late 1553 or 1554 , on the suggestion of his favorite doctor and dentist , the Spanish Jew Moses Hamon , the Sultan issued a firman ( <unk> ) formally denouncing blood libels against the Jews . Furthermore , Suleiman enacted new criminal and police legislation , prescribing a set of fines for specific offenses , as well as reducing the instances requiring death or mutilation . In the area of taxation , taxes were levied on various goods and produce , including animals , mines , profits of trade , and import @-@ export duties . In addition to taxes , officials who had fallen into disrepute were likely to have their land and property confiscated by the Sultan . 
 Education was another important area for the Sultan . Schools attached to mosques and funded by religious foundations provided a largely free education to Muslim boys in advance of the Christian countries of the time . In his capital , Suleiman increased the number of <unk> ( <unk> , primary schools ) to fourteen , teaching boys to read and write as well as the principles of Islam . Young men wishing further education could proceed to one of eight <unk> ( <unk> , colleges ) , whose studies included grammar , metaphysics , philosophy , astronomy and astrology . Higher <unk> provided education of university status , whose graduates became imams ( <unk> ) or teachers . Educational centers were often one of many buildings surrounding the courtyards of mosques , others included libraries , <unk> , fountains , soup kitchens and hospitals for the benefit of the public . 
 = = Cultural achievements = = 
 Under Suleiman 's patronage , the Ottoman Empire entered the golden age of its cultural development . Hundreds of imperial artistic societies ( called the <unk> <unk> Ehl @-@ i <unk> , " Community of the Talented " ) were administered at the Imperial seat , the Topkapı Palace . After an apprenticeship , artists and craftsmen could advance in rank within their field and were paid commensurate wages in quarterly annual installments . Payroll registers that survive testify to the breadth of Suleiman 's patronage of the arts , the earliest of documents dating from 1526 list 40 societies with over 600 members . The Ehl @-@ i <unk> attracted the empire 's most talented artisans to the Sultan 's court , both from the Islamic world and from the recently conquered territories in Europe , resulting in a blend of Arabic , Turkish and European cultures . Artisans in service of the court included painters , book binders , furriers , jewellers and goldsmiths . Whereas previous rulers had been influenced by Persian culture ( Suleiman 's father , Selim I , wrote poetry in Persian ) , Suleiman 's patronage of the arts saw the Ottoman Empire assert its own artistic legacy . 
 Suleiman himself was an accomplished poet , writing in Persian and Turkish under the <unk> ( nom de plume ) Muhibbi ( <unk> , " Lover " ) . Some of Suleiman 's verses have become Turkish proverbs , such as the well @-@ known Everyone aims at the same meaning , but many are the versions of the story . When his young son Mehmed died in 1543 , he composed a moving chronogram to commemorate the year : Peerless among princes , my Sultan Mehmed . In addition to Suleiman 's own work , many great talents enlivened the literary world during Suleiman 's rule , including Fuzuli and <unk> . The literary historian E. J. W. Gibb observed that " at no time , even in Turkey , was greater encouragement given to poetry than during the reign of this Sultan " . Suleiman 's most famous verse is : 
 The people think of wealth and power as the greatest fate , 
 But in this world a spell of health is the best state . 
 What men call sovereignty is a worldly strife and constant war ; 
 Worship of God is the highest throne , the happiest of all estates . 
 Suleiman also became renowned for sponsoring a series of monumental architectural developments within his empire . The Sultan sought to turn Constantinople into the center of Islamic civilization by a series of projects , including bridges , mosques , palaces and various charitable and social establishments . The greatest of these were built by the Sultan 's chief architect , Mimar Sinan , under whom Ottoman architecture reached its zenith . Sinan became responsible for over three hundred monuments throughout the empire , including his two masterpieces , the Süleymaniye and Selimiye mosques — the latter built in Adrianople ( now Edirne ) in the reign of Suleiman 's son Selim II . Suleiman also restored the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem and the Jerusalem city walls ( which are the current walls of the Old City of Jerusalem ) , renovated the Kaaba in Mecca , and constructed a complex in Damascus . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Consorts and progeny = = = 
 Suleiman had three known consorts : 
 <unk> Hatun , mother of Şehzade Murad ( the fact that she really was a consort is disputed ) 
 Mahidevran <unk> ( m . 1512 / 14 ) , a Circassian or Albanian 
 Haseki Hürrem Sultan ( also known as Roxelana ) ( m . 1531 ) , Suleiman 's concubine and later legal wife and first Haseki Sultan , possibly a daughter of the Ruthenian Orthodox priest . 
 Suleiman had some children with his consorts : 
 Şehzade Mahmud , born 1512 ( died in 1521 ) 
 Şehzade Mustafa – son with Mahidevran , born 1515 ( killed in 1553 on the Sultan 's orders ) 
 Şehzade Murad – son with <unk> , born 1519 ( died in 1521 ) 
 Şehzade Mehmed – son with Hürrem , born 1521 ( died in 1543 ) 
 <unk> Sultan – daughter with Hürrem , born 1522 ( died in 1578 ) 
 Şehzade Abdullah – son with Hürrem or Mahidevran , born 1523 ( died in 1525 ) 
 Sultan Selim II – son with Hürrem , born 1524 ( died in 1574 ) 
 Şehzade Bayezid – son with Hürrem , born 1525 ( killed by his brother Selim with the support of his father in 1561 ) 
 Şehzade Cihangir – son with Hürrem , born 1531 ( died in 1553 ) 
 <unk> Sultan – daughter with Mahidevran 
 = = = Relationship with Hürrem Sultan = = = 
 Suleiman was infatuated with Hürrem Sultan , a harem girl from Ruthenia , then part of Poland . Western diplomats , taking notice of the palace gossip about her , called her " <unk> " or " Roxelana " , referring to her Ruthenian ( Ukrainian ) origins . The daughter of an Orthodox priest , she was captured by Tatars from Crimea , sold as a slave in Constantinople , and eventually rose through the ranks of the Harem to become Suleiman 's favorite . Breaking with two centuries of Ottoman tradition , a former concubine had thus become the legal wife of the Sultan , much to the astonishment of the observers in the palace and the city . He also allowed Hürrem Sultan to remain with him at court for the rest of her life , breaking another tradition — that when imperial heirs came of age , they would be sent along with the imperial concubine who bore them to govern remote provinces of the Empire , never to return unless their progeny succeeded to the throne . 
 Under his pen name , Muhibbi , Sultan Suleiman composed this poem for Hürrem Sultan : 
 " Throne of my lonely niche , my wealth , my love , my moonlight . 
 My most sincere friend , my confidant , my very existence , my Sultan , my one and only love . 
 The most beautiful among the beautiful ... 
 My springtime , my merry faced love , my daytime , my sweetheart , laughing leaf ... 
 My plants , my sweet , my rose , the one only who does not distress me in this room ... 
 My Istanbul , my Caraman , the earth of my Anatolia 
 My Badakhshan , my Baghdad and Khorasan 
 My woman of the beautiful hair , my love of the slanted brow , my love of eyes full of misery ... 
 I 'll sing your praises always 
 I , lover of the tormented heart , Muhibbi of the eyes full of tears , I am happy . " 
 = = = Grand Vizier Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha = = = 
 Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha was the boyhood friend of Suleiman . Ibrahim was originally a Christian from Parga ( in Epirus ) , and when he was young was educated at the Palace School under the devshirme system . Suleiman made him the royal falconer , then promoted him to first officer of the Royal Bedchamber . Ibrahim Pasha rose to Grand Vizier in 1523 and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of all the armies . Suleiman also conferred upon Ibrahim Pasha the honor of beylerbey of Rumelia ( first @-@ ranking military governor @-@ general ) , granting Ibrahim authority over all Turkish territories in Europe , as well as command of troops residing within them in times of war . According to a 17th @-@ century chronicler , Ibrahim had asked Suleiman not to promote him to such high positions , fearing for his safety ; to which Suleiman replied that under his reign , no matter what the circumstance , Ibrahim would never be put to death . 
 Yet Ibrahim eventually fell from grace with the Sultan . During his thirteen years as Grand Vizier , his rapid rise to power and vast accumulation of wealth had made Ibrahim many enemies at the Sultan 's court . Reports had reached the Sultan of Ibrahim 's impudence during a campaign against the Persian Safavid empire : in particular his adoption of the title <unk> sultan ( <unk> سلطان ) was seen as a grave affront to Suleiman . 
 Suleiman 's suspicion of Ibrahim was worsened by a quarrel between the latter and the finance secretary ( <unk> ) Iskender Çelebi . The dispute ended in the disgrace of Çelebi on charges of intrigue , with Ibrahim convincing Suleiman to sentence the <unk> to death . Before his death however , Çelebi 's last words were to accuse Ibrahim of conspiracy against the Sultan . These dying words convinced Suleiman of Ibrahim 's disloyalty , and on 15 March 1536 Ibrahim was executed . 
 = = Succession = = 
 Sultan Suleiman 's two wives ( Hürrem and Mahidevran ) had borne him six sons , four of whom survived past the 1550s . They were Mustafa , Selim , Bayezid , and Cihangir . Of these , only Mustafa , the eldest , was not Hürrem Sultan 's son , but rather Mahidevran Sultan 's , and therefore preceded Hürrem 's children in the order of succession . Hürrem was aware that should Mustafa become Sultan her own children would be strangled . Yet Mustafa was recognized as the most talented of all the brothers and was supported by Pargalı İbrahim Pasha , who was by this time Suleiman 's Grand Vizier . The Austrian ambassador Busbecq would note " Suleiman has among his children a son called Mustafa , marvelously well educated and prudent and of an age to rule , since he is 24 or 25 years old ; may God never allow a Barbary of such strength to come near us " , going on to talk of Mustafa 's " remarkable natural gifts " . Hürrem is usually held at least partly responsible for the intrigues in nominating a successor . Although she was Suleiman 's wife , she exercised no official public role . This did not , however , prevent Hürrem from wielding powerful political influence . Since the Empire lacked , until the reign of Ahmed I , any formal means of nominating a successor , successions usually involved the death of competing princes in order to avert civil unrest and rebellions . In attempting to avoid the execution of her sons , Hürrem used her influence to eliminate those who supported Mustafa 's accession to the throne . 
 Thus in power struggles apparently instigated by Hürrem , Suleiman had Ibrahim murdered and replaced with her sympathetic son @-@ in @-@ law , Rüstem Pasha . By 1552 , when the campaign against Persia had begun with Rüstem appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the expedition , intrigues against Mustafa began . Rüstem sent one of Suleiman 's most trusted men to report that since Suleiman was not at the head of the army , the soldiers thought the time had come to put a younger prince on the throne ; at the same time he spread rumors that Mustafa had proved receptive to the idea . Angered by what he came to believe were Mustafa 's plans to claim the throne , the following summer upon return from his campaign in Persia , Suleiman summoned him to his tent in the <unk> valley , stating he would " be able to clear himself of the crimes he was accused of and would have nothing to fear if he came " . 
 Mustafa was confronted with a choice : either he appeared before his father at the risk of being killed ; or , if he refused to attend , he would be accused of betrayal . In the end , Mustafa chose to enter his father 's tent , confident that the support of the army would protect him . Busbecq , who claims to have received an account from an eyewitness , describes Mustafa 's final moments . As Mustafa entered his father 's tent , Suleiman 's eunuchs attacked Mustafa , with the young prince putting up a brave defence . Suleiman , separated from the struggle only by the linen hangings of the tent , peered through the chamber of his tent and " directed fierce and threatening glances upon the mutes , and by menacing gestures sternly rebuked their hesitation . Thereupon , the mutes in their alarm , redoubling their efforts , hurled Mustafa to the ground and , throwing the bowstring round his neck , strangled him . " 
 Cihangir is said to have died of grief a few months after the news of his half @-@ brother 's murder . The two surviving brothers , Selim and Bayezid , were given command in different parts of the empire . Within a few years , however , civil war broke out between the brothers , each supported by his loyal forces . With the aid of his father 's army , Selim defeated Bayezid in Konya in 1559 , leading the latter to seek refuge with the Safavids along with his four sons . Following diplomatic exchanges , the Sultan demanded from the Safavid Shah that Bayezid be either extradited or executed . In return for large amounts of gold , the Shah allowed a Turkish executioner to strangle Bayezid and his four sons in 1561 , clearing the path for Selim 's succession to the throne seven years later . 
 = = Death = = 
 His mausoleum is adjacent to <unk> ’ s , a separate and more sombre domed structure , at the courtyard of the Süleymaniye Mosque . On 5 September 1566 , Suleiman , who had set out from Constantinople to command an expedition to Hungary , died before an Ottoman victory at the Battle of Szigetvár in Hungary and the Grand Vizier kept his death secret during the retreat for the enthronement of Selim II . Just the night before the sickly sultan died in his tent , two months before he would have turned 72 . The sultan ’ s body was taken home to be buried in Istanbul , leaving behind the legend along with his heart and internal organs in Hungary , buried under the military tent where he died , in a golden casket . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the time of Suleiman 's death , the Ottoman Empire was one of the world 's foremost powers . Suleiman 's conquests had brought under the control of the Empire the major Muslim cities ( Mecca , Medina , Jerusalem , Damascus , Cairo and Baghdad ) , many Balkan provinces ( reaching present day Croatia and Austria ) , and most of North Africa . His expansion into Europe had given the Ottoman Turks a powerful presence in the European balance of power . Indeed , such was the perceived threat of the Ottoman Empire under the reign of Suleiman that Austria 's ambassador Busbecq warned of Europe 's imminent conquest : " On [ the Turks ' ] side are the resources of a mighty empire , strength unimpaired , habituation to victory , endurance of toil , unity , discipline , frugality and watchfulness ... Can we doubt what the result will be ? ... When the Turks have settled with Persia , they will fly at our throats supported by the might of the whole East ; how unprepared we are I dare not say . " 
 Even thirty years after his death , " Sultan <unk> " was quoted by the English playwright William Shakespeare as a military prodigy in The Merchant of Venice , where the Prince of Morocco boasts about his prowess by saying that he defeated Suleiman in three battles ( Act 2 , Scene 1 ) . 
 Suleiman 's legacy was not , however , merely in the military field . The French traveler Jean de Thévenot bears witness a century later to the " strong agricultural base of the country , the well being of the peasantry , the abundance of staple foods and the pre @-@ eminence of organization in Suleiman 's government " . The administrative and legal reforms which earned him the name Law Giver ensured the Empire 's survival long after his death , an achievement which " took many generations of decadent heirs to undo " . 
 Through his personal patronage , Suleiman also presided over the Golden Age of the Ottoman Empire , representing the pinnacle of the Ottoman Turks ' cultural achievement in the realm of architecture , literature , art , theology and philosophy . Today the skyline of the Bosphorus and of many cities in modern Turkey and the former Ottoman provinces , are still adorned with the architectural works of Mimar Sinan . One of these , the Süleymaniye Mosque , is the final resting place of Suleiman and Hürrem Sultan : they are buried in separate domed mausoleums attached to the mosque . 
 However , after his death , the Ottoman Empire entered into a state of decline and stagnation during the reign of Sultan Selim II and later ( not so great ) sultans . The Ottoman conquests of Europe were ended permanently by major defeats such as the Battle of Lepanto and the Battle of Vienna . As the years passed , the Ottoman Empire slowly turned into a shadow of its former glory , becoming known as the " sick man of Europe " , where the Christian powers gradually regained their might , gaining new technologies and weapons for their armies until the Empire 's dissolution by the reign of Mehmed VI , the last Sultan of the Ottoman Empire , who was removed after World War I , which allowed the empire 's total dismemberment as even the Muslim provinces became independent or part of colonial empires and Atatürk opted for a republican Turkish nation state . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Suleiman the Magnificent appears in P. J. Parker 's internationally acclaimed historic fiction Roxelana and Suleyman ( 2001 ; Published 2012 ; Revised 2016 ) 
 Suleiman the Magnificent appears as the lead character of the 2011 – 14 Turkish TV series <unk> <unk> and occurs in TV series Hürrem Sultan ( 2003 ) . 
 Suleiman I also features in the movies Les trois <unk> ( 1912 ) and <unk> <unk> aka Stars of Eger ( 1968 ) . 
 Suleiman is portrayed as a young man in the game Assassin 's Creed : Revelations . 
 Suleiman the Magnificent appears as the leader of the Ottomans in the computer strategy games , Age of Empires III , Civilization IV , and Civilization V. 
 Suleiman the Magnificent is also portrayed in the strategic video game Europa Universalis IV loading screen . 
 = Reunion ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Reunion " is the fifth episode of the third season of American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 41st episode of the series overall . It was written by supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on December 4 , 2008 . Guest stars in this episode include Susan Barrett , Marceline Hugot , Robyn Lively , Janel Moloney , Diane Neal , Rip Torn , and Steve Witting . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is opposed to going to her high school reunion , but her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , manages to convince her otherwise . Meanwhile , Don Geiss ( Torn ) wakes up from his coma only to inform Jack of his decision to remain CEO of General Electric ( GE ) . At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) feel threatened by NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) when he gets more laughs than they do in the elevator . 
 " Reunion " has received generally positive reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 7 @.@ 2 million households during its original broadcast . Matt Hubbard won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , while Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller received a nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) receives an invitation to her upcoming high school reunion in White Haven , Pennsylvania . She is reluctant to attend as she was a lonely nerd but is persuaded to go by her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) . Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) wakes up from his diabetic coma and tells Jack he will remain CEO of General Electric ( GE ) . Distraught by the revelation , as Don had chosen Jack as the CEO to run GE , Jack decides to fly to Miami for a vacation , and offers to drop Liz off on the way to her reunion . When they land in White Haven after a major snowstorm , Jack is stranded with her . 
 Meanwhile , at the 30 Rock studios , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) , is shocked when NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) gets more laughs than he does in the elevator , compelling him to go to Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) for help . The same thing happens to Jenna and in retaliation , she starts singing " Wind Beneath My Wings " , prompting Kenneth to start singing " 99 Bottles of Beer " , to which everyone in the elevator joins in . As revenge for upstaging them , Tracy and Jenna start doing his page duties which upsets Kenneth , and so swears never to upstage them again . 
 Liz goes to the reunion but learns that she was not the quiet , lonely nerd she thought , but the angry bully everyone hated . Jack in search of a drink ends up at the reunion as well , and is mistaken for a former popular student Larry Braverman and still unhappy with Geiss ' decision , takes on the persona . Liz tries to regain the friendship of her classmates — Kelsey <unk> ( Robyn Lively ) , Erin O 'Neil ( Diane Neal ) , Rob Sussman ( Steve Witting ) , and Diane ( Susan Barrett ) — without success . Jack , as Larry Braverman , persuades them to like Liz , until an ex @-@ girlfriend ( Janel Moloney ) of Larry 's reveals he has a son , at which point Jack confesses he is not Larry and Liz and Jack both make a quick escape whilst being booed off stage ; Liz happily going back to mistreating her former classmates after they attempt to reenact the pig 's blood scene from Carrie on her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Reunion " was written by 30 Rock supervising producer Matt Hubbard , making it his fifth writing credit after " The Rural Juror " , " Hard Ball " , " The Collection " , and " MILF Island " . The episode was directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , making it her fourth for the series . " Reunion " originally aired in the United States on December 4 , 2008 , on NBC as the fifth episode of the show 's third season and the 41st overall episode of the series . 
 Actor Rip Torn made his sixth appearance on the show as GE CEO Don Geiss , after appearing in the episodes " The C Word " , " Corporate Crush " , " Jack Gets in the Game " , " Succession " , and " Sandwich Day " . This was actress Marceline Hugot 's sixth guest spot in the series as Kathy Geiss , the daughter of Don Geiss . St. Cecilia 's Catholic Church served as the high school where Liz Lemon attends her high school reunion . In September 2008 , it was reported that actresses Blake Lively and Leighton Meester , who star on Gossip Girl , were set to guest star on the show as former high school classmates of Liz 's in a flashback sequence , but the appearances fell through . 30 Rock and Gossip Girl are shot next to each other at Silvercup Studios in Queens , New York . Actress Robyn Lively , the half @-@ sister of Blake Lively , guest starred in " Reunion " as Kelsey Winthrop , a former classmate of Liz 's . 
 In this episode , Liz says the line " I want to go to there " , twice , which according to series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey was " coined " by her daughter , Alice . In an interview with the New York Daily News , Jane Krakowski , who portrays Jenna Maroney , revealed " Some of the great catchphrases of 30 Rock have come from Alice . Like , ' I want to go [ to ] there ! ' – that 's Alice . It 's so funny because I hear people say it on the street , and that was [ Tina 's ] daughter ! " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Jack , believing that Don Geiss will give him the CEO job , and after learning about Liz 's high school reunion , says " I wish I had a Princeton reunion right now . I 'd wipe the smug smile off Michelle Obama 's face " , a reference to Michelle Obama who graduated from Princeton , and to her husband , Barack Obama , who won the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election . At the reunion , Rob Sussman , a past classmate of Liz 's , complains that Liz said he was gayer than the volleyball scene in the 1986 action film Top Gun . During the reunion , Liz 's former classmates play Seven minutes in heaven , a game in which two people are selected to go into a closet or other dark enclosed space and do whatever they like for seven minutes , often kissing . Later , Liz 's classmates plan to " Carrie " her on stage as revenge for her being mean to them , but is stopped by Jack saying " we cannot Carrie Liz Lemon " . This is a reference to the 1976 horror film Carrie in which the title character is drenched with pig 's blood . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Reunion " was watched by 7 @.@ 2 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 3 @.@ 4 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . " Reunion " finished in ninth place in the weekly ratings for the week of December 1 – 7 , 2008 . Matt Hubbard won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , while Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller received a nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . This episode was submitted for consideration on the behalf of Tina Fey for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series at the same awards show , but lost it to actress Toni Collette . Hubbard was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for " Reunion " , but lost it in a tie to fellow 30 Rock writer Robert Carlock for the episode " Apollo , Apollo " and Modern Family 's Steven Levitan and Christopher Lloyd for the pilot episode . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning gave the episode an 8 @.@ 9 rating out of 10 and wrote " ... the real reason to watch , as always , was Tina Fey and Alec Baldwin and their fantastic comedic performances . " Canning responded favorably to the episode with the exception of the Tracy , Jenna , and Kenneth storyline , calling it " silly " . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that Jack taking on the Larry Braverman persona " gave Baldwin a chance to play a delightfully goofy strain of those occasional glimpses we get of a happy Jack . " Like Sepinwall , Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad was favorable to Jack going to the reunion , but most enjoyed the character impersonating Larry Braverman , observing it was a " well @-@ used plot device " as Baldwin " made it believable " . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich was positive about " Reunion " , calling it a " nice " episode . Jeff Labrecque for Entertainment Weekly enjoyed the episode , and said that " Reunion " was the first episode of the season that " I think the show benefited from the refocused attention on its core characters . The reunion plot was so strong , and the Carrie finale so inspired , that I hope the viewership ratings reflect positively and encourage a continuance of this creative trend . " The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin wrote that he was " much more amused " by Rob Sussman 's " still @-@ simmering rage " against Liz , because he " scored many of the show 's biggest laughs . " He said that he found the second plot " a little underwhelming though I thought there was a neat meta @-@ textual element to it " , but wrote that it " scored some nice shots at the vapid narcissism of actors but it promised more than it could deliver . " Rick Porter of Zap2it said that despite the " super @-@ capital @-@ A @-@ list guest stars " that guest starred at the beginning of the season , " Reunion " got back " to the show 's core cast ... [ and ] the show gave us probably the best episode of the season . " Time contributor James Poniewozik opined that this episode was " pretty good " and " funny in most of the usual 30 Rock ways . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Jeremy Medina of Paste wrote that " Reunion " was " essentially unremarkable ( especially in its portrayal of Liz ) " . Medina disliked that Tina Fey 's Liz was portrayed in " unlikable light " , and after insulting her former classmates at the high school reunion it " seemed a bit uncharacteristic and unflattering to her character . " 
 = La Stazione = 
 La Stazione ( Italian pronunciation : [ la <unk> ] , " The Station " ) is an Italian restaurant and former train station in the village of New Paltz in Ulster County , New York . The building was the first of two railroad stations constructed in the town of New Paltz , and it is the only former Wallkill Valley Railroad station standing at its original location . 
 After a lengthy public debate over whether to place the station to the east or west of the Wallkill River , it was built in 1870 on the east bank , within the village of New Paltz . The rail line was formally opened during a large ceremony on December 20 , 1870 . A decade later the station had become a popular departure point for the Mohonk Mountain House by many vacationers , including two U.S. presidents . In the late 19th century , over a dozen stagecoaches ran between the station and Mohonk daily . 
 The station burned down in 1907 and was rebuilt later that year . The rise of the automobile caused the railroad to end passenger service in 1937 ; by 1959 the station was completely closed and sold off . After closure , it was used for a variety of businesses , including serving as a public @-@ access television station . Freight service along the Wallkill Valley line continued until 1977 , when the corridor was shut to regular rail traffic . 
 The building was in such a state of disrepair by the 1980s that it was almost demolished , and the nearby tracks were torn up and sold for scrap by 1984 . However , the station avoided demolition and was renovated in 1988 . It was used as a real estate office , and the rail corridor itself was formally opened five years later as the Wallkill Valley Rail Trail . In 1999 , the station became an Italian restaurant and received its current name , La Stazione . The building was expanded in 2003 and served as the setting for a scene in a 2008 mob film . 
 = = Planning and construction = = 
 In February 1864 , plans were in place to extend the route of the proposed Wallkill Valley Railroad between the towns of Shawangunk and New Paltz . A civil engineering survey to determine a possible route and cost of such an endeavor was undertaken in March of that year . The proposal sparked a controversy as to whether the route would run east or west of the Wallkill River in New Paltz . The western route was roughly 100 feet ( 30 m ) shorter , and the eastern route would cost $ 25 @,@ 000 more . However , it was felt that the increased economic activity from having the rail line run east of the river , and directly through the village of New Paltz , would offset the expense . Bonding for the rail line through New Paltz , at a cost of $ 123 @,@ 000 , was completed by January 1869 . The Wallkill Valley Railroad was the first rail line in Ulster County , and was heralded as a cure for the region 's isolation from the rest of the industrialized world . 
 By November 1869 , the Gardiner rail depot , to the south of New Paltz , was ceremoniously opened by the railroad 's president , Floyd McKinstry . The station immediately began to see regular traffic . A second Gardiner station was constructed in the hamlet of Forest Glen , in the northern part of Gardiner . The railroad company was contractually obligated to start construction in New Paltz by May 18 , 1870 , and work on the New Paltz station commenced that day . The depot was designed to be 20 by 80 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 by 24 @.@ 4 m ) . The design included freight and baggage rooms , as well as a water tank and engine house . The station had two waiting rooms , while most stations on the Wallkill line only had one . The New Paltz station , as with the other Wallkill Valley stations , was based on " standard patterns ... rather than [ being designed ] by individual architects " . 
 Half the station 's lumber came from Honesdale , Pennsylvania , via the Delaware and Hudson Canal and its framework was raised on July 1 , 1870 . Work was completed by September 1870 . John C. Deyo had provided the carpentry , Snyder and Fuller painted it , and John C. Shaffer was the contractor . Shaffer had also constructed living quarters for the railroad 's workers . 
 The masonry for a bridge over the Plattekill Creek between Gardiner and New Paltz was completed by late June 1870 , and trestle work was done by July . Beginning in late September 1870 , the railroad had begun laying tracks between Gardiner and New Paltz . The tracks reached the Plattekill Creek bridge by the end of October , and the rail line reached New Paltz on December 1 , 1870 . 
 = = Opening and early operation = = 
 The rail line was officially opened in New Paltz on December 20 , 1870 , during a day @-@ long celebration . At that time , the Wallkill Valley line was connected to the Erie Railroad 's Montgomery – Goshen branch to the south ; an inaugural train containing about 350 passengers ran to Goshen , making stops at each station along the way , before heading back to New Paltz . The station 's telegraph was used to " receive ... election returns " throughout the 1870s . 
 On March 3 , 1880 , four men robbed the station 's safe . They broke into the depot late at night and dragged the safe to the center of the station . They then attempted to drill holes into the safe and explode it with gunpowder , but failing that , cut off one of its sides . The contents of the safe were 300 cigars and a few bills and papers . After the suspects were arrested in Poughkeepsie , the local sheriff was reluctant to transfer the suspects to New Paltz . The Poughkeepsie police were insistent that they be paid immediately for their services . The day after their arrest , the men were allowed to go to a barber shop for a shave ; some witnesses were unable to identify the suspects because of this , and the officers were publicly chided for incompetence . Cigars in the suspects ' pockets were identical to the cigars in the safe , and along with tools recovered from the site , they were used to identify the men . The suspects were brought to a jail in Kingston pending the ruling of a grand jury that April . A large crowd gathered at the New Paltz depot to watch them depart . The men were described as " <unk> of the first water " , possibly " stylish " , and so proficient at safe @-@ cracking that , " if they [ had ] any chance at all , or [ got ] hold of any weapon , they [ would ] pick their way thro ' the jail as easily as boring through a lime heap " . The men were subsequently convicted . As a result of the burglary , station agent Dwight Marsh was given a revolver , and it became policy not to keep valuables in the safe overnight . On December 8 , 1880 , another thief broke a window at the depot and stole a box of cigars . 
 Two sheds had been built adjacent to the station by 1881 . The land the sheds were built on was purchased the previous year by Mohonk Mountain House co @-@ founder Albert Smiley for $ 500 . The sheds were built for the resort 's horses . During this period , as many as 14 stagecoaches each day transported guests between the station and Mohonk . The West Shore Railroad purchased the Wallkill Valley line in June 1881 , and placed an additional siding by the depot in 1887 to allow daily " special extra @-@ fare trains ... for the Minnewaska and Mohonk visitors " . 
 President Chester A. Arthur visited the station with his daughter in 1884 . He was welcomed by the railroad 's director and brought to Lake Mohonk . President Rutherford B. Hayes occasionally attended conferences at the Mohonk Mountain House . In 1892 , several townspeople held a reception for him at the station , giving him " three rousing cheers " . Other notable Mountain House guests who arrived by train were opera singer Ernestine Schumann @-@ Heink and orator William Jennings Bryan . A sewage line was installed from the station to the Wallkill River in 1905 . 
 = = Springtown station = = 
 As soon as the station in the village was completed , a second station was built at Springtown , a hamlet in the northwestern part of the town of New Paltz that once sported " its own post office , church , school , hotel , a gambling den ... and a bevy of bars " . The station was planned to be two stories tall with an area of 16 by 40 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 by 12 @.@ 2 m ) . A 413 @-@ foot ( 126 m ) bridge across the Wallkill River to Springtown was completed by December 1870 , and the station was constructed at the point where the rail line crossed Coffey Road . Throughout its history , the Springtown station was occupied by various tenants who took up residence . 
 The original New Paltz station burned down around 4 : 45 A.M. on April 23 , 1907 , damaging freight and killing station agent E. J. Snyder 's dog . The fire originated in the office stove , and spread rapidly before local fire companies could arrive . A passenger car was used as a temporary station while the building was rebuilt . By late September 1907 , the concrete foundation and the framework of the new building had been put in place , but work on the interior did not begin until November because the lumber had not arrived . The depot was completely rebuilt by December 31 , 1907 , and in active use by February 7 , 1908 . While the original station had a gabled roof , the rebuilt station was hipped . The direction of the new station 's battens was horizontal ; the original station had had vertical slats . The rebuilt freight house was placed a distance from the depot . 
 The building was not fully rebuilt until 1911 . A house was constructed at the site of the Springtown depot the year before it was rebuilt . The New York Public Service Commission , a regulatory agency founded in 1907 , ruled in May 1911 that the new Springtown station was adequate . The Springtown station had no station agent or freight house . In 1925 , sparks shooting off a passing train caused a fire in Springtown that burned down six buildings , causing $ 7 @,@ 000 in damage . The prominence of the New Paltz station , as well as the growth of SUNY New Paltz in the village , caused the decline of Springtown as a community . 
 = = Closure = = 
 Passenger service along the Wallkill Valley line ceased in 1937 , due to the increased usage of automobiles . By December 1958 the building ( then owned by the New York Central Railroad ) was no longer used as a railroad station . It was sold off in 1959 , and hosted a number of local endeavors , serving as a chapter house for the Knights of Columbus and as an office for a public @-@ access television station . Under the ownership of the television station , the roof and floorboards were repaired . 
 In April 1977 , the owner of the property , <unk> and Gold Associates , attempted to open the building as a bar . Their zoning permit was rejected ; the village mayor was " unalterably opposed " to the prospect , and the board believed the proposed bar would lead to complaints from nearby apartments . It was also believed that it would be unsafe to open a bar adjacent to an active rail line , and that such a venture would threaten the nearby Huguenot Street Historic District . On December 31 , 1977 , all regular freight service ceased along the Wallkill Valley line . By the early 1980s the depot had become a " hangout for youths to drink and carouse " and the village considered dismantling it . Conrail , at that time the owner of the rail line , removed all tracks along the corridor between 1983 and 1984 and salvaged the steel . 
 = = Renovation = = 
 Robert Mark Realty bought the former station in 1986 and renovated it at a cost of $ 175 @,@ 000 . Work began in October 1987 and was more than halfway done by January 1988 . Matt <unk> , the architect who had overseen the renovation of the former New Paltz opera house as a restaurant , served as the project 's architect . <unk> Builders served as the contractor . The building 's design follows a Shingle Style architecture and its sidings are both shingle and clapboard . There are bay windows on the east and west faces , and rafters are partly visible . The building served as a real estate office . 
