 On February 9 , 1999 , the village approved a plan to allow the building to open as a 36 @-@ seat Italian restaurant under the co @-@ ownership of two men , Jeff DiMarco and Rocco Panetta . It was at this time the station was given its current name , La Stazione . DiMarco had previously managed construction for an adjacent restaurant , the Gilded Otter . He sold his ownership of La Stazione in August 2000 . 
 The building is adjacent to a rail trail , and there is a 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) bike rack by the building 's northern end . The village of New Paltz purchased its section of the former Wallkill Valley rail corridor from Conrail in 1991 , formally opening it on October 9 , 1993 as a public walkway , the Wallkill Valley Rail Trail . The permit allowing La Stazione to operate as a restaurant also required the placement of a sign in the building 's parking lot to indicate the presence of the trail . The village allowed La Stazione to place a public picnic table under an overhang by the rail trail , on the condition that the restaurant did not provide outdoor food service . In August 1999 , the restaurant was forced to remove a gas tank and gas line that were placed under the trail ; failure to do so could have resulted in the revocation of La Stazione 's certificate of occupancy , preventing the building from being operated as a restaurant . 
 In 2001 , the village was experiencing water drainage issues in the area by the restaurant . By early 2002 , the village approved plans for an expansion of La Stazione , which addressed the drainage issues ; the restaurant offered to install larger pipes than were necessary in exchange for the village " defray [ ing ] their costs " . When the Gardiner station burned down on October 10 , 2002 , La Stazione was left as the last former station of the Wallkill Valley Railroad remaining at its original location . The building 's addition was completed in 2003 . 
 A scene from the 2008 mob film Front Man was filmed at La Stazione ; the film 's director , Ray <unk> , is the cousin of the restaurant 's owner , Rocco Panetta . The scene featured Chris Colombo , son of the late Joseph Colombo , a former boss of the Colombo crime family . Colombo had previously starred in a 2005 mobster documentary on HBO . The building was added to the New Paltz Downtown Historic District on July 24 , 2009 . 
 = = Former Wallkill Valley stations = = 
 Binnewater Historic District 
 Campbell Hall ( Metro @-@ North station ) 
 Kingston , New York railroad stations 
 = Chad Griffin = 
 Chad Hunter Griffin ( born July 16 , 1973 ) is an American political strategist best known for his work advocating for LGBT rights in the United States . 
 Griffin got his start in politics volunteering for the Bill Clinton presidential campaign , which led to a position in the White House Press Office at the age of 19 . Following his stint in the White House and his graduation from Georgetown University , he led a number of political campaigns advocating for or against various California ballot initiatives , as well as a number of fundraising efforts for political candidates , such as Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama . 
 Following the 2008 passage of California 's highly publicized Proposition 8 , which barred the recognition of same @-@ sex marriage , Griffin founded the American Foundation for Equal Rights ( AFER ) to overturn the law . AFER 's challenge , Perry v. Brown was ultimately successful following a decision by the United States Supreme Court in June 2013 . In 2012 , Griffin was appointed president of the Human Rights Campaign , the largest LGBT rights organization in the United States . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Griffin was born in Hope , Arkansas , and grew up 45 miles to the northeast in Arkadelphia . While attending Ouachita Baptist University , he volunteered for the 1992 presidential campaign of Bill Clinton , and , following the election , received a job offer from Dee Dee Myers to join the transition team and administration . Griffin dropped out of college and became , at the age of 19 , the youngest @-@ ever member of a presidential staff . He worked as a White House Press Office manager for two years . There , he also acted as White House liaison to the 1995 film The American President , where he met producer Rob Reiner . Griffin went on to lead Reiner 's charitable foundation and to work with Reiner on numerous political efforts , including the founding of the American Foundation for Equal Rights ( AFER ) . AFER is a nonprofit organization formed to challenge the federal constitutionality of California 's Proposition 8 , which limited legal recognition of marriage in California to opposite @-@ sex couples . After leaving the White House , Griffin entered the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University , from which he graduated in 1997 . Griffin was also a part of Griffin Schein , a consulting firm that he founded with Kristina <unk> , former communications director for Michelle Obama . 
 = = LGBT rights activism = = 
 Griffin , who is himself gay , is best known for his work advocating for LGBT rights , often citing the elevated rate of suicide among gay teens as motivation . In 2008 , Griffin was selected as one of The Advocate 's People of the Year , and in 2013 , Griffin was placed 16th on Out magazine 's " Power 50 " list of the 50 @-@ most powerful LGBT individuals in the United States , moving up from 20th , 28th and 29th positions in 2012 , 2011 and 2010 , respectively . 
 = = = American Foundation for Equal Rights = = = 
 Griffin and Reiner founded AFER in 2008 to challenge the federal constitutionality of California 's Proposition 8 . Prior to AFER 's founding , Griffin had raised funds and produced television ads for the " No on 8 " campaign . This was Griffin 's first professional work on LGBT rights . Following Proposition 8 's passage in 2008 , Griffin and Reiner reflected on the No campaign 's failure , and the possibility of mounting a federal legal challenge . An acquaintance of Reiner 's suggested speaking to conservative lawyer Theodore Olson , who supported the challenge and soon began research on the case . Griffin saw the case and Olson 's support as an opportunity to frame the same @-@ sex marriage debate in nonpartisan terms . It was Olson who later suggested recruiting the contrastingly liberal David Boies as co @-@ counsel , the two had previously litigated opposite sides of Bush v. Gore . Griffin approached Boies , who quickly accepted . 
 Meanwhile , Griffin began discussing the potential case with other LGBT rights organizations . Many of those organizations , including the American Civil Liberties Union , Lambda Legal , and the National Center for Lesbian Rights opposed a federal lawsuit , seeing it as " reckless " and expressing fear that a loss at the Supreme Court could be " devastating " . These same groups would later ask to intervene in the lawsuit , an attempt which Griffin fought and which was ultimately unsuccessful . In a letter to the leaders of those organizations , Griffin wrote " You have unrelentingly and unequivocally acted to undermine this case even before it was filed . In light of this , it is inconceivable that you would zealously and effectively litigate this case if you were successful in intervening . " Griffin also expressed concern that intervention would complicate the trial , making it less efficient and would , as a result , ultimately weaken their case . 
 In May 2009 AFER announced its creation after filing their lawsuit , now styled Hollingsworth v. Perry , which argued that Proposition 8 was unconstitutional on equal protection and due process grounds . The lawsuit 's plaintiffs are two same @-@ sex couples , Kristin Perry and Sandra Stier , Paul <unk> and Jeffrey <unk> . Governor of California Jerry Brown and other state officials are listed as defendants in their official capacities . Perry was successful at district court and at the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals . In December 2012 , the Supreme Court agreed to review the 9th Circuit ruling , and held in June 2013 that the proponents of Proposition 13 had lacked standing for their appeals to the 9th Circuit and Supreme Court , which left the district court ruling intact . On June 28 , California resumed marrying same @-@ sex couples . 
 = = = Other LGBT @-@ related activism = = = 
 In 2012 , Griffin was selected to succeed Joe <unk> as president of the Human Rights Campaign , the largest LGBT advocacy and political lobbying organization in the United States . His appointment was well received by many in the LGBT community , including Cleve Jones , R. Clarke Cooper , and Transgender Law Center executive director <unk> Davis . Griffin assumed his new role on June 11 , 2012 . 
 In May 2012 , Griffin asked a question which , in part , led Vice President Joe Biden to publicly share his support for same @-@ sex marriage . In a May 2012 Meet the Press appearance , Biden recounted that , at a private dinner with LGBT campaign donors , he had been asked " How do you feel about us ? " The dinner was being held at the home of a gay couple and their two children , and Biden told the parents : " I wish every American could see the look of love that those kids had in their eyes for you guys . And they wouldn 't have any doubt about what this is about . " Barack Obama announced his own support a few days later , becoming the first sitting United States president to do so . 
 Griffin was one of several executive producers of the 2009 documentary Outrage , which investigated allegations of homosexuality among a series of political figures who had worked against LGBT rights . Griffin was selected to help raise funds for its production . 
 = = Other work = = 
 Prior to his work opposing Proposition 8 , Griffin has been involved in supporting or opposing a variety of other California ballot initiatives . In 1998 , Reiner hired Griffin to lead an effort to pass California Proposition 10 . Proposition 10 created a tax on cigarettes and other tobacco products sold in California , and directed that income toward early childhood education efforts under the First 5 California Commission . That commission 's executive director , Kristin Perry , later became the named plaintiff in Perry v. Brown . In 2004 , Griffin was campaign director for California Proposition 71 , which authorized the sale of three billion dollars in general obligation bonds to fund stem cell research . Two years later , Griffin led the unsuccessful campaign for passage of California Proposition 87 , which would have established a tax on oil extraction in the state . Funds were to have been used to for alternative energy and energy efficiency efforts . Prior to these initiatives , in 2003 , Griffin ran the Rally to Save Ahmanson Ranch , which successfully advocated for wilderness protection of what became the Upper Las <unk> Canyon Open Space Preserve . Jason Schwartzman shadowed Griffin during this campaign in preparation for Schwartzman 's role as the head of an environmental group in the 2004 film I Heart Huckabees . 
 Griffin 's recent work also includes political fundraising for candidates , his clients have included Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama . He was a member of the national finance committee for Obama 's 2012 reelection campaign , and raised over $ 300 @,@ 000 in that effort . Griffin also sits on the board of Brad Pitt 's Make It Right Foundation New Orleans , which works to build houses for those who lost homes in New Orleans to Hurricane Katrina . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Griffin attended a White House dinner in 2012 . He began dating longtime friend Charlie Joughin in early 2015 . 
 = Pill railway station = 
 Pill railway station was a railway station on the Portishead Branch Line , 7 @.@ 8 miles ( 12 @.@ 6 km ) west of Bristol Temple Meads , serving the village of Pill in North Somerset , England . The station was opened by the Bristol and Portishead Pier and Railway Company on 18 April 1867 . It had two platforms , on either side of a passing loop , with a goods yard and signal box later additions . Services increased until the 1930s , at which point a half @-@ hourly service operated . However the Portishead Branch was recommended for closure by the Beeching report , and the station was closed on 7 September 1964 , although the line saw freight traffic until 1981 . Regular freight trains through the station began to run again in 2002 when Royal Portbury Dock was connected to the rail network . 
 The station is due to be reopened to passenger traffic in 2019 as part of MetroWest , a scheme to increase rail services in the Bristol area . The new station will have a single platform , an accessible footbridge and a car park , with trains running between Portishead and Bristol . 
 = = History = = 
 Pill railway station was opened on 18 April 1867 by the Bristol and Portishead Pier and Railway Company , when services began on their line from the Bristol and Exeter Railway at Portishead Junction to a pier on the Severn Estuary at Portishead . The station served the village of Pill on the south bank of the River Avon . The line was built as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge , and was largely single track . The station was sited in a cutting close to the old centre of Pill , 3 miles 73 chains ( 6 @.@ 3 km ) from the line 's terminus at Portishead , 7 miles 61 chains ( 12 @.@ 5 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 126 miles 12 chains ( 203 @.@ 0 km ) from the Great Western Railway 's terminus at London Paddington . To the east , the railway passed through the village and crossed a valley on the brick @-@ built Pill Viaduct , while to the west the line was largely through flat , open countryside . The station was initially the second along the line from Portishead Junction , after Clifton Bridge and before Portbury . 
 The station at Pill was aligned roughly north @-@ west / south @-@ east , with the line bridged to the east by Station Road and Myrtle Hill . There were two platforms , separated by two running lines , forming a passing loop . The southern " down " platform was for trains towards Portishead , the northern " up " platform for trains towards Bristol . Each platform was provided with a brick shelter and steps up to Station Road . The station building was sited on Station Road , west of the platforms . 
 There were initially six trains per day in each direction on weekdays and one on Sundays , operated by the Bristol and Exeter Railway . The Great Western took over the Bristol and Exeter in 1876 , and in 1884 took over ownership of the Bristol and Portishead . Services increased to nine trains per day on weekdays by 1889 . The line was relaid as 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge in 1880 , coinciding with a lengthening of the platforms , and by 1909 there were 13 trains per day on weekdays and two trains on Sundays . 
 The double track loop through the station was extended at both ends in March 1912 , with the platforms also extended . A small goods yard and coal depot was built at the north @-@ west end of the station at the same time . A signal box was built on the southern platform at the end of the First World War . By 1929 , services had increased to 21 trains per day on weekdays and eight per day on Sundays . This allowed a train every half @-@ hour , with one train per hour running to Bristol Temple Meads and the other terminating at Ashton Gate . Passenger traffic was mainly commuters , to both Bristol and Portishead , as well as people who wished to use the Pill ferry across the river to Shirehampton . During the Second World War , many evacuees from Bristol <unk> into the city from Pill . The station staff at this time consisted of a station master , two porters and two female signallers . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , Pill came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . Passenger services had reduced by 1949 to 13 trains per day on weekdays and seven on Sundays . In 1963 the Beeching report suggested the complete withdrawal of services along the line as a cost @-@ saving measure , and so goods services at Pill were ended on 10 June 1963 ; with the station closing completely on 7 September 1964 . In the final year of operation , there were only six trains on weekdays and none on Sundays . Freight trains continued to pass through the station , but their number decreased over time , and the line fell out of regular use after 30 March 1981 . The line however was kept intact by British Rail , with occasional freight trains , and in 2002 a single track was relaid to allow rail access to Royal Portbury Dock , which brought regular freight traffic . At this time remnants of both platforms could be seen and the station buildings were in commercial use . 
 = = Future = = 
 The Portishead Branch Line is to be reopened as part of the MetroWest scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There had been calls for the line to reopen , primarily due to traffic congestion on the A369 , which is the only route from Portishead to Bristol . A consultation on the reopening plans was held between 22 June and 3 August 2015 to gather views from the community and stakeholders before moving on to detailed designs . The detailed proposals will be subject to a second consultation before the plans are finalised . Due to the additional capital costs , the line will not be electrified , however the design will include passive provision for future electrification . 
 As part of the works , Pill station will be reopened . Trains both to and from Portishead will use the southern platform , which will be resurfaced and provided with a waiting shelter , lighting , passenger information displays and audible announcements . The northern platform , adjacent to the current single track line to Royal Portbury Dock , will not be reinstated , however the track will be retained for freight trains . The two tracks will have a junction east of the station . 
 Initial plans for the station were for access to be from Monmouth Road , which runs parallel to the railway , north of the line . There was to be a fully accessible footbridge across the line , with both ramp and stairs , as well as a pedestrian crossing across Monmouth Road and a lit 50 @-@ space car park on the old goods yard at the eastern end of Monmouth Road . The very end of the goods yard would be maintained for Network Rail access . These plans were changed following an agreement to acquire a property on Station Road . The new plans have the entrance to be on Station Road , at the east end of the site , meaning there would be no need for a footbridge . There would be disabled parking and a pick up / drop off point adjacent to the entrance , although the exact design of this area is still under consideration . Noise mitigation options are to be investigated and there will be improvements to local footpaths . The line is due to reopen in 2020 . 
 It is expected that reopening the station will result in reduced car usage to and from Pill and the surrounding villages . Most station users will walk to the station , with the next largest share being car drivers and car passengers being dropped off , followed by cyclists and bus users . Some parking restrictions are proposed to prevent rail users parking on the local streets , which are narrow and not suitable for widening . 
 Trains along the reopened line will operate between Portishead and Bristol Temple Meads , with two trains per hour in each direction . Services would call at Pill and Parson Street , with aspirations to also call at Bedminster and a reopened Ashton Gate . Trains could also be extended on to the Severn Beach Line . The trains used will be diesel multiple units , likely three carriages long . The line will be operated as part of the Greater Western passenger franchise . Great Western Railway , a subsidiary of FirstGroup , currently operate the Greater Western franchise , however their contract expires in early 2019 , before services to Portishead are due to start . 
 = Be Our Guest = 
 " Be Our Guest " is a song written by lyricist Howard Ashman and composer Alan Menken for Walt Disney Pictures ' 30th animated feature film Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . Recorded by American actor Jerry Orbach and English actress Angela Lansbury as Lumiere and Mrs. Potts , respectively , " Be Our Guest " is a large @-@ scale Broadway @-@ inspired musical number that takes place during the first half of Beauty and the Beast , performed by the castle 's staff of enchanted objects in an elaborate attempt to welcome Belle . Menken initially intended for the melody of " Be Our Guest " to be temporary but was ultimately unable to compose a satisfying one with which to replace it . The song had originally been intended for Belle 's father Maurice . However , " Be Our Guest " had to be entirely re @-@ written as the story evolved in order to return its focus to Belle . 
 " Be Our Guest " has garnered universal acclaim from both film and music critics who , in addition to dubbing the song a show @-@ stopper , praised its catchiness and Orbach 's vocal performance while applauding the scene 's unprecedented use of computer @-@ generated imagery . " Be Our Guest " has since been extolled as one of Disney 's most celebrated and popular songs , establishing itself as one of the studio 's greatest and most iconic . " Be Our Guest " received nominations for both the Golden Globe and Academy Awards for Best Original Song , ultimately losing both to the film 's title song . " Be Our Guest " has been ranked highly on several " best Disney song " countdown lists , garnering recognition from IGN , M and the American Film Institute . In addition to appearing in the Broadway musical adaptation of Beauty and the Beast , " Be Our Guest " was performed by Orbach live at the 64th Academy Awards , has been parodied in an episode of The Simpsons and covered by Alvin and the Chipmunks and The Chipettes . 
 = = Background = = 
 Originally , Beauty and the Beast , under the direction of Richard Purdum , was not intended to be a musical . Then @-@ studio chief Jeffrey Katzenberg made the decision to turn the film into a Broadway @-@ style musical similar to The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Disney 's previous animated film , after he , displeased with the film 's initial story reel , ordered the film scrapped and restarted from scratch . As a result , Purdum resigned , and first @-@ time feature film directors Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale replaced him . 
 Following the Academy Award @-@ winning success of The Little Mermaid , Katzenberg asked the The Little Mermaid songwriting duo of Howard Ashman and Alan Menken to write the songs for and score Beauty and the Beast . At first Ashman , who was at the time writing songs with Menken for a recently pitched idea for another Disney film called Aladdin ( 1992 ) , was reluctant to join the struggling film project , but eventually agreed . 
 Musically , " Be Our Guest " is based on a simple melody that was composed by Menken , who initially had little intention of using it as anything more than just a " dummy . " Upon singing the tune and presenting it to co @-@ writer Ashman , Menken discovered that he was unable to come up with a melody capable of surpassing " that dumb piece of music that I wrote initially because it was just right . " Subsequently , Ashman wrote the song 's lyrics . 
 Originally , the filmmakers had initially intended for " Be Our Guest " to be performed by Lumiere to Belle 's disoriented father Maurice when the character first discovers the Beast 's castle . According to co @-@ director Gary Trousdale , " The song had already been recorded and the sequence partially animated when we decided that it would be more meaningful if it was directed towards Belle " because " she is one of the two main characters and the story revolves around her coming to the castle . " Consequently , the song had to be re @-@ written and the entire scene re @-@ animated . Trousdale explained , " We had to bring Jerry Orbach and all the other vocal talents back into the studio to change all references to gender that appeared in the original recording . " 
 = = Context , scene and analysis = = 
 Beauty and the Beast 's fourth musical number , " Be Our Guest " is set within the first half of the film , occurring shortly after Belle sacrifices her own freedom in return for her father 's , becoming the Beast 's prisoner . Confined to her bedroom when she , upset , stubbornly refuses to join the Beast for dinner , Belle eventually ventures into the kitchen after feeling hungry , where she is greeted by the castle 's staff of enchanted inanimate objects – Mrs. Potts , Cogsworth and Lumiere . Upon insisting that they treat her more like a guest than a prisoner , Lumiere decides to go against the Beast 's orders and invites Belle to dinner . A " food chorus line , " " Be Our Guest " is " a rollicking invitation to Belle from the castle staff . " As one of the film 's most poignant , large @-@ scale , " all @-@ stops @-@ pulled production number [ s ] , " the scene features " dancing plates and other fanciful dinner guests " as they " perform for Belle , hoping to make her stay a little more comfortable . " As the film 's heroine , Belle is served a meal in the form of " a Broadway @-@ quality stage show . " Commonly regarded as the " show @-@ stopper " of Beauty and the Beast , the sequence both visually and musically " derive [ s its ] insatiable energy and excitement from the gradual accumulation of participation . " The Washington Post observed that " ' Be Our Guest ' " involves " the household gadgets enjoin [ ing ] Belle to live with them , " comparing it heavily to the song " Under the Sea " from Disney 's The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , which was also written by Menken and Ashman . Longing to be human , servant and maître d ' Lumiere is also of the impression that he is worth nothing unless he serves , singing , " Life is so unnerving / For a servant who 's not serving . " 
 Significantly , Beauty and the Beast was one of Disney 's earliest feature @-@ length animated films to fully employ computer @-@ generated imagery and technology , utilizing it to a significant extent , as depicted throughout its signature musical numbers " Be Our Guest " and " Beauty and the Beast . " Significantly , " Be Our Guest " " marks the debut of the [ Pixar Image Computer ] system that is featured in the ballroom dance sequence and ' Be Our Guest ' . " Due to its <unk> , the sequence has been noted for " tak [ ing ] full advantage of the advantages of animation . " In terms of character development , " Be Our Guest introduces both Belle and audiences to Lumiere 's " musical expertise . " Additionally , the energetic and flamboyant way in which Lumiere , a suave , French @-@ accented candelabra , is personified and portrayed throughout " Be Our Guest " has often been likened to French entertainer Maurice Chevalier . The Washington Post commented , " The model for Lumiere seems to have been Maurice Chevalier , and the idea is so choice , and so deftly executed , that it places him immediately among the top rank of Disney characters . " American actor and singer Jerry Orbach , who provided the voice of Lumiere , himself admitted to People that the character was very much him doing a deliberate impersonation of Chevalier . 
 Described as both a " musical montage " and the " magical set piece " of Beauty and the Beast , " Be Our Guest " is " a big production number featuring dancing cutlery . " Analyzing the scene 's complex , elaborate choreography , film critics have observed the profound influence that American filmmaker and choreographer Busby Berkeley has had on " Be Our Guest " , deeming its lively " Busby Berkeley @-@ style choreography " both " joyous and charming " while commenting , " Without the confines of camera range , there are virtually no limits to how spectacular an animated Berkeley scene can be ... most notably ... ' Be Our Guest ' . " David Kronke of Amazon.com hailed the song itself as " an inspired Busby Berkeley homage . " Similarly , the Dance Films Association wrote , " the ' Be Our Guest ' number features practically all of the techniques employed by Berkeley in his musical comedies , " while The New York Times called " Be Our Guest " a " Busby Berkeley @-@ style number in which Belle is serenaded by furniture and dishes . " Film critic Roger Ebert joked that the " Be Our Guest " choreography resembles " Busby Berkeley running amok . " Additionally , Jerry Griswold , author of The Meanings of " Beauty and the Beast " : A Handbook , observed several similarities between " Be Our Guest " and a scene from Maurice Sendak and Carole King 's musical Really Rosie . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Written in the key of B ♭ major , " Be Our Guest " is , according to the song 's official sheet music which , published by Walt Disney Music Publishing , is available at Musicnotes.com , a Broadway musical @-@ inspired song . An energetic , " turbo @-@ charged Broadway chorus number , " " Be Our Guest " was written in common time at a " free " tempo of 50 beats per minute , spanning a length of three minutes and forty @-@ four seconds . In " Be Our Guest , " Orbach 's " low " tenor or baritone vocal range spans roughly three octaves , from the low note of F3 to the high note of D ♭ 6 . Described as a " scintillating , " " jolly , " " lavish and bouncy " song , " Be Our Guest " is , according to TV Guide , a " boisterous " number , comparing it to songs from the Broadway musicals Hello , Dolly ! and Mame . With the film 's " roots in Broadway , " Beliefnet described " Be Our Guest " as a " rousing " and " tuneful ballad . " Musically , the song , according to Film.com , has a total of four key changes and modulations , beginning slowly and " gradually build [ ing ] ... to a thunderous , bring @-@ the @-@ house @-@ down climax . " 
 Additionally described as " a spark of Gallic vaudeville that lights a flame to both [ entertainers ] Maurice Chevalier and Yves Montand , " " Be Our Guest " depicts both " fun " and " humour . " Extending a warm , energetic invitation towards Belle , the first verse of the song is preceded by a spoken introduction . It reads , at first in French , " Ma <unk> Mademoiselle , it is with deepest pride and greatest pleasure that we welcome you tonight . And now we invite you to relax , let us pull up a chair as the dining room proudly presents : your dinner , " immediately succeeded by the sung lyrics " Be our guest , be our guest , put our service to the test , " continuing with " Go on , unfold your menu / take a glance and then you 'll / be our guest / oui , our guest / be our guest . " A nostalgic Lumiere muses about being human , pining for the " good old days when we were useful . " Furthermore , Lumiere voices his need to serve , singing , " Life is so unnerving / For a servant who 's not serving . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Be Our Guest " has been universally lauded , receiving widespread critical acclaim and garnering nearly unanimously positive reviews from both film and music critics . Hailing it as a " crowd @-@ pleasing production number , " TV Guide drew similarities between " Be Our Guest " and songs from the Broadway musicals Hello , Dolly ! and Mame . The Globe and Mail 's Jennie Punter called the song " show @-@ stopping . " Similarly , Drew Taylor of Indiewire echoed Punter 's statement , writing , " when the enchanted wait staff dazzle the captive Belle , assuring her that she 's not a prisoner she 's a guest of the castle , " the result is ultimately " show @-@ stopping . " Writing for the Austin Chronicle , Kathleen Maher , who generally panned the film 's songs and musical numbers , liked " Be Our Guest " , describing it as Beauty and the Beast 's " only ... magical set piece . " Ranking Beauty and the Beast : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack as Disney 's greatest soundtrack , Moviefone 's Sandie Angulo Chen highlighted " Be Our Guest " , noting its " infectious quality " while <unk> it as an " amazing food chorus line . " JoBlo.com wrote that " Be Our Guest " is both " eye @-@ popping " and " impossibly catchy . " Orbach 's performance as Lumiere has also garnered significant praise . Filmtracks.com commented , " the ever popular ' Be Our Guest ' ... flourish [ es ] due to a spirited lead performance by Jerry Orbach . " Similarly , Hollywood.com cited in the website 's biography of the actor , " Among the highlights of [ Beauty and the Beast ] was Orbach 's delivery of the showstopping number ' Be Our Guest ' . " 
 Several critics have awarded specific praise to " Be Our Guest " ' s choreography , comparing it extensively to the work of director and choreographer Busby Berkeley . In addition to hailing " Be Our Guest " as " delightful , " Candice Russel of the Sun @-@ Sentinel wrote , " In setting the table for Belle , Lumiere and friends concoct a Busby Berkeley song @-@ and @-@ dance extravaganza . " The Deseret News ' Chris Hicks described " the Busby Berkeley @-@ style ' Be Our Guest ' " as " first @-@ rate . " Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly highlighted the scene , writing , " The set pieces are <unk> pleasing , especially the Busby Berkeley @-@ style dancing @-@ kitchenware spectacular , ' Be Our Guest ' . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews coined " ' Be Our Guest ' ... the animated equivalent of Broadway show @-@ stoppers , with all the energy and audacity of something choreographed by Busby Berkeley . " Calling it a " wonderful musical number , " Roger Ebert enthused , " ' Be Our Guest ' is a rollicking invitation to Belle from the castle staff , choreographed like Busby Berkeley running amok . " In review of the 2011 3D re @-@ release of Beauty and the Beast , Stephen Whitty of The Star @-@ Ledger commented , " The illusion of depth does add more life to the enchanted housewares — particularly the ' Be Our Guest ' number , with its Busby Berkeley <unk> . " 
 While Beauty and the Beast 's several theatrical re @-@ releases and reissues have been met with generally mixed reviews , critical response towards the " Be Out Guest " musical sequence has remained predominantly positive . Reviewing the 2001 IMAX re @-@ release of the film , the Los Angeles Times ' Charles Solomon felt that the inclusion of the deleted song " Human Again " was unnecessary , preferring " Be Our Guest " and writing , " a second major production number simply isn 't needed ; ' Be Our Guest ' is sufficient . " Similarly , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer 's William Arnold wrote , " On the other hand , it 's understandable why [ " Human Again " ] was cut from the original . It 's almost too similar to the film 's show @-@ stopper , ' Be Our Guest ' . " Reviewing the film 's 2012 3D conversion , Todd Gilchrist of Boxoffice wrote that " Be Our Guest " is " effective , immersive and maybe even memorable . " Meanwhile , Annlee Ellingson of Paste wrote , " It 's thrilling to experience this film 's major set pieces on the big screen again , especially the Broadway @-@ infused ' Be Our Guest ' number . " The Times @-@ Picayune 's Mike Scott wrote , " But then the 3 @-@ D all but disappears until the ' Be Our Guest ' number -- with its artfully surreal dance of the dishes . " Andrew Pulver of The Guardian , who otherwise criticized the film 's songs , praised " Be Our Guest " , writing , " Apart from the spectacular Busby <unk> [ ' ] Be Our Guest [ ' ] , the film pretty much grinds to a halt whenever one of the songs ... starts up . " Likewise , Neil Smith of Total Film concluded that " only ‘ Be Our Guest ’ and the ballroom swoop really benefit from a stereoscopic make @-@ over that doesn ’ t do the hand @-@ drawn remainder many favours . " 
 Although vastly critically acclaimed , the song was not entirely void of some minor criticism . <unk> , Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic commented , " numbers like ' Be Our Guest ' provides evidence that Lumiere and co. are infinitely preferable as entertaining flatware . " On Lansbury 's performance , Tan joked , " The singer 's delightfully personable contribution is almost reason enough to forgive Disney for thinking her English accent ... would not look out of place in a film set in 18th century France . " A more negative review was written by Pete Vonder Haar of The Houston Press . Observing that Beauty and the Beast " was Disney 's first stab at incorporating computer animation , " he felt that " the results are , now , pretty primitive , " concluding , " I recall thinking the dancing forks during ' Be Our Guest ' ... looked pretty bad and time has not been kind . " The song has also been compared to " Under the Sea " from The Little Mermaid , most of which have been mixed . Jay Boyar the Orlando Sentinel opined , " ' Be Our Guest ' ... is the closest thing in Beauty and the Beast to the bubbly ' Under the Sea ' extravaganza in The Little Mermaid , " while Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman 's review was much more negative , describing the song as " merely serviceable " and concluding , ' Be Our Guest , ' ... sorry to say , is no ' Under the Sea ' . " Likewise , Desson Howe of The Washington Post panned both the song and Lumiere , writing , " the <unk> 's Maurice Chevalier accent is clearly intended to substitute for the Caribbean @-@ <unk> lobster in Mermaid . And the ensemble song , ' Be Our Guest , ' in which the household gadgets enjoin Belle to live with them , is an obvious attempt to reprise a similar Mermaid number , ' Under the Sea . ' But it 's just under par . " 
 = = = Awards , accolades and legacy = = = 
 Alongside the songs " Beauty and the Beast " and " Belle , " " Be Our Guest " was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 64th Academy Awards in 1992 . Having garnered three separate Academy Award nominations for Best Original Song , Beauty and the Beast became the first film in the history of the Academy Awards to achieve this rare feat ; this would not be repeated until <unk> nominated for the award in 2007 . Ultimately , " Be Our Guest " lost to the film 's title song . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Beauty and the Beast producer Don Hahn revealed that Disney feared that having three songs nominated for Best Original Song would result in a draw or three @-@ way tie . Therefore , while " Beauty and the Beast " received heavy promotion from the studio , significantly less was given to " Be Our Guest " and " Belle . " " Be Our Guest " was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 49th Golden Globe Awards in 1992 , losing again to " Beauty and the Beast . " In 2004 , the American Film Institute nominated " Be Our Guest " for its " 100 Years … 100 Songs " ranking . 
 <unk> believes that " Be Our Guest " represents " what Disney is all about . " Dubbed one of the most memorable songs from Beauty and the Beast , while lauded as a " favorite , " a " classic " and " one of the greatest showstoppers " in film history , " Be Out Guest " is commonly cited as one of Disney 's greatest songs . As Beauty and the Beast 's " most frequently heard song , " BuzzSugar ranked " Be Our Guest " third on the website 's list of the " 25 Disney Songs We Will Never Stop Singing " . Calling the song a " gem , " author Maggie <unk> wrote that " Be Our Guest " was " one of the first [ Disney ] songs to get permanently lodged in your brain . " Oh No They Didn 't ranked " Be Our Guest " eighth on its list of " The Top 25 Disney Songs of All Time " , while IGN ranked the song third , with author Lucy O 'Brien writing , " Of all the brilliant numbers peppered throughout Beauty and the Beast , it 's the turbo @-@ charged Broadway chorus number [ ' ] Be Our Guest [ ' ] that 's the stand @-@ out , " describing it as " one of the best songs ever devised by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman . " " Be Our Guest " was ranked seventh on M 's " Top 20 Disney Songs of All Time " list , with author Stephanie <unk> citing " Be our guest , be our guest , put our service to the test " as her favorite lyrics . Meanwhile , HitFix ranked " Be Our Guest " sixth on their own list o " The 20 Best Disney Songs of All Time . " Additionally , while ranking Lumiere the thirty @-@ ninth " Best Animated Movie Character " of all @-@ time , Empire hailed " Be Our Guest " as the character 's best moment and " Stroke of genius , " writing , " The song ... sees Lumiere introduce perhaps the greatest dining experience in animation history . " While ranking the " 50 Greatest Fairy Tale Movies , " on which Beauty and the Beast ranked second , Total Film highlighted " Be Our Guest " as the film 's " Most Magical Moment . " Film.com ranked " Be Our Guest " the thirteenth " Greatest Musical Number ... in Movie History , " describing the song as " a masterpiece of showtune construction " while lauding its Busby Berkeley @-@ inspired choreography . " Be Our Guest " was the only animated musical number included on the website 's list of 50 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In 1992 , Jerry Orbach performed " Be Our Guest " at the 64th Academy Awards . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Covers and parodies = = = 
 In 1995 , Alvin and the Chipmunks and The Chipettes recorded a cover of " Be Our Guest " for their Disney @-@ themed concept album When You Wish Upon a Chipmunk . 
 In the Animaniacs parody episode " Cutie and the Beast " , Yakko and Wakko Warner sing a version entitled " She 's a Pest . " 
 In The Simpsons sixth season episode " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " ( 1995 ) , " Be Our Guest " is parodied by the character Mr. Burns when he performs the song " See My Vest " . New York magazine @-@ run website Vulture.com ranked the song eighth on its list of " The Ten Best Simpsons Songs " . 
 In South Park : Bigger , Longer and Uncut , the song is parodied by Big Gay Al when he performs the song " I 'm Super " . 
 An Oscar @-@ themed rendition of the song was performed by Seth MacFarlane at the 85th Academy Awards . 
 In 2013 , English television personalities Ant & Dec appeared in a Christmas television advertisement for the supermarket Morrisons . In the minute @-@ long commercial , a computer @-@ animated gingerbread man named Ginger serenades Ant & Dec to the tune of " Be Our Guest , " inviting them to enjoy the store 's products . 
 In the Disney Channel Original Movie Descendants , Prince Ben ( the son of Belle and the Beast ) and the <unk> Prep Glee Club perform an a cappella hip @-@ hop version of the song before Ben 's coronation . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 " Be Our Guest " was also featured as an elaborate production number in the Broadway musical adaptation of Beauty and the Beast , which ran from 1994 to 2007 . Originally performed by American actors Gary Beach and Beth Fowler , who originated the roles of Lumiere and Mrs. Potts , respectively , " Be Our Guest " was " a spectacular dance of illuminated saucers , showgirls bedecked with spinning plates , and giant @-@ size bottles spewing streams of brilliant sparkles . " In addition to " performance [ s ] by eye @-@ catching cutlery , plates , a tablecloth and napkins , " the musical number featured " a show @-@ stopping routine [ from ] a dancing doormat . " 
 Reception towards the Broadway treatment of " Be Our Guest " has been generally mixed . While some theatre critics , such as Alex Bentley of <unk> , felt that " Be Our Guest " " remain [ s ] as timeless as ever , " The Christian Science Monitor 's Karen Campbell criticized the number 's lavishness , feeling that it compromised the story Campbell wrote , " Only in the fantastical ' Be Our Guest ' number ... does the show 's extraordinary technological magic threaten to derail the story line . " However , some critics did positively comment on the fact that the Broadway adaptation of " Be Our Guest " was more than simply a " cookie @-@ cutter " carbon copy rendition of the original version featured in the animated film . 
 = Coronation of the British monarch = 
 The coronation of the British monarch is a ceremony ( specifically , initiation rite ) in which the monarch of the United Kingdom is formally invested with regalia and crowned at Westminster Abbey . It corresponds to the coronations that formerly took place in other European monarchies , all of which have abandoned coronations in favour of inauguration or enthronement ceremonies . 
 The coronation usually takes place several months after the death of the previous monarch , as it is considered a joyous occasion that would be inappropriate while mourning continues . This interval also gives the planners enough time to complete the elaborate arrangements required . For example , Queen Elizabeth II was crowned on 2 June 1953 , having ascended the throne on 6 February 1952 ; the date of her coronation was announced almost a year in advance , and preparations inside the abbey took five months . 
 The ceremony is performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury , the most senior cleric in the Church of England , of which the monarch is head . Other clergy and members of the nobility also have roles ; most participants in the ceremony are required to wear ceremonial uniforms or robes and coronets . Many other government officials and guests attend , including representatives of other countries . 
 The essential elements of the coronation have remained largely unchanged for the past thousand years . The sovereign is first presented to , and acclaimed by , the people . He or she then swears an oath to uphold the law and the Church . Following that , the monarch is anointed with holy oil , invested with regalia , and crowned , before receiving the homage of his or her subjects . Wives of kings are then anointed and crowned as queen consort . The service ends with a closing procession , and since the 20th century it has been traditional for the Royal Family to appear later on the balcony of Buckingham Palace , before attending a banquet there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development of the English coronation = = = 
 The main elements of the coronation service and the earliest form of oath were devised by Saint Dunstan for the coronation of King Edgar in 973 AD . It drew on ceremonies used by the Kings of the Franks and those used in the ordination of bishops . Two versions of coronation services , known as ordines ( from the Latin ordo meaning " order " ) or <unk> , survive from before the Norman Conquest . It is not known if the First Rescension was ever used in England and it was the Second Rescension which was used by Edgar in 973 and by subsequent Anglo @-@ Saxon and early Norman kings . 
 A Third Rescension was probably compiled during the reign of King Henry I and was used at the coronation of King Stephen in 1135 . While retaining the most important elements of the Anglo @-@ Saxon rite , it borrowed heavily from the consecration of the Holy Roman Emperor from the Pontificale Romano @-@ <unk> , a book of German liturgy compiled in Mainz in 961 , thus bringing the English tradition into line with continental practice . It remained in use until the Coronation of Edward II in 1308 when the Fourth <unk> was first used , having been compiled over several preceding decades . Although influenced by its French counterpart , the new ordo focussed on the balance between the monarch and his nobles and on the oath , neither of which concerned the absolutist French kings . One manuscript text of this <unk> is the Liber Regalis at Westminster Abbey which has come to be regarded as the definitive version . 
 Following the start of the Reformation in England , the boy king Edward VI had been crowned in the first Protestant coronation in 1547 , during which Archbishop Thomas Cranmer preached a sermon against idolatry and " the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome " . However , six years later , he was succeeded by his half @-@ sister , Mary I , who restored the Catholic rite . In 1559 , Elizabeth I underwent the last English coronation under the auspices of the Catholic Church ; however , Elizabeth 's insistence on changes to reflect her Protestant beliefs resulted in several bishops refusing to officiate at the service and it was conducted by the low @-@ ranking Bishop of Carlisle , Owen Oglethorpe . 
 = = = Scottish coronations = = = 
 Scottish coronations were traditionally held at Scone Abbey , with the king seated on the Stone of Destiny . The original rituals were a fusion of ceremonies used by the kings of Dál Riata , based on the inauguration of Aidan by Columba in 574 , and by the Picts from whom the Stone of Destiny came . A crown does not seem to have been used until the inauguration of Alexander II in 1214 . The ceremony included the laying on of hands by a senior cleric and the recitation of the king 's genealogy . Alexander III was the last Scottish king to be crowned in this way in 1249 , since the Stone was captured by the English forces of Edward I in 1296 . It was later incorporated into the English Coronation Chair and its first certain use at an English coronation was that of Henry IV in 1399 . Pope John XXII in a bull of 1329 granted the kings of Scotland the right to be anointed and crowned . No record exists of the exact form of the medieval rituals , but a later account exists of the coronation of the 17 @-@ month @-@ old infant King James V at Stirling Castle in 1513 . The ceremony was held in a church , since demolished , within the castle walls and was conducted by the Bishop of Glasgow , because the Archbishop of St Andrews had been killed at the Battle of Flodden . It is likely that the child would have been knighted before the start of the ceremony . The coronation itself started with a sermon , followed by the anointing and crowning , then the coronation oath , in this case taken for the child by an unknown noble or priest , and finally an oath of fealty and acclamation by the congregation . 
 James VI of Scotland had been crowned in The Church of the Holy Rude , Stirling , in 1567 and became James I of Great Britain in 1603 . Charles I travelled north for a Scottish coronation at Holyrood Abbey in Edinburgh in 1633 , but caused consternation amongst the Presbyterian Scots by his insistence on elaborate High Anglican ritual , arousing " <unk> <unk> of <unk> of <unk> " . Charles II underwent a simple Presbyterian coronation ceremony at Scone in 1650 , but his brother James II was never crowned in Scotland , although Scottish peers attended his coronation in London , setting a precedent for future ceremonies . 
 = = = Modern coronations = = = 
 The Liber Regalis was translated into English for the first time for the Coronation of James I in 1601 as a result of the Reformation in England . James II who was a Catholic , ordered a truncated version omitting the Eucharist in 1685 , but this was restored for later monarchs . Only four years later , the service was again revised by Henry Compton for the Coronation of William and Mary and this has formed the basis of subsequent coronation services . However , in the 20th century , liturgical scholars have sought to restore the spiritual meaning of the ceremony by rearranging the elements with reference to the medieval texts , creating a " complex marriage of innovation and tradition " . 
 = = = Timing = = = 
 The timing of the coronation has varied throughout British history . King Edgar 's coronation was some 15 years after his accession in 957 and may have been intended to mark the high point of his reign , or that he reached the age of 30 , the age at which Jesus Christ was baptised . Harold II was crowned on the day after the death of his predecessor , Edward the Confessor , the rush probably reflecting the contentious nature of Harold 's succession ; whereas the first Norman monarch , William I " The Conqueror " , was also crowned on the day he became king , 25 December 1066 , but three weeks since the surrender of English nobles and bishops at <unk> , allowing time to prepare a spectacular ceremony . Most of his successors were crowned within weeks , or even days , of their accession . Edward I was fighting in the Ninth Crusade when he acceded to the throne in 1272 ; he was crowned soon after his return in 1274 . Edward II 's coronation , similarly , was delayed by a campaign in Scotland in 1307 . Henry VI was only a few months old when he acceded in 1422 ; he was crowned in 1429 , but did not officially assume the reins of government until he was deemed of sufficient age , in 1437 . Pre @-@ modern coronations were usually either on a Sunday , the Christian Sabbath , or on a Christian holiday . Edgar 's coronation was at Pentecost , William I 's on Christmas Day , possibly in imitation of the Byzantine emperors , and King John 's was on Ascension Day . Elizabeth I consulted her astrologer , John Dee , before deciding on an auspicious date . The coronations of Charles II in 1661 and Anne in 1702 were on St George 's Day , the feast of the patron saint of England . 
 Under the Hanoverian monarchs in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , it was deemed appropriate to extend the waiting period to several months , following a period of mourning for the previous monarch and to allow time for preparation of the ceremony . In the case of every monarch since and including George IV , at least one year has passed between accession and coronation , with the exception of George VI , whose predecessor did not die but abdicated . The coronation date had already been set ; planning simply continued with a new monarch . 
 Since a period of time has often passed between accession and coronation , some monarchs were never crowned . Edward V and Lady Jane Grey were both deposed before they could be crowned , in 1483 and 1553 , respectively . Edward VIII also went uncrowned , as he abdicated in 1936 before the end of the customary one @-@ year period between accession and coronation . A monarch , however , accedes to the throne the moment their predecessor dies , not when they are <unk> i.e. " The King is dead . Long live the King . " 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon monarchs used various locations for their coronations , including Bath , Kingston upon Thames , London , and Winchester . The last Anglo @-@ Saxon monarch , Harold II , was crowned at Westminster Abbey in 1066 ; the location was preserved for all future coronations . The basic elements of the coronation ceremony have also remained the same for the last thousand years ; it was devised in 973 by Dunstan . When London was under the control of the French , Henry III was crowned at Gloucester in 1216 ; he later chose to have a second coronation at Westminster in 1220 . Two hundred years later , Henry VI also had two coronations ; as King of England in London in 1429 , and as King of France in Paris in 1431 . 
 = = = Coronation of consorts and others = = = 
 Coronations may be performed for a person other than the reigning monarch . In 1170 , Henry the Young King , heir apparent to the throne , was crowned as a second king of England , subordinate to his father Henry II ; such coronations were common practice in mediaeval France and Germany , but this is only one of two instances of its kind in England ( the other being that of Ecgfrith of Mercia in 796 , crowned whilst his father , Offa of Mercia , was still alive ) . More commonly , a king 's wife is crowned as queen consort . If the king is already married at the time of his coronation , a joint coronation of both king and queen may be performed . The first such coronation was of Henry II of England and Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1154 ; seventeen such coronations have been performed , including that of the co @-@ rulers William III and Mary II . The most recent was that of George VI and the former Elizabeth Bowes @-@ Lyon in 1937 . If the king married , or remarried , after his coronation , or if his wife were not crowned with him for some other reason , she might be crowned in a separate ceremony . The first such separate coronation of a queen consort in England was that of Matilda of Flanders in 1068 ; the last was Anne Boleyn 's in 1533 . The most recent King to wed post @-@ coronation , Charles II , did not have a separate coronation for his bride , Catherine of Braganza . Following the English Civil War , Oliver Cromwell declined the crown but underwent a coronation in all but name in his second investiture as Lord Protector in 1657 . 
 = = = Bringing coronations to the people = = = 
 The idea of the need to gain popular support for a new monarch by making the ceremony a spectacle for ordinary people , started with the coronation in 1377 of Richard II who was a 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy , thought unlikely to command respect simply by his physical appearance . On the day before the coronation , the boy king and his retinue were met outside the City by the Lord Mayor , Aldermen and the livery companies , and he was conducted to the Tower of London where he spent the night in vigil . The following morning , the king travelled on horseback in a great procession through the decorated City streets to Westminster . Bands played along the route , the public conduits flowed with red and white wine , and an imitation castle had been built in Cheapside , probably to represent the New Jerusalem , where a girl blew gold leaf over the king and offered him wine . Similar , or even more elaborate pageants continued until the coronation of Charles II in 1661 . Thereafter , there was only a short procession from Westminster Hall to the abbey . For the coronation of George IV in 1831 , a state procession from St James 's Palace to the abbey was instituted , and this pageantry is an important feature of the modern event . 
 In early modern coronations , the events inside the Abbey were usually recorded by artists and published in elaborate folio books of engravings , the last of these was published in 1905 depicting the coronation which had taken place three years earlier . Re @-@ enactments of the ceremony were staged at London and provincial theatres ; in 1761 , a production featuring the Westminster Abbey Choir at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden ran for three months after the real event . In 1902 , a request to record the ceremony on a gramophone record was rejected , but Sir Benjamin Stone photographed the procession into the abbey . Nine years later , at the coronation of George V , Stone was allowed to photograph the recognition , the presentation of the swords , and the homage . 
 The coronation of George VI in 1937 was broadcast on radio by the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) , and parts of the service were filmed and shown in cinemas . The state procession was shown live on the new BBC Television Service , the first major outside broadcast . At Elizabeth II 's coronation in 1953 , most of the proceedings inside the Abbey were also televised by the BBC . Originally , events as far as the choir screen were to be televised live , with the remainder to be filmed and released later after any mishaps were edited out . This would prevent television viewers from seeing most of the highlights of the coronation , including the actual crowning , live ; it led to controversy in the press and even questions in Parliament . The organising committee subsequently decided the entire ceremony would be televised , except for the anointing and communion , which had also been excluded from photography at the last coronation . It was revealed 30 years later that the about @-@ face was due to the personal intervention of the Queen . It is estimated that over 20 million people watched the broadcast in the United Kingdom . As a result of the coronation , public interest in television rose significantly . 
 = = = Commonwealth realms = = = 
 The need to include the various elements of the British Empire in coronations was not considered until 1902 , when it was attended by the prime ministers and governors @-@ general of the British Dominions , by then almost completely autonomous , and also by many of the rulers of the Indian Princely States and the various British <unk> . An Imperial Conference was held afterwards . In 1911 , the procession inside the Abbey included the banners of the Dominions and the Indian Empire along with the traditional banners of the Home Nations . By 1937 , the Statute of Westminster 1931 had made the Dominions fully independent , and the wording of the coronation oath had to be amended to include their names and confine the elements concerning religion to the United Kingdom . 
 Thus since 1937 , the monarch has been simultaneously crowned as sovereign of several independent nations besides the United Kingdom , known since 1953 as the Commonwealth realms . Elizabeth II was asked , for example : " Will you solemnly promise and swear to govern the Peoples of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , the Union of South Africa , Pakistan and Ceylon , and of your Possessions and other Territories to any of them belonging or pertaining , according to their respective laws and customs ? " 
 = = Participants = = 
 Attendees include foreign and Commonwealth dignitaries as well as Britons , some of whom participate in the ceremony directly . For Elizabeth II 's coronation in 1953 , 8 @,@ 000 guests were squeezed into the Abbey and each person had to make do with a maximum of 18 inches ( 46 cm ) of seating . 
 = = = Clergy = = = 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury , who has precedence over all other clergy and all laypersons except members of the Royal Family , traditionally officiates at coronations ; in his or her absence , another bishop appointed by the monarch may take the Archbishop 's place . There have , however , been several exceptions . William I was crowned by the Archbishop of York , since the Archbishop of Canterbury had been appointed by the Antipope Benedict X , and this appointment was not recognised as valid by the Pope . Edward II was crowned by the Bishop of Winchester because the Archbishop of Canterbury had been exiled by Edward I. Mary I , a Catholic , refused to be crowned by the Protestant Archbishop Thomas Cranmer ; the coronation was instead performed by the Bishop of Winchester . Elizabeth I was crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle ( to whose see is attached no special precedence ) because the senior prelates were " either dead , too old and infirm , unacceptable to the queen , or unwilling to serve " . Finally , when James II was deposed and replaced with William III and Mary II jointly , the Archbishop of Canterbury refused to recognise the new Sovereigns ; he had to be replaced by the Bishop of London . Hence , in almost all cases where the Archbishop of Canterbury has failed to participate , his place has been taken by a senior cleric : the Archbishop of York is second in precedence , the Bishop of London third , the Bishop of Durham fourth , and the Bishop of Winchester fifth . 
 = = = Great Officers of State = = = 
 The Great Officers of State traditionally participate during the ceremony . The offices of Lord High Steward and Lord High Constable have not been regularly filled since the 15th and 16th centuries respectively ; they are , however , revived for coronation ceremonies . The Lord Great Chamberlain <unk> the Sovereign with the ceremonial vestments , with the aid of the Groom of the Robes and the Master ( in the case of a king ) or Mistress ( in the case of a queen ) of the Robes . 
 The Barons of the Cinque Ports also participated in the ceremony . Formerly , the Barons were the Members of the House of Commons representing the Cinque Ports of Hastings , New Romney , Hythe , Dover and Sandwich . Reforms in the 19th century , however , integrated the Cinque Ports into a regular constituency system applied throughout the nation . At later coronations , Barons were specially designated from among the city councillors for the specific purpose of attending coronations . Originally , the Barons were charged with bearing a ceremonial canopy over the Sovereign during the procession to and from Westminster Abbey . The last time the Barons performed such a task was at the coronation of George IV in 1821 . The Barons did not return for the coronations of William IV ( who insisted on a simpler , cheaper ceremonial ) and Victoria . At coronations since Victoria 's , the Barons have attended the ceremony , but they have not carried canopies . 
 = = = Other claims to attend the coronation = = = 
 Many landowners and other persons have honorific " duties " or privileges at the coronation . Such rights are determined by a special Court of Claims , over which the Lord High Steward traditionally presided . The first recorded Court of Claims was convened in 1377 for the coronation of Richard II . By the Tudor period , the hereditary post of Lord High Steward had merged with the Crown , and so Henry VIII began the modern tradition of naming a temporary Steward for the coronation only , with separate commissioners to carry out the actual work of the court . 
 In 1952 , for example , the Court accepted the claim of the Dean of Westminster to advise the Queen on the proper procedure during the ceremony ( for nearly a thousand years he and his predecessor abbots have kept an unpublished Red Book of practices ) , the claim of the Lord Bishop of Durham and the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells to walk beside the Queen as she entered and exited the Abbey and to stand on either side of her through the entire coronation ritual , the claim of the Earl of Shrewsbury in his capacity as Lord High Steward of Ireland to carry a white staff . The legal claim of the Queen 's Scholars of Westminster School to be the first to acclaim the monarch on behalf of the common people was formally disallowed by the Court , but in practice their traditional shouts of " Vivat ! Vivat Regina ! " were still incorporated into the Coronation Anthem . 
 = = Dress = = 
 = = = Sovereign 's robes = = = 
 The Sovereign wears a variety of different robes and other garments during the course of the ceremony : 
 Crimson surcoat – the regular dress during most of the ceremony , worn under all other robes . In 1953 , Elizabeth II wore a newly made gown in place of a surcoat . 
 Robe of State of crimson velvet or Parliament Robe – the first robe used at a coronation , worn on entry to the Abbey and later at State Openings of Parliament . It consists of an ermine cape and a long crimson velvet train lined with further ermine and decorated with gold lace . 
 Anointing gown – a simple and austere garment worn during the anointing . It is plain white , bears no decoration and fastens at the back . 
 <unk> <unk> ( " shroud tunic " ) – the first robe with which the Sovereign is invested . It is a loose white undergarment of fine linen cloth edged with a lace border , open at the sides , sleeveless and cut low at the neck . It symbolises the derivation of Royal authority from the people . 
 <unk> – the second robe with which the Sovereign is invested . It is a long coat of gold silk which reaches to the ankles and has wide @-@ flowing sleeves . It is lined with rose @-@ coloured silk , trimmed with gold lace , woven with national symbols and fastened by a sword belt . It derives from the full dress uniform of a consul of the Byzantine Empire . 
 Robe Royal or <unk> Regale – the main robe worn during the ceremony and used during the Crowning . It is a four @-@ square mantle , lined in crimson silk and decorated with silver coronets , national symbols and silver imperial eagles in the four corners . It is lay , rather than liturgical , in nature . 
 Stole Royal or <unk> – a gold silk scarf which accompanies the Robe Royal , richly and heavily embroidered with gold and silver thread , set with jewels and lined with rose @-@ coloured silk and gold fringing . 
 Purple surcoat – the counterpart to the crimson surcoat , worn during the final part of the ceremony . 
 Imperial Robe of purple velvet – the robe worn at the conclusion of the ceremony , on exit from the Abbey . It comprises an embroidered ermine cape with a train of purple silk velvet , trimmed with Canadian ermine and fully lined with pure silk English satin . The purple recalls the imperial robes of Roman Emperors . 
 In contrast to the history and tradition which surround the Regalia , it is customary for most coronation robes to be newly made for each monarch . The present exceptions are the supertunica and Robe Royal , which both date from the coronation of George IV in 1821 . 
 = = = Official costume = = = 
 Several participants in the ceremony wear special costumes , uniforms or robes . Peers ' robes comprise a full @-@ length crimson velvet coat , and an ermine cape . Rows of sealskin spots on the cape designate the peer 's rank ; dukes use four rows , marquesses three and a half , earls three , viscounts two and a half , and barons and lords of Parliament two . Royal dukes use six rows of ermine , ermine on the front of the cape and long trains borne by pages . Peeresses ' ranks are designated not by sealskin spots , but by the length of their trains and the width of the ermine edging on the same . For duchesses , the trains are 1 @.@ 8 m ( 2 yds ) long , for marchionesses one and three @-@ quarters yards , for countesses one and a half yards , for viscountesses one and a quarter yards , and for baronesses and ladies 90 cm ( 1 yd ) . The ermine edgings are 13 cm ( 5 in ) in width for duchesses , 10 cm ( 4 in ) for marchionesses , 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 in ) for countesses and 5 cm ( 2 in ) for viscountesses , baronesses and ladies . The robes of peers and peeresses are used only during coronations . The canopy @-@ bearers wear their Garter robes as well as Tudor @-@ style underdress . 
 = = = Crowns and coronets = = = 
 Peers wear coronets , as do most members of the Royal Family ; such coronets display heraldic emblems based on rank or association to the monarch . The heir @-@ apparent 's coronet displays four crosses @-@ pattée alternating with four fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis , surmounted by an arch . The same style , without the arch , is used for the children and siblings of Sovereigns . The coronets of children of the heir @-@ apparent display four fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis , two crosses @-@ pattée and two strawberry leaves . A fourth style , including four crosses @-@ pattée and four strawberry leaves , is used for the children of the sons and brothers of Sovereigns . The aforementioned coronets are borne instead of any coronets based on peerage dignities . The coronets of dukes show eight strawberry leaves , those of marquesses four strawberry leaves alternating with four raised silver balls , those of earls eight strawberry leaves alternating with eight raised silver balls , those of viscounts sixteen silver balls and those of barons six silver balls . Peeresses use the same design , except that they appear on smaller circlets than the peers ' coronets . 
 Aside from kings and queens , the only individuals authorised to wear crowns ( as opposed to coronets ) are the Kings of Arms , the United Kingdom 's senior heraldic officials . Garter , <unk> , and Norroy and Ulster Kings of Arms have heraldic jurisdiction over England , Wales and Northern Ireland ; Lord Lyon King of Arms is responsible for Scotland . In addition , there is a King of Arms attached to each of the Order of the Bath , Order of St. Michael and St. George and the Order of the British Empire . These have only a ceremonial role , but are authorised by the statutes of their orders to wear the same crown as Garter at a coronation . The crown of a King of Arms is silver @-@ gilt and consists of sixteen acanthus leaves alternating in height , and inscribed with the words Miserere mei Deus secundum magnam <unk> tuam ( Latin : " Have mercy on me O God according to Thy great mercy " , from Psalm 51 ) . The Lord Lyon King of Arms has worn a crown of this style at all coronations since that of George III . Prior to that he wore a replica of the Crown of Scotland . In 2004 a new replica of this crown was created for use by the Lord Lyon at future coronations . 
 = = = Other participants = = = 
 Along with persons of nobility , the coronation ceremonies are also attended by a wide range of political figures , including the Prime Minister and all members of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom , all Governors @-@ General and Prime Ministers of the Commonwealth realms , all Governors of British Crown Colonies , as well as the Heads of State of dependent nations . Dignitaries and representatives from other nations are also customarily invited . 
 = = = Guests = = = 
 In the 20th century , guests not participating directly wore court dress or white tie of some form . Ladies wore long evening gowns with tiaras or similar . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Recognition and oath = = = 
 The Sovereign enters Westminster Abbey wearing the crimson surcoat and the Robe of State of crimson velvet . 
 Once the Sovereign takes his or her seat on the Chair of Estate , the Garter Principal King of Arms , the Archbishop of Canterbury , the Lord Chancellor , the Lord Great Chamberlain , the Lord High Constable and the Earl Marshal go to the east , south , west and north of the Abbey . At each side , the Archbishop calls for the Recognition of the Sovereign , with the words , 
 Sirs , I here present unto you [ name ] , your undoubted King ( Queen ) . Wherefore all you who are come this day to do your homage and service , are you willing to do the same ? 
 After the people acclaim the Sovereign at each side , the Archbishop administers an oath to the Sovereign . Since the Glorious Revolution , the Coronation Oath Act of 1688 has required , among other things , that the Sovereign " Promise and <unk> to <unk> the People of this Kingdome of England and the Dominions thereto belonging according to the Statutes in Parlyament Agreed on and the Laws and Customs of the same " . The oath has been modified without statutory authority ; for example , at the coronation of Elizabeth II , the exchange between the Queen and the Archbishop was as follows : 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury : Will you solemnly promise and swear to govern the Peoples of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , the Union of South Africa , Pakistan and Ceylon , and of your Possessions and other Territories to any of them belonging or pertaining , according to their respective laws and customs ? 
 The Queen : I solemnly promise so to do . 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury : Will you to your power cause Law and Justice , in Mercy , to be executed in all your judgments ? 
 The Queen : " I will . " 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury : Will you to the utmost of your power maintain the Laws of God and the true profession of the Gospel ? Will you to the utmost of your power maintain in the United Kingdom the Protestant Reformed Religion established by law ? Will you maintain and preserve inviolable the settlement of the Church of England , and the doctrine , worship , discipline , and government thereof , as by law established in England ? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of England , and to the Churches there committed to their charge , all such rights and privileges , as by law do or shall appertain to them or any of them ? 
 The Queen : All this I promise to do . The things which I have here before promised , I will perform , and keep . So help me God . 
 The monarch additionally swears an oath to preserve Presbyterian church government in the Church of Scotland . This part of the oath is taken before the coronation . 
 Once the taking of the oath concludes , an ecclesiastic presents a Bible to the Sovereign , saying " Here is Wisdom ; This is the royal Law ; These are the lively Oracles of God . " The Bible used is a full King James Bible , including the Apocrypha . At Elizabeth II 's coronation , the Bible was presented by the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland . Once the Bible is presented , the Holy Communion is celebrated , but the service is interrupted after the Nicene Creed . 
 = = = Anointing = = = 
 After the Communion service is interrupted , the crimson robe is removed , and the Sovereign proceeds to the Coronation Chair , which has been set in a prominent position , wearing the anointing gown . In 1953 , the chair stood atop a dais of several steps . This mediaeval chair has a cavity in the base into which the Stone of Scone is fitted for the ceremony . Also known as the " Stone of Destiny " , it was used for ancient Scottish coronations until brought to England by Edward I. It has been used for every coronation at Westminster Abbey since . Until 1996 , the stone was kept with the chair in Westminster Abbey , but it was moved that year to Edinburgh Castle in Scotland , where it is displayed on the proviso that it be returned to England for use at future coronations . 
 Once seated in this chair , a canopy of golden cloth is held over the monarch 's head for the anointing . The duty of acting as canopy @-@ bearers was performed in recent coronations by four Knights of the Garter . This element of the coronation service is considered sacred and is concealed from public gaze ; it was not photographed in 1937 or televised in 1953 . The Dean of Westminster pours consecrated oil from an eagle @-@ shaped ampulla into a spoon with which the Archbishop of Canterbury anoints the Sovereign in the form of a cross on the hands , head , and heart . The filigreed spoon is the only part of the mediaeval Crown Jewels which survived the commonwealth . The Archbishop concludes by reciting a blessing . 
 = = = Investing = = = 
 The Sovereign is then <unk> in the <unk> <unk> , over which is placed the supertunica . 
 The Lord Great Chamberlain presents the spurs , which represent chivalry . The Archbishop of Canterbury , assisted by other bishops , then presents the Sword of State to the Sovereign . The Sovereign is then further robed , this time receiving bracelets and putting the Robe Royal and Stole Royal on top of the supertunica . The Archbishop then delivers several Crown Jewels to the Sovereign . First , he delivers the Orb , a hollow gold sphere decorated with precious and semi @-@ precious stones . The Orb is surmounted by a cross , representing the rule of Jesus over the world ; it is returned to the Altar immediately after being received . Next , the Sovereign receives a ring representing his or her " marriage " to the nation . The Sovereign 's Sceptre with Dove , so called because it is surmounted by a dove representing the Holy Ghost , and the Sovereign 's Sceptre with Cross , which incorporates Cullinan I , are delivered to the Sovereign . 
 = = = Crowning = = = 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury lifts St Edward 's Crown from the high altar , sets it back down , and says a prayer : " Oh God , the crown of the faithful ; bless we beseech thee and sanctify this thy servant our king / queen , and as thou dost this day set a crown of pure gold upon his / her head , so enrich his / her royal heart with thine abundant grace , and crown him / her with all princely virtues through the King Eternal Jesus Christ our Lord . Amen " . 
 The Dean of Westminster picks up the crown and he , the archbishop and several other high @-@ ranking bishops proceed to the Coronation Chair where the crown is handed back to the archbishop , who reverently places it on the monarch 's head . At this moment , the king or queen is crowned , and the guests in the abbey cry in unison three times , " God Save the King / Queen " . Peers of the realm and officers of arms put on their coronets , the trumpeters sound a fanfare and church bells ring out across the kingdom , as gun salutes echo from the Tower of London and Hyde Park . 
 Finally , the archbishop , standing before the monarch , says another prayer : " God crown you with a crown of glory and righteousness , that having a right faith and manifold fruit of good works , you may obtain the crown of an everlasting kingdom by the gift of him whose kingdom <unk> for ever . " To this the guests , with heads bowed , say " Amen " . 
 = = = <unk> and homage = = = 
 The Sovereign is then borne into the Throne . The Archbishops and Bishops swear their fealty , saying " I , N. , Archbishop [ Bishop ] of N. , will be faithful and true , and faith and truth will bear unto you , our Sovereign Lord [ Lady ] , King [ Queen ] of this Realm and Defender of the Faith , and unto your heirs and successors according to law . So help me God . " The peers then proceed to pay their homage , saying " I , N. , Duke [ Marquess , Earl , Viscount , Baron or Lord ] of N. , do become your liege man of life and limb , and of earthly worship ; and faith and truth will I bear unto you , to live and die , against all manner of folks . So help me God . " The clergy pay homage together , led by the Archbishop of Canterbury . Next , members of the Royal Family pay homage individually . The peers are led by the premier peers of their rank : the Dukes by the Premier Duke , the Marquesses by the Premier Marquess , and so forth . 
 If there is a queen consort , she is anointed and crowned in a simple ceremony immediately after homage is paid . The Communion service interrupted earlier is resumed and completed . 
 = = = Closing procession = = = 
 The Sovereign then exits the Coronation Theatre , entering St Edward 's Chapel ( within the Abbey ) , preceded by the bearers of the Sword of State , the Sword of Spiritual Justice , the Sword of Temporal Justice and the blunt Sword of Mercy . St Edward 's Crown and all the other regalia are laid on the High Altar ; the Sovereign removes the Robe Royal and Stole Royal , exchanges the crimson surcoat for the purple surcoat and is <unk> in the Imperial Robe of purple velvet . He or she then wears the Imperial State Crown and takes into his or her hands the Sceptre with the Cross and the Orb and leaves the chapel while all present sing the national anthem . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music played at coronations has been primarily classical and religiously inspired . Much of the choral music uses texts from the Bible which have been used at coronations since King Edgar 's coronation at Bath in 973 and are known as coronation anthems . In the coronations following the Reformation , court musicians , often the Master of the King 's Music , were commissioned to compose new settings for the traditional texts . The most frequently used piece is Zadok the Priest by George Frideric Handel ; one of four anthems commissioned from him for George II 's coronation in 1727 . It has featured in every coronation since , an achievement unparalleled by any other piece . Previous settings of the same text were composed by Henry Lawes for the 1661 coronation of Charles II and Thomas Tomkins for Charles I in 1621 . 
 In the 19th century , works by major European composers were often used , but when Sir Frederick Bridge was appointed Director of Music for the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII , he decided that it ought to be a celebration of four hundred years of British music . Compositions by Thomas Tallis , Orlando Gibbons and Henry Purcell were included alongside works by contemporary composers such as Arthur Sullivan , Charles Villiers Stanford and John Stainer . Hubert Parry 's I was glad was written as the entrance anthem for the 1902 coronation , replacing an 1831 setting by Thomas Attwood ; it contains a bridge section partway through so that the King 's or Queen 's Scholars of Westminster School can exercise their right to be the first commoners to acclaim the sovereign , shouting their traditional " <unk> " as he or she enters the coronation theatre . This anthem and Charles Villiers Stanford 's Gloria in excelsis ( 1911 ) have also been used regularly in recent coronations , as has the national anthem , God Save the Queen ( or King ) . Other composers whose music featured in Elizabeth II 's coronation include Sir George Dyson , Gordon Jacob , Sir William Henry Harris , Herbert Howells , Sir William Walton , Samuel Sebastian Wesley , Ralph Vaughan Williams and the Canadian @-@ resident but English @-@ born Healey Willan . Ralph Vaughan Williams suggested that a congregational hymn be included . This was approved by the Queen and the Archbishop of Canterbury , so Vaughan Williams recast his 1928 arrangement of Old 100th , the English metrical version of Psalm 100 , the Jubilate Deo ( " All people that on earth do dwell " ) for congregation , organ and orchestra : the setting has become ubiquitous at festal occasions in the Anglophone world . 
 = = After @-@ celebrations = = 
 Since the 20th century it has been traditional for the newly crowned monarch and other members of the royal family to sit for official portraits at Buckingham Palace and appear on the balcony , from where in 1953 they watched a flypast by the Royal Air Force . During the appearance , the monarch wears the Imperial State Crown and , if there is one , the queen consort wears her consort crown . In the evening , a fireworks display is held nearby , usually in Hyde Park . In 1902 , Edward VII 's illness led to the postponement of a fourteen @-@ course banquet at Buckingham Palace . In 1953 , two state banquets were held in the ballroom there , and classical music was provided by the Royal Horse Guards . 
 Historically , the coronation was immediately followed by a banquet held in Westminster Hall in the Palace of Westminster ( which is also the home to the Houses of Parliament ) . The King or Queen 's Champion ( the office being held by the <unk> family in connection with the Manor of <unk> ) would ride into the hall on horseback , wearing a knight 's armour , with the Lord High Constable riding to his right and the Earl Marshal riding to his left . A herald would then make a proclamation of the readiness of the Champion to fight anyone denying the monarch . After 1800 , the form for this was as follows : 
 If any person , of what degree soever , high or low , shall deny or <unk> our Sovereign Lord ... , King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , son and next heir unto our Sovereign Lord the last King deceased , to be the right heir to the Imperial Crown of this Realm of Great Britain and Ireland , or that he ought not to enjoy the same ; here is his Champion , who saith that he <unk> , and is a false traitor , being ready in person to combat with him ; and in this quarrel will adventure his life against him , on what day soever he shall be appointed . 
 The King 's Champion would then throw down the gauntlet ; the ceremony would be repeated at the centre of the hall and at the High Table ( where the Sovereign would be seated ) . The Sovereign would then drink to the Champion from a gold cup , which he would then present to the latter . This ritual was dropped from the coronation of Queen Victoria and was never revived . The offices of Chief Butler of England , Grand Carver of England and Master Carver of Scotland were also associated with the coronation banquet . 
 Banquets have not been held at Westminster Hall since the coronation of George IV in 1821 . His coronation was the most elaborate in history ; his brother and successor William IV eliminated the banquet on grounds of economy , ending a 632 @-@ year @-@ old tradition . 
 = = <unk> as Emperor of India = = 
 Queen Victoria assumed the title Empress of India in 1876 . A durbar ( court ) was held in Delhi , India on 1 January 1877 to proclaim her assumption of the title . The queen did not attend personally , but she was represented there by the Viceroy , Lord Lytton . A similar durbar was held on 1 January 1903 to celebrate the accession of Edward VII , who was represented by his brother the Duke of Connaught . In 1911 , George V also held a durbar which he and his wife Queen Mary attended in person . Since it was deemed inappropriate for a Christian anointing and coronation to take place in a largely non @-@ Christian nation , George V was not crowned in India ; instead , he wore an imperial crown as he entered the Durbar . Tradition prohibited the removal of the Crown Jewels from the United Kingdom ; therefore , a separate crown , known as the Imperial Crown of India , was created for him . The Emperor was enthroned , and the Indian princes paid homage to him . Thereafter , certain political decisions , such as the decision to move the capital from Calcutta to Delhi , were announced at the Durbar . The ceremony was not repeated , and the imperial title was abandoned by George VI in 1948 , a year after Indian gained independence . 
 = New York State Route 120A = 
 New York State Route 120A ( NY 120A ) is a state highway in southern Westchester County , New York , in the United States . It serves as an alternate route to the southern half of NY 120 running along the New York – Connecticut state line . The southern terminus of route is at NY 120 in Harrison . Its northern terminus is at NY 120 in North Castle . Most of the 8 @.@ 55 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 76 km ) route straddles the New York – Connecticut state line , and part of the route is physically located in Connecticut . However , this part of the highway is not recognized by Connecticut as " Route 120A " , and is considered to be part of NY 120A by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 120A begins at an intersection with NY 120 next to I @-@ 287 ( the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway ) in the village of Harrison . Although the route is signed north – south , it initially heads east along Westchester Avenue , overlapping with the northbound direction of NY 120 for 0 @.@ 08 miles ( 0 @.@ 13 km ) as the road passes under I @-@ 287 . East of the freeway overpass , NY 120 leaves to the northwest while NY 120A continues eastward on the four @-@ lane Westchester Avenue . It serves residential areas until it crosses into Rye Brook , where the street makes a turn to the southeast and soon enters more commercialized neighborhoods . In the center of Rye Brook , the route meets Ridge Street ( unsigned County Route 54 or CR 54 ) . The businesses give way to homes east of the junction , and NY 120A passes into the village of Port Chester just three blocks from Ridge Street near an intersection with Bowman Avenue ( CR 104 ) . 
 Inside the village limits , maintenance of NY 120A shifts from the state to Westchester County , which inventories the route as CR 112 . Continuing on , the road narrows to two lanes ahead of Port Chester 's central business district , where NY 120A passes the Port Chester Public Library and the village 's post office ahead of a junction with Pearl Street three blocks west of U.S. Route 1 and two blocks west of the Metro @-@ North Railroad . Here , NY 120A turns off Westchester Avenue and onto North Pearl Street , becoming a village @-@ maintained route in the process . The route 's northeastward run on North Pearl Street is brief , however , as NY 120A turns northwest onto King Street after just two blocks . 
 As the route heads away from Pearl Street and Port Chester 's commercial center , the blocks of businesses are gradually replaced with the residential neighborhoods that comprise most of northern Port Chester . About 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) north of Pearl Street , NY 120A passes Lyon Park and reverts to a state @-@ maintained road at an intersection with Putnam Avenue ( unsigned NY <unk> ) . Continuing on , the highway serves King Street School before crossing from Port Chester to Rye Brook several blocks later . In the latter village , the route slowly bends northward toward the Connecticut state line . It eventually reaches the boundary , at which point NY 120A begins to run northwestward along the state line , with the southbound lane in New York and the northbound lane in Connecticut . A short distance later , the route connects to the Hutchinson River Parkway and its Connecticut continuation , the Merritt Parkway ( Route 15 ) , by way of a modified cloverleaf interchange . 
 Not far from the interchange , the highway bends northward to fully enter Connecticut . Although the road is located outside of New York , it is maintained by NYSDOT and considered by the DOT to be part of NY 120A . In Connecticut , NY 120A travels generally northwestward through the town of Greenwich , intersecting several streets of local importance , including Greenwich 's locally maintained continuation of Anderson Hill Road ( CR 18 ) . The foray into Connecticut ends soon afterward , and the route proceeds to straddle the state line for another 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) . Along this stretch , the route passes a series of commercial buildings in an otherwise residential area . Another New York @-@ maintained stretch in Greenwich , Connecticut , soon follows as the route veers north to bypass the grounds of Westchester County Airport . As the route heads past the airport , it meets Rye Lake Road , Greenwich 's connection to both the airport and Airport Road ( CR 135 ) . 
 Past Rye Lake Road , NY 120A serves the Griffith E. Harris Golf Club and several mansions on its way back to the New York – Connecticut state line . Just north of the airport , NY 120A turns westward onto Gateway Lane , a small east – west street leading back into New York and the town of North Castle . Gateway Lane and NY 120A both end just inside the state line at an intersection with NY 120 . Here , NY 120 changes names from Purchase Street to King Street as the route continues NY 120A 's course along the state line . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of Westchester Avenue from Purchase Street in Harrison to North Pearl Street in Port Chester was originally designated as part of NY 119 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . By the following year , a spur route connecting NY 119 to NY 120 in North Castle was assigned the NY 120A designation . It began at Westchester Avenue and went north to the Connecticut state line via Ridge Street , where it turned northwest to follow King Street to NY 120 . The section of King Street between Ridge Street and Port Chester was designated as NY 120B by 1932 . 
 NY 120A was truncated c . 1938 to consist only of the Ridge Street portion of its alignment while NY 120B was extended northwest along King Street to NY 120 in North Castle and southward along NY 119 and Ridge Street to a terminus at NY 120 in Rye . The NY 120B designation was eliminated by the following year , at which time NY 120A was reextended along King Street to North Castle and realigned east of Ridge Street to follow old NY 120B into Port Chester . NY 119 was truncated on its east end to NY 22 in White Plains c . 1961 while NY 120 was rerouted to follow what had been NY 119A south to Rye along Purchase Street . The former routing of NY 119 and NY 120 from Purchase Street to downtown Port Chester became an extension of NY 120A . The routing of NY 120A in Port Chester was modified slightly by 1990 to follow North Pearl Street between Westchester Avenue and King Street . 
 On September 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of the 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) section of NY 120A leading southeast from the northwestern crossing into Connecticut was transferred from Westchester County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The road was one of 10 highways exchanged during the swap . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment = 
 " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . The 26th episode overall , it originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 7 , 1991 . In the episode , Homer gets an illegal cable hook @-@ up . Despite the family 's enjoyment of the new channels , Lisa becomes suspicious that they are stealing cable . Her suspicions are confirmed by Reverend Lovejoy and she protests by no longer watching television . Meanwhile , Bart manages to tune into a sexually explicit adult movie channel , and Homer invites his friends over to watch a boxing match , but Lisa 's protest gets to him . He decides not to watch the fight and cuts the cable . 
 The episode was written by freelance writer Steve <unk> and directed by Rich Moore . It is based on the Eighth Commandment ( " Thou shalt not steal " ) . The episode marks the debut of Troy McClure who was voiced by Phil Hartman and based on the typical " washed up " Hollywood actor . The character Drederick Tatum , one of the boxers in the boxing match Homer and his friends watch , also makes his first appearance on the show in this episode . 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " received a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 2 , finishing 25th the week it aired . It received favorable reviews from critics and became the second episode of The Simpsons to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The first scene is Homer dreaming on the hammock that he is a Hebrew in the time of Moses , breaking one of the Ten Commandments by stealing . When he wakes up he sees Ned Flanders angrily reject an offer from a dim @-@ witted man to get an illegal cable hook @-@ up for $ 50 , Homer chases after the cable man , who agrees to hook up the Simpsons ' television for free . Homer likes the new channels and spends a lot of time watching the television along with his family . Lisa , however , feels suspicious about the cable hook @-@ up . Following a Sunday School lesson regarding the existence and nature of Hell , Lisa becomes terrified of violations of the Ten Commandments , the adherence to which she is assured will keep one 's soul safe from Hell . She fears that because Homer violated the Eighth Commandment , he will go to Hell when he dies . 
 Lisa additionally opposes other examples of common thievery all around her . She even convinces Marge to pay the cost on two grapes she sampled in a grocery store . Lisa pays a visit to Reverend Lovejoy at church , where he suggests that Lisa cannot turn her father in to the police for the illegal hook @-@ up , since she must continue to " Honour Thy Father and Thy Mother " , according to the Fifth Commandment . He instead encourages Lisa to not watch anything on Homer 's cable hook @-@ up , setting a good example that he hopes others will follow . Marge pleads with Homer to either cut the cable or pay for it , but he refuses to do either , saying that the cable will stay as long as he desires . Meanwhile , Bart sets up posters on the back door for his showing of an adult channel for 50 cents , but he is caught a few seconds later by Homer , who then forbids him from doing it . 
 Homer sees a commercial for " The Bout to Knock the Other Guy Out ! " , a much @-@ anticipated boxing match in which Drederick Tatum will fight for the World Heavyweight Championship . Homer decides to have a party and invites all of his friends to come over and watch the fight . Lisa tries to boycott the party , and this results in Homer making her stay outside on the lawn . Homer ’ s conscience eventually bothers him , more in the form of his daughter 's distress than a moral objection to stealing cable due to a hallucination that he is in prison for stealing cable . He finally gives in to Lisa 's protests , begrudgingly choosing not to watch the last minutes of the fight , and Marge and Maggie join them as well . Bart , on the other hand , does not care , wanting to see the fight , but Homer drags him outside by force . The family sits the fight out and when everyone has left , Homer hesitantly cuts his cable hook @-@ up despite Bart 's objection ; he accidentally ends up cutting the power to the whole neighborhood which causes the screen to become static for a few seconds before cutting to credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " was written by freelance writer Steve <unk> and directed by Rich Moore . It was originally going to be named " Homer vs. the 8th Commandment " , but the writers decided to include Lisa in the title because they wanted the cast to feel as if all their characters were equally represented on the show . The episode is based on the Eighth Commandment ( " thou shall not steal " ) , which is one of the Ten Commandments . The Simpsons writer Al Jean said that " whenever people come up to me and say that The Simpsons is just sort of this outrageous show that has no moral center , I always point them to this [ episode ] , where Homer gets an illegal cable hook @-@ up ( which many people have done in real life ) and suffers enormous consequences . " 
 The Simpsons writer Mike Reiss feels that episodes such as " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " are his favorite episodes to write because they have a " solid theme or an issue " ( in this case , religion and theft ) , that one can " discuss endlessly and just have it present itself in so many different ways . " Producer Jeff Martin said that the writers tried to use a " very strict construction of the Eighth Commandment , " considering cable theft to be " essentially a victimless crime . " " Homer vs. the 8th Commandment " was produced at a time when illegal cable hookups were becoming commonplace in many homes . This episode later inspired the season four episode " Homer the Heretic " , in which Homer stops going to church on Sundays . Based on the Fourth Commandment , " remember the Sabbath and keep it holy " , that episode originated when Jean commented to Reiss , " We had a lot of luck with Homer stealing cable , so maybe we could look to other commandments ? " 
 The episode marks the debut appearance of the character Troy McClure , voiced by Phil Hartman . McClure was based on the typical " washed up " Hollywood actor , and B movie actors Troy Donahue and Doug McClure served as inspiration for his name and certain character aspects . According to show creator Matt Groening , Hartman was cast in the role due to his ability to pull " the maximum amount of humor " out of any line he was given . McClure 's visual appearance is similar to that of Hartman himself . McClure became a recurring character on the show after " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " , but was retired in 1998 after Hartman 's death . In addition to McClure , Hartman also provided the voice of the cable guy . The character Drederick Tatum , one of the boxers in the boxing match Homer and his friends watch , also makes his first appearance on the show in this episode . His physical appearance was based on the American boxer Mike Tyson , and he was named after a real boxer Simpsons writer George Meyer had seen . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene in which Homer stands in front of and is struck by the cable man 's truck resembles a scene in Alfred Hitchcock 's film North by Northwest . Drederick Tatum is based on Mike Tyson . In a joke about Mr. Burns ' age , Burns recalls watching a bare @-@ knuckle match between Gentleman Jim Corbett and " an Eskimo fellow . " The films that are watched by the family on the new cable are Jaws , Die Hard , and Wall Street . One of the X @-@ rated films Bart and his friends watch on cable is called Broadcast Nudes . The title parodies Broadcast News , which was written by Simpsons executive producer James L. Brooks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " finished 25th in ratings for the week of February 4 – 10 , 1991 with a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 2 , and was viewed in approximately 14 million homes . It did better than the show 's season average rank of 32nd , and was the highest rated program on Fox that week . The episode finished second in its timeslot to The Cosby Show , which aired at the same time on NBC and had a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 8 . 
 In The Gospel According to The Simpsons , Mark I. Pinsky writes that the episode has " the structure of an exquisitely crafted twenty @-@ two minute sermon . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson felt that " [ The episode ] helped establish the show ’ s reputation as a master <unk> of pop culture . The introduction of cable into the home allowed [ the writers ] to mock many different movies and other media outlets , and this helped make the episode very entertaining . It also worked in many other ways and offered a fine show . " Writing for MacLean 's magazine , Jaime J. Weinman described " Homer vs. Lisa and the Eighth Commandment " as " the first truly great episode — the one that established The Simpsons as the funniest and most multi @-@ layered sitcom around . The story of Homer stealing cable was an excuse for dozens of parodies of early 90s cable TV , but it was also a story about Homer and his daughter and an examination of how we rationalize little acts of theft in our daily lives . " 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called the episode a " skilful demonstration of a moral dilemma that must have plagued millions since the inception of cable TV . " Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , wrote that " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " is " one of the many demonstrations that while [ The Simpsons ] may have pushed the censorship envelope for its day , it remained moral to its core . The running satire of cable programs is also quite amusing . " 
 The episode won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) . It was the second episode of the show to win the award . It was also nominated in the " Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special " category . 
 = Harvey Milk = 
 Harvey Bernard Milk ( May 22 , 1930 – November 27 , 1978 ) was an American politician who became the first openly gay person to be elected to public office in California , when he won a seat on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors . Politics and gay activism were not his early interests ; he was not open about his homosexuality and did not participate in civic matters until around the age of 40 , after his experiences in the counterculture of the 1960s . 
 Milk moved from New York City to settle in San Francisco in 1972 amid a migration of gay men to the Castro District . He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests , and ran unsuccessfully for political office three times . His theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity , and Milk won a seat as a city supervisor in 1977 . 
 Milk served almost 11 months in office and was responsible for passing a stringent gay rights ordinance for the city . On November 27 , 1978 , Milk and Mayor George Moscone were assassinated by Dan White , another city supervisor who had recently resigned but wanted his job back . Milk 's election was made possible by and was a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics . 
 Despite his short career in politics , Milk became an icon in San Francisco and a martyr in the gay community . In 2002 , Milk was called " the most famous and most significantly open LGBT official ever elected in the United States " . Anne Kronenberg , his final campaign manager , wrote of him : " What set Harvey apart from you or me was that he was a visionary . He imagined a righteous world inside his head and then he set about to create it for real , for all of us . " Milk was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Milk was born in <unk> , New York , to William Milk and Minerva Karns . He was the younger son of Lithuanian Jewish parents and the grandson of Morris Milk , a department store owner who helped to organize the first synagogue in the area . As a child , Harvey was teased for his protruding ears , big nose , and oversized feet , and tended to grab attention as a class clown . He played football in school , and developed a passion for opera ; in his teens , he acknowledged his homosexuality to himself , but kept it a closely guarded secret . Under his name in the high school yearbook , it read , " <unk> Milk — and they say WOMEN are never at a loss for words " . 
 Milk graduated from Bay Shore High School in Bay Shore , New York , in 1947 and attended New York State College for Teachers in Albany ( now the State University of New York at Albany ) from 1947 to 1951 , majoring in mathematics . He also wrote for the college newspaper . One classmate remembered , " He was never thought of as a possible queer — that 's what you called them then — he was a man 's man " . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After graduation , Milk joined the United States Navy during the Korean War . He served aboard the submarine rescue ship USS <unk> ( ASR @-@ 13 ) as a diving officer . He later transferred to Naval Station , San Diego to serve as a diving instructor . In 1955 , he was discharged from the Navy at the rank of lieutenant , junior grade . 
 Milk 's early career was marked by frequent changes ; in later years he would take delight in talking about his metamorphosis from a middle @-@ class Jewish boy . He began teaching at George W. Hewlett High School on Long Island . In 1956 , he met Joe Campbell , at the Jacob Riis Park beach , a popular location for gay men in Queens . Campbell was seven years younger than Milk , and Milk pursued him passionately . Even after they moved in together , Milk wrote Campbell romantic notes and poems . Growing bored with their New York lives , they decided to move to Dallas , Texas , but they were unhappy there and moved back to New York , where Milk got a job as an actuarial statistician at an insurance firm . Campbell and Milk separated after almost six years ; it would be his longest relationship . 
 Milk tried to keep his early romantic life separate from his family and work . Once again bored and single in New York , he thought of moving to Miami to marry a lesbian friend to " have a front and each would not be in the way of the other " . However , he decided to remain in New York , where he secretly pursued gay relationships . In 1962 Milk became involved with Craig Rodwell , who was 10 years younger . Though Milk courted Rodwell ardently , waking him every morning with a call and sending him notes , Milk was uncomfortable with Rodwell 's involvement with the New York Mattachine Society , a gay @-@ rights organization . When Rodwell was arrested for walking in Riis Park , and charged with inciting a riot and with indecent exposure ( the law required men 's swimsuits to extend from above the navel to below the thigh ) , he spent three days in jail . The relationship soon ended as Milk became alarmed at Rodwell 's tendency to agitate the police . 
 Milk abruptly stopped working as an insurance actuary and became a researcher at the Wall Street firm Bache & Company . He was frequently promoted despite his tendency to offend the older members of the firm by ignoring their advice and flaunting his success . Although he was skilled at his job , co @-@ workers sensed that Milk 's heart was not in his work . He started a romantic relationship with Jack Galen McKinley , and recruited him to work on conservative Republican Barry Goldwater 's 1964 presidential campaign . Their relationship was troubled . When McKinley first began his relationship with Milk in late 1964 , he was 16 years old . He was prone to depression and sometimes threatened to commit suicide if Milk did not show him enough attention . To make a point to McKinley , Milk took him to the hospital where Milk 's ex @-@ lover , Joe Campbell , was himself recuperating from a suicide attempt , after his lover Billy Sipple left him . Milk had remained friendly with Campbell , who had entered the avant @-@ garde art scene in Greenwich Village , but Milk did not understand why Campbell 's despondency was sufficient cause to consider suicide as an option . 
 = = = Rise of Castro Street = = = 
 The Eureka Valley of San Francisco , where Market and Castro Streets intersect , had for decades been a blue @-@ collar Irish Catholic neighborhood synonymous with the Most Holy Redeemer Parish ( a few Lutherans of Scandinavian ancestry also lived in the neighborhood ) . Beginning in the late 1960s , however , young families left the neighborhood and moved to Bay Area suburbs , and the city 's economic base eroded as factories moved to cheaper locations nearby and blue @-@ collar port jobs relocated to Oakland . Mayor Joseph Alioto , proud of his working @-@ class background and supporters , based his political career on welcoming developers to provide construction jobs and attracting a Roman Catholic Cardinal to the city . Many blue @-@ collar workers — often Alioto supporters — lost their jobs as large corporations with service industry positions replaced factory and dry dock jobs . San Francisco , which had been " a city of villages " , a decentralized city with ethnic enclaves that each surrounded its own main street , began a demographic change . 
 As the downtown area developed , neighborhoods suffered , including Castro Street . The Most Holy Redeemer Parish shops shut down , and houses were abandoned and shuttered . In 1963 , real estate prices plummeted when most of the working @-@ class families tried to sell their houses quickly after a gay bar opened in the neighborhood . Hippies , attracted to the free love ideals of the Haight @-@ Ashbury area but repulsed by its crime rate , bought some of the cheap Victorian houses . Beginning in the late 1960s , many San Francisco gays who were affluent began to move from the small apartments of the Polk Gulch area , San Francisco 's primary <unk> since the end of World War II , to the large cheap Victorians in the Castro neighborhood . 
 Since the end of World War II , the major port city of San Francisco had been home to a sizable number of gay men expelled from the military who had decided to stay rather than return to their hometowns and face ostracism . By 1969 the Kinsey Institute believed San Francisco had more gay people per capita than any other American city ; when the National Institute of Mental Health asked the Institute to survey homosexuals , the Institute chose San Francisco as its focus . Milk and McKinley were among the thousands of gay men attracted to San Francisco . McKinley was a stage manager for Tom O 'Horgan , a director who started his career in experimental theater , but soon graduated to much larger Broadway productions . They arrived in 1969 with the Broadway touring company of Hair . McKinley was offered a job in the New York City production of Jesus Christ Superstar , and their tempestuous relationship came to an end . The city appealed to Milk so much that he decided to stay , working at an investment firm . In 1970 , increasingly frustrated with the political climate after the U.S. invasion of Cambodia , Milk let his hair grow long . When told to cut it , he refused and was fired . 
 Milk drifted from California to Texas to New York , without a steady job or plan . In New York City he became involved with O 'Horgan 's theater company as a " general aide " , signing on as associate producer for Lenny and for Eve Merriam 's Inner City . The time he had spent with the cast of flower children wore away much of Milk 's conservatism . A contemporary New York Times story about O 'Horgan described Milk as " a sad eyed man — another aging hippie with long , long hair , wearing faded jeans and pretty beads " . Craig Rodwell read the description of the formerly uptight man and wondered if it could be the same person . One of Milk 's Wall Street friends worried that he seemed to have no plan or future , but remembered Milk 's attitude : " I think he was happier than at any time I had ever seen him in his entire life . " 
 Milk met Scott Smith , 18 years his junior , and began another relationship . Milk and Smith returned to San Francisco , where they lived on money they had saved . In March 1973 , after a roll of film Milk left at a local shop was ruined , he and Smith opened a camera store on Castro Street with their last $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Changing politics = = = 
 In the late 1960s , the Society for Individual Rights ( SIR ) and the Daughters of Bilitis ( DOB ) began to work against police persecution of gay bars and entrapment in San Francisco . Oral sex was still a felony , and in 1970 , nearly 90 people in the city were arrested for having sex in public parks at night . Mayor Alioto asked the police to target the parks , hoping the decision would appeal to the Archdiocese and his Catholic supporters . In 1971 , 2 @,@ 800 gay men were arrested for public sex in San Francisco . By comparison , New York City recorded only 63 arrests for the same offense that year . Any arrest for a morals charge required registration as a sex offender . 
 Congressman Phillip Burton , Assemblyman Willie Brown , and other California politicians recognized the growing clout and organization of homosexuals in the city , and courted their votes by attending meetings of gay and lesbian organizations . Brown pushed for legalization of sex between consenting adults in 1969 but failed . SIR was also pursued by popular moderate Supervisor Dianne Feinstein in her bid to become mayor , opposing Alioto . Ex @-@ policeman Richard Hongisto worked for 10 years to change the conservative views of the San Francisco Police Department , and also actively appealed to the gay community , which responded by raising significant funds for his campaign for sheriff . Though Feinstein was unsuccessful , Hongisto 's win in 1971 showed the political clout of the gay community . 
 SIR had become powerful enough for political maneuvering . In 1971 SIR members Jim Foster , Rick Stokes , and Advocate publisher David Goodstein formed the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club , known as simply " Alice " . Alice befriended liberal politicians to persuade them to sponsor bills , proving successful in 1972 when Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon obtained Feinstein 's support for an ordinance outlawing employment discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation . Alice chose Stokes to run for a relatively unimportant seat on the community college board . Though Stokes received 45 @,@ 000 votes , he was quiet , unassuming , and did not win . Foster , however , shot to national prominence by being the first openly gay man to address a political convention . His speech at the 1972 Democratic National Convention ensured that his voice , according to San Francisco politicians , was the one to be heard when they wanted the opinions , and especially the votes , of the gay community . 
 Milk became more interested in political and civic matters when he was faced with civic problems and policies he disliked . One day in 1973 , a state bureaucrat entered Milk 's shop Castro Camera and informed him that he owed $ 100 as a deposit against state sales tax . Milk was incredulous and traded shouts with the man about the rights of business owners ; after he complained for weeks at state offices , the deposit was reduced to $ 30 . Milk fumed about government priorities when a teacher came into his store to borrow a projector because the equipment in the schools did not function . Friends also remember around the same time having to restrain him from kicking the television while Attorney General John N. Mitchell gave consistent " I don 't recall " replies during the Watergate hearings . Milk decided that the time had come to run for city supervisor . He said later , " I finally reached the point where I knew I had to become involved or shut up " . 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 Milk 's reception by the gay political establishment in San Francisco was icy . Jim Foster , who had by then been active in gay politics for 10 years , resented the newcomer 's asking for his endorsement for a position as prestigious as city supervisor . Foster told Milk , " There 's an old saying in the Democratic Party . You don 't get to dance unless you put up the chairs . I 've never seen you put up the chairs . " Milk was furious at the patronizing snub , and the conversation marked the beginning of an antagonistic relationship between the " Alice " Club and Harvey Milk . Some gay bar owners , still battling police harassment and unhappy with what they saw as a timid approach by Alice to established authority in the city , decided to endorse him . 
 Though he had drifted through his life thus far , Milk found his vocation , according to journalist Frances FitzGerald , who called him a " born politician " . At first , his inexperience showed . He tried to do without money , support , or staff , and instead relied on his message of sound financial management , promoting individuals over large corporations and government . He supported the reorganization of supervisor elections from a city @-@ wide ballot to district ballots , which was intended to reduce the influence of money and give neighborhoods more control over their representatives in city government . He also ran on a culturally liberal platform , opposing government interference in private sexual matters and favoring the legalization of marijuana . Milk 's fiery , flamboyant speeches and savvy media skills earned him a significant amount of press during the 1973 election . He earned 16 @,@ 900 votes — sweeping the Castro District and other liberal neighborhoods and coming in 10th place out of 32 candidates . Had the elections been reorganized to allow districts to elect their own supervisors , he would have won . 
 = = = Mayor of Castro Street = = = 
 Milk displayed an affinity for building coalitions from early in his political career . The Teamsters wanted to strike against beer distributors — Coors in particular — who refused to sign the union contract . An organizer asked Milk for assistance with gay bars ; in return , Milk asked the union to hire more gay drivers . A few days later , Milk canvassed the gay bars in and surrounding the Castro District , urging them to refuse to sell the beer . With the help of a coalition of Arab and Chinese grocers the Teamsters had also recruited , the boycott was successful . Milk found a strong political ally in organized labor , and it was around this time that he began to style himself " The Mayor of Castro Street " . As Castro Street 's presence grew , so did Milk 's reputation . Tom O 'Horgan remarked , " Harvey spent most of his life looking for a stage . On Castro Street he finally found it . " 
 Tensions between the older citizens of the Most Holy Redeemer Parish and the gays entering the Castro District were growing , however , and in 1973 , when two gay men tried to open an antique shop , the Eureka Valley Merchants Association ( <unk> ) attempted to prevent them from receiving a business license . Milk and a few other gay business owners founded the Castro Village Association , with Milk as the president . He often repeated his philosophy that gays should buy from gay businesses . Milk organized the Castro Street Fair in 1974 to attract more customers to the area . More than 5 @,@ 000 attended , and some of the <unk> members were stunned ; they did more business at the Castro Street Fair than on any previous day . 
 = = = Serious candidate = = = 
 Although he was a newcomer to the Castro District , Milk had shown leadership in the small community . He was starting to be taken seriously as a candidate and decided to run again for supervisor in 1975 . He reconsidered his approach and cut his long hair , swore off marijuana , and vowed never to visit another gay bathhouse again . Milk 's campaigning earned the support of the teamsters , firefighters , and construction unions . Castro Camera became the center of activity in the neighborhood . Milk would often pull people off the street to work his campaigns for him — many discovered later that they just happened to be the type of men Milk found attractive . 
 Milk favored support for small businesses and the growth of neighborhoods . Since 1968 , Mayor Alioto had been luring large corporations to the city despite what critics labeled " the <unk> of San Francisco " . As blue @-@ collar jobs were replaced by the service industry , Alioto 's weakened political base allowed for new leadership to be voted into office in the city . George Moscone was elected mayor . Moscone had been instrumental in repealing the sodomy law earlier that year in the California State Legislature . He acknowledged Milk 's influence in his election by visiting Milk 's election night headquarters , thanking Milk personally , and offering him a position as a city commissioner . Milk came in seventh place in the election , only one position away from earning a supervisor seat . Liberal politicians held the offices of the mayor , district attorney , and sheriff . 
 Despite the new leadership in the city , there were still conservative strongholds . One of Moscone 's first acts as mayor was appointing a police chief to the embattled San Francisco Police Department ( SFPD ) . He chose Charles Gain , against the wishes of the SFPD . Most of the force disliked Gain for criticizing the police in the press for racial insensitivity and alcohol abuse on the job , instead of working within the command structure to change attitudes . By request of the mayor , Gain made it clear that gay police officers would be welcomed in the department ; this became national news . Police under Gain expressed their hatred of him , and of the mayor for betraying them . 
 = = = Race for State Assembly = = = 
 Keeping his promise to Milk , newly elected Mayor George Moscone appointed him to the Board of Permit Appeals in 1976 , making him the first openly gay city commissioner in the United States . Milk , however , considered seeking a position in the California State Assembly . The district was weighted heavily in his favor , as much of it was based in neighborhoods surrounding Castro Street , where Milk 's sympathizers voted . In the previous race for supervisor , Milk received more votes than the currently seated assemblyman . However , Moscone had made a deal with the assembly speaker that another candidate should run — Art Agnos . Furthermore , by order of the mayor , neither appointed nor elected officials were allowed to run a campaign while performing their duties . 
 Milk spent five weeks on the Board of Permit Appeals before Moscone was forced to fire him when he announced he would run for the California State Assembly . Rick Stokes replaced him . Milk 's firing , and the backroom deal made between Moscone , the assembly speaker , and Agnos , fueled his campaign as he took on the identity of a political underdog . He railed that high officers in the city and state governments were against him . He complained that the prevailing gay political establishment , particularly the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club , were shutting him out ; he referred to Jim Foster and Stokes as gay " Uncle Toms " . He enthusiastically embraced a local independent weekly magazine 's headline : " Harvey Milk vs. The Machine " . 
 Milk 's role as a representative of San Francisco 's gay community expanded during this period . On September 22 , 1975 , President Gerald Ford , while visiting San Francisco , walked from his hotel to his car . In the crowd , Sara Jane Moore raised a gun to shoot him . A former Marine who had been walking by grabbed her arm as the gun discharged toward the pavement . The bystander was Oliver " Bill " Sipple , who had left Milk 's ex @-@ lover Joe Campbell years before , prompting Campbell 's suicide attempt . The national spotlight was on him immediately . On psychiatric disability leave from the military , Sipple refused to call himself a hero and did not want his sexuality disclosed . Milk , however , took advantage of the opportunity to illustrate his cause that public perception of gay people would be improved if they came out of the closet . He told a friend : " It 's too good an opportunity . For once we can show that gays do heroic things , not just all that ca @-@ ca about molesting children and hanging out in bathrooms . " Milk contacted a newspaper . 
 Several days later Herb Caen , a columnist at The San Francisco Chronicle , exposed Sipple as gay and a friend of Milk 's . The announcement was picked up by national newspapers , and Milk 's name was included in many of the stories . Time magazine named Milk as a leader in San Francisco 's gay community . Sipple , however , was besieged by reporters , as was his family . His mother , a staunch Baptist in Detroit , now refused to speak to him . Although he had been involved with the gay community for years , even participating in Gay Pride events , Sipple sued the Chronicle for invasion of privacy . President Ford sent Sipple a note of thanks for saving his life . Milk said that Sipple 's sexual orientation was the reason he received only a note , rather than an invitation to the White House . 
 Milk 's continuing campaign , run from the storefront of Castro Camera , was a study in disorganization . Although the older Irish grandmothers and gay men who volunteered were plentiful and happy to send out mass mailings , Milk 's notes and volunteer lists were kept on scrap papers . Any time the campaign required funds , the money came from the cash register without any consideration for accounting . The campaign manager 's assistant was an 11 @-@ year @-@ old neighborhood girl . Milk himself was hyperactive and prone to fantastic outbursts of temper , only to recover quickly and shout excitedly about something else . Many of his rants were directed at his lover , Scott Smith , who was becoming disillusioned with the man who was no longer the laid @-@ back hippie he had fallen in love with . 
 If the candidate was manic , he was also dedicated and filled with good humor , and he had a particular genius for getting media attention . He spent long hours registering voters and shaking hands at bus stops and movie theater lines . He took whatever opportunity came along to promote himself . He thoroughly enjoyed campaigning , and his success was evident . With the large numbers of volunteers , he had dozens at a time stand along the busy thoroughfare of Market Street as human billboards , holding " Milk for Assembly " signs while commuters drove into the heart of the city to work . He distributed his campaign literature anywhere he could , including among one of the most influential political groups in the city , the Peoples Temple . Milk 's volunteers took thousands of brochures there , but came back with feelings of apprehension . Because the Peoples Temple leader , Jim Jones , was politically powerful in San Francisco ( and supported both candidates ) , Milk allowed Temple members to work his phones , spoke at the Temple and later wrote a letter to President Jimmy Carter defending Jones character , despite private misgivings about the group . But to his volunteers , he said : " Make sure you 're always nice to the Peoples Temple . If they ask you to do something , do it , and then send them a note thanking them for asking you to do it . They 're weird and they 're dangerous , and you never want to be on their bad side . " 
 The race was close , and Milk lost by fewer than 4 @,@ 000 votes . Agnos , however , taught Milk a valuable lesson when he criticized Milk 's campaign speeches as " a downer ... You talk about how you 're gonna throw the bums out , but how are you gonna fix things — other than beat me ? You shouldn 't leave your audience on a down . " In the wake of his loss , Milk , realizing that the Toklas Club would never support him politically , co @-@ founded the San Francisco Gay Democratic Club . 
 = = Broader historical forces = = 
 The fledgling gay rights movement had yet to meet organized opposition in the U.S. In 1977 a few well @-@ connected gay activists in Miami , Florida were able to pass a civil rights ordinance that made discrimination based on sexual orientation illegal in Dade County . A well @-@ organized group of conservative fundamentalist Christians responded , headed by singer Anita Bryant . Their campaign was titled Save Our Children , and Bryant claimed the ordinance infringed her right to teach her children Biblical morality . Bryant and the campaign gathered 64 @,@ 000 signatures to put the issue to a county @-@ wide vote . With funds raised in part by the Florida Citrus Commission , for which Bryant was the spokeswoman , they ran television advertisements that contrasted the Orange Bowl Parade with San Francisco 's Gay Freedom Day Parade , stating that Dade County would be turned into a " hotbed of homosexuality " where " men ... cavort with little boys " . 
 Jim Foster , then the most powerful political organizer in San Francisco , went to Miami to assist gay activists there as election day neared , and a nationwide boycott of orange juice was organized . The message of the Save Our Children campaign was influential , and the result was an overwhelming defeat for gay activists ; in the largest turnout in any special election in the history of Dade County , 70 % voted to repeal the law . 
 = = = Just politics = = = 
 Christian conservatives were inspired by their victory , and saw an opportunity for a new , effective political cause . Gay activists were shocked to see how little support they received . An impromptu demonstration of over 3 @,@ 000 Castro residents formed the night of the Dade County ordinance vote . Gay men and lesbians were simultaneously angry , chanting " Out of the bars and into the streets ! " , and elated at their passionate and powerful response . The San Francisco Examiner reported that members of the crowd pulled others out of bars along Castro and Polk Streets to " deafening " cheers . Milk led marchers that night on a five @-@ mile ( 8 km ) course through the city , constantly moving , aware that if they stopped for too long there would be a riot . He declared , " This is the power of the gay community . Anita 's going to create a national gay force . " Activists had little time to recover , however , as the scenario replayed itself when civil rights ordinances were overturned by voters in Saint Paul , Minnesota ; Wichita , Kansas ; and Eugene , Oregon , throughout 1977 and into 1978 . 
 California State Senator John Briggs saw an opportunity in the Christian fundamentalists ' campaign . He was hoping to be elected governor of California in 1978 , and was impressed with the voter turnout he saw in Miami . When Briggs returned to Sacramento , he wrote a bill that would ban gays and lesbians from teaching in public schools throughout California . Briggs claimed in private that he had nothing against gays , telling gay journalist Randy Shilts , " It 's politics . Just politics . " Random attacks on gays rose in the Castro . When the police response was considered inadequate , groups of gays patrolled the neighborhood themselves , on alert for attackers . On June 21 , 1977 , a gay man named Robert Hillsborough died from 15 stab wounds while his attackers gathered around him and chanted " Faggot ! " Both Mayor Moscone and Hillsborough 's mother blamed Anita Bryant and John Briggs . One week prior to the incident , Briggs had held a press conference at San Francisco City Hall where he called the city a " sexual garbage heap " because of homosexuals . Weeks later , 250 @,@ 000 people attended the 1977 San Francisco Gay Freedom Day Parade , the largest attendance at any Gay Pride event to that point . 
 In November 1976 , voters in San Francisco decided to reorganize supervisor elections to choose supervisors from neighborhoods instead of voting for them in city @-@ wide ballots . Harvey Milk quickly qualified as the leading candidate in District 5 , surrounding Castro Street . 
 = = = Last campaign = = = 
 Anita Bryant 's public campaign opposing homosexuality and the multiple challenges to gay rights ordinances across the United States fueled gay politics in San Francisco . Seventeen candidates from the Castro District entered the next race for supervisor ; more than half of them were gay . The New York Times ran an exposé on the veritable invasion of gay people into San Francisco , estimating that the city 's gay population was between 100 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 out of a total 750 @,@ 000 . The Castro Village Association had grown to 90 businesses ; the local bank , formerly the smallest branch in the city , had become the largest and was forced to build a wing to accommodate its new customers . Milk biographer Randy Shilts noted that " broader historical forces " were fueling his campaign . 
 Milk 's most successful opponent was the quiet and thoughtful lawyer Rick Stokes , who was backed by the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club . Stokes had been open about his homosexuality long before Milk had , and had experienced more severe treatment , once hospitalized and forced to endure electroshock therapy to ' cure ' him . Milk , however , was more expressive about the role of gay people and their issues in San Francisco politics . Stokes was quoted saying , " I 'm just a businessman who happens to be gay , " and expressed the view that any normal person could also be homosexual . Milk 's contrasting populist philosophy was relayed to The New York Times : " We don 't want sympathetic liberals , we want gays to represent gays ... I represent the gay street people — the 14 @-@ year @-@ old runaway from San Antonio . We have to make up for hundreds of years of persecution . We have to give hope to that poor runaway kid from San Antonio . They go to the bars because churches are hostile . They need hope ! They need a piece of the pie ! " 
 Other causes were also important to Milk : he promoted larger and less expensive child care facilities , free public transportation , and the development of a board of civilians to oversee the police . He advanced important neighborhood issues at every opportunity . Milk used the same manic campaign tactics as in previous races : human billboards , hours of handshaking , and dozens of speeches calling on gay people to have hope . This time , even The San Francisco Chronicle endorsed him for supervisor . On election day , November 8 , 1977 , he won by 30 % against sixteen other candidates , and after his victory became apparent , he arrived on Castro Street on the back of his campaign manager 's motorcycle — escorted by Sheriff Richard Hongisto — to what a newspaper story described as a " tumultuous and moving welcome " . 
 Milk had recently taken a new lover , a young man named Jack Lira , who was frequently drunk in public , and just as often escorted out of political events by Milk 's aides . Since the race for the California State Assembly , Milk had been receiving increasingly violent death threats . Concerned that his raised profile marked him as a target for assassination , he recorded on tape his thoughts , and whom he wanted to succeed him if he were killed , adding : " If a bullet should enter my brain , let that bullet destroy every closet door " . 
 = = Supervisor = = 
 Milk 's swearing @-@ in made national headlines , as he became the first non @-@ incumbent openly gay man in the United States to win an election for public office . He likened himself to pioneering African American baseball player Jackie Robinson and walked to City Hall arm in arm with Jack Lira , stating " You can stand around and throw bricks at Silly Hall or you can take it over . Well , here we are . " The Castro District was not the only neighborhood to promote someone new to city politics . Sworn in with Milk were also a single mother ( Carol Ruth Silver ) , a Chinese American ( Gordon Lau ) , and an African American woman ( Ella Hill Hutch ) — all firsts for the city . Daniel White , a former police officer and firefighter , was also a first @-@ time supervisor , and he spoke of how proud he was that his grandmother was able to see him sworn in . 
 Milk 's energy , affinity for pranking , and unpredictability at times exasperated Board of Supervisors President Dianne Feinstein . In his first meeting with Mayor Moscone , Milk called himself the " number one queen " and dictated to Moscone that he would have to go through Milk instead of the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club if he wanted the city 's gay votes — a quarter of San Francisco 's voting population . However , Milk also became Moscone 's closest ally on the Board of Supervisors . The biggest targets of Milk 's ire were large corporations and real estate developers . He fumed when a parking garage was slated to take the place of homes near the downtown area , and tried to pass a commuter tax so office workers who lived outside the city and drove into work would have to pay for city services they used . Milk was often willing to vote against Feinstein and other more tenured members of the board . In one controversy early in his term , Milk agreed with fellow Supervisor Dan White , whose district was located two miles south of the Castro , that a mental health facility for troubled adolescents should not be placed there . After Milk learned more about the facility , he decided to switch his vote , ensuring White 's loss on the issue — a particularly poignant cause that White championed while campaigning . White did not forget it . He opposed every initiative and issue Milk supported . 
 Milk began his tenure by sponsoring a civil rights bill that outlawed discrimination based on sexual orientation . The ordinance was called the " most stringent and encompassing in the nation " , and its passing demonstrated " the growing political power of homosexuals " , according to The New York Times . Only Supervisor White voted against it ; Mayor Moscone enthusiastically signed it into law with a light blue pen that Milk had given him for the occasion . 
 Another bill Milk concentrated on was designed to solve the number one problem according to a recent citywide poll : dog excrement . Within a month of being sworn in , he began to work on a city ordinance to require dog owners to scoop their pets ' feces . Dubbed the " <unk> <unk> law " , its authorization by the Board of Supervisors was covered extensively by television and newspapers in San Francisco . Anne Kronenberg , Milk 's campaign manager , called him " a master at figuring out what would get him covered in the newspaper " . He invited the press to <unk> Park to explain why it was necessary , and while cameras were rolling , stepped in the offending substance , seemingly by mistake . His staffers , however , knew he had been at the park for an hour before the press conference looking for the right place to walk in front of the cameras . It earned him the most fan mail of his tenure in politics and went out on national news releases . 
 Milk had grown tired of Lira 's drinking and considered breaking up with him when Lira called a few weeks later and demanded Milk come home . When Milk arrived , he found Lira had hanged himself . Already prone to severe depression , Lira had attempted suicide previously . One of the longest notes he left for Milk indicated he was upset about the Anita Bryant and John Briggs campaigns . 
 = = = Briggs Initiative = = = 
 John Briggs was forced to drop out of the 1978 race for California governor , but received enthusiastic support for Proposition 6 , dubbed the Briggs Initiative . The proposed law would have made firing gay teachers — and any public school employees who supported gay rights — mandatory . Briggs ' messages supporting Proposition 6 were pervasive throughout California , and Harvey Milk attended every event Briggs hosted . Milk campaigned against the bill throughout the state as well , and swore that even if Briggs won California , he would not win San Francisco . In their numerous debates , which toward the end had been honed to quick back @-@ and @-@ forth banter , Briggs maintained that homosexual teachers wanted to abuse and recruit children . Milk responded with statistics compiled by law enforcement that provided evidence that pedophiles identified primarily as heterosexual , and dismissed Briggs ' assertions with one @-@ liner jokes : " If it were true that children mimicked their teachers , you 'd sure have a helluva lot more nuns running around " . 
 Attendance at Gay Pride marches during the summer of 1978 in Los Angeles and San Francisco swelled . An estimated 250 @,@ 000 to 375 @,@ 000 attended San Francisco 's Gay Freedom Day Parade ; newspapers claimed the higher numbers were due to John Briggs . Organizers asked participants to carry signs indicating their hometowns for the cameras , to show how far people came to live in the Castro District . Milk rode in an open car carrying a sign saying " I 'm from <unk> , N.Y. " He gave a version of what became his most famous speech , the " Hope Speech " , that The San Francisco Examiner said " ignited the crowd " : 
 On this anniversary of Stonewall , I ask my gay sisters and brothers to make the commitment to fight . For themselves , for their freedom , for their country ... We will not win our rights by staying quietly in our closets ... We are coming out to fight the lies , the myths , the distortions . We are coming out to tell the truths about gays , for I am tired of the conspiracy of silence , so I 'm going to talk about it . And I want you to talk about it . You must come out . Come out to your parents , your relatives . 
 Despite the losses in battles for gay rights across the country that year , he remained optimistic , saying " Even if gays lose in these initiatives , people are still being educated . Because of Anita Bryant and Dade County , the entire country was educated about homosexuality to a greater extent than ever before . The first step is always hostility , and after that you can sit down and talk about it . " 
 Citing the potential infringements on individual rights , former governor of California Ronald Reagan voiced his opposition to the proposition , as did Governor Jerry Brown and President Jimmy Carter , the latter in an afterthought following a speech he gave in Sacramento . On November 7 , 1978 , the proposition lost by more than a million votes , astounding gay activists on election night . In San Francisco , 75 percent voted against it . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 On November 10 , 1978 , 10 months after being sworn in , White resigned his position on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors , claiming that his annual salary of $ 9 @,@ 600 was not enough to support his family . Milk was also feeling the pinch of the decrease in income when he and Scott Smith were forced to close Castro Camera a month before . Within days , White requested that his resignation be withdrawn and he be reinstated , and Mayor Moscone initially agreed . However , further consideration — and intervention by other supervisors — convinced the mayor to appoint someone more in line with the growing ethnic diversity of White 's district and the liberal leanings of the Board of Supervisors . On November 18 , news broke of the murder of California Representative Leo Ryan , who was in Jonestown , Guyana to check on the remote community built by members of the Peoples Temple who had relocated from San Francisco . The next day came news of the mass suicide of members of the Peoples Temple . Horror came in degrees as San Franciscans learned more than 400 Jonestown residents were dead . Dan White remarked to two aides who were working for his reinstatement , " You see that ? One day I 'm on the front page and the next I 'm swept right off . " Soon the number of dead in Guyana topped 900 . 
 Moscone planned to announce White 's replacement days later , on November 27 , 1978 . A half hour before the press conference , White entered City Hall through a basement window to avoid metal detectors , and made his way to Moscone 's office . Witnesses heard shouting between White and Moscone , then gunshots . White shot the mayor in the shoulder and chest , then twice in the head after Moscone had fallen on the floor . White then quickly walked to his former office , reloading his police @-@ issue revolver with hollow @-@ point bullets along the way , and intercepted Milk , asking him to step inside for a moment . Dianne Feinstein heard gunshots and called the police . She found Milk face down on the floor , shot five times , including twice in the head at close range . After identifying both bodies , Feinstein was shaking so badly she required support from the police chief . It was she who announced to the press , " Today San Francisco has experienced a double tragedy of immense proportions . As President of the Board of Supervisors , it is my duty to inform you that both Mayor Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk have been shot and killed , " then adding after being drowned out by shouts of disbelief , " and the suspect is Supervisor Dan White . " Milk was 48 years old . Moscone was 49 . 
 Within an hour , White called his wife from a nearby diner ; she met him at a church and escorted him to the police , where White turned himself in . Many residents left flowers on the steps of City Hall . That evening , a spontaneous gathering began to form on Castro Street , moving toward City Hall in a candlelight vigil . Their numbers were estimated between 25 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 , spanning the width of Market Street , extending the mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from Castro Street . The next day , the bodies of Moscone and Milk were brought to the City Hall rotunda where mourners paid their respects . Six thousand mourners attended a service for Mayor Moscone at St. Mary 's Cathedral . Two memorials were held for Milk ; a small one at Temple Emanu @-@ El and a more boisterous one at the Opera House . 
 = = = " City in agony " = = = 
 Moscone had recently increased security at City Hall in the wake of the Jonestown suicides . Survivors from Guyana recounted drills for suicide preparations that Jones called " White Nights " . Rumors about Moscone 's and Milk 's murders were fueled by the coincidence of Dan White 's name and Jones ' suicide preparations . A stunned District Attorney called the assassinations so close to the news about Jonestown " incomprehensible " , but denied any connection . Governor Jerry Brown ordered all flags in California to be flown at half staff , and called Milk a " hard @-@ working and dedicated supervisor , a leader of San Francisco 's gay community , who kept his promise to represent all his constituents " . President Jimmy Carter expressed his shock at both murders and sent his condolences . Speaker of the California Assembly Leo McCarthy called it " an insane tragedy " . " A City in Agony " topped the headlines in The San Francisco Examiner the day after the murders ; inside the paper stories of the assassinations under the headline " Black Monday " were printed back to back with updates of bodies being shipped home from Guyana . An editorial describing " A city with more sadness and despair in its heart than any city should have to bear " went on to ask how such tragedies could occur , particularly to " men of such warmth and vision and great energies " . Dan White was charged with two counts of murder and held without bail , eligible for the death penalty owing to the recent passage of a statewide proposition that allowed death or life in prison for the murder of a public official . One analysis of the months surrounding the murders called 1978 and 1979 " the most emotionally devastating years in San Francisco 's fabulously spotted history " . 
 The 32 @-@ year @-@ old White , who had been in the Army during the Vietnam War , had run on a tough anti @-@ crime platform in his district . Colleagues declared him a high @-@ achieving " all @-@ American boy " . He was to have received an award the next week for rescuing a woman and child from a 17 @-@ story burning building when he was a firefighter in 1977 . Though he was the only supervisor to vote against Milk 's gay rights ordinance earlier that year , he had been quoted as saying , " I respect the rights of all people , including gays " . Milk and White at first got along well . One of White 's political aides ( who was gay ) remembered , " Dan had more in common with Harvey than he did with anyone else on the board " . White had voted to support a center for gay seniors , and to honor Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin 's 25th anniversary and pioneering work . 
 After Milk 's vote for the mental health facility in White 's district , however , White refused to speak with Milk and only communicated with one of Milk 's aides . Other acquaintances remembered White as very intense . " He was impulsive ... He was an extremely competitive man , obsessively so ... I think he could not take defeat , " San Francisco 's assistant fire chief told reporters . White 's first campaign manager quit in the middle of the campaign , and told a reporter that White was an egotist and it was clear that he was <unk> , though he denied it in the press . White 's associates and supporters described him " as a man with a pugilistic temper and an impressive capacity for nurturing a grudge " . The aide who had handled communications between White and Milk remembered , " Talking to him , I realized that he saw Harvey Milk and George Moscone as representing all that was wrong with the world " . 
 When Milk 's friends looked in his closet for a suit for his casket , they learned how much he had been affected by the recent decrease in his income as a supervisor . All of his clothes were coming apart ; all of his socks had holes . He was cremated and his ashes were split , most of them scattered in San Francisco Bay by his closest friends . Some of them were encapsulated and buried beneath the sidewalk in front of 575 Castro Street , where Castro Camera had been located . Harry Britt , one of four people Milk listed on his tape as an acceptable replacement should he be assassinated , was chosen to fill that position by the city 's acting mayor , Dianne Feinstein . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Dan White 's arrest and trial caused a sensation , and illustrated severe tensions between the liberal population and the city police . The San Francisco Police were mostly working @-@ class Irish descendants who intensely disliked the growing gay immigration , as well as the liberal direction of the city government . After White turned himself in and confessed , he sat in his cell while his former colleagues on the police force told Harvey Milk jokes ; police openly wore " Free Dan White " T @-@ shirts in the days after the murder . An undersheriff for San Francisco later stated : " The more I observed what went on at the jail , the more I began to stop seeing what Dan White did as the act of an individual and began to see it as a political act in a political movement . " White showed no remorse for his actions , and only exhibited vulnerability during an eight @-@ minute call to his mother from jail . 
 The seated jury for White 's trial consisted of white middle @-@ class San Franciscans who were mostly Catholic ; gays and ethnic minorities were excused from the jury pool . The jury was clearly sympathetic to the defendant : some of the members cried when they heard White 's tearful recorded confession , at the end of which the interrogator thanked White for his honesty . White 's defense attorney , Doug Schmidt , argued that he was not responsible for his actions , using the legal defense known as diminished capacity : " Good people , fine people , with fine backgrounds , simply don 't kill people in cold blood . " Schmidt tried to prove that White 's anguished mental state was a result of manipulation by the politicos in City Hall who had consistently disappointed and confounded him , finally promising to give his job back only to refuse him again . Schmidt said that White 's mental deterioration was demonstrated and exacerbated by his junk food binge the night before the murders , since he was usually known to have been health @-@ food conscious . Area newspapers quickly dubbed it the Twinkie defense . White was acquitted of the first degree murder charge on May 21 , 1979 , but found guilty of voluntary manslaughter of both victims , and he was sentenced to serve seven and two @-@ thirds years . With the sentence reduced for time served and good behavior , he would be released in five . He cried when he heard the verdict . 
 = = = White Night riots = = = 
 Acting Mayor Feinstein , Supervisor Carol Ruth Silver , and Milk 's successor Harry Britt condemned the jury 's decision . When it was announced over the police radio in the city , someone sang " Danny Boy " on the police band . A surge of people from the Castro District walked again to City Hall , chanting " Avenge Harvey Milk " and " He got away with murder " . Pandemonium rapidly escalated as rocks were hurled at the front doors of the building . Milk 's friends and aides tried to stop the destruction , but the mob of more than 3 @,@ 000 ignored them and lit police cars on fire . They shoved a burning newspaper dispenser through the broken doors of City Hall , then cheered as the flames grew . One of the rioters responded to a reporter 's question about why they were destroying parts of the city : " Just tell people that we ate too many Twinkies . That 's why this is happening . " The chief of police ordered the police not to retaliate , but to hold their ground . The White Night riots , as they became known , lasted several hours . 
 Later that evening , May 21 , 1979 , several police cruisers filled with officers wearing riot gear arrived at the Elephant Walk Bar on Castro Street . Harvey Milk 's protégé Cleve Jones and a reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle , Warren <unk> , watched as officers stormed into the bar and began to beat patrons at random . After a 15 @-@ minute melee , they left the bar and struck out at people walking along the street . The chief of police finally ordered the officers out of the neighborhood . By morning , 61 police officers and 100 rioters and gay residents of the Castro had been hospitalized . City Hall , police cruisers , and the Elephant Walk Bar suffered damages in excess of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 After the verdict , the District Attorney Joseph Freitas faced a furious gay community to explain what had gone wrong . The prosecutor admitted to feeling sorry for White before the trial , and neglected to ask the interrogator who had recorded White 's confession ( and who was a childhood friend of White 's and his police softball team coach ) about his biases and the support White received from the police because , he said , he did not want to embarrass the detective in front of his family in court . Nor did Freitas question White 's frame of mind , lack of a history of mental illness , or bring into evidence city politics , suggesting that revenge may have been a motive . Supervisor Carol Ruth Silver testified on the last day of the trial that White and Milk were not friendly , yet she had contacted the prosecutor and insisted on testifying . It was the only testimony the jury heard about their strained relationship . Freitas blamed the jury whom he claimed had been " taken in by the whole emotional aspect of [ the ] trial " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Milk 's and Moscone 's murders and White 's trial changed city politics and the California legal system . In 1980 San Francisco ended district supervisor elections , fearing that a Board of Supervisors so divisive would be harmful to the city , and that they had been a factor in the assassinations . A grassroots neighborhood effort to restore district elections in the mid @-@ 1990s proved successful , and the city returned to neighborhood representatives in 2000 . As a result of Dan White 's trial , California voters changed the law to reduce the likelihood of acquittals of accused who knew what they were doing but claimed their capacity was impaired . Diminished capacity was abolished as a defense to a charge , but courts allowed evidence of it when deciding whether to incarcerate , commit , or otherwise punish a convicted defendant . The " Twinkie defense " has entered American mythology , popularly described as a case where a murderer escapes justice because he <unk> on junk food , simplifying White 's lack of political savvy , his relationships with George Moscone and Harvey Milk , and what San Francisco Chronicle columnist Herb Caen described as pandemic police " dislike of homosexuals " . 
 Dan White served a little more than five years for the double murder of Moscone and Milk . On October 21 , 1985 , a year and a half after his release from prison , White was found dead in a running car in his ex @-@ wife 's garage . He was 39 years old . His defense attorney told reporters that he had been despondent over the loss of his family , and the situation he had caused , adding " This was a sick man . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Harvey Milk 's political career centered on making government responsive to individuals , gay liberation , and the importance of neighborhoods to the city . At the onset of each campaign , an issue was added to Milk 's public political philosophy . His 1973 campaign focused on the first point , that as a small business owner in San Francisco — a city dominated by large corporations that had been courted by municipal government — his interests were being overlooked because he was not represented by a large financial institution . Although he did not hide the fact that he was gay , it did not become an issue until his race for the California State Assembly in 1976 . It was brought to the fore in the supervisor race against Rick Stokes , as it was an extension of his ideas of individual freedom . 
 Milk strongly believed that neighborhoods promoted unity and a small @-@ town experience , and that the Castro should provide services to all its residents . He opposed the closing of an elementary school ; even though most gay people in the Castro did not have children , Milk saw his neighborhood having the potential to welcome everyone . He told his aides to concentrate on fixing potholes and boasted that 50 new stop signs had been installed in District 5 . Responding to city residents ' largest complaint about living in San Francisco — dog feces — Milk made it a priority to enact the ordinance requiring dog owners to take care of their pets ' droppings . Randy Shilts noted , " some would claim Harvey was a socialist or various other sorts of ideologues , but , in reality , Harvey 's political philosophy was never more complicated than the issue of dogshit ; government should solve people 's basic problems . " 
 Karen Foss , a communications professor at the University of New Mexico , attributes Milk 's impact on San Francisco politics to the fact that he was unlike anyone else who had held public office in the city . She writes , " Milk happened to be a highly energetic , charismatic figure with a love of theatrics and nothing to lose ... Using laughter , reversal , transcendence , and his insider / outsider status , Milk helped create a climate in which dialogue on issues became possible . He also provided a means to integrate the disparate voices of his various constituencies . " Milk had been a rousing speaker since he began campaigning in 1973 , and his oratory skills only improved after he became City Supervisor . His most famous talking points became known as the " Hope Speech " , which became a staple throughout his political career . It opened with a play on the accusation that gay people recruit impressionable youth into their numbers : " My name is Harvey Milk — and I want to recruit you . " A version of the Hope Speech that he gave near the end of his life was considered by his friends and aides to be the best , and the closing the most effective : 
 And the young gay people in the Altoona , Pennsylvanias and the Richmond , <unk> who are coming out and hear Anita Bryant in television and her story . The only thing they have to look forward to is hope . And you have to give them hope . Hope for a better world , hope for a better tomorrow , hope for a better place to come to if the pressures at home are too great . Hope that all will be all right . Without hope , not only gays , but the blacks , the seniors , the handicapped , the us 'es , the us 'es will give up . And if you help elect to the central committee and other offices , more gay people , that gives a green light to all who feel disenfranchised , a green light to move forward . It means hope to a nation that has given up , because if a gay person makes it , the doors are open to everyone . 
 In the last year of his life , Milk emphasized that gay people should be more visible to help to end the discrimination and violence against them . Although Milk had not come out to his mother before her death many years before , in his final statement during his taped prediction of his assassination , he urged others to do so : 
 I cannot prevent anyone from getting angry , or mad , or frustrated . I can only hope that they 'll turn that anger and frustration and madness into something positive , so that two , three , four , five hundred will step forward , so the gay doctors will come out , the gay lawyers , the gay judges , gay bankers , gay architects ... I hope that every professional gay will say ' enough ' , come forward and tell everybody , wear a sign , let the world know . Maybe that will help . 
 However , Milk 's assassination has become entwined with his political efficacy , partly because he was killed at the zenith of his popularity . Historian Neil Miller writes , " No contemporary American gay leader has yet to achieve in life the stature Milk found in death . " His legacy has become ambiguous ; Randy Shilts concludes his biography writing that Milk 's success , murder , and the inevitable injustice of White 's verdict represented the experience of all gays . Milk 's life was " a metaphor for the homosexual experience in America " . According to Frances FitzGerald , Milk 's legend has been unable to be sustained as no one appeared able to take his place in the years after his death : " The Castro saw him as a martyr but understood his martyrdom as an end rather than a beginning . He had died , and with him a great deal of the Castro 's optimism , idealism , and ambition seemed to die as well . The Castro could find no one to take his place in its affections , and possibly wanted no one . " On the 20th anniversary of Milk 's death , historian John D <unk> said , " The legacy that I think he would want to be remembered for is the imperative to live one 's life at all times with integrity . " For a political career so short , Cleve Jones attributes more to his assassination than his life : " His murder and the response to it made permanent and unquestionable the full participation of gay and lesbian people in the political process . " 
 = = = Tributes and media = = = 
 The City of San Francisco has paid tribute to Milk by naming several locations after him . Where Market and Castro streets intersect in San Francisco flies an enormous Gay Pride flag , situated in Harvey Milk Plaza . The San Francisco Gay Democratic Club changed its name to the Harvey Milk Memorial Gay Democratic Club in 1978 ( it is currently named the Harvey Milk Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual , Transgender Democratic Club ) and boasts that it is the largest Democratic organization in San Francisco . In New York City , Harvey Milk High School is a school program for at @-@ risk youth that concentrates on the needs of gay , lesbian , bisexual , and transgender students and operates out of the Hetrick Martin Institute . 
 In 1982 , freelance reporter Randy Shilts completed his first book : a biography of Milk , titled The Mayor of Castro Street . Shilts wrote the book while unable to find a steady job as an openly gay reporter . The Times of Harvey Milk , a documentary film based on the book 's material , won the 1984 Academy Award for Documentary Feature . Director Rob Epstein spoke later about why he chose the subject of Milk 's life : " At the time , for those of us who lived in San Francisco , it felt like it was life changing , that all the eyes of the world were upon us , but in fact most of the world outside of San Francisco had no idea . It was just a really brief , provincial , localized current events story that the mayor and a city council member in San Francisco were killed . It didn 't have much reverberation . " 
 Milk 's life has been the subject of a musical theater production ; an eponymous opera ; a children 's picture book ; a French @-@ language historical novel for young @-@ adult readers ; and the biopic Milk , released in 2008 after 15 years in the making . The film was directed by Gus Van Sant and starred Sean Penn as Milk and Josh Brolin as Dan White , and won two Academy Awards for Best Original Screenplay and Best Actor . It took eight weeks to film , and often used extras who had been present at the actual events for large crowd scenes , including a scene depicting Milk 's " Hope Speech " at the 1978 Gay Freedom Day Parade . 
 Milk was included in the " Time 100 Heroes and Icons of the 20th Century " as " a symbol of what gays can accomplish and the dangers they face in doing so " . Despite his antics and publicity stunts , according to writer John Cloud , " none understood how his public role could affect private lives better than Milk ... [ he ] knew that the root cause of the gay predicament was invisibility " . The Advocate listed Milk third in their " 40 Heroes " of the 20th century issue , quoting Dianne Feinstein : " His homosexuality gave him an insight into the scars which all oppressed people wear . He believed that no sacrifice was too great a price to pay for the cause of human rights . " 
 In August 2009 , President Barack Obama posthumously awarded Milk the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his contribution to the gay rights movement stating " he fought discrimination with visionary courage and conviction " . Milk 's nephew Stuart accepted for his uncle . Shortly after , Stuart co @-@ founded the Harvey Milk Foundation with Anne Kronenberg with the support of Desmond Tutu , co @-@ recipient of 2009 Presidential Medal of Freedom and now a member of the Foundation 's Advisory Board . Later in the year , California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger designated May 22 as " Harvey Milk Day " , and inducted Milk in the California Hall of Fame . 
 Since 2003 , the story of Harvey Milk has been featured in three exhibitions created by the GLBT Historical Society , a San Francisco – based museum , archives , and research center , to which the estate of Scott Smith donated Milk 's personal belongings that were preserved after his death . On May 22 , 2014 , the United States Postal Service issued a postage stamp honoring Harvey Milk , the first openly LGBT political official to receive this honor . The stamp features a photo taken in front of Milk 's Castro Camera store and was unveiled on what would have been his 84th birthday . 
 Harry Britt summarized Milk 's impact the evening Milk was shot in 1978 : " No matter what the world has taught us about ourselves , we can be beautiful and we can get our thing together ... Harvey was a prophet ... he lived by a vision ... Something very special is going to happen in this city and it will have Harvey Milk 's name on it . " 
 In 2012 , Milk was inducted into the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people . 
 = = Archival Resources = = 
 The Gay , Lesbian , Bisexual , Transgender Historical Society Holds artifacts of Milk , including the suit he was wearing when shot by Dan White 
 Harvey Milk <unk> Smith Collection , 1930 @-@ 1995 , held at the San Francisco Public Library , James C. Hormel <unk> Center . 
 = Fort Dansborg = 
 Fort Dansborg , a locally called Danish Fort , is a Danish fort located in the shores of Bay of Bengal in Tharangambadi in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu . Fort Dansborg was built in the land ceded by Thanjavur king Ragunatha Nayak in an agreement with Danish Admiral Ove Gjedde in 1620 and acted as the base for Danish settlement in the region during the early 17th century . The fort is the second largest Danish fort after Kronborg . The fort was sold to the British in 1845 and along with Tharangambadi , the fort lost its significance as the town was not an active trading post for the British . After India 's independence in 1947 , the fort was used as an inspection bungalow by the state government till 1978 when the Department of Archaeology , Government of Tamil Nadu took over the control of the fort . The fort is now used as a museum where the major artifacts of the fort and the Danish empire are displayed . 
 The fort was renovated twice in modern times , once by Tranquebar Association with the help of the Danish royal family and the State Archaeology Department in 2001 and secondly by a project named Destination Development of Tranquebar by the Department of Tourism of the Government of Tamil Nadu in 2011 . The fort is one of the prominent tourist destinations in the region . 
 = = History = = 
 Coramandel was an active international trading coast from the 3rd century BCE . The European colonial empires like British , French , Dutch and Portuguese established maritime trade with India during the early 17th century . The Danish East India Company was established in the capital of Denmark , Copenhagen in 1616 and a mission was sent with Admiral Ove Gjedde ( 1594 – 1660 CE ) . Ove Gjedde signed a deal with the Thanjavur ruler king Raghunatha Nayak ( 1600 – 34 ) in 1620 in spite of resistance from the Portuguese . The rent was fixed as ₹ <unk> per annum and a total of 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) by 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) area was ceded to the Danish mission . The treaty signed during November 1620 also allowed the Danes to collect taxes from the neighbouring villages of Tranquebar . The treaty signed in a golden leaf manuscript is maintained in the Danish royal archives in Copenhagen . 
 The fort is the second largest Danish fort after Kronborg , the inspiration for Shakespeare 's Hamlet . It was built by Ove Gjedde with the help of local laborers in Danish style . The lower compartment in the basement adjoining the fort was used as a store room , prison and a rest room for the soldiers , while the governor and priests resided in the second level . Fort Dansborg was the base for Danish settlement in the region during the early 17th century . Originally a fishing village , Tharangambadi ( referred as Tranquebar ) was fortified by the Danish , who used the port as the main trading post for the colony , with the major export of the colony being cotton textiles . During the middle of the 18th century , the commercial importance of the town declined and the centre of textile production moved to Serampore in the state of Bengal . But Tranquebar still remained the headquarters of the Colony . The fort and the town was sold to the British in 1845 and , along with Tharangambadi , the fort lost its significance as the town was not a trading post anymore . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Fort Dansborg is located in the southern part of Tharangambadi , located 283 km ( 176 mi ) from the state capital Chennai . It is built in Danish style , characterized by large halls , columned structures , high ceilings and projecting drapery . The length of the fort in the side facing the sea is 60 m ( 200 ft ) and the width is about 11 m ( 36 ft ) . The fort is trapezoidal in shape with three rooms in the left wing , originally used as the governor 's residence , a kitchen with an open fireplace and chimney in the top left hand corner , and a church room , now a museum , located in the centre of the building . The original rectory and the northern part of it , which are now the store rooms , are located in the right wing . The corner room on the right side was the residence of the commercial director . In modern times , it is used as a store room . The core of the building is made of brick . The main door of the fort faces north , while an additional door faces the east . The second storey of the fort has a set of guard rooms . The staircase leading to it are built with bricks . The central part of the fort has four camel hump shaped domes . The central pillar of the hall holds the entire weight of the domes . 
 The citadel encloses a set of buildings , the notable ones being the fort built in 1620 , the <unk> Temple built in the 13th century , the Zion Church built in 1701 , New Jerusalem Church built in 1718 , the Town Gateway built in 1792 , the Danish Governor Bungalow built in 1784 and a series of tomb stones built during the 17th and 18th centuries . The settlement inside the citadel is modeled like a small European town with a land gate and wooden doors leading to the main street , namely , the King 's Street . Some of the notable buildings in the King 's street are the Gate House , <unk> 's House , Port Master 's Bungalow and Rehling 's House . There were originally citadel walls towards the sea , which eroded with time on account of the salty nature of the environment . The fortification could not withstand an attack by regular military forces , but acted as a protection for the citizens of the settlement against predatory cavalry raids . The bastions of the fort are constructed with black stone . 
 = = Renovation in modern times = = 
 The Tranquebar Association , formed in 2001 , with the help of the Tamil Nadu State Archaeological Department and the Danish Royal family , restored the South end of the fort with the same kind of material like brick and black stone , used during the original construction . The renovation was completed in 2005 , with contributions from local artisans , Danish volunteers , Danish and Indian experts . In 2001 , chemists from the Archaeological Survey of India ( ASI ) restored the portrait of Raja Ragunatha Naik , Tranquebar site map , pottery , portrait of Christian IV , the Danish King . Metal <unk> lamps , which provide a uniform green @-@ coloured lighting , were used for illuminating the exteriors . The restored complex was opened by the Collector of the Nagapattinam District in 2002 . 
 There was a project planned by the Government of Tamil Nadu to lay stones along the shores to protect the fort and the <unk> Temple in Tharangambadi from erosion . While the project was planned much before the Indian Ocean Tsunami in 2005 , it was implemented only in 2007 . Before the tsunami , there was stiff resistance from the local villages citing impact to fishery in the region . Post tsunami , the resistance from the locals receded and the project was extended to accommodate additional areas of the shore . 
 The Department of Tourism Development of Tamil Nadu initiated a project named " Destination Development of Tranquebar " . The project was started in 2011 , with an estimated budget of ₹ 3 @,@ 730 @,@ 800 ( US $ 55 @,@ 000 ) and planned a phased re @-@ creation of the fort and the environs around it . As a part of the first phase of the project , cobble @-@ stoned pathways were laid and ornamental cast iron street lamps were installed in the path around the fort . The cobble @-@ stone pathways were laid for a total of 350 m ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) around the facade and for 100 m ( 330 ft ) on Goldsmith street . The first phase was completed at an expense of ₹ 2 @,@ 430 @,@ 000 ( US $ 36 @,@ 000 ) . The second phase of the project involved the laying of cobble @-@ stone pathways from the Tranquebar Arch to the river promenade . The second phase was completed at an expense of ₹ 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 ( US $ 19 @,@ 000 ) . Environmental protection measures , like restraining movement of heavy vehicles around the fort to maintain the highest atmospheric ozone concentration , were also implemented . 
 = = Culture = = 
 A factory was established soon after the fort was constructed and it minted coins that bore the initials TB or DB , indicating Dansborg . The fort acted as the important gateway in the trade route from Europe to Coramandel . Protestant missionaries were sent from Denmark by king Fredric IV , who was also the head of Lutheran Church of Denmark . Two of them , namely , Bartholomäus <unk> and Heinrich <unk> came to Tranquebar on 9 July 1706 , established the Tranquebar Mission , learnt Tamil in a few years and were the first to translate and print The New Testament of the Bible in Tamil in the printing press inside the fort . The Danish mission was the first Protestant mission in India and from its inception , was staffed by German missionaries trained at <unk> schools and seminary founded by Francke at the end of 17th century . A Tamil @-@ Latin dictionary containing 9000 words was compiled there by a medical missionary named Friedrich Koenig in 1778 , whose source letters are stored in the royal archives . The fort is featured in a large number of videos , films and commercials . After India 's independence in 1947 , the fort was used as an inspection bungalow by the state government till 1978 when the State Department of Archaeology of the Government of Tamil Nadu took over the control of the fort . The fort is now used as a museum , housing a collection of major artifacts of the fort and the Danish empire . The fort is one of the most visited tourist landmarks in the region . 
 = Timema = 
 Timema is a genus of relatively short @-@ bodied , stout stick insects native to the far western United States . The genus was first described in 1895 by Samuel Hubbard Scudder , based on observations of the species Timema <unk> . 
 Compared to other stick insects ( order Phasmatodea ) , the genus Timema is considered basal ; that is , the earliest " branch " to diverge from the phylogenetic tree that includes all Phasmatodea . To emphasize this outgroup status , all stick insects not included in Timema are sometimes described as " Euphasmatodea . " 
 Five of the twenty @-@ one species of Timema are parthenogenetic , including two species that have not engaged in sexual reproduction for one million years , the longest known asexual period for any insect . 
 = = Description = = 
 Timema spp. differ from other Phasmatodea in that their tarsi have three segments rather than five . For stick insects , they have relatively small , stout bodies , so that they look somewhat like earwigs ( order Dermaptera ) . 
 = = = Cryptic coloration and camouflage = = = 
 Timema walking sticks are night @-@ feeders who spend daytime resting on the leaves or bark of the plants they feed on . Timema colors ( primarily green , gray , or brown ) and patterns ( which may be stripes , scales , or dots ) match their typical background , a form of crypsis . 
 In 2008 , researchers studying the presence or absence of a dorsal stripe suggested that it has independently evolved several times in Timema species and is an adaptation for crypsis on needle @-@ like leaves . All of the eight Timema species with a dorsal stripe have at least one host plant with needle @-@ like foliage . Of the thirteen unstriped species , seven feed only on broadleaf plants . Four ( T. <unk> , T. <unk> , T. genevieve , and T. <unk> ) rest during the day on the host plant 's trunk rather than its leaves and have bodies that are brown , gray , or tan . Only two species ( T. <unk> and T. <unk> ) have green unstriped morphs that feed on needle @-@ like foliage ; both are generalist feeders that also feed on broadleaf hosts . 
 The species Timema <unk> exhibits both striped and unstriped populations depending on the host plant , a form of polymorphism that clearly illustrates the camouflage function of the stripe . The earliest ancestors of this species were generalists that fed on plants belonging to both the genera Adenostoma and Ceanothus . They eventually diverged into two distinct ecotypes with a more specialist host plant preference . One ecotype prefers to feed on Adenostoma while the other ecotype prefers to feed on Ceanothus . The Adenostoma ecotype possesses a white dorsal stripe , an adaptation to blend in with the needle @-@ like leaves of the plant , while the Ceanothus ecotype does not ( Ceanothus spp. have broad leaves ) . The Adenostoma ecotype is also smaller , with a wider head , and shorter legs . 
 These characteristics are genetically inherited and has been interpreted as the early stages of the speciation process . The two ecotypes will eventually become separate species once reproductive isolation is achieved . At the moment , both ecotypes are still capable of interbreeding and producing viable offspring , as such they are still considered a single species . 
 = = = Life cycle and reproduction = = = 
 Timema eggs are soft , ellipsoidal , and about two mm long , with a lid @-@ like structure at one end ( the operculum ) through which the nymph will emerge . Timema females use particles of dirt , which they have previously ingested , to coat their eggs . 
 The eggs of many stick insects , including Timema , are attractive to ants , who carry them away to their burrows to feed on the egg 's capitulum , while leaving the rest of the egg intact to hatch . The emerging nymph passes through six or seven instars before reaching adulthood . 
 Timema males , in sexual species of Timema , show a consistent pattern of courting behavior . The male climbs onto the back of the female and , after a short display of vibrating and waving , they proceed to mate . ( Rejection by the female is possible but uncommon . ) The male then rides on the female 's back for up to five days , a behavior often referred to as " guarding " the female . 
 Several species of Timema are parthenogenetic : that is , females can reproduce asexually , producing viable eggs without male participation . 
 According to <unk> <unk> of Simon Fraser University , " Timema are indeed the oldest insects for which there is good evidence that they have been asexual for long periods of time . " She heads a team of researchers who found that five Timema species ( T. <unk> , T. <unk> , T. <unk> , T. <unk> and T. genevieve ) have used only asexual reproduction for more than 500 @,@ 000 years , with T. <unk> and T. genevieve reproducing asexually for over one million years . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The geographic range of Timema is limited to mountainous regions of western North America between 30 ° and 42 ° N. They are found primarily in California , as well as in a few other neighboring states ( Oregon , Nevada , Arizona ) and in northern Mexico . All are herbivores , primarily feeding on host plants found in chaparral . 
 Host plants of the different Timema species include Pseudotsuga menziesii ( Douglas fir ) , Sequoia sempervirens ( Californian redwood ) , Arctostaphylos spp . ( manzanita ) , Ceanothus spp . , Adenostoma <unk> ( <unk> ) , Abies concolor ( white fir ) , Quercus spp . ( oak ) , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> spp . ( mountain @-@ mahogany ) , Eriogonum sp . ( buckwheat ) , and Juniperus spp . ( juniper ) . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 General phylogenetic relationships within Timema ( Law & Crespi , 2002 ) . Species marked with ♀ are parthenogenetic ( female only ) . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Timema is the only member of the family <unk> and the suborder Timematodea . Their clade is considered basal to the order Phasmatodea ; that is , many scientists believe that Timema @-@ type stick insects represent the earliest " branch " to diverge from the phylogenetic tree that gave rise to all the stick insects of Phasmatodea . This primal distinction is referenced by the name " Euphasmatodea " , which is given to all the clades of Phasmatodea other than the suborder Timematodea . 
 Twenty @-@ one species have been described ; in addition there is at least one undescribed species known to exist : 
 = Bill Brown with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Bill Brown was a member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . Bradman 's men went through their 34 matches without defeat ; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 An experienced right @-@ handed opening batsman , Brown was on his third visit to England , having first toured in 1934 before World War II . However , Brown 's best years were lost to the war and by 1948 Sid Barnes and Arthur Morris had superseded him in the pecking order to become Australia 's first @-@ choice opening pair . Brown was selected as a reserve opener ; this decision generated controversy among critics who believed he was past his best . 
 Bradman rotated the three openers in the tour matches , but Morris and Barnes were preferred in the Tests . Bradman accommodated Brown in his first @-@ choice team by playing him out of position in the middle order in the Tests . However , Brown appeared uncomfortable in the unfamiliar role , and was dropped after making 73 runs at a batting average of 24 @.@ 33 in the first two Tests . 
 Despite his struggles in the Test arena , Brown had success in the tour matches as an opener . He scored 1 @,@ 448 runs at 57 @.@ 92 in all first @-@ class matches , ranking fourth in both the aggregates and averages . He scored eight centuries , second only to Bradman , including 200 against Cambridge University . However , Brown gained criticism for his slow batting . Following his omission from the Test team , Brown batted in a highly circumspect manner to increase the reliability and volume of his scoring . A very occasional off spin bowler , Brown took his career first @-@ class best of 4 / 16 in his only stint with the ball , against the South of England . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brown had been a regular member of the Australian Test team since his debut in 1934 , and immediately after World War II , he captained Australia in the inaugural Test against New Zealand . However , he was sidelined by injury in 1946 – 47 and Sid Barnes and Arthur Morris opened in the Tests , averaging 73 @.@ 83 and 71 @.@ 85 respectively . Brown resumed his Test career in the following season , replacing Barnes , but he was dropped after scoring 29 runs in two Tests . Barnes then came in and made 139 runs in the next two Tests , including a 112 in the Fourth Test . Morris was then rested for the Fifth Test to allow Brown another chance to show his ability and make a case for continued national selection , and he made 99 . In the Tests against India during the season , Barnes , Morris and Brown had shared the opening duties ; their batting averages were 43 @.@ 00 , 52 @.@ 25 and 42 @.@ 66 respectively . In any case , Brown had done enough to tour England with The Invincibles in 1948 , his third trip there , although Barnes and Morris were the first @-@ choice opening combination . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire . Brown gained selection , although Bradman batted him out of position in the middle order while Barnes and Morris opened . Brown came in 6 / 335 and scored 25 at a typically placid pace , accumulating his runs at a lower strike rate than the other recognised batsmen . He was out with the score at 6 / 402 as Australia went on to declare at 8 / 462 and win by an innings . 
 In the next match against Leicestershire , Bradman rested Morris , so Brown opened with Barnes . Brown scored 26 in an opening stand of 46 , as Australia amassed 448 and won by an innings . 
 The Australians proceeded to play Yorkshire at Bradford , on a damp pitch suitable for slower bowling . In the first innings , Brown took three catches from the bowling of Keith Miller — who had resorted to bowling off spin — as Yorkshire were bowled out for 71 in difficult batting conditions . Opening with Morris while Barnes was rested , Brown made 13 as the match remained finely balanced after Australia was bowled out for 101 . Brown took another catch from Miller in the second innings as the hosts were bowled out for 89 . Chasing 60 for victory , Brown fell to Frank Smailes for two as the Australian top order collapsed to 6 / 31 — effectively seven wickets down with the injured Sam Loxton unable to bat — before scraping home by four wickets . 
 Brown was rested for the next match against Surrey , which Australia won by an innings . After the first four matches , five Australians hade made centuries , and another had passed fifty . Brown had scored only 66 runs with a highest score of 26 , while Morris and Barnes , the incumbent openers , had scored 223 and 298 runs with a century and fifty apiece . 
 Brown was recalled for the match against Cambridge University , opening with Morris while Barnes rested . After putting on 64 for the opening wicket with Morris , Brown added 176 for the second wicket with Ron Hamence . He added a further 140 for the fourth wicket with Lindsay Hassett , who was captaining the team while Bradman rested himself . Brown top @-@ scored with 200 and Hassett declared when his double @-@ centurion was out with the score at 4 / 414 . Australia went on to win by an innings . In the following match against Essex , Brown opened with Barnes while Morris was rested . The pair put on 145 in 97 minutes — the highest opening stand by the Australians on the tour to that point — before Barnes was out hit wicket . In the meantime , Brown had reached 50 in 90 minutes . Bradman came in and he and Brown accelerated to put on a second @-@ wicket partnership of 219 in 90 minutes , before the latter was out for 153 from three hours of batting with the score at 2 / 364 . Brown had scored his last 100 runs in less than 90 minutes . Australia went on to score 721 runs on the first day , the highest number of runs amassed in one day of first @-@ class cricket , before completing victory by an innings and 451 runs , their largest winning margin for the tour . Opening with Morris while Barnes was rested , Brown completed his third century in as many innings with 108 against Oxford University , after putting on an opening stand of 139 . This meant that he had scored 461 runs in eight days of cricket , and put him atop the batting aggregates , ahead of Bradman . Australia went on to complete their fourth successive innings victory . 
 The next match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . Bradman installed Barnes and Morris as his preferred opening pair , while Brown batted out of position at No. 6 . Barring one change in the bowling department , the same team lined up in the First Test , with the top six batsmen in the same positions . It was a chance for players from both sides to gain a psychological advantage , but Brown failed to capitalise . He came to the crease with the score at 4 / 280 to join Keith Miller and scored 26 in a stand of 63 before being dismissed as Australia amassed 552 and won by an innings . This was followed by Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the tour , against Lancashire , a draw for which Brown was rested . 
 Brown returned for the following match , which was against Nottinghamshire , and added 122 to register his fourth century in less than three weeks . Australia made 400 but the hosts hung on for a draw in the second innings . In the next match against Hampshire , Brown opened with Barnes and made a duck as Australia were dismissed for 117 on a damp pitch in reply to the home side 's 195 . It was the first time the tourists had conceded a first innings during the summer . Hampshire were subsequently bowled out in their second innings for 103 to leave Australia a target of 182 . This time Barnes fell for a duck , and Brown anchored Australia to an eight @-@ wicket win with an unbeaten 81 after a century second @-@ wicket partnership with Ian Johnson . The final match before the First Test was against Sussex . Opening with Morris , Brown played second fiddle , accumulating 44 as the pair put on an opening stand of 153 . Morris went on to 184 and Australia declared at 5 / 549 before completing another innings victory . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Up to this point , Brown — who was on his third tour of England — had scored 800 runs on tour at an average of 72 @.@ 72 , with a double century , three other centuries and 81 not out , In contrast , middle @-@ order batsman Neil Harvey struggled in the initial stages of his first tour of England . Harvey failed to pass 25 in his first six innings , and although he had scored an unbeaten 100 against Sussex , he had totalled only 296 runs at 42 @.@ 29 . As a result , Brown gained selection in the First Test at Trent Bridge , batting out of position in the middle order while Barnes and Morris opened , whereas Harvey was dropped despite making a century in Australia 's most recent Test against India . 
 England batted first and made 165 , with Brown prominent in the field . Early on the first day of play , Brown caught England opener Cyril Washbrook on the run at the fine leg boundary after the batsman had attempted to hook a Ray Lindwall bouncer , leaving England at 2 / 15 after 41 minutes of play . He later made a series of one @-@ handed stops in the field , helping to keep the pressure on the batsmen . Brown took his second catch of the innings to remove Alec Bedser , who had featured in a rearguard fightback to help take England to 165 after they had fallen to 8 / 74 . 
 On the second day , Barnes and Bradman took the score to 1 / 121 before Barnes and Miller were dismissed without further addition to the score . All the while , Australia had been scoring slowly , as they would throughout the day . Brown came in at No. 5 to join Bradman , but he had played most of his career as an opening batsman and he looked uncomfortable in the middle order , but Bradman brought him in ahead of Hassett as the new ball was due and Brown was used to starting his innings against pace bowlers and a new ball . English captain Norman Yardley removed Jim Laker from the attack and took the second new ball . Bradman struck his first boundary in over 80 minutes and the run rate picked up somewhat , prompting England to revert to slower bowling . Australia passed England 's total before Yardley brought himself on to bowl and trapped Brown — who was attempting to push the ball to mid @-@ on — leg before wicket ( lbw ) with an off cutter in his first over . This ended a 64 @-@ run stand in 58 minutes and left Australia at 4 / 185 . Following the departure of Brown , the scoring slowed as Bradman changed the team strategy to one of attempting to bat only once . Australia eventually reached 509 , and after England compiled 441 in their second innings , Brown was not needed as Australia made the 98 runs required victory for the loss of only two wickets . 
 Between Tests , Brown was rested for the match against Northamptonshire , which Australia won by an innings . He returned for the second fixture against Yorkshire . Opening with Barnes , Brown made 19 as Australia took a 43 @-@ run first innings lead . In the second innings , Brown top @-@ scored with 113 . He combined with Bradman to add 154 runs for the second wicket as the match petered into a draw . In a patient and restrained display , Brown took four hours to make his century . Following his controversial selection for the tour , Brown was attempting to justify his position in the team by accumulating a large amount of runs , but earned criticism for being too dour . However , the century was enough to see him retain his middle @-@ order position for the Second Test at Lord 's , where Australia fielded an unchanged team . Former Test leg spinner and teammate Bill O 'Reilly — who was in England as a journalist — criticised the selection of Brown , who had appeared to be noticeably uncomfortable in the unfamiliar role . He said that despite Brown 's unbeaten double century in his previous Test at Lord 's in 1938 , Sam Loxton and Neil Harvey had better claims to selection . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 Australia won the toss and batted first at the home of cricket . Centurion Morris fell at 3 / 166 and new batsman Miller was trapped lbw for four shortly after . Brown came in at 4 / 173 and helped Lindsay Hassett rebuild the innings after the two quick wickets . Both men scored slowly , averaging more than three and half minutes for each run . After putting on a partnership of 43 , Hassett was bowled by Yardley , who then trapped Brown for 24 to leave Australia stumbling at 6 / 225 . Brown had hit two consecutive half @-@ volleys off his pads through the leg side for four , and attempted a third boundary in a row to a similar delivery . However , this third delivery came off the pitch more quickly and beat Brown for pace . Australia managed to avoid further collapse a counterattack from the tail saw them to 350 before they bowled England out for 215 . The tourists batted much more productively in the second innings in ideal weather on the third day . Brown joined Miller after Bradman fell at 4 / 329 ; Australia had lost 3 / 33 but steadied to reach stumps at 343 without further loss , with Brown on seven . After the rest day , Australia resumed with a lead of 478 runs and six wickets in hand . The morning was punctuated by three rain stoppages . Just ten minutes after the start , heavy rain intervened . The weather cleared and Miller and Brown moved to lunch on 63 and 32 respectively , with Australia at 4 / 409 . In 88 minutes of play , Australia had added 117 runs . Brown was caught behind from Alec Coxon after lunch without adding to his score for 32 , after an 87 @-@ run partnership with Miller , with the score at 5 / 416 . Bradman eventually declared at 7 / 460 , 595 runs ahead . It would take a world record chase from England to win the match . The home team lost wickets regularly and fell for 186 to lose by 409 runs . Although part of a successful team , Brown was unable to replicate the centuries he made in each of his two previous Tests at Lord ’ s on the preceding tours , and it was to be the last Test of his career . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Test . Brown injured a finger while fielding in the first innings , so he was unable to bat in Australia 's first innings . In the second innings , Australia 's makeshift openers Harvey and Sam Loxton chased down the 122 runs for victory to complete a 10 @-@ wicket win in less than an hour . 
 = = Dropped = = 
 Brown was rested for the following match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test . Loxton scored 159 not out , featuring in two century partnerships and propelling Australia to 7 / 774 declared , which was its highest score of the tour and laid the foundation for an innings victory . Loxton ’ s effort was enough to oust Brown from his middle @-@ order position for the Third Test at Old Trafford . According to O ’ Reilly , Brown had appeared out of place in the middle @-@ order because he was used to the opener ’ s classical role of defending against and wearing down the opening bowlers , rather than attacking . During the Test , which was drawn , Barnes was injured and off spinner Ian Johnson was used as a makeshift opener as Morris was the only specialist left after Brown ’ s omission . Afterwards , Brown managed only eight as Australia defeated Middlesex by ten wickets in their only county match between Tests . 
 Barnes was still unavailable for the Fourth Test , but Brown was not recalled to open with Morris ; instead , Hassett was promoted to open with Morris , while the teenaged Harvey came into the middle @-@ order . Although Hassett failed with only 13 and 17 in his two innings , Harvey struck 112 in the first innings , before Australia chased down 404 on the final day to set a world record for the highest successful run @-@ chase in Test cricket and won by seven wickets . 
 Brown partnered the recovered Barnes and patiently scored 140 , before being the fifth man out with the score at 344 , as Australia amassed 456 and defeated Derbyshire by an innings immediately after the Fourth Test . Looking to regain his Test position by sheer weight of runs , Brown started slowly ; Barnes made 24 of the first 29 runs . He took 185 minutes to reach 50 , much to the displeasure of the restless spectators , before accelerating and scoring his next 50 runs in 37 minutes . 
 In the next match against Glamorgan , Brown scored 16 in a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . He scored 33 and seven in the following match , falling both times to the leg spin of Eric Hollies as Australia defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets . Brown was then rested as Australia faced and drew with Lancashire for the second time on the tour . He returned for the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , scoring 49 out of Australia 's 282 in a weather @-@ affected draw that failed to reach the second innings . Brown was overlooked for selection in the Fifth Test at The Oval . Barnes returned to the team and Australia crushed England by an innings and 149 runs to take the series 4 – 0 after cutting them down for only 52 in the first innings . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and Brown top @-@ scored with 106 . After putting on 64 with Morris for the first wicket , he put on 104 each for the next two partnerships with Bradman and Harvey respectively , before falling at 3 / 272 . Brown again batted slowly ; he took 255 minutes to reach triple figures and was greeted by ironic clapping as he slowly accumulated runs while his partners attacked . Brown 's dismissal triggered a collapse ; Australia lost their last seven wickets for 89 to end at 361 . Despite this , they completed another innings victory . In the next match against the Gentlemen of England , which was held at Lord 's , Brown scored 120 , featuring in a 180 @-@ run second wicket partnership with Bradman , as Australia amassed 5 / 610 and won by an innings . Former Australian Test opener and batting partner Jack Fingleton said " Brown has always looked the class batsman that he is when playing at Lord 's , and this superb century , so different in conception and execution to the one at Canterbury [ against Kent ] , made one reflect what a grand opening batsman this series of Tests had done without " . Fingleton made a duck in the next match but Australia nevertheless defeated Somerset by an innings and 374 runs . He then made 13 against the South of England in his last first @-@ class match of the season . The match was washed out , but not before Brown took 4 / 16 from 4 @.@ 1 overs in his only first @-@ class bowling effort of the tour , cleaning up the tail . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last Australian tour in 1938 , the team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted only six England players from the season 's Tests be allowed to compete . After his opponents had finalised their team , Bradman fielded a full @-@ strength team , and Brown missed out . The match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . In the first match , Brown was rested as the Australians claimed an innings victory . In the second match , Brown scored 24 not out batting at No. 8 and took a wicket in the second innings as Australia ended the tour with another innings victory . 
 = = Role = = 
 An experienced right @-@ handed opening batsman , Brown was on his third campaign in England , having first toured in 1934 before the World War II . However , Brown 's best years were lost to the war and by 1948 , Barnes and Morris had risen above him in the pecking order and become Australia 's first @-@ choice opening pair . Brown was selected as the reserve opener , a decision that generated controversy among pundits who believed he was past his best . 
 During the tour matches , which were usually played consecutively with only one or no days between fixtures , Bradman rotated the trio of openers , so one would generally be rested while the other two opened , N- but in the Tests , Morris and Barnes were preferred . Bradman accommodated Brown in his first @-@ choice team by playing him out of position in the middle order in the first two Tests and against Worcestershire and the MCC , when he fielded the strongest XI . However , Brown appeared uncomfortable in the unfamiliar role , and after making 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in the first two Tests , he was dropped . 
 Nevertheless , Brown was successful in the tour matches when he played as an opener . He ended the tour with eight centuries and a total of 1 @,@ 448 first @-@ class runs at an average of 57 @.@ 92 , behind only Bradman , Hassett and Morris in the runs and averages , with a highest score of 200 against Cambridge University . Brown 's tally of eight centuries was second only to Bradman , and took his tally on English soil to 18 first @-@ class tons . Excluding the matches against Worcestershire , the MCC and the first two Tests , in which Brown had scored 25 , 26 , 17 , 24 and 32 batting in the middle order while Barnes and Morris opened , Brown scored 1 @,@ 324 runs at 66 @.@ 20 while opening in the other matches , which would have put him in a clear fourth place on the batting averages . Following his omission from the Test team midway through the tour , Brown batted in a slow and conservative manner in order to score more runs and regain his position , much to the chagrin of the crowds . 
 A very occasional off spinner , Brown took 4 / 16 against the South of England in his only first @-@ class bowling assignment of the tour . It was his best career bowling figures — he accumulated only six wickets in his first @-@ class career . He also took 18 catches in the first @-@ class fixtures . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Hensley Henson = 
 Herbert Hensley Henson ( 8 November 1863 – 27 September 1947 ) was an Anglican priest , scholar and controversialist . He was Bishop of Hereford , 1918 – 20 and Bishop of Durham , 1920 – 39 . 
 The son of a zealous member of the Plymouth Brethren , Henson was not allowed to go to school until he was fourteen , and was largely self @-@ educated . He was admitted to the University of Oxford , and gained a first @-@ class degree in 1884 . In the same year he was elected as a Fellow of All Souls , where he began to make a reputation as a speaker . He was ordained as a priest in 1888 . 
 Feeling a vocation to minister to the urban poor , Henson served in the East End of London and Barking before becoming chaplain of an ancient hospice in Ilford in 1895 . In 1900 he was appointed to the high @-@ profile post of vicar of St Margaret 's , Westminster and canon of Westminster Abbey . While there , and as Dean of Durham ( 1913 – 18 ) , he wrote prolifically and sometimes controversially . The Anglo @-@ Catholic wing of the Church took exception to his liberal theological views , which some regarded as heretical , and sought unsuccessfully in 1917 to block his appointment as Bishop of Hereford . 
 In 1920 , after two years in the largely rural diocese of Hereford , Henson returned to Durham as its bishop . The industrial north @-@ east of England , including County Durham , was badly affected by an economic depression . Henson was opposed to strikes , trade unions and socialism , and for a time his forthright expression of his views made him unpopular in the diocese . His opinions about some Church matters changed radically during his career : at first a strong advocate of the Church of England 's continued establishment as the country 's official church , he came to believe that politicians could not be trusted to legislate properly on ecclesiastical matters , and he espoused the cause of disestablishment . He campaigned against efforts to introduce prohibition , exploitation of foreign workers by British companies , and fascist and Nazi aggression , and supported reform of the divorce laws , a controversial revision of the Book of Common Prayer and ecumenism . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Henson was born in London , the fourth son and sixth child of eight of Thomas Henson ( 1812 – 96 ) , a businessman , and his second wife , Martha , née Fear . The family moved to Broadstairs on the coast of Kent when Henson was two years old . Thomas Henson was a zealous evangelical Christian who had renounced the Church of England and joined the Plymouth Brethren . Martha Henson shielded her children from the worst excesses of what the biographer Matthew Grimley describes as Thomas 's " bigotry " , but in 1870 she died , and , in Henson 's words , " with her died our happiness " . From an early age the young Henson was a dedicated Christian and felt a vocation for the Anglican priesthood ; his father 's fundamentalist views were anathema , and left him with what Grimley calls " an enduring hatred of protestant fanaticism " . In 1873 Thomas Henson remarried ; Emma Parker , widow of a Lutheran pastor , filled the role of stepmother with sympathy and kindness , mitigating the father 's grimness and ensuring that the children were properly educated . In Henson 's phrase , " she recreated the home " . 
 Henson was fourteen before his father allowed him either to be baptised or to attend a school . The Rector of Broadstairs conducted the baptism ; there were no godparents , and Henson undertook their functions himself . He took religious instruction from the rector leading to his confirmation as a communicant member of the Church of England in 1878 . At Broadstairs Collegiate School he derived little educational benefit , having already educated himself widely and deeply from books in his father 's library . He rose to be head boy of the school , but after a dispute with the headmaster during which Henson expressed " with more passion than respect " his opinion of the head , he ran away from the school in 1879 . He gained employment as an assistant master at Brigg grammar school in Lincolnshire ; the headmaster there recognised his talent and recommended that he should apply for admission to the University of Oxford . Thomas Henson was against the idea , partly because his financial means had declined , but was talked round by his wife and gave his consent . Thomas agreed to fund his son 's studies , but the sum he allowed was too little to pay the substantial fees for residence at any of the colleges of the university . In 1881 Henson applied successfully for admission as an " unattached " student , a member of none of the Oxford colleges , but eligible for the full range of university tuition . Cut off from the camaraderie of college life , Henson felt seriously isolated . He concentrated on his studies , and gained a first class honours degree in Modern History in June 1884 . 
 = = = All Souls = = = 
 Such was the quality of Henson 's scholarship that his history tutor encouraged him to enter the annual competition for appointment as a Fellow of All Souls , the university 's post @-@ graduate research college . He was appointed in November 1884 , at the age of twenty . Membership of the college offered an annual stipend of £ 200 ; for the first time , Henson was in reasonably comfortable financial circumstances . At All Souls , he later wrote , " I was welcomed with a generous kindness which made me feel immediately at home . I formed friendships which have enriched my life . " His biographer John Peart @-@ Binns suggests that Henson may nonetheless have remained something of an outsider , his arrival at All Souls " akin to that of an alien " . The college was headed by the Warden , Sir William Anson , who became something of a father figure to Henson , and encouraged his researches . Henson 's first paper , on William II of England , marked him out as not only a fine scholar but a gripping speaker when he delivered it to an audience . Aware that his quick tongue could lead him into indiscretion , he adopted and maintained all his life the practice of writing out his lectures and sermons in full beforehand rather than improvising or speaking from concise notes . He preferred a quill pen , and wrote in a fine clear hand ; he considered illegible writing to be a form of bad manners as tiresome as inaudible talking . He gained a reputation as a controversialist . In a biographical sketch , Harold Begbie wrote that at Oxford Henson was nicknamed " Coxley <unk> " ; he added : 
 Never was any man more certain he was right ; never was any man more inclined to ridicule the bare idea that his opponent could be anything but wrong ; and never was any man more thoroughly happy in making use of a singularly trenchant intellect to stab and thrust its triumphant way through the logic of his adversary . 
 In 1885 , in tandem with his work at All Souls , Henson acted as tutor to Lyle Rathbone , son of the philanthropic businessman William Rathbone . The family lived in Birkenhead , where for six months Henson stayed with them . He had ample leisure time , much of which he spent in visiting local churches and nonconformist chapels . This process left him struggling with doctrinal questions , but sure of a religious vocation . The day after his return to Oxford in October 1885 he went into St Mary 's , Iffley , and with his hand on the altar vowed to dedicate himself to God and the Church . 
 Henson 's beliefs on doctrine were still forming , but he inclined to high @-@ churchmanship and was influenced by Charles Gore and the <unk> , though he was <unk> by more extreme Anglo @-@ Catholic forms of <unk> . With his suspicion of nonconformism he was a proponent of the principle of establishment – the maintenance of Anglicanism as the official state religion – and in 1886 he became secretary of the new Oxford Laymen 's League for Defence of the National Church , to counter the threat of disestablishment proposed by politicians such as Joseph Chamberlain and Charles Dilke . 
 = = = Ordination and east London = = = 
 The poverty Henson had seen during his six months in Birkenhead gave him a strong impetus to minister to the poor . In 1887 , after being ordained deacon , he took charge of the Oxford House Settlement , a high @-@ church mission in Bethnal Green , a poor area of the East End of London . While in this post he honed his speaking skills in public debates with atheist orators , many from the National Secular Society 's Bethnal Green office . 
 In 1888 Henson was ordained priest . Shortly afterwards All Souls appointed him vicar of a church in its gift : St Margaret 's , Barking , east of London , a large , working class parish , with a population of 12 @,@ 000 , and increasing . At twenty @-@ five he was the youngest vicar in the country , and had a large staff of curates to manage . An All Souls colleague Cosmo Lang , himself on the brink of a Church career , visited Henson at Barking and noted , " He came six months ago to a parish dead – 250 a good congregation in the church ; and now , when he preaches , every seat is filled – 1100 ! " 
 With the energy and impetuosity noted by Lang , Henson worked continually over the next seven years to improve the parish , restoring the fabric of the church , opening clubs for his parishioners , and holding popular open @-@ air services in the vicarage grounds . At Barking his high @-@ church leanings were welcomed , and he was invited to preach from time to time at St Alban 's Holborn , a central London bastion of Anglo @-@ Catholicism . He was never physically strong , and his relentless work at Barking put a strain on his physique . In 1895 he accepted an offer from Lord Salisbury of a less arduous post , the chaplaincy of St Mary 's Hospital , Ilford , which he held until 1900 . In 1895 and 1896 , Henson was select preacher at Oxford , and from 1897 he served as chaplain to John <unk> , Bishop of St Albans . He had time for writing ; between 1897 and 1900 he published four books , ranging from purely theological studies to analyses of Church politics . His beliefs had changed from his early high @-@ churchmanship to a broad @-@ church <unk> ; his 1899 Cui bono ? set out his concerns about the strict ritualists in the Anglo @-@ Catholic wing of the Church . 
 = = = Westminster = = = 
 The Ilford appointment had been in Salisbury 's personal gift ; in his official capacity as prime minister he was responsible for Henson 's next appointment : rector of St Margaret 's , Westminster and canon of Westminster Abbey in 1900 . St Margaret 's , the parish church of the British parliament , was a high @-@ profile appointment ; Henson followed predecessors as willing as he was to court controversy including Henry Hart Milman and Frederic Farrar . His eventual successor as Bishop of Durham , Alwyn Williams wrote that at St Margaret 's , Henson 's brilliance as a speaker and independence of thought attracted large congregations and " his increasingly liberal churchmanship " appealed to a wide range of public opinion , though some of his views offended the orthodox . 
 In 1902 Henson married Isabella ( Ella ) Caroline ( 1870 – 1949 ) , the only daughter of James Wallis Dennistoun of Dennistoun , Scotland . Grimley comments that it was in keeping with Henson 's usual impulsiveness that he proposed within four days of meeting her . The marriage was lifelong ; there were no children . 
 From his pulpit , Henson spoke against the view that ecumenism was , in W E Gladstone 's words , " a moral monster " , and criticised schools that failed to provide adequate religious instruction . Preaching at Westminster Abbey in 1912 he attracted international attention for naming and denouncing three British directors of the Peruvian @-@ Amazon Company for the " <unk> atrocities " – the mass enslavement and brutal treatment of indigenous Peruvians in the company 's rubber factories . During his time at St Margaret 's Henson published nine books , some of them collected sermons and lectures , others on the role of Christianity in modern society and theological questions . 
 Henson 's uncompromising character brought him into frequent conflict with old friends and colleagues . In 1909 he offended Charles Gore , now Bishop of Birmingham , by defying Gore 's order not to preach in the institute of a Congregational church in the diocese . His confrontational style and liberal theology caused delay in his promotion , despite his obvious abilities . An apocryphal story circulated in 1908 that the prime minister , Herbert Asquith , suggested Henson 's name to Edward VII when the see of York became vacant , and the king replied , " Damn it all , man , I am Defender of the Faith ! " In 1910 the post of Dean of Lincoln fell vacant . Asquith considered appointing Henson , but decided , as he told the Archbishop of Canterbury , Randall Davidson , that " it would be rather like sending a destroyer into a land @-@ locked pool " . 
 = = = Dean and bishop = = = 
 In 1912 the Dean of Durham , George Kitchin , died . The Bishop , Handley Moule , hoped the prime minister would appoint Henry Watkins , the Archdeacon of Durham , but Asquith chose Henson . On 2 January 1913 Moule presided over Henson 's formal installation at Durham Cathedral . 
 The five years Henson spent as Dean of Durham were marked by further controversy , including his objection to the existing divorce laws as too favourable to men and unfair to women . He was hostile to changes aimed at giving the Church more control over its own affairs ; he regarded establishment and parliamentary control as safeguards against extremism . He opposed William Temple 's " Life and Liberty movement " , which campaigned for synodical and democratic government of the Church , and he was against the establishment of the National Assembly of the Church of England in 1919 . To Henson , the essence of Anglicanism rested on parliamentary enforcement of the rights of the laity of the Church against the bishops and priests , and the inclusion of both clergy and laity in all matters under the rule of the monarch as Supreme Governor of the Church . 
 Among other views for which Henson was known were his disapproval of teetotalism campaigners and of socialism , and for his disbelief in social reform as an ally of religion . When the Kikuyu controversy erupted in 1913 Henson once again found himself at odds with Gore . The question was whether two colonial bishops had committed heresy by taking part in an ecumenical service . Gore and his ally Bishop Weston of Zanzibar led the charge , and appear in Henson 's journal as " devoted , unselfish , indefatigable , eminently gifted , but ... also fanatical in temper , bigoted in their beliefs , and reckless in their methods . " Together with Bishop Moule , Dean Wace of Canterbury and other leaders , Henson strongly , and successfully , supported the accused bishops : " The Church owes a deep debt of gratitude to the Bishops of Uganda and Mombasa . " 
 Henson spoke out strongly , and ultimately unsuccessfully , against the proposed disestablishment of the Anglican Church in Wales . In doing so he addressed many nonconformist gatherings ; the historian Owen Chadwick suggests that this may have commended him to David Lloyd George , who became prime minister in 1916 . A serious doctrinal row within the Church seemed to many to put Henson out of the running for elevation to a bishopric . He had defended the right of clergy to express doubts about the virgin birth and bodily resurrection . He was , as most of his critics failed , or refused , to notice , doctrinally orthodox on the resurrection , and content to accept the tradition of the virgin birth , but his contention that other priests had the right to question them was intolerable to the Anglo @-@ Catholic wing of the Church , led by Gore . 
 Archbishop Davidson had no doubts about Henson 's doctrinal soundness , and persuaded him to issue a statement of faith to silence his critics . Davidson stated publicly that no fair @-@ minded man could read consecutively a series of Henson 's sermons without feeling that they had in him a brilliant and powerful teacher of the Christian faith . Gore and his followers were obliged to call off their protests . Against Davidson 's advice for caution , Lloyd George appointed Henson to the vacant see of Hereford in 1917 . Gore and others , including Cosmo Lang , now the Archbishop of York , failed to attend the consecration service . Their attitude hurt Henson , offended lay opinion in the Church , and was sharply criticised in The Times . Henson was consecrated bishop in Westminster Abbey on 4 February 1918 by Davidson , assisted by twelve supporting bishops . He was enthroned at Hereford Cathedral eight days later . 
 Although Henson 's elevation was controversial chiefly among factions of the clergy – in general lay people supported his appointment – it nevertheless gave fresh impetus to the idea of taking away from the prime minister the power to choose bishops . Gore attempted to promote the idea at the Convocation of Clergy in May 1918 ; Henson abandoned restraint and in Chadwick 's words " stripped Gore 's arguments bare " . He argued from historical examples that appointments made at the Church 's instigation were partisan and disastrous , and that the Crown and prime minister were able to take an unbiased view in the national interest . Despite the public support for him , the controversy revived Henson 's feelings of isolation . 
 The appointment was described as " sending an armoured car into an orchard of apple trees " and Henson had doubts about accepting a mainly rural diocese rather than ministering to the urban poor . Nevertheless , the clergy and laity of Hereford gave him a warm welcome , and he enjoyed working with the incumbents of country parishes . They appreciated his delicacy in not intruding unduly into local church concerns , and it was remarked that " he treated all the world as his equals " . During his brief time at Hereford he published only one book , Christian Liberty ( 1918 ) , a collection of sermons . There was regret in the diocese that his tenure there was brief . In 1920 the see of Durham became vacant on the death of Bishop Moule . Davidson wanted Thomas Strong , Dean of Christ Church , to be appointed and pressed his claims on Lloyd George , but the prime minister took the view that the area needed Henson 's practical skills and common touch rather than Strong 's academic scholarship . 
 = = = Durham = = = 
 Henson was translated to Durham – England 's most senior diocese after Canterbury , York and London – in October 1920 . The appointment was challenging : the area was in grave economic difficulty , with the important coal @-@ mining industry in a crisis caused by falling industrial demand for coal in the years after the war . <unk> there was potential for friction , as the Dean of Durham , James Welldon , who had once been a bishop himself , was temperamentally and politically at odds with his new superior , given to making public statements that Henson found infuriating . Welldon , in Henson 's view , " could neither speak with effect nor be silent with dignity " . They clashed on several occasions , most conspicuously when Welldon , a strong admirer of prohibition , publicly criticised Henson 's tolerant views on the consumption of alcohol . Relations between the Deanery and Auckland Castle , the bishop 's official residence , improved markedly in April 1933 when Cyril Alington , the Head Master of Eton from 1917 to 1933 , succeeded Welldon . Alington was almost universally loved , and though he and Henson differed on points of ecclesiastical practice , they remained warm friends . 
 At the beginning of Henson 's episcopate the Durham miners were on strike . He got on well with miners individually and conversed with many of them as they walked through the extensive grounds of Auckland Castle . It was said of him that he got on easily with everyone " except other dignitaries in gaiters " . Friction arose from Henson 's belief that strikes were morally wrong because of the harm they did to other working people , and he had , in Grimley 's words , " a violent , almost obsessional " , dislike of trade unions . His early concern for the welfare of the poor remained unchanged , but he regarded socialism and trade unionism as negations of individuality . For the same reason he was against state provision of social welfare , though a strong advocate of voluntary spending on it . Later in his bishopric Henson denounced the Jarrow March in 1936 as " revolutionary mob pressure " and condemned the action of his subordinate , the suffragan Bishop of Jarrow , who had given the march his blessing . He loathed class distinction , and was not antipathetic to social reformers , but he was strong in his criticism of Christian campaigners who maintained that the first duty of the Church was social reform . To Henson , the Church 's principal concern was each individual man or woman 's spiritual welfare . 
 The best @-@ known anecdote of Henson , according to Chadwick , comes from his time at Durham . Cosmo Lang complained that his portrait by Orpen " makes me look proud , pompous and <unk> " , to which Henson responded , " And to which of those epithets does your Grace take exception ? " Grimley remarks that on occasion each of those unflattering adjectives applied just as much to Henson . Nonetheless , Henson ranked Lang " among the greater figures of ecclesiastical history " . 
 The most conspicuous cause with which Henson was involved during his time at Durham was , in Anglican terms , of national , and even international , rather than diocesan concern . As a broad churchman he gave strong support in the mid @-@ 1920s to a major revision and modernising of the Book of Common Prayer , the Church 's prescribed forms of worship , used at all services . The evangelical wing of the Church opposed the revision , which some low @-@ church factions dubbed " popish " . Henson , now on the same side as the Anglo @-@ Catholics with whom he had early been in bitter dispute , called the opposition " the Protestant underworld " . Despite the clear majority of clergy and laity in favour of the revision , the House of Commons refused to authorise it , and voted it down in 1927 and again in 1928 . Henson 's colleague Cyril <unk> wrote that the Commons had " made it plain that the Church does not possess full spiritual freedom to determine its worship " . The Church instituted damage limitation measures by permitting parishes to use the new unauthorised text where there was a local consensus to do so , but Henson was horrified at what he saw as Parliament 's betrayal of its duty to preside impartially over the governance of the Church , giving in to pressure from what he termed " an army of illiterates " . 
 Together with the suspicions he had started to harbour that a socialist government might misuse ecclesiastical patronage , the Prayer Book debacle turned Henson from a strong proponent of establishment to its best @-@ known critic . He spent much time and energy fruitlessly campaigning for disestablishment . He was , as he had often been earlier in his career , an isolated figure . Few of his colleagues agreed with him , even those dismayed by the parliamentary vote . He was less isolated in some other causes he took up in the 1920s and 30s . He was one of many wary of the ultra @-@ liberalism of the Modern Churchmen 's Union . In 1934 , he was among the senior clerics who censured Dean Dwelly for inviting a Unitarian to preach in Liverpool Cathedral and Bishop David for permitting it . He was critical of American evangelism as practised by Frank Buchman and the Oxford Group . Henson wrote of Buchman 's " oracular despotism " and " the trail of moral and intellectual wrecks which its progress leaves behind . " 
 Henson was in a minority of senior clergy in speaking out against the dictators of the Axis powers . He condemned Nazi anti @-@ Semitism , Mussolini 's invasion of Abyssinia , appeasement and the Munich agreement . On 1 February 1939 , at the age of seventy @-@ five , he retired from Durham to Hintlesham in Suffolk . Seven months later the Second World War began . Henson supported the Allies ' fight in what he saw as a just war to defeat godless barbarism ; he wrote of " The deepening infamies of Nazi warfare – infamies so horrible as almost to shake one 's faith in the essential <unk> of Humanity . " He urged , " there can be no compromise or patched up peace " . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Winston Churchill was impressed by Henson . Grimley comments that they had much in common , both spending years as isolated figures speaking out for beliefs that were dismissed at the time and later vindicated . As prime minister , Churchill persuaded Henson out of retirement in 1940 to resume his old duties as a Canon of Westminster Abbey . After overcoming the momentary strangeness of being back in his old post after nearly thirty years he preached with vigour until cataracts made his eyesight too poor to continue . He retired from the Abbey in 1941 . 
 In his later years Henson 's lifelong sense of loneliness was compounded by the growing deafness of his wife , making their conversation difficult . He found some solace in the friendship of her companion , Fearne Booker , who lived with the Hensons for more than thirty years . He occupied a considerable part of his retirement writing a substantial work of autobiography , published in three volumes under the title Retrospect of an Unimportant Life . Both at the time and subsequently many of his friends and admirers regretted his publishing the work ; they thought he had done his reputation a disservice . Despite what Williams calls the " peculiar interest and vivacity " of the books , his survey of his many campaigns and controversies , seemed to others to be self @-@ justifying and wilfully to deny many changes of stance that he had manifestly made during his career . In Williams 's view the posthumous publication of Henson 's edited letters were a better legacy : " delightful in both form and content , and , barbed though they often are , they do him fuller justice " . 
 In his writings Henson referred to his two regrets in life . The first was that he had not been at a public school , a fact to which he ascribed his lifelong feeling of being an outsider . The second regret was that he and his wife had been unable to have children . They unofficially adopted a succession of poor boys and paid for their education . At least one of them became a priest and was ordained by Henson . 
 Henson died at Hintlesham on 27 September 1947 at the age of eighty @-@ four . At his wish his body was cremated ; his ashes were interred in Durham Cathedral . 
 = = Books by Henson = = 
 = = = As editor = = = 
 Church Problems , a View of Modern Anglicanism . London : John Murray . 1900 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Naked Truth by Bishop Herbert Croft . London : Chatto & Windus . 1919 [ 1674 ] . OCLC <unk> . 
 A Memoir of the Right Honourable Sir William Anson . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 1920 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = As author = = = 
 = Batgirl = 
 Batgirl is the name of several fictional superheroes appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics , depicted as female counterparts to the superhero Batman . Although the character Betty Kane was introduced into publication in 1961 by Bill Finger and Sheldon Moldoff as Bat @-@ Girl , she was replaced by Barbara Gordon in 1967 , who later came to be identified as the iconic Batgirl . Depicted as the daughter of Gotham City police commissioner James Gordon , she debuted in Detective Comics # 359 , titled " The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl ! " ( 1967 ) by writer Gardner Fox and artist Carmine Infantino . As Batgirl , the character operates primarily in Gotham City , allying herself with Batman and the original Robin , Dick Grayson , as well as other prominent heroes in the DC Universe . 
 Batgirl makes regular appearances in Detective Comics , Batman Family and several other books produced by DC until 1988 . That year , she appears in Barbara Kesel 's Batgirl Special # 1 , in which she retires from crime @-@ fighting . She subsequently appears in Alan Moore 's graphic novel Batman : The Killing Joke where , in her civilian identity , she is shot by the Joker and left paraplegic . Although she is recreated as the computer expert and information broker Oracle by editor Kim Yale and writer John Ostrander the following year , her paralysis sparked debate about the portrayal of women in comics , particularly violence depicted toward female characters . 
 In the 1999 crossover No Man 's Land , the character Helena Bertinelli , known as Huntress , briefly assumes the role of Batgirl until she is stripped of the identity by Batman for violating his stringent codes . Within the same storyline , writer Kelley Puckett and artist Damion Scott introduce the character Cassandra Cain , written as the daughter of assassins David Cain and Lady Shiva ; she takes the mantle of Batgirl under the guidance of Batman and Oracle . In 2000 , she became the first Batgirl to star in an eponymous monthly comic book series , in addition to becoming one of the most prominent characters of Asian descent to appear in American comics . The series was canceled in 2006 , at which point during the company @-@ wide event One Year Later , she is established as a villain and head of the League of Assassins . After receiving harsh feedback from readership , she is later restored to her original conception . However , the character Stephanie Brown , originally known as Spoiler and later Robin , succeeds her as Batgirl after Cassandra Cain abandons the role . 
 Stephanie Brown became the featured character of the Batgirl series written by Bryan Q. Miller from 2009 to 2011 . DC subsequently relaunched all their monthly publications during The New 52 event . In the revised continuity , Barbara Gordon recovers from her paralysis following a surgical procedure and stars in the relaunched Batgirl series written by Gail Simone as the title character . As Batgirl , Barbara Gordon has been adapted into various media relating to the Batman franchise , including television , film , animation , video games , and other merchandise . This factored into the decision to return her to the comic book role , as Dan DiDio , co @-@ publisher of DC Comics , expressed that she is the best @-@ known version of the character . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Detective Comics , Batman Family and other appearances ( 1961 – 1988 ) = = = 
 Following the accusations of a homoerotic subtext in the depiction of the relationship between Batman and Robin as described in Fredric Wertham 's book Seduction of the Innocent ( 1954 ) , a female character , Kathy Kane the Batwoman , appeared in 1956 as a love @-@ interest for Batman . In 1961 DC Comics introduced a second female character as a love @-@ interest for Robin . Betty Kane as " Bat @-@ Girl " arrived as the niece of and Robin @-@ like sidekick to Batwoman , first appearing in Batman # 139 ( 1961 ) . The creation of the Batman Family , which included Batman and Batwoman depicted as parents , Robin and Bat @-@ Girl depicted as their children , the extraterrestrial imp Bat @-@ Mite and the " family pet " Ace the Bat @-@ Hound , caused the Batman @-@ related comic books to take " a wrong turn , switching from superheroes to situational comedy " . 
 DC Comics abandoned these characters in 1964 when newly appointed Batman @-@ editor Julius Schwartz judged them too silly and therefore inappropriate . Schwartz had asserted that these characters should be removed , considering the Batman related comic books had steadily declined in sales , and restored the Batman mythology to its original conception of heroic vigilantism . Bat @-@ Girl , along with other characters in the Batman Family , were retconned out of existence following the 1985 limited series Crisis on Infinite Earths . However , even though Bat @-@ Girl did not exist in the post @-@ Crisis continuity , a modified version of the character , Mary Elizabeth " Bette " Kane , introduced as the superhero Flamebird , continues to appear in DC Comics publications . 
 Schwartz stated that he had been asked to develop a new female character in order to attract a female viewership to the Batman television series of the 1960s . Executive producer William Dozier suggested that the new character would be the daughter of Gotham City 's Police Commissioner James Gordon , and that she would adopt the identity of Batgirl . When Dozier and producer Howie Horowitz saw rough concept artwork of the new Batgirl by artist Carmine Infantino during a visit to DC offices , they optioned the character in a bid to help sell a third season to the ABC television network . Infantino reflected on the creation of Batgirl , stating " Bob Kane had had a Bat @-@ Girl for about three stories in the ’ 50s but she had nothing to do with a bat . She was like a pesky girl version of Robin . I knew we could do a lot better , so Julie and I came up with the real Batgirl , who was so popular she almost got her own TV show . " Yvonne Craig portrayed the character in the show 's third season . Barbara Gordon and alter ego Batgirl debuted in Detective Comics # 359 , " The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl " ( 1967 ) . In the debut story , while driving to a costume ball dressed as a female version of Batman , Barbara Gordon intervenes in a kidnapping attempt on Bruce Wayne by the super villain Killer Moth , attracting Batman 's attention and leading to a crime @-@ fighting career . Although Batman insists she give up crime @-@ fighting because of her gender , Batgirl disregards his objections . 
 In her civilian identity , Dr. Barbara Gordon Ph.D. is depicted as a career woman with a doctorate in library science , as well as being head of Gotham City public library , " presumably one of the largest public libraries in the DC Comics version of reality . " She was given a regular backup slot in Detective Comics starting with issue # 384 ( February 1969 ) , alternating issues with Robin until issue # 404 , after which she had the backup slot to herself . Frank Robbins wrote nearly all of these backups , which were penciled first by Gil Kane and later by Don Heck . Barbara Gordon ’ s Batgirl exceeded the earlier Bat @-@ Girl and Batwoman characters in popularity , and readers requested for her to appear in other titles . Although some readers requested that Batwoman also continue to appear in publication , DC responded to the fan @-@ based acclaim and criticism of the new character in an open letter in Detective Comics # 417 ( 1971 ) , stating : " I 'd like to say a few words about the reaction some readers have to Batgirl . These are readers who remember Batwoman and the other Bat @-@ girls from years back ... They were there because romance seemed to be needed in Batman 's life . But thanks to the big change and a foresighted editor , these hapless females are gone for good . In their place stands a girl who is a capable crime @-@ fighter , a far cry from Batwoman who constantly had to be rescued [ by ] Batman . " 
 Batgirl continued to appear in DC Comics publications throughout the late 1960s and 1970s as a supporting character in Detective Comics , in addition to guest appearances in various titles such as Justice League of America , World 's Finest Comics , The Brave and the Bold , Adventure Comics , and Superman . In the early @-@ 1970s Batgirl reveals her secret identity to her father ( who had already discovered it on his own ) and serves as a member of the United States House of Representatives . She moves to Washington , D.C. , intending to give up her career as Batgirl , and in June 1972 appeared in a story entitled " Batgirl 's Last Case . " Julius Schwartz brought her back a year later in Superman # 268 ( 1973 ) in which she has a blind date with Clark Kent , establishing their friendship , and fights alongside Superman . Batgirl and Superman team up twice more , in Superman # 279 and DC Comics Presents # 19 . Batgirl also guest @-@ starred in other Superman related titles such as # 453 of Adventure Comics and in Superman Family # 171 , where she teams with Supergirl . The character is given a starring role in DC 's Batman Family comic book which debuted in 1975 . The original Robin , Dick Grayson , became her partner in the series , with the two frequently referred to as the " Dynamite Duo : Batgirl & Robin " . Batgirl meets Batwoman in Batman Family # 10 , when the retired superhero briefly returns to crime @-@ fighting ( before the Bronze Tiger murders Kane ) . The two fight Killer Moth and Cavalier , and learn each other 's secret identities . Batwoman retires once again at the conclusion of the story , leaving Batgirl to continue crime @-@ fighting . Although this series ended after three years of publication , Batgirl continued to appear in back up stories published in Detective Comics through issue # 519 ( October 1982 ) . 
 Crisis on Infinite Earths , a limited miniseries published in 1985 , was written in order to reduce the complex history of DC Comics to a single continuity . Although Batgirl is a featured character , her role is relatively small — she delivers Supergirl 's eulogy in issue seven of the 12 @-@ part series . The conclusion of Crisis on Infinite Earths changed DC Universe continuity in many ways . Following the reboot , Barbara Gordon is born to Roger and Thelma Gordon , and she is Jim Gordon 's niece and adopted daughter in current canon . Post @-@ Crisis , Supergirl does not arrive on Earth until after Gordon has established herself as Oracle , and many of the adventures she shared with Batgirl are retroactively described as having been experienced by Power Girl . In Secret Origins # 20 ( 1987 ) , Barbara Gordon 's origin is rebooted by author Barbara Randal . Within the storyline , Gordon recounts the series of events that lead to her career as Batgirl , including her first encounter with Batman as a child , studying martial arts under the tutelage of a sensei , memorizing maps and blue prints of the city , excelling in academics in order to skip grades , and pushing herself to become a star athlete . 
 = = = Batgirl Special and Batman : The Killing Joke ( 1988 ) = = = 
 DC officially retired the hero in the one @-@ shot comic Batgirl Special # 1 ( July 1988 ) , written by Barbara Kesel . Later that year , she appears in Alan Moore 's Batman : The Killing Joke . In this graphic novel , the Joker shoots and paralyzes Barbara Gordon in an attempt to drive her father insane , thereby proving to Batman that anyone can be morally compromised . Although events in The Killing Joke exert a great impact on the character , the story has little to do with her . She is deployed as a plot device to cement the Joker ’ s vendetta against Commissioner Gordon and Batman . In 2006 , during an interview with Wizard , Moore expressed regret over his treatment of the character calling it " shallow and ill @-@ conceived " . He stated prior to writing the graphic novel , " I asked DC if they had any problem with me crippling Barbara Gordon — who was Batgirl at the time — and if I remember , I spoke to Len Wein , who was our editor on the project " , and following a discussion with then @-@ Executive Editorial Director Dick Giordano , " Len got back onto the phone and said , ‘ Yeah , okay , cripple the bitch . ' " Although there has been speculation as to whether or not editors at DC specifically intended to have the character 's paralysis become permanent , Brian Cronin , author of Was Superman A Spy ? : And Other Comic Book Legends Revealed ( 2009 ) noted that DC had hired Barbara Kesel to write the Batgirl Special specifically to retire the character and set her in place for The Killing Joke . Gail Simone included the character 's paralysis in a list of " major female characters that had been killed , mutilated , and depowered " , dubbing the phenomenon " Women in Refrigerators " in reference to a 1994 Green Lantern story where the title character discovers his girlfriend 's mutilated body in his refrigerator . Following the release of the graphic novel , comic book editor and writer Kim Yale discussed how distasteful she found the treatment of Barbara Gordon with her husband , fellow comic writer John Ostrander . Rather than allow the character to fall into obscurity , the two decided to revive her as a character living with a disability — the information broker , Oracle . 
 = = = No Man 's Land ( 1999 ) = = = 
 Eleven years after the editorial retirement of Barbara Gordon as Batgirl , a new version of the character was introduced in Batman : Shadow of the Bat # 83 during the multi @-@ title story arc " No Man 's Land " ( 1999 ) . In Batman : Legends of the Dark Knight # 120 ( 1999 ) , the new Batgirl is revealed to be Helena Bertinelli , an established DC comics superhero alternatively known as the Huntress . Bertinelli is eventually forced to abandon the mantle by Batgirl . No Man 's Land also marks the introduction of Cassandra Cain in Batman # 567 ( 1999 ) . Depicted as a martial arts child prodigy , Cassandra Cain is written as a young woman of partly Asian descent who succeeds Helena Bertinelli as Batgirl , with the approval of both Batman and Oracle . 
 = = = Batgirl and other appearances ( 2000 – 2011 ) = = = 
 The first Batgirl monthly comic was published in 2000 , with Cassandra Cain as the title character . Raised by assassin David Cain , Cassandra Cain was not taught spoken language , but instead was taught to " read " physical movement . Subsequently , Cain 's only form of communication was body language . The parts of the character 's brain normally used for speech were trained so Cain could read other people 's body language and predict , with uncanny accuracy , their next move . This also caused her brain to develop learning functions different from most , a form of dyslexia that hampers her abilities to read and write . 
 Despite Cain 's disability , author Andersen <unk> describes the character 's unique form of language as the key factor in what makes Cain an excellent detective ; the ability to walk into a room and " know " something is wrong based on body language . During the first arc of the Batgirl comic book series entitled " Silent Running " , Cassandra Cain encounters a psychic who " reprograms " her brain , enabling her to comprehend verbal language , while simultaneously losing the ability to predict movements . This issue is resolved during the second arc of the series , " A Knight Alone " , when Batgirl encounters the assassin Lady Shiva who agrees to teach her how to predict movement once again . Six years after its debut , DC Comics canceled the Batgirl comic book series with issue # 73 ( 2006 ) , ending with Cain relinquishing her role as Batgirl . 
 When DC Comics continuity skipped forward one year after the events of the limited series Infinite Crisis , Cassandra Cain is revived as leader of the League of Assassins , having abandoned her previous characterization as an <unk> . The character 's progression from hero to villain angered some of her fans and was accompanied by heavy criticism . Cain reprised her role as Batgirl in the " Titans East " ( 2007 ) storyline of Teen Titans , where it was discovered that she had been influenced by a mind @-@ altering drug administered by supervillain Deathstroke the Terminator . Following the conclusion of the storyline , DC Comics has restored Cain 's original characterization as a superhero and the character has been given a supporting role in the comic book series Batman and the Outsiders . 
 Following the events of Batman 's disappearance , Cassandra , acting under her mentor 's orders in the event of his death , handed over the Batgirl mantle to Stephanie Brown , the former Spoiler and Robin . After declining an offer from Tim Drake to reclaim the Batgirl mantle from Stephanie , Cassandra rejoined the Batman Family under the new identity of Blackbat . She currently acts as the Hong Kong representative of Batman Inc . 
 Stephanie Brown , formerly the Spoiler and briefly the fourth Robin , takes up the mantle of Batgirl after Cassandra Cain gives Brown her costume under Batman 's order . Eventually , Barbara Gordon approves of Brown as her newest successor — and she gives Brown her own Batgirl costume and becomes her mentor for a period . Brown is the fourth in @-@ continuity Batgirl and the second Batgirl to star in her own ongoing Batgirl comic book series . 
 = = = The New 52 : Batgirl , Birds of Prey and other appearances ( 2011 – 2016 ) = = = 
 In September , 2011 , following the company @-@ wide relaunch , Barbara Gordon stars in a new Batgirl series — one of The New 52 titles featuring the company 's most iconic characters . The conclusion of the limited series Flashpoint ( 2011 ) establishes a new continuity within the DC Universe , with all characters regressing to an earlier age and stage in their careers , while remaining in a modern timeline . DC Senior VP of Sales , Bob Wayne , explained that with each of their titles reverting to issue # 1 , " our creative teams have the ability to take a more modern approach — not only with each character , but with how the characters interact with one another and the universe as a whole , and focus on the earlier part of the careers of each of our iconic characters . " Wayne also stated that " The Killing Joke still happened and she was Oracle . Now she will go through physical rehabilitation and become a more seasoned and nuanced character because she had these incredible and diverse experiences . Dan DiDio , Co @-@ Publisher of DC Comics explained the decision by stating that " she 'll always be the most recognizable [ Batgirl ] . " Series writer Gail Simone stated : " For many years , I got to write the character as Oracle , and there is to this day , no character who means more to me . This is classic Barbara as she was originally conceived , with a few big surprises . It ’ s a bit of a shock , to be sure , but we ’ re doing everything we can to be respectful to this character ’ s amazing legacy , while presenting something thrilling that a generation of comics readers will be experiencing for the first time ... Barbara Gordon leaping , fighting , and swinging over Gotham . Now , when citizens of that city look up , they are going to see <unk> . And that is absolutely thrilling . " 
 In the new , revised continuity , the events of The Killing Joke took place three years before the current storyline , and while it is established she was paraplegic during that time , Barbara Gordon is written as having regained her mobility after undergoing experimental surgery at a South African clinic . Although she resumes her work as Batgirl one year after her recovery , she continues to suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder , causing her to hesitate in battle when exposed to gunfire that could result in receiving new spinal damage . The character also exhibits survivor guilt due to the fact she has made a full recovery from her paralysis while others have not . Series writer Gail Simone stated that while the character is " one of the smartest and toughest women in comics ... One thing the book is truly about , is that the after @-@ effects of something like PTSD ( post @-@ traumatic stress disorder ) or other trauma @-@ related syndromes , can strike even very smart , very intellectually tough people , even soldiers and cops " , a subject that is generally overlooked in comic books . She also explained the method of the character 's recovery is based upon real life experiences in that " some of the best real world work in the field of mobility rehabilitation is coming from South Africa . People have been talking about this as if it 's some sort of mystical thing like returning from the dead , but there are treatments and surgeries that can restore mobility in some cases . Barbara 's spine was not severed . That makes her a candidate . " 
 Prior to release , Batgirl # 1 sold out at the distribution level with over 100 @,@ 000 copies printed in its first run according to Diamond Comic Distributors . Along with Action Comics # 1 , Justice League # 1 , Batman # 1 , Batman and Robin # 1 , Batman : The Dark Knight # 1 , Detective Comics # 1 , Flash # 1 , Green Lantern # 1 , and Superman # 1 , retailers were required to order a second printing . Calvin Reid of Publishers Weekly states in a review of the first issue : " The artwork is okay though conventional , while Simone ’ s script tries to tie up of the end of the previous Barbara Gordon / Oracle storyline and setup up the new Batgirl . Her formula : murderous villains , blood splattering violence and high flying superheroics mixed with single @-@ white @-@ female bonding ... plus a cliffhanger ending to the first issue that offers a nifty [ segue ] into the new world of Barbara Gordon and Batgirl . " The New York Times critic George Gene <unk> wrote : " Unlike some of the other DC comics I read this week , Batgirl achieves a deft hat trick : a well @-@ shaped reintroduction to a character , an elegant acknowledgement of fundamental history and the establishment of a new status quo . This is a must @-@ buy series . " Earning a B + rating in a review from Entertainment Weekly , Ken Tucker writes that Simone " [ takes ] her Birds of Prey storytelling powers and focuses them on the newly revived Barbara Gordon as Batgirl . The result is a burst of exhilaration , as Barbara / Batgirl revels in her new freedom even as she encounters a so @-@ far not @-@ terribly @-@ chilling villain called Mirror . " 
 Since the series relaunch in September 2011 , Batgirl has remained within the top 30 of the 300 best @-@ selling monthly comic book publications sold in North America . Monthly estimated sales figures are as follows : Batgirl No. 1 with 81 @,@ 489 copies ( ranked 12th overall ) , Batgirl No. 2 with 75 @,@ 227 ( ranked 14th ) , Batgirl No. 3 with 62 @,@ 974 ( ranked 18th ) , Batgirl No. 4 with 53 @,@ 975 ( raked 23rd ) , Batgirl No. 5 with 51 @,@ 327 ( raked 26th ) , and Batgirl No. 6 with 47 @,@ 836 ( ranked 30th ) . The hardcover edition of volume 1 , Batgirl : The Darkest Reflection , which collects issues # 1 @-@ 6 , made the The New York Times Best Seller list , alongside Animal Man : The Hunt , Batman & Robin : Born to Kill , Batman : Detective Comics , Wonder Woman : Blood , Batwoman : Hydrology , Green Lantern : Sinestro . 
 Additionally , Barbara Gordon makes an appearance in Birds of Prey No. 1 , where Black Canary offers her a spot on the new Birds of Prey roster . She declines Canary 's invitation , suggesting that Katana take her place instead . Series writer Duane <unk> has stated that Batgirl will join the team in issue # 4 . He commented that while she " is an essential part of this team " , she is not the focus of the series , as she is hesitant to be associated with the other characters because of their status as outlaws . 
 In October 2014 , the monthly Batgirl title underwent a soft reboot with the new creative team Brenden Fletcher ( writer ) Cameron Stewart ( writer , layouts ) , Babs Tarr ( artist ) and Maris Wicks ( colors ) . The first six @-@ issue story explored Barbara Gordon 's attempt to start a new life as a PhD student in the hip Gotham borough of Burnside . While seemingly light and engaging compared to Gail Simone 's darker preceding run , the new arc ultimately dealt with Babs ' inability to fully escape her earlier trauma and the villain was revealed as her own brain scans , an algorithm similar to the pre @-@ New 52 Oracle . While the reboot was highly praised for its fun , energy , innovative use of social media , and particularly for Tarr 's art , issue 37 caused controversy with its depiction of a villain named Dagger Type , which some critics saw as a transphobic caricature . In response , the creative team issued a joint apology and revised the issue for the subsequent collected edition , Batgirl Vol . 1 : The Batgirl of Burnside . 
 On March 13 , 2015 DC Comics released 25 Joker @-@ themed variant covers for its various monthly series for release that June , in celebration of the character 's 75th anniversary . Among them was a cover to Batgirl # 41 by artist Rafael Albuquerque that took its inspiration from The Killing Joke . The cover depicts the Joker standing next to a tearful Batgirl , who has a red smile painted across her mouth . The Joker has one hand holding a revolver draped over Batgirl 's shoulder and is pointing to her cheek with the other hand , as if gesturing to shoot her . The cover quickly drew criticism for highlighting a dark period in the character 's history , especially when juxtaposed with the youthful , more optimistic direction of the series at the time . The hashtag # changethecover drew dozens of posts on Twitter and Tumblr asking DC to not release the variant . DC ultimately withdrew the cover from publication at the request of Albuquerque , who stated , " My intention was never to hurt or upset anyone through my art ... For that reason , I have recommended to DC that the variant cover be pulled . " 
 = = = DC Rebirth : Batgirl and Batgirl and the Birds of Prey ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 In March 2016 , DC Comics announced it would be relaunching all of its monthly titles under the DC Rebirth event . The relaunch restores elements of the pre @-@ Flashpoint DC continuity while maintaining elements of The New 52 as well . Among the new titles and creative teams announced , Batgirl written by Hope Larson and Batgirl and the Birds of Prey written by Julie Benson and Shawna Benson were included . 
 = = = Alternative versions = = = 
 Various alterations of Barbara Gordon as Batgirl have appeared in storylines published in and out of mainstream continuity titles . Variants of the character within continuity often appear in stories which involve time travel , such as the crossover limited series Zero Hour : Crisis in Time , a follow @-@ up story preceded by the 1985 limited series Crisis on Infinite Earths which altered mainstream continuity . Notable imprints of DC Comics such as Elseworlds and All Star DC Comics have also featured alternate versions of the character . The Elseworlds imprint takes the company 's iconic characters and places them in alternate timelines , places and events making heroes " as familiar as yesterday seem as fresh as tomorrow . " As Batgirl , Barbara Gordon has made several appearances in Elseworlds comics since 1997 . The character is given starring roles in the noir @-@ style storyline Thrillkiller ( 1997 ) , its sequel Thrillkiller ' 62 ( 1998 ) , and the one @-@ shot comic Elseworld 's Finest : Supergirl & Batgirl ( 1998 ) . 
 In 2005 , DC Comics launched its All Star imprint — an ongoing series of comics designed to pair the company 's most iconic characters with the most acclaimed writers and artists in the industry . Similar to Elseworlds , All Star is not restricted to continuity and establishes a fresh perspective for the latest generation of readership . According to Dan DiDio , " [ t ] hese books are created to literally reach the widest audience possible , and not just the comic book audience , but anyone who has ever wanted to read or see anything about Superman or Batman . " An alternate Barbara Gordon was adapted into Frank Miller 's All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder ( 2005 ) as a teenage Batgirl . In addition , another variation of the character had been set to star in an eponymous All Star Batgirl title , written by Geoff Johns ; however , the series was canceled prior to publication . 
 Alternate versions of Batgirl aside from Barbara Gordon have also appeared in publications by DC Comics . In Batman Beyond Unlimited ( set in the continuity of the animated series Batman Beyond ) , the new Batgirl is a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl named Nissa . In Batgirl : Future 's End # 1 , set in an alternate future , a trio of Batgirls include Casandra Cain , Stephanie Brown and newcomer Tiffany Fox — the daughter of Lucius Fox and the first African American character to be portrayed as Batgirl . 
 In the alternate history DC Comics Bombshells universe , there is no singular Batgirl . Instead , there exists a group of young female vigilantes known as The Batgirls , whose ranks consist of a Batwoman fan named Harper Row , an African @-@ American mechanic named Kathy Duquesne , a young girl named Nell Little , and a Singaporean @-@ American dancer named <unk> Yeoh . In Digital Issue 42 ( collected in Print Issue 14 ) , Harley Quinn tells Pamela Isley about encountering " the Belle of the Bog " , who appears to be Barbara Gordon as a vampire . Barbara Gordon 's origins as the first Bombshell Batgirl will be explored in DC Comics Bombshells Annual # 1 , set to be published on 31 August 2016 . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Batgirl has officially been represented by four different characters - and two claimants - beginning with her introduction in 1961 . 
 = = = Betty / Bette Kane = = = 
 During the Golden Age , a female character was introduced as a love interest for Robin . Betty Kane as " Bat @-@ Girl " was depicted as the niece of and Robin @-@ like sidekick to the original Batwoman . In 1964 , however , editor Julius Schwartz asserted that Bat @-@ Girl and other characters in the Bat @-@ Family should be removed considering the decline in sales and restored the Batman mythology to its original conception of heroic vigilantism . During the Crisis on Infinite Earths storyline , Betty Kane was retconned out of existence . 
 Mary Elizabeth " Bette " Kane is a reinvented version of the Betty Kane character during the Golden Age . As her original characterization was retconned out of existence during the Crisis on Infinite Earths storyline , a discrepancy arose where her Bat @-@ Girl character had joined the west coast version of the Teen Titans but simply disappeared . The character was reintroduced as Bette Kane and the alias of Flamebird . Following Infinite Crisis , the character 's past as Bat @-@ Girl was hinted at as being a part of continuity . However , that reference included a revamped origin of the character and it may or may not have been the current Bette Kane . 
 = = = Barbara Gordon = = = 
 During the run of the Batman television series , DC editorial was approached about adding a female character back into the Batman family . Revising the character history and motivation , Julius Schwartz created Barbara Gordon . This character held the role of Batgirl from 1967 to 1988 when she was retired by DC editorial decision . The character 's role was changed to a paraplegic source of information for all members of the Batman family and codenamed Oracle . She was later restored as Batgirl during The New 52 relaunch of the entire DC publication line in 2011 . 
 = = = Cassandra Cain = = = 
 During the same No Man 's Land storyline , Cassandra Cain was given the role of Batgirl under the guidance of Batman and Oracle . Written as the daughter of assassins David Cain and Lady Shiva , she is trained from early childhood to read human body language instead of developing verbal and written communication skills as part of her father 's conditioning to mold her into the world 's deadliest assassin . However , after committing her first murder , she vows to never again use her martial @-@ arts prowess to kill . In 2000 , she became the first Batgirl to star in an eponymous monthly comic book series as well as one of the most prominent characters of Asian descent to appear in American comics . The series was canceled in 2006 and Cassandra Cain abandoned the role of Batgirl shortly thereafter . Years later , Cassandra rejoined the Batman family under the moniker Blackbat . 
 = = = Stephanie Brown = = = 
 Stephanie Brown was formerly known as Spoiler and then as the first in @-@ continuity female Robin until her apparent death in 2006 . Following her return to comics in 2009 , she assumed the role of Batgirl . She maintained this position until 2011 , the relaunch of the DC imprint under The New 52 . The character reappeared in the DCU in Batman # 28 , as Spoiler . 
 = = = Claimants = = = 
 = = = = Helena Bertinelli = = = = 
 For a brief time during 1999 's No Man 's Land storyline , Helena Bertinelli assumed the mantle of Batgirl . After violating Batman 's code against extreme violence , she was stripped of the mantle and returned to her alias of Huntress . 
 = = = = Charlotte " Charlie " Gage @-@ Radcliffe = = = = 
 After Cassandra Cain abandoned the role a mystery character appeared as the new Batgirl in the Birds of Prey comic . Possessing superpowers , the teen claimed the empty mantle in an attempt to honor the character . However , Barbara Gordon quickly dissuaded the teen from continuing in the role . Charlie Gage @-@ Radcliffe acquiesced , but modified her costume and changed her name to Misfit . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 While Barbara Gordon and Cassandra Cain have both been the subject of academic analysis regarding the portrayal of women in comics , commentary on Barbara Gordon 's Batgirl has focused on her character 's connection to the Women 's liberation movement , doctoral degree and career as a librarian , while analysis of Cassandra Cain 's Batgirl has focused on the character 's double minority status as a woman and a person of color . Since her debut in DC Comics publication , and fueled by her adaptation into the Batman television series in 1967 , Barbara Gordon 's Batgirl has been listed among fictional characters that are regarded as cultural icons . Author Brian Cronin , in Was Superman A Spy ? : And Other Comic Book Legends Revealed ( 2009 ) notes that following her 1967 debut , " Batgirl was soon popular enough to appear regularly over the next two decades and Yvonne Craig certainly made an impression on many viewers with her one season portraying young Ms. Gordon . " In 2011 , IGN ranked Barbara Gordon 17th in the Top 100 Comic Books Heroes . Cassandra Cain 's Batgirl has become one of the most prominent Asian characters to appear in American comic books , and her understated sexuality is notable as being contrary to the common sexual objectification of female characters , especially those of Asian descent . 
 = = = Feminist interpretations = = = 
 In The Supergirls : Fashion , Feminism , Fantasy , and the History of Comic Book Heroines ( 2009 ) , author Mike Madrid states that what set Barbara Gordon as Batgirl apart from other female characters was her motivation for crime @-@ fighting . Unlike Batwoman who preceded her , " she wears his symbol on her chest , but she is not his girlfriend or faithful handmaiden . " Because of the fact she does not pursue a romantic interest in Batman , " Batgirl is a female Batman can actually regard as a brilliant peer and a partner in the war on crime , the same way he would a male . " Historian Peter Sanderson observed that Barbara Gordon 's Batgirl reflected the Women 's liberation movement of the 1960s . In the 1980s , Barbara Kesel , after writing a complaint to DC Comics over the negative portrayal of female characters , was given the opportunity to write for Barbara Gordon in Detective Comics . Robin Anne Reid , in Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy : Overviews ( 2009 ) wrote that " Kesel 's version of Batgirl established her as a character separate from Batman and Robin : a woman motivated to do what men do , but alone and in her own way . Her Secret Origins ( 1987 ) and Batgirl Special ( 1988 ) countered the victimized and objectified presentation of Barbara Gordon / Batgirl in Alan Moore 's acclaimed The Killing Joke ( 1988 ) . " She notes that Kesel 's interpretation of the character emphasized her intelligence , technological skill , and ability to overcome fear . Gail Simone included the character 's paralysis in a list of " major female characters that had been killed , mutilated , and depowered " , dubbing the phenomenon " Women in Refrigerators " in reference to a 1994 Green Lantern story where the title character discovers his girlfriend 's mutilated body in his refrigerator . Simone highlighted the gender difference regarding the treatment of Batman and Batgirl regarding paralysis by stating that " [ b ] oth had their backs broken [ Batman broke his in a dramatic Batcave confrontation with the villain Bane ; Batgirl broke hers when she was ambushed in her home and shot in the spine by the Joker , never given a chance to fight ] . Less than a year later , Batman was fine . Batgirl — now named Oracle — was in a wheelchair and remained so for many years . ” 
 In Superheroes and <unk> : Analyzing the Minds Behind the Masks ( 2010 ) , author Sharon Packer wrote that " [ a ] nyone who feels that feminist critics overreacted to [ Gordon 's ] accident is advised to consult the source material " calling the work " sadistic to the core . " Brian Cronin noted that " [ many ] readers felt the violence towards Barbara Gordon was too much , and even Moore , in retrospect , has expressed his displeasure with how the story turned out . " Jeffrey A. Brown , author of Dangerous Curves : Action Heroines , Gender , Fetishism , and Popular Culture ( 2011 ) noted The Killing Joke as an example of the " inherent misogyny of the male @-@ dominated comic book industry " in light of the " relatively unequal violence [ female characters ] are subjected to . " While male characters may be critically injured or killed , they are more than likely to be returned to their original conception , while female characters are more likely to receive permanent damage . Reid states that although speculation behind the editorial decision to allow the paralysis of the character to become permanent included the idea she had become outdated , " if audiences had grown tired of Batgirl , it was not because she was a bad character but because she had been written badly . " 
 Despite views that present the character 's Batgirl persona as a symbol of female empowerment , a long @-@ held criticism is that she was originally conceived as an uninspired variation of Batman " rather than standing alone as leader , such as Wonder Woman " who had no pre @-@ existing male counterpart . In analyzing stereotypes in gender , Jackie Marsh noted that male superheroes ( such as Batman ) are depicted as hyper @-@ masculine and anti @-@ social , " while female superheroes are reduced to a childlike status by their names " such as the Batgirl character . 
 = = = Representation for librarians = = = 
 In The Image and Role of the Librarian ( 2002 ) , Wendi Arant and Candace R. Benefiel argue that Batgirl 's portrayal as a librarian is considered to be significant to the profession , in that it is represented as a valuable and honorable career . Even in light of the fact that the character abandons it in order to run for United States Congress , Barbara Gordon is seen as being given a " career switch that even most librarians would consider a step up . " In the essay " Librarians , Professionalism and Image : Stereotype and Reality " ( 2007 ) , Abigail <unk> views the character less favorably , stating that " [ t ] he unassuming role of librarian is used as a low @-@ visibility disguise for her crime @-@ fighting alter @-@ ego , and while her information @-@ locating skills may have been useful to her extra @-@ curricular activities no direct examples are given . " 
 = = = Representation for Asian Americans = = = 
 The Cassandra Cain version of Batgirl , depicted as a biracial character ( Half White and half Chinese ) , is notable as one of the most prominent characters of Asian descent to appear in American comic books . Jeffrey A. Brown states that while her ethnicity is rarely mentioned in the comic books , Asian women have had a long history in comics of being portrayed as martial artists and are often exploited as sex objects . However , in the case of Batgirl , " Cassandra 's racial identity is treated more implicitly than explicitly . Her costume design actually conceals her entire body so that while in her guise as Batgirl her ethnicity is completely <unk> . " The fact that her sexuality is also understated represents a shift away from the typical <unk> of women , and Asian women in particular . The most controversial aspect of her character came about during the One Year Later event , when she is reintroduced as a villain . The abrupt shift in her character brought about negative criticism from readership . When questioned about the change in characterization , writer Adam <unk> stated : " They didn 't present me with a rationale as to why Cassandra was going to change , or a motivating factor . That was left for me to come up with and them to approve . And we did that . But as far as to why the editors and writers and whoever else made the decision decided that was a good direction , I honestly couldn 't answer . " 
 = = In other media = = 
 Portrayed by Yvonne Craig , the character 's first adaptation outside of comic books took place in the third season of Batman ( 1967 ) . Les Daniels , in Batman : The Complete History ( 2004 ) wrote that the goal of ABC was to " attract new audience members , especially idealistic young girls and less high @-@ minded older men . " According to Craig : " I used to think the reason they hired me was because they knew I could ride my own motorcycle ... I realized they hired me because I had a cartoon voice . " A shared criticism of Batgirl and other female superheroes in television at the time ( such as Wonder Woman and the Bionic Woman ) , is that she was not allowed to engage in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat on screen . As such , " her fights were choreographed carefully to imitate the moves of a Broadway showgirl through the use of a straight kick to her opponent 's face rather than the type of kick a martial artist would use . " However , Craig has also stated : " I meet young women who say Batgirl was their role model ... They say its because it was the first time they ever felt girls could do the same things guys could do , and sometimes better . I think that ’ s lovely . " During the early 1970s , Craig portrayed Batgirl once again in a public service announcement to advocate equal pay for women . 
 Since Batman , the character has had a long history of appearances in television and other media . As Batgirl , Barbara Gordon plays a supporting role in a string of animated series , voiced by Jane Webb in The Batman / Superman Hour ( 1968 ) , <unk> Britt in The New Adventures of Batman ( 1977 ) , Melissa Gilbert in Batman : The Animated Series ( 1992 ) , Tara Strong in The New Batman Adventures ( 1997 ) , Danielle Judovits in The Batman ( 2004 ) , and Mae Whitman in Batman : The Brave and the Bold ( 2008 ) . In 2012 , Batgirl starred alongside Supergirl and Wonder Girl in Super Best Friends Forever , a series of shorts developed by Lauren Faust for the DC Nation block on Cartoon Network . Barbara Gordon makes two cameo appearances in the first season of the animated series Young Justice , and is added as a recurring character in season two where she has adopted her Batgirl persona . Dina Meyer starred as Barbara Gordon in the television series Birds of Prey ( 2002 ) . Although this series focused on her role as Oracle , the series included flash @-@ backs of the character 's history as Batgirl . In the film Batman & Robin , Alicia Silverstone played a variation of the character : Barbara Wilson , Alfred Pennyworth 's niece . 
 In addition to live @-@ action television and animation , the character has appeared in a number of video games included in the Batman franchise . She appears in The Adventures of Batman & Robin and Batman : Rise of Sin Tzu voiced by Tara Strong . She also appears in LEGO Batman for the PC , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , DS , and PlayStation Portable . In Scribblenauts Unmasked : A DC Comics Adventure , The Barbara Gordon incarnation of Batgirl appears when Maxwell heads to Arkham Asylum to battle The Scarecrow . The other three Batgirls ( Bette Kane , Stephanie Brown and Cassandra Cain ) can be spawned and all three are playable in the Wii U version . The most recent video game featuring Batgirl is Batman : Arkham Knight , available for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and PC . The developers created a side story named " A Matter of Family " in which the player is able to control Batgirl . Robin is also playable , but only in fight scenes . The plot tells about Batgirl entering an amusement park where Joker maintains her father , commissioner James Gordon , captive , as well as other cops . Gotham 's Ben McKenzie did tease about seeing Batgirl in child form in the series . Film director Nicolas Winding Refn revealed in a interview with Collider that he would like to direct a Batgirl movie . 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 = = Other collected editions = = 
 Batman : Bruce Wayne – Murderer ? ( Batgirl # 24 ) 
 Batman : Bruce Wayne – Fugitive Vol . One ( Batgirl # 27 and # 29 ) 
 Batman : Bruce Wayne – Fugitive Vol . Three ( Batgirl # 33 ) 
 Batman War Games : Act One - Outbreak ( Batgirl # 55 ) 
 Batman War Games : Act Two - Tides ( Batgirl # 56 ) 
 Batman War Games : Act Three - Endgame ( Batgirl # 57 ) 
 = The Titan 's Curse = 
 The Titan 's Curse is a 2007 fantasy @-@ adventure novel based on Greek mythology written by Rick Riordan . It is the third novel in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series and the sequel to The Sea of Monsters . It charts the adventures of the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old demigod Percy Jackson as he and his friends go on a dangerous quest to rescue his friend Annabeth Chase and the Greek goddess Artemis , who have both been kidnapped . 
 The Titan 's Curse was published by Miramax Books , an imprint of Hyperion Books for Children and thus Disney Publishing ( succeeded by the Disney Hyperion imprint ) . It was released in the United States and the United Kingdom on May 1 , 2007 . The novel was also released in audiobook format , read by Jesse Bernstein . 
 Mostly well @-@ received , The Titan 's Curse was nominated for numerous awards , winning ones such as the No. 1 The New York Times children 's series best seller and Book Sense Top Ten Summer Pick for 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Percy Jackson , Annabeth Chase , and Thalia Grace get a ride from Mrs. Jackson to Westover Hall , a boarding school in Bar Harbor , Maine , to escort two sibling half @-@ bloods named Nico and Bianca di Angelo that Grover Underwood has found . They are attacked by a manticore named Dr. Thorn . Though Artemis and her hunters arrive to help , Annabeth is captured by Dr. Thorn . Artemis is troubled by the manticore 's mention of a " Great Stirring " of monsters , and goes off alone to hunt an Olympus @-@ destroying monster she believes to have finally returned from Tartarus . She sends the half @-@ bloods and Hunters ( whose number now includes Bianca di Angelo ) to Camp Half @-@ Blood with her brother Apollo . 
 While there , Nico settles into camp life ; Percy and Blackjack save a sea monster Percy nicknames Bessie ; and Artemis 's lieutenant Zoë Nightshade has mysterious dreams about the goddess being in grave danger . Percy has similar dreams about Annabeth . Both are unable to act , however , until the Oracle ( a shriveled mummy ) somehow leaves her storage room and delivers the Huntress a prophecy . Chiron and Zoë organize a quest , but Percy is not included because the Hunters refuse to travel with a boy . He successfully sneaks away from camp on Blackjack , though he is almost stopped by Mr. D ( Dionysus ) . 
 When they arrive in Washington , D.C. , Percy notices Dr. Thorn heading into the National Museum of Natural History , and follows him using an invisibility cap . Luke and a man called the General are there , and summon spartoi to hunt the official quest group , who are currently in the National Air and Space Museum nearby . Percy runs to warn them , but they are attacked by the Nemean Lion before they can leave . They flee , and , on the advice of Apollo , travel to Cloudcroft , New Mexico . In Cloudcroft , Grover senses the presence of Pan , who sends the <unk> Boar to help them escape the spartoi who have caught up with them . The boar carries them as far as Gila Claw , Arizona and the " junkyard of the gods " . After a brief encounter with Ares and Aphrodite , the group enters the junkyard , where Bianca tries to take a cursed statuette for Nico . Her theft awakens a prototype of Talos , and she gives her life to bring it down . The remaining quest members travel to the Hoover Dam , and , after narrowly escaping the spartoi again , arrive in San Francisco . 
 Once there , Percy seeks out Nereus and learns that the monster Artemis was hunting is Bessie , the monster he saved , who is an <unk> . After a final encounter with Dr. Thorn , Grover heads back to Camp Half @-@ Blood with the <unk> . Zoë , Percy , and Thalia go to find Frederick Chase in the hope that he will help them reach their final destination : Mount Tamalpais , which is the modern location of the Titans ' fortress on Mount Othrys . With Mr. Chase 's car , they travel to the Garden of Hesperides . Zoë is wounded by the dragon Ladon while they pass through . From the place where Atlas once held up the sky , they see Artemis now doing his job . Seeing Annabeth in chains and learning that " the General " is Zoë 's father Atlas , Percy takes the burden from Artemis so his companions can fight the Titan 's advance guard . Artemis manages to force Atlas back under his burden , but not before he seriously wounds her lieutenant . Thalia battles Luke , and he falls from a cliff , apparently dead . With the help of Mr. Chase , who arrives in a biplane he has fitted with celestial bronze weaponry , they escape and travel to Olympus . Zoë dies during the trip and is turned into a constellation by the lady Artemis . 
 During the winter solstice meeting , the gods are finally convinced by Artemis to take action against the Titans . Thalia is also asked by Artemis to become an immortal Huntress , and her acceptance is the only thing that prevents the onset of the Great Prophecy . Percy is told by his father that Luke is somehow not dead , and he and Annabeth return to Camp Half @-@ Blood worried about the future . Before he can relax , however , Percy is forced to explain Bianca 's death to Nico . Nico blames Percy , and when a group of spartoi arrive to attack the son of Poseidon , Nico banishes them to the realm of Hades . Percy realizes Nico must be a son of Hades . Nico runs away , and the only people Percy tells the truth are Annabeth and Grover . They promise to hide this fact from everyone else , especially the Titan 's army . 
 = = = Prophecy = = = 
 The prophecy given by the oracle to Zoë Nightshade reads : 
 Five shall go west to the goddess in chains , 
 One shall be lost in the land without rain , 
 The bane of Olympus shows the trail , 
 Campers and Hunters combined prevail , 
 The Titan ’ s curse must one withstand , 
 And one shall perish by a parent ’ s hand . 
 = = = = Meaning = = = = 
 <unk> group consisting of Zoë , Thalia , Grover , Bianca , and Percy ( originally Phoebe ) . The questers travel to Mount Othrys in the west to free Artemis from her confinement . 
 2 . Bianca sacrificed herself in the desert to save the group against a defective prototype of Hephaestus ' robot , Talos . 
 3 . They followed the <unk> , which was called the bane of Olympus because if he was sacrificed in flames , the person that sacrificed it would have the power to destroy Olympus . During the quest , it keeps appearing in various bodies of water . 
 4 . The only way the quest would be successful was if campers and Hunters worked together . The quest consisted of three campers ( Percy , Grover , and Thalia ) and two Hunters ( Bianca and Zoë ) . 
 5 . The curse of holding the sky above the earth had to be taken by someone ( Luke took the sky from Atlas ; Annabeth took the sky from Luke ; Artemis took it from Annabeth ; Percy took it for Artemis and Artemis forced Atlas back under the sky ) . 
 6 . In the end , Zoë after already suffering from being poisoned by the dragon Ladon , was killed by her father Atlas after he tossed her against a wall . 
 = = Major characters = = 
 Percy Jackson : Percy , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old demigod and son of Poseidon , is the protagonist as well as the series ' narrator . He embarks on a journey to save Annabeth and the Greek goddess Artemis , who have both been kidnapped . 
 Thalia Grace : Thalia is a 15 @-@ year @-@ old demigod daughter of Zeus . Though she appears in Percy 's dream in the first book , she makes a full appearance at the end of The Sea of Monsters and is given a greater role in the third book . Thalia is described as looking very punk , with electric blue eyes , black clothes , and spiky hair . Her personality is often described as " independent and many times sarcastic . " Thalia is a lot like Percy and consequently , they often butt heads . She is heartbroken by Luke 's betrayal , it is supposed that she had feelings for him . She is also afraid of heights , which she reluctantly admits to Percy , despite the fact that she is daughter of Zeus , God of the Sky . 
 Annabeth Chase : Annabeth is a 14 @-@ year @-@ old demigod and the daughter of Athena . She is friends with Percy , Thalia and Grover . She is kidnapped along with Artemis by the Titans . She has a great passion and interest for architecture and she wishes to be an architect when she is older . Although she has a growing love interest in Percy , her feelings for Luke remain a problem between the two . Percy returns her feelings without realizing it , and is oblivious to how she feels about him . 
 Grover Underwood : A large @-@ hearted satyr whose favorite foods are aluminum cans and cheese enchiladas . He is 28 years old , yet has the appearance of a teenager due to the satyrs ' slower growth rate ( half that of humans ) . He wants to become a searcher for Pan , the satyr god of nature and the wild , who fell into a " deep sleep " due to the humans ' pollution of the world . 
 Bianca di Angelo : Bianca is a 12 @-@ year @-@ old demigod and the daughter of Hades . She and her ten @-@ year @-@ old brother Nico were trapped in the Lotus Casino , where time is slowed down , but in the beginning of the book , they were released and attended quest in the " Junkyard of the Gods " . 
 Zoë Nightshade : Zoë is the daughter of Atlas , a banished <unk> for helping the hero Hercules , and the first lieutenant of the Hunters of Artemis . She often has trouble updating her language and uses Old English . She dies after being bitten by Ladon , who protects the immortality @-@ giving golden apple tree , and after her father Atlas , throws her against a pile of rocks . Artemis turns her spirit into a constellation soon after her death for remembrance . She and Thalia developed grudges against each other after Thalia did not want to join the hunters , but they get along when they do not think about it . 
 Luke Castellan : The 21 @-@ year @-@ old demigod son of Hermes , Luke is the main antagonist of the series . He is the sidekick to , Kronos ; Kronos ' followers and army gather on a ship called the Princess Andromeda . 
 Nico di Angelo : The 10 @-@ year @-@ old demigod son of Hades and older sister Bianca di Angelo are rescued from a manticore by Percy , Annabeth , Thalia , and Grover . He is left at camp during the quest , but stays in the Hermes cabin because his parentage has not yet been discovered . He leaves camp after hearing Percy broke his promise , letting Bianca die . Before he leaves , he sends an army of skeletal warriors back to the underworld . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " The Titan 's Curse " received relatively positive reviews , which often lauded the humor and action in the story . Children 's Literature , which commended the book 's fast pace and humor , wrote , " Readers will relate to good natured Percy , the protagonist . " Kirkus awarded it a starred review with , " This third in the Olympians series makes the Greek myths come alive in a way no dreary classroom unit can ... will have readers wondering how literature can be this fun . This can stand alone , though newcomers to the series will race back to the first two volumes and eagerly await a fourth installment . " School Library Journal praised the " adventurous " plot as well as the book 's appeal : " Teachers will cheer for Percy Jackson and the Olympians as they inspire students to embrace Greek mythology and score the ultimate Herculean challenge : getting kids to read . All in all , a winner of Olympic proportions and a surefire read @-@ aloud . " Booklist 's starred review approved of the novel 's humor action , and plotting : " The Percy Jackson & the Olympians series is built around a terrific idea — that the half @-@ mortal offspring of Greek gods live among us , playing out struggles of mythic scale — and Riordan takes it from strength to strength with this exciting installment , adding even more depth to the characters and story arc while retaining its predecessors ' nonstop laughs and action . " <unk> raved , " Rick Riordan 's Olympian adventures have gained great popularity thanks to their combination of humor , adventure and a winning hero ... Readers who are familiar with ancient mythology will enjoy Riordan 's tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek approach ; those who aren 't just might be tempted to go to the original sources to learn more . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The Titan 's Curse received several literature @-@ related awards , including : number one The New York Times children 's series best seller and Book Sense Top Ten Summer Pick for 2007 . It was also a Quill Award nominee . 
 = = Audiobook = = 
 An eight @-@ hour @-@ and @-@ forty @-@ eight @-@ minute audiobook read by the actor Jesse Bernstein and published by Listening Library was released on April 24 , 2007 . 
 AudioFile Magazine lauded Bernstein 's interpretation , writing , " Sounding alternately young , or old , or really scary , Jesse Bernstein ... effectively voices the confusion and loss the team experiences . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In The Battle of the Labyrinth , Annabeth and Percy find an entrance into the Labyrinth during a game of capture the flag . Percy soon learns that Luke had used the entrance and will lead his army through the Labyrinth straight in to the heart of camp . To get into the Labyrinth , Percy has to find the symbol of Daedalus , the Greek letter delta , ( Δ ) on a passageway , touch it , and then enter the Labyrinth . Using the Labyrinth , Percy tries to find Daedalus so Luke cannot get Ariadne 's string , thereby foiling Luke 's invasion . 
 = Cock Lane ghost = 
 The Cock Lane ghost was a purported haunting that attracted mass public attention in 1762 . The location was an apartment in Cock Lane , a short road adjacent to London 's Smithfield market and a few minutes ' walk from St Paul 's Cathedral . The event centred on three people : William Kent , a usurer from Norfolk , Richard Parsons , a parish clerk , and Parsons ' daughter Elizabeth . 
 Following the death during childbirth of Kent 's wife , Elizabeth Lynes , he became romantically involved with her sister , Fanny . Canon law prevented the couple from marrying , but they nevertheless moved to London and lodged at the property in Cock Lane , then owned by Parsons . Several accounts of strange knocking sounds and ghostly apparitions were reported , although for the most part they stopped after the couple moved out , but following Fanny 's death from smallpox and Kent 's successful legal action against Parsons over an outstanding debt , they resumed . Parsons claimed that Fanny 's ghost haunted his property and later his daughter . Regular séances were held to determine " Scratching Fanny 's " motives ; Cock Lane was often made impassable by the throngs of interested bystanders . 
 The ghost appeared to claim that Fanny had been poisoned with arsenic and Kent was publicly suspected of being her murderer . But a commission whose members included Samuel Johnson concluded that the supposed haunting was a fraud . Further investigations proved the scam was perpetrated by Elizabeth Parsons , under duress from her father . Those responsible were prosecuted and found guilty ; Richard Parsons was pilloried and sentenced to two years in prison . 
 The Cock Lane ghost became a focus of controversy between the Methodist and Anglican churches and is referenced frequently in contemporary literature . Charles Dickens is one of several Victorian authors whose work alluded to the story and the pictorial satirist William Hogarth referenced the ghost in two of his prints . 
 = = Background = = 
 In about 1756 – 57 William Kent , a usurer from Norfolk , married Elizabeth Lynes , the daughter of a grocer from Lyneham . They moved to Stoke Ferry where Kent kept an inn and later , the local post office . They were apparently very much in love , but their marriage was short @-@ lived as within a month of the move Elizabeth died during childbirth . Her sister Frances — commonly known as Fanny — had during Elizabeth 's pregnancy moved in with the couple and she stayed to care for the infant and its father . The boy did not survive long and rather than leave , Fanny stayed on to take care of William and the house . The two soon began a relationship , but canon law appeared to rule out marriage ; when Kent travelled to London to seek advice he was told that as Elizabeth had borne him a living son , a union with Fanny was impossible . In January 1759 therefore , he gave up the post office , left Fanny and moved to London , intending to " purchase a place in some public office " in the hope that " business would erase that passion he had unfortunately indulged " . Fanny meanwhile stayed with one of her brothers at Lyneham . 
 Despite her family 's disapproval of their relationship , Fanny began to write passionate letters to Kent , " filled with repeated entreaties to spend the rest of their lives together " . He eventually allowed her to join him at lodgings in East Greenwich near London . The two decided to live together as man and wife , making wills in each other 's favour and hoping to remain discreet . In this , however , they did not reckon on Fanny 's relations . The couple moved to lodgings near the Mansion House , but their landlord there may have learnt of their relationship from Fanny 's family , expressing his contempt by refusing to repay a sum of money Kent loaned him ( about £ 20 ) . In response , Kent had him arrested . 
 While attending early morning prayers at the church of St Sepulchre @-@ without @-@ Newgate , William Kent and Fanny met Richard Parsons , the officiating clerk . Although he was generally considered respectable , Parsons was known locally as a drunk and was struggling to provide for his family . He listened to the couple 's plight and was sympathetic , offering them the use of lodgings in his home on Cock Lane , to the north of St Sepulchre 's . Located along a narrow , winding thoroughfare similar to most of central London 's streets , the three @-@ storey house was in a respectable but declining area , and comprised a single room on each floor , connected by a winding staircase . Shortly after Mr and Mrs Kent ( as they called themselves ) moved in , Kent loaned Parsons 12 guineas , to be repaid at a rate of a guinea per month . 
 It was while Kent was away at a wedding in the country that the first reports of strange noises began . Parsons had a wife and two daughters ; the elder , Elizabeth , was described as a " little artful girl about eleven years of age " . Kent asked Elizabeth to stay with Fanny , who was then several months into a pregnancy , and to share her bed while he was away . The two reported hearing scratching and rapping noises . These were attributed by Mrs Parsons to a neighbouring cobbler , although when the noises re @-@ occurred on a Sunday , Fanny asked if the cobbler was working that day ; Mrs Parsons told her he was not . James Franzen , landlord of the nearby Wheat Sheaf public house , was another witness . After visiting the house he reported seeing a ghostly white figure ascend the stairs . Terrified , he returned home , where Parsons later visited him and claimed also to have seen a ghost . 
 As Fanny was only weeks away from giving birth Kent made arrangements to move to a property at Bartlet 's Court in Clerkenwell , but by January 1760 it was not ready and so they moved instead to an " inconvenient " apartment nearby , intending only a temporary stay . However , on 25 January Fanny fell ill . The attending doctor diagnosed the early stages of an eruptive fever and agreed with Kent that their lodgings were inadequate for someone at so critical a stage of pregnancy . Fanny was therefore moved , by coach , to Bartlet 's Court . The next day her doctor returned and met with her apothecary . Both agreed that Fanny 's symptoms were indicative of smallpox . On hearing this , Fanny sent for an attorney , to ensure the will she had had made was in good order , and that Kent would inherit her estate . An acquaintance of Kent 's , Stephen Aldrich , Rector of St John Clerkenwell , reassured her that she would be forgiven for her sins . She died on 2 February . 
 As sole executor of Fanny 's will , Kent ordered a coffin , but fearful of being prosecuted should the nature of their relationship become known , asked that it remain nameless . On registering the burial he was , however , forced to give a name , and he gave her his own . Fanny 's family was notified and her sister Ann Lynes , who lived nearby at Pall Mall , attended the funeral at St John 's . When Ann learned of the terms of Fanny 's will , which left her brothers and sisters half a crown each and Kent the rest , she tried but failed to block it in Doctors ' Commons . The bulk of Kent 's inheritance was Fanny 's £ 150 share of her dead brother Thomas 's estate . This also included some land owned by Thomas , sold by the executor of his estate , John Lynes , and Kent received Fanny 's share of that too ( almost £ 95 ) . Her family resented this . Legal problems with Lynes 's sale meant that each of Thomas 's beneficiaries had to pay £ 45 in compensation to the purchaser , but Kent refused , claiming that he had already spent the money in settling Fanny 's debts . In response to this , in October 1761 John Lynes began proceedings against Kent in the Court of Chancery . Meanwhile , Kent became a stockbroker and remarried in 1761 . 
 = = Haunting = = 
 Echoing the actions of Kent 's previous landlord , Parsons had not repaid Kent 's loan — of which about three guineas was outstanding — and Kent therefore instructed his attorney to sue him . He managed to recover the debt by January 1762 , just as the mysterious noises at Cock Lane began again . Catherine Friend had lodged there shortly after the couple left but moved out when she found the noises , which had returned intermittently and which were becoming more frequent , could not be stopped . They apparently emanated from Elizabeth Parsons , who also suffered fits , and the house was regularly disturbed by unexplained noises , likened at the time to the sound of a cat scratching a chair . Reportedly determined to discover their source , Richard Parsons had a carpenter remove the wainscotting around Elizabeth 's bed . He approached John Moore , assistant preacher at St Sepulchre 's since 1754 and rector of St Bartholomew @-@ the @-@ Great in West Smithfield since June 1761 . The presence of one ghost , presumed to belong to Fanny 's sister , Elizabeth , had already been noted while Fanny lay dying , and the two concluded that the spirit now haunting Parsons ' house must be that of Fanny Lynes herself . The notion that a person 's spirit might return from the dead to warn those still alive was a commonly held belief , and the presence of two apparently restless spirits was therefore an obvious sign to both men that each ghost had an important message to disclose . 
 Parsons and Moore devised a method of communication ; one knock for yes , two knocks for no . Using this system , the ghost appeared to claim that Fanny had been murdered . It was conjectured that the mysterious figure in white which so terrified James Franzen , presumed to be the ghost of Elizabeth , had appeared there to warn her sister of her impending death . As the first ghost had seemingly vanished , this charge against Kent — that he murdered Elizabeth — was never acted on , but through repeated questioning of Fanny 's ghost it was divined that she had died not from the effects of smallpox , but rather from arsenic poisoning . The deadly toxin had apparently been administered by Kent about two hours before Fanny died and now , it was supposed , her spirit wanted justice . Moore had heard from Parsons how Kent had pursued the debt he was owed , and he had also heard from Ann Lynes , who had complained that as Fanny 's coffin lid was screwed down she had not been able to see her sister 's corpse . Moore thought that Fanny 's body might not show any visible signs of smallpox and that if she had been poisoned , the lack of scarring would have been something Kent would rather keep hidden . As a clergyman with inclinations toward Methodism he was inclined to trust the ghost , but for added support he enlisted the aid of Thomas Broughton , an early Methodist . Broughton visited Cock Lane on 5 January and left convinced the ghost was real . The story spread through London , The Public Ledger began to publish detailed accounts of the phenomenon , and Kent fell under public suspicion as a murderer . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 After reading the veiled accusations made against him in the Public Ledger , Kent determined to clear his name , and accompanied by a witness went to see John Moore . The Methodist showed Kent the list of questions he and Parsons had drawn up for the ghost to answer . One concerned William and Fanny 's marital status , prompting Kent to admit that they never married . Moore told him he did not think he was a murderer , rather , he believed the spirit 's presence indicated that " there was something behind darker than all the rest , and that if he would go to Parson 's house , he might be a witness to the same and convinced of its reality " . On 12 January therefore , Kent enlisted the aid of the two physicians who attended Fanny in her last days , and with Broughton , went to Cock Lane . On the house 's upper floor Elizabeth Parsons was publicly undressed , and with her younger sister was put to bed . The audience sat around the bed , positioned in the centre of the room . They were warned that the ghost was sensitive to disbelief and told that they should accord it due respect . When the séance began , a relative of Parsons , Mary Frazer , ran around the room shouting " Fanny , Fanny , why don 't you come ? Do come , pray Fanny , come ; dear Fanny , come ! " When nothing happened , Moore told the group the ghost would not come as they were making too much noise . He asked them to leave the room , telling them he would try to contact the ghost by stamping his foot . About ten minutes later they were told the ghost had returned and that they should re @-@ enter the room . Moore then started to run through his and Parsons ' list of questions : 
 " Are you the wife of Mr. Kent ? " — Two knocks 
 " Did you die naturally ? " — Two knocks 
 " By poison ? " — One knock 
 " Did any person other than Mr. Kent administer it ? " — Two knocks 
 After more questions , a member of the audience exclaimed " Kent , ask this Ghost if you shall be hanged " . He did so , and the question was answered by a single knock . Kent exclaimed " Thou art a lying spirit , thou are not the ghost of my Fanny . She would never have said any such thing . " 
 Public interest in the story grew when it was discovered that the ghost appeared to follow Elizabeth Parsons . She was removed to the house of a Mr Bray , where on 14 January , in the presence of two unidentified nobles , more knocking sounds were heard . A few days later she was returned to Cock Lane , where on 18 January another séance was held . In attendance were Kent , the apothecary , and local parish priest and incumbent of St John Clerkenwell , Stephen Aldrich . On that occasion , when a clergyman used a candle to look under the bed , the ghost " refused " to answer , Frazer claiming " she [ the ghost ] loving not light " . After a few minutes of silence the questioning continued , but when Moore asked if the ghost would appear in court against Kent , Frazer refused to ask the question . 
 When they lived at Cock Lane William and Fanny had employed a maid , Esther " Carrots " Carlisle ( Carrots on account of her red hair ) . She had since moved to a new job and knew nothing of the haunting , but seeking evidence of Fanny 's poisoning , Moore went to question her . Carrots told him that Fanny had been unable to speak in the days before she died , so Moore invited her to a séance , held on 19 January . Once there , she was asked to confirm that Fanny had been poisoned , but Carrots remained adamant that Fanny had said nothing to her , telling the party that William and Fanny had been " very loving , and lived very happy together . " Kent arrived later that night , this time with James Franzen and priests William Dodd and Thomas Broughton . Frazer began with her usual introduction before Moore sent her out , apparently irritated by her behaviour . He then asked the party of about 20 to leave the room , calling them back a few minutes later . This time , the séance centred on Carrots , who addressed the ghost directly : 
 " Are you my mistress ? " — One knock , followed by scratches 
 " Are you angry with me , Madam ? " — One knock 
 " Then I am sure , Madam , you may be ashamed of yourself for I never hurt you in my life . " 
 At this , the séance was ended . Frazer and Franzen remained alone in the room , the latter reportedly too terrified to move . Frazer asked if he would like to pray and was angered when he apparently could not . The séance resumed and Franzen later returned to his home , where he and his wife were reportedly tormented by the ghost 's knocking in their bedchamber . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 On 20 January another séance was held , this time at the home of a Mr Bruin , on the corner of nearby Hosier Lane . Among those attending was a man " extremely desirous of detecting the fraud , and discovering the truth of this mysterious affair " , who later sent his account of the night to the London Chronicle . He arrived with a small party which included James Penn of St Ann 's in Aldersgate . Inside the house , a member of the group positioned himself against the bed , but was asked by one of the ghost 's sympathisers to move . He refused , and following a brief argument the ghost 's supporters left . The gentleman then asked if Parsons would allow his daughter to be moved to a room at his house , but was refused . For the remainder of the night the ghost made no sound , while Elizabeth Parsons , now extremely agitated , displayed signs of convulsions . When questioned she confirmed that she had seen the ghost , but that she was not frightened by it . At that point several of the party left , but at about 7 am the next morning the knocking once more recommenced . Following the usual questions about the cause of Fanny 's death and who was responsible , the interrogation turned to her body , which lay in the vaults of St John 's . 
 Parsons agreed to move his daughter to Aldrich 's house for further testing on 22 January , but when that morning Penn and a man of " veracity and fortune " called on Parsons and asked for Elizabeth , the clerk told them she was not there and refused to reveal her whereabouts . Parsons had spoken with friends and was apparently worried that Kent had been busy with his own investigations . Instead , he allowed Elizabeth to be moved that night to St Bartholomew 's Hospital , where another séance was held . Nothing was reported until about 6 am , when three scratches were heard , apparently while the girl was asleep . The approximately 20 @-@ strong audience complained that the affair was a deception . Once Elizabeth woke she began to cry , and once reassured that she was safe admitted that she was afraid for her father , " who must needs be ruined and undone , if their matter should be supposed to be an imposture . " She also admitted that although she had appeared to be asleep , she was in fact fully aware of the conversation going on around her . 
 Initially only the Public Ledger reported on the case , but once it became known that noblemen had taken an interest and visited the ghost at Mr Bray 's house on 14 January , the story began to appear in other newspapers . The St. James 's Chronicle and the London Chronicle printed reports from 16 – 19 January ( the latter the more sceptical of the two ) , and Lloyd 's Evening Post from 18 – 20 January . The story spread across London and by the middle of January the crowds gathered outside the property were such that Cock Lane was rendered impassable . Parsons charged visitors an entrance fee to " talk " with the ghost , which , it was reported , did not disappoint . After receiving several requests to intercede , Samuel Fludyer , Lord Mayor of London , was on 23 January approached by Alderman Gosling , John Moore and Parsons . They told him of their experiences but Fludyer was reminded of the then recent case of fraudster Elizabeth Canning and refused to have Kent or Parsons arrested ( on charges of murder and conspiracy respectively ) . Instead , against a backdrop of hysteria caused in part by the newspapers ' relentless reporting of the case , he ordered that Elizabeth be tested at Aldrich 's house . Meanwhile , Elizabeth was again the subject of study , in two séances held 23 – 24 January . Parsons accepted the Lord Mayor 's decision , but asked that " some persons connected with the girl might be permitted to be there , to divert her in the day @-@ time " . This was refused , as were two similar requests , Aldrich and Penn insisting that they would accept only " any person or persons , of strict character and reputation , who are housekeepers " . Aldrich and Penn 's account of their negotiations with Parsons clearly perturbed the clerk , as he defended his actions in the Public Ledger . This prompted Aldrich and Penn to issue a pointed retort in Lloyd 's Evening Post : " We are greatly puzzled to find Mr. Parsons asserting that he hath been always willing to deliver up the child , when he refused a gentleman on Wednesday evening the 20th inst . [ ... ] What is to be understood , by requiring security " ? 
 Elizabeth was taken on 26 January to the house of Jane Armstrong , sleeping there in a hammock . The continued noises strengthened the resolve of the ghost 's supporters , while the press 's ceaseless reporting of the case continued . Horace Walpole , 4th Earl of Orford , announced that with the Duke of York , Lady Northumberland , Lady Mary Coke and Lord Hertford , he was to visit Cock Lane on 30 January . After struggling through the throngs of interested visitors though , he was ultimately disappointed ; the Public Advertiser observed that " the noise is now generally deferred till seven in the morning , it being necessary to vary the time , that the imposition may be the better carried on " . 
 = = Exposure = = 
 With Lord Dartmouth Aldrich began to draw together the people who would be involved in his investigation . They chose the matron of a local lying @-@ in hospital as principal lady @-@ in @-@ waiting , the critic and controversialist Bishop John Douglas , and Dr George Macaulay . A Captain Wilkinson was also included on the committee ; he had attended one séance armed with a pistol and stick ; the former to shoot the source of the knocking , and the latter to make his escape ( the ghost had remained silent on that occasion ) . James Penn and John Moore were also on the committee , but its most prominent member was Dr Samuel Johnson , who documented the séance , held on 1 February 1762 : 
 On the night of the 1st of February many gentlemen eminent for their rank and character were , by the invitation of the Reverend Mr. Aldrich , of Clerkenwell , assembled at his house , for the examination of the noises supposed to be made by a departed spirit , for the detection of some enormous crime . About ten at night the gentlemen met in the chamber in which the girl , supposed to be disturbed by a spirit , had , with proper caution , been put to bed by several ladies . They sat rather more than an hour , and hearing nothing , went down stairs , when they interrogated the father of the girl , who denied , in the strongest terms , any knowledge or belief of fraud . The supposed spirit had before <unk> promised , by an affirmative knock , that it would attend one of the gentlemen into the vault under the Church of St. John , Clerkenwell , where the body is deposited , and give a token of her presence there , by a knock upon her coffin ; it was therefore determined to make this trial of the existence or veracity of the supposed spirit . While they were enquiring and deliberating , they were summoned into the girl 's chamber by some ladies who were near her bed , and who had heard knocks and scratches . When the gentlemen entered , the girl declared that she felt the spirit like a mouse upon her back , and was required to hold her hands out of bed . From that time , though the spirit was very solemnly required to manifest its existence by appearance , by impression on the hand or body of any present , by scratches , knocks , or any other agency , no evidence of any <unk> @-@ natural power was exhibited . The spirit was then very seriously advertised that the person to whom the promise was made of striking the coffin , was then about to visit the vault , and that the performance of the promise was then claimed . The company at one o 'clock went into the church , and the gentleman to whom the promise was made , went with another into the vault . The spirit was solemnly required to perform its promise , but nothing more than silence ensued : the person supposed to be accused by the spirit , then went down with several others , but no effect was perceived . Upon their return they examined the girl , but could draw no confession from her . Between two and three she desired and was permitted to go home with her father . It is , therefore , the opinion of the whole assembly , that the child has some art of making or counterfeiting a particular noise , and that there is no agency of any higher cause . 
 Disappointed that the ghost had failed to reveal itself , Moore now told Kent he believed it was an imposter , and that he would help reveal it . Kent asked him to admit the truth and write an affidavit of what he knew , so as to end the affair and restore Kent 's reputation , but Moore refused , telling him that he still believed that the spirit 's presence was a reminder of his sin . Moore 's view of the couple 's relationship was shared by many , including Mrs Parsons , who believed that the supposed ghost of Elizabeth Kent had disapproved of her sister 's new relationship . 
 Another séance on 3 February saw the knocking continue unabated , but by then Parsons was in an extremely difficult — and serious — situation . Keen to prove the ghost was not an imposture he allowed his daughter to be examined at a house on The Strand from 7 – 10 February , and at another house in Covent Garden from 14 February . There she was tested in a variety of ways which included being swung up in a hammock , her hands and feet extended . As expected , the noises commenced , but stopped once Elizabeth was made to place her hands outside the bed . For two nights the ghost was silent . Elizabeth was told that if no more noises were heard by Sunday 21 February , she and her father would be committed to Newgate Prison . Her maids then saw her conceal on her person a small piece of wood about 6 by 4 inches ( 150 by 100 mm ) and informed the investigators . More scratches were heard but the observers concluded that Elizabeth was responsible for the noises , and that she had been forced by her father to make them . Elizabeth was allowed home shortly after . 
 On or about 25 February , a pamphlet sympathetic to Kent 's case was published , called The Mystery Revealed , and most likely written by Oliver Goldsmith . Meanwhile , Kent was still trying to clear his name , and on 25 February he went to the vault of St John 's , accompanied by Aldrich , the undertaker , the clerk and the parish sexton . The group was there to prove beyond any doubt that a recent newspaper report , which claimed that the supposed removal of Fanny 's body from the vault accounted for the ghost 's failure to knock on her coffin , was false . The undertaker removed the lid to expose Fanny 's corpse , " and a very awful shocking sight it was " . For Moore this was too much and he published his retraction : 
 In justice to the person , whose reputation has been attacked in a most gross manner , by the pretended Ghost in Cock @-@ lane ; to check the credulity of the weak ; to defeat the attempts of the malicious , and to prevent further imposition , on account of this absurd phenomenon , I do hereby certify , that though , from the several attendances on this occasion , I have not been able to point out , how , and in what manner , those <unk> and scratchings , of the supposed Ghost , were contrived , performed , and continued ; yet , that I am convinced , that those <unk> and scratchings were the effects of some artful , wicked contrivance ; and that I was , in a more especial manner , convinced of its being such , on the first of this month , when I attended with several persons of rank and character , who assembled at the Rev. Mr. Aldrich 's , Clerkenwell , in order to examine into this iniquitous imposition upon the Public . Since which time I have not seen the child , nor heard the noises ; and think myself in duty bound to add , that the injured person ( when present to hear himself accused by the pretended Ghost ) has not , by his behaviour , given the least ground of suspicion , but has preserved that becoming steadfastness , which nothing , I am persuaded , but innocence could inspire . 
 It was not enough to keep him from being charged by the authorities with conspiracy , along with Richard Parsons and his wife , Mary Frazer , and Richard James , a tradesman . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial of all five was held at the Guild Hall in London on 10 July 1762 . Presiding over the case was Lord Chief Justice William Murray . Proceedings began at 10 am , " brought by William Kent against the above defendants for a conspiracy to take away his life by charging him with the murder of Frances Lynes by giving her poison whereof she died " . The courtroom was crowded with spectators , who watched as Kent gave evidence against those in the dock . He told the court about his relationship with Fanny and of her resurrection as " Scratching Fanny " ( so @-@ called because of the scratching noises made by the " ghost " ) . James Franzen was next on the stand , his story corroborated by Fanny 's servant , Esther " Carrots " Carlisle , who testified later that day . Dr Cooper , who had served Fanny as she lay dying , told the court that he had always believed the strange noises in Cock Lane to be a trick , and his account of Fanny 's illness was supported by her apothecary , James Jones . Several other prosecution witnesses described how the hoax had been revealed , and Richard James was accused by the prosecution 's last witness of being responsible for some of the more offensive material published in the Public Ledger . 
 The defence 's witnesses included some of those who had cared for Elizabeth Parsons and who presumably still believed that the ghost was real . Other witnesses included the carpenter responsible for removing the wainscotting from Parsons ' apartment and Catherine Friend , who to escape the knocking noises had left the property . One witness 's testimony caused the court to burst into laughter , at which she replied " I assure you gentlemen , it is no laughing matter , whatever you may think of it . " Thomas Broughton was also called , as was a priest surnamed Ross , one of those who had questioned the ghost . Judge Murray asked him " Whether he thought he had puzzled the Ghost , or the Ghost had puzzled him ? " John Moore was offered support by several esteemed gentlemen and presented Murray with a letter from Thomas Secker , Archbishop of Canterbury , who sought to intercede on his behalf . Murray placed the letter in his pocket , unopened , and told the court " it was impossible it could relate to the cause in question . " Richard James and Richard Parsons also received support from various witnesses , some of whom although acknowledging Parsons ' drink problem , told the court they could not believe he was guilty . 
 The trial ended at about 9 : 30 pm . The judge spent about 90 minutes summing up the case , but it took the jury only 15 minutes to reach a verdict of guilty for all five defendants . The following Monday , two others responsible for defaming Kent were found guilty and later fined £ 50 each . The conspirators were brought back on 22 November but sentencing was delayed in the hope that they could agree on the level of damages payable to Kent . Having failed to do so they returned on 27 January 1763 and were committed to the King 's Bench Prison until 11 February , by which time John Moore and Richard James had agreed to pay Kent £ 588 ; they were subsequently admonished by Justice Wilmot and released . The following day , the rest were sentenced : 
 The Court <unk> that Mr. Kent , who had been so much injured on the occasion , should receive some reparation by punishment of the offenders , deferred giving judgment for seven or eight months , in hopes that the parties might make it up in the meantime . Accordingly , the clergyman , and tradesman agreed to pay Mr. Kent a round sum — some say between £ 500 and £ 600 to purchase their pardon , and were , therefore , dismissed with a severe reprimand . The father was ordered to be set in the pillory three times in one month — once at the end of Cock – Lane ; Elizabeth his wife to be imprisoned one year ; and Mary Frazer six months in Bridewell , with hard labour . The father appearing to be out of his mind at the time he was first to standing in the pillory , the execution of that part of his sentence was deferred to another day , when , as well as the other day of his standing there , the populace took so much compassion on him , that instead of using him ill , they made a handsome subscription for him . 
 Parsons , all the while protesting his innocence , was also sentenced to two years imprisonment . He stood in the pillory on 16 March , 30 March and finally on 8 April . In contrast to other criminals the crowd treated him kindly , making collections of money for him . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Cock Lane ghost was a focus for a contemporary religious controversy between the Methodists and orthodox Anglicans . Belief in a spiritual afterlife is a requirement for most religions , and in every instance where a spirit had supposedly manifested itself in the real world , the event was cherished as an affirmation of such beliefs . In his youth , John Wesley had been strongly influenced by a supposed haunting at his family home and these experiences were carried through to the religion he founded , which was regularly criticised for its position on witchcraft and magic . Methodism , although far from a united religion , became almost synonymous with a belief in the supernatural . Some of its followers therefore gave more credence to the reality of the Cock Lane ghost than did the Anglican establishment , which considered such things to be relics of the country 's Catholic past . This was a view that was epitomised in the conflict between the Methodist John Moore and the Anglican Stephen Aldrich . In his 1845 memoirs , Horace Walpole , who had attended one of the séances , accused the Methodists of actively working to establish the existence of ghosts . He described the constant presence of Methodist clergymen near Elizabeth Parsons and implied that the church would recompense her father for his troubles . 
 Samuel Johnson was committed to his Christian faith and shared the views of author Joseph Glanvill , who , in his 1681 work <unk> <unk> , wrote of his concern over the advances made against religion and a belief in witchcraft , by atheism and scepticism . For Johnson the idea that an afterlife might not exist was an appalling thought , but although he thought that spirits could protect and counsel those still living , he kept himself distant from the more credulous Methodists , and recognised that his religion required proof of an afterlife . Ever a sceptic , in his discussions with his biographer James Boswell , he said : 
 Sir , I make a distinction between what a man may experience by the mere strength of his imagination , and what imagination cannot possibly produce . Thus , suppose I should think I saw a form , and heard a voice cry , " Johnson , you are a very wicked fellow , and unless you repent you will certainly be punished ; " my own unworthiness is so deeply impressed upon my mind , that I might imagine I thus saw and heard , and therefore I should not believe that an external communication had been made to me . But if a form should appear , and a voice tell me that a particular man had died at a particular place , and a particular hour , a fact which I had no apprehension of , nor any means of knowing , and this fact , with all its circumstances , should afterwards be unquestionably proved , I should , in that case , be persuaded that I had supernatural intelligence imparted to me . 
 Johnson 's role in revealing the nature of the hoax was not enough to keep the satirist Charles Churchill from mocking his apparent credulity in his 1762 work The Ghost . He resented Johnson 's lack of enthusiasm for his writing and with the character of ' <unk> ' , written as one of the more credulous of the ghost 's investigators , used the satire to highlight a " superstitious streak " in his subject . Johnson paid this scant attention , but was said to have been more upset when Churchill again mocked him for his delay in releasing Shakespeare . Publishers were at first wary of attacking those involved in the supposed haunting , but Churchill 's satire was one of a number of publications which , following the exposure of Parsons ' deception , heaped scorn on the affair . The newspapers searched for evidence of past impostures and referenced older publications such as Reginald Scot 's Discoverie of Witchcraft ( 1584 ) . The ghost was referenced in an anonymous work entitled Anti @-@ <unk> : or , Superstition Detected and Exposed ( 1762 ) , which sought to ridicule the credulity of those involved in the Cock Lane case . The author described his work as a " sally of indignation at the contemptible wonder in Cock @-@ lane " . Works such as The Orators ( 1762 ) by Samuel Foote , were soon available . <unk> poems such as Cock @-@ lane Humbug were released , theatres staged plays such as The Drummer and The Haunted House . 
 Oliver Goldsmith , who had in February 1762 published The Mystery Revealed , may also have been responsible for the satirical illustration , English <unk> or the Invisible Ghost ( 1762 ) . It shows a séance as envisioned by the artist , with the ghost hovering above the heads of the two children in the bed . To the right of the bed a woman deep in prayer exclaims " O ! that they would lay it in the Red Sea ! " Another cries " I shall never have any rest again " . The English magistrate and social reformer John Fielding , who was blind , is pictured entering from the left saying " I should be glad to see this spirit " , while his companion says " Your W — — r 's had better get your Warrant back 'd by his L — <unk> — p " , referring to a Middlesex magistrate 's warrant which required an endorsement from the Lord Mayor , Samuel Fludyer . A man in tall boots , whip in hand , says : " Ay Tom I 'll lay 6 to 1 it runs more nights than the Coronation " and his companion remarks " How they swallow the hum " . A clergymen says " I saw the light on the Clock " while another asks " Now thou Infidel does thou not believe ? " , prompting his neighbour to reply " Yes if it had happen 'd sooner ' t would have serv 'd me for a new Character in the <unk> the Story would tell better than the Cat & Kittens " . Another clergyman exclaims " If a Gold Watch knock 3 times " , and a Parson asks him " Brother don 't disturb it " . On the wall , an image of The Bottle <unk> is alongside an image of Elizabeth Canning , whose fraud had so worried Samuel Fludyer that he had refused to arrest either Parsons or Kent . 
 Playwright David Garrick dedicated the enormously successful The Farmer 's Return to the satirical artist William Hogarth . The story concerns a farmer who regales his family with an account of his talk with Miss Fanny , the comedy being derived from the reversal of traditional roles : the sceptical farmer poking fun at the credulous city @-@ folk . Hogarth made his own observations of the Cock Lane ghost , with obvious references in <unk> , Superstition and Fanaticism ( 1762 ) . This illustration makes a point of attacking Methodist ministers , one of whom is seen to slip a phallic " ghost " into a young woman 's bodice . He again attacked the Methodists in The Times , Plate 2 ( 1762 – 1763 ) , placing an image of Thomas Secker ( who had tried to intervene on behalf of the Methodists ) behind the Cock Lane ghost , and putting the ghost in the same pillory as the radical politician John Wilkes , which implied a connection between the demagoguery surrounding the Methodists and <unk> . The print enraged Bishop William Warburton , who although a vocal critic of Methodism , wrote : 
 I have seen Hogarth 's print of the Ghost . It is a horrid composition of lewd Obscenity & blasphemous <unk> for which I detest the artist & have lost all esteem for the man . The best is , that the worst parts of it have a good chance of not being understood by the people . 
 The 19th @-@ century author Charles Dickens — whose childhood nursemaid Mary Weller may have affected him with a fascination for ghosts — made reference to the Cock Lane ghost in several of his books . One of Nicholas Nickleby 's main characters and a source of much of the novel 's comic relief , Mrs. Nickleby , claims that her great @-@ grandfather " went to school with the Cock @-@ lane Ghost " and that " I know the master of his school was a Dissenter , and that would in a great measure account for the Cock @-@ lane Ghost 's behaving in such an improper manner to the clergyman when he grew up . " Dickens also very briefly mentions the Cock Lane ghost in A Tale of Two Cities and <unk> and Son . 
 According to a 1965 source , the site of Parson 's lodgings corresponded to the building with the modern address 20 Cock Lane . The house was believed to have been built in the late 17th century , and was demolished in 1979 . 
 = Edward M. Burke = 
 Edward M. " Ed " Burke ( born December 29 , 1943 ) is alderman of the 14th Ward of the City of Chicago . A member of the Democratic Party , he was first elected to the Chicago City Council in 1969 , and represents part of the city 's Southwest Side . Chair of Council 's Committee on Finance , Burke has been called Chicago 's " most powerful alderman " by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . Burke was named one of the " 100 Most Powerful Chicagoans " by Chicago Magazine , describing him as " [ o ] ne of the last of the old @-@ school Chicago Machine <unk> . " 
 Burke is the longest @-@ serving aldermen in Chicago history . He was a leader of the " Vrdolyak 29 " during the first term of Mayor Harold Washington , the " Council Wars " era . Burke and his staff were the subjects of federal and local investigations , and members of his staff were the targets of indictments and convictions involving payroll and contracting irregularities . 
 Burke is the lead partner in a law firm that specializes in property tax appeals and which includes clients who do business with the city . Burke 's wife is Illinois Supreme Court Justice Anne M. Burke . He and his wife were foster parents and were party to a protracted , highly publicized , racially charged child custody dispute . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Burke is a lifelong resident of Chicago . His father , Joseph P. Burke , was a Cook County Sheriff 's policeman who worked as a court bailiff . Joseph Burke served as committeeman from the 14th Ward ( a local Democratic party post ) , and was elected alderman from the 14th Ward in November 1953 . 
 Ed Burke attended Visitation Grammar School in Visitation Parish on Chicago 's South Side and is a 1961 graduate of Quigley Preparatory Seminary . He graduated with a bachelor 's degree from DePaul University in 1965 , then worked for three years as a Chicago police officer , assigned to the state 's attorney 's office . Meanwhile , he studied law at DePaul University College of Law . In 1968 , Burke received a Juris Doctor degree , was admitted to the Illinois Bar , and married his wife , Anne Marie . 
 While in law school in the late 1960s , an era of escalation in the Vietnam War , Burke received a draft deferment as a full @-@ time student . After his marriage and the death of his father , he applied for and was granted a hardship deferment ( 3 @-@ A ) , as the sole support of his wife , mother , and two younger brothers . In June 1969 , the Illinois Selective Service board of appeals reclassified him 1 @-@ A ( " available for unrestricted military service " ) . At the same time , he was accepted into a Chicago @-@ based United States Army Reserve unit , the 363rd civil affairs group , as a private . Political rivals expressed concern that special consideration allowed Burke to join the Reserve unit ahead of others , but an Army investigation found no evidence of manipulation in his favor . 
 = = Democratic committeeman = = 
 Burke succeeded his father in local politics , first as Democratic Committeeman and then as alderman from the 14th Ward . After the elder Burke died in office of cancer on May 11 , 1968 , Edward Burke took leave from his job as a policeman to replace his father as Democratic committeeman for the 14th Ward . Though not a precinct captain , Burke won election to his father 's committeeman seat in a secret vote of 65 precinct captains , defeating a veteran precinct captain by just 3 ½ votes . At 24 , Burke was the youngest person in Chicago 's history to become a ward committeeman , a position he has held ever since . 
 = = Chicago Alderman = = 
 The 14th Ward Democrats slated the young Burke as the Democratic candidate in a special election called for on March 11 , 1969 to fill vacancies in City Council , including the 14th Ward . Burke faced six opponents , but won with a majority of 11 @,@ 204 votes , while the next highest candidate received 1460 votes . Following the 1971 aldermanic elections , the Council approved the appointment of Burke , who was at the time a police sergeant on leave , as chairman of the Police and Fire Committee . In 1972 and 1973 , Burke joined Alderman Edward Vrdolyak in a dissident caucus of aldermen demanding a greater voice in city affairs from Mayor Richard J. Daley and finance committee chairman Thomas Keane . The dissident aldermen were labelled the " Young Turks , " and their caucus was called the " coffee rebellion " after the beverage served at their morning meetings . In the backroom of the City Council chamber , Burke once threatened to punch Alderman Leon Despres in the nose if Despres were not so old . 
 Former city commissioner of consumer affairs Jane Byrne announced her challenge to Chicago Mayor Michael Bilandic on April 24 , 1978 , describing herself as an alternative to a " cabal of evil men [ that ] has fastened onto the government of the City of Chicago , " and , when pressed to name them , singled out Burke and Vrdolyak . 
 After Burke 's first campaign for alderman , he has been unopposed in most of his re @-@ election campaigns . In 2007 , Burke faced his first opponent since 1971 , a school teacher who had never run for office . A Burke supporter unsuccessfully challenged the validity of the opponent 's ballot application , but the case was tied up in court for most of the campaign , and Burke went on to win with nearly 90 percent of the vote . 
 = = = Leader of opposition to Mayor Washington = = = 
 Burke was , along with Alderman Edward Vrdolyak , a leader of the " Vrdolyak 29 " , a City Council majority voting block , which included 28 white and one Puerto Rican aldermen , who opposed the agenda of the newly elected Mayor Harold Washington , Chicago 's first black mayor , during Washington 's first three years as mayor , 1983 – 1986 , a period referred to as Council Wars . Vrdolyak , a Burke mentor , was chairman of the Cook County Democratic Party . Vrdolyak forged the alliance by expanding the number of city council committees to 29 and negotiating 29 committee chairmanship assignments . On May 2 , 1983 , during the first city council meeting of the Washington administration , the mayor and some aldermen left the meeting , Vrdolyak was President pro tempore of the city council ( chair of city council meetings when the mayor is not present ) so he continued the meeting . Burke was chosen to chair the powerful Finance Committee . 
 Burke assumed a vocal role in anti @-@ Washington attacks and was considered second to Vrdolyak in the anti @-@ Washington caucus . Burke sued in Cook County Circuit Court to remove Washington from office , contending that Washington forfeited his office by being three weeks late in filing a routine financial disclosure by the deadline set by state law . The suit was dismissed . Burke asked Illinois Attorney General Neil Hartigan to seek the ouster of Washington . The request was denied . Richard M. Daley , Cook County States Attorney at the time , pleaded for unity , saying , " This personal hatred has gone too far . " 
 In the spring of 1987 , in Chicago 's municipal elections , Vrdolyak , rather than seeking re @-@ election as alderman , was the Solidarity Party 's candidate challenging Washington for mayor . Washington won re @-@ election , and Washington allies won twenty @-@ five City Council seats . Burke led opposition in the City Council , but Washington supporter Alderman Timothy C. Evans replaced Burke as Chairman of the Committee on Finance . <unk> from the spacious Finance Committee staff offices , Burke never used the relatively modest office allocated to him in City Hall and instead worked out of his private law office two blocks away . In the days following the death of Mayor Washington in office , Burke supported the Council 's selection of Alderman Eugene Sawyer over Evans to serve as mayor . Sawyer prevailed , but Burke was the alderman who least often voted in support of the legislative agenda of Mayor Sawyer , Chicago 's second black mayor . After Richard M. Daley was elected mayor in the spring of 1989 , Daley nominated Burke as Finance chairman , a position he has held ever since . 
 The chairmanship of the City Council 's Committee on Finance has been described as " the No. 2 spot in city government " . Almost all expenditures , tax matters , and many city contracts must be recommended by the Finance Committee before they can be considered by the full Council . As Chairman of the Committee on Finance , Burke controlled a 63 @-@ member staff and $ 2 @.@ 2 @-@ million annual budget , dwarfing the resources of other council committees . In the city 's self @-@ managed workman 's compensation program , the Finance Committee determines and approves payment amounts in disability claims . As Chairman of the Committee on Finance , Burke controls a $ 1.3M per year taxpayer @-@ funded payroll account available to aldermen with no scrutiny . In 2008 , Burke spent the largest portion of the account , $ 70 @,@ 164 , more than any other alderman by more than $ 26 @,@ 000 . Burke is also a member of the City Council 's committees on Aviation ; Budget and Government Operation ; Energy , Environmental Protection and Public Utilities ; and Zoning . Additionally , Burke is a member of the Chicago Planning Commission and Economic Development Commission . He controls three well @-@ funded political action committees , the " Friends of Edward M Burke , " the " 14th Ward Regular Democratic Organization , " and " The Burnham Committee . " In July 2009 , Burke 's campaign funds totaled $ 3 @.@ 7 million , higher than any other alderman and one of the largest in Illinois . Illinois judges are elected in partisan elections , and a significant aspect of Burke 's influence derives from his role as the longtime chairman of the judicial slating subcommittee of the Cook County Democratic Party . 
 Burke has been a principal draftsman of the map of ward boundaries . When Burke started his political career , the 14th Ward that he represents was centered in the Back of the Yards neighborhood , more than a mile and a half east of where it is now . The 14th Ward is a gerrymandered area whose shape has been described as " like a piece of a jigsaw puzzle " . With each new ward map , drawn every 10 years , its boundaries have been moved farther west . As of 2010 , its boundaries extended from 39th Street south to 59th and from Western Avenue west to Cicero Avenue , including most of the Brighton Park , Gage Park and Archer Heights neighborhoods . The ethnic composition of the ward has changed dramatically during Burke 's tenure in office . As of 1968 , residents were predominantly of Polish or other Eastern European extraction , but by 2010 it had a large Mexican and Mexican @-@ American population . 
 Burke maintains a taxpayer @-@ salaried staff to ghost @-@ write speeches , resolutions , and works of non @-@ fiction for him , including Thomas J. O 'Gorman , carried on Burke 's City Council staff payroll as a " legislative aide " since 1995 . In October 2006 , Burke and O 'Gorman published End of Watch , a book detailing the lives and tragedies of police officers who died in the line of duty . Also , Burke and R. Craig Sautter published the book Inside the Wigwam : Chicago Presidential Conventions 1860 – 1996 . Under Burke 's direction , the Finance Committee staff compiles historical exhibits in City Hall and drafts honorary resolutions for special visitors to Chicago or recently deceased prominent Americans and Chicagoans . Burke was named " Best Orator at City Hall " in the Chicago Reader 's " Best of Chicago 2010 " special issue . 
 = = = Ghost payrolling on Burke 's staff = = = 
 The staffing practices of Burke 's Finance Committee came under scrutiny in local and federal investigations of ghost @-@ payrolling abuses in local government and resulted in several indictments and convictions . 
 Marie D 'Amico , the daughter of Alderman Anthony <unk> of the 39th Ward of Chicago , pleaded guilty to having collected tens of thousands of dollars in no @-@ work jobs between 1981 and 1994 from three separate public agencies : Cook County sheriff , Cook County clerk , and the City Council 's Finance Committee while Burke was chairman . Burke denied knowing D 'Amico rarely showed up for work . Burke said the Finance Committee 's chief investigator , who had died in 1994 , " apparently connived " with D 'Amico to carry D 'Amico on the payroll , prompting the Chicago Sun @-@ Times editorial , " Dead Men Can 't Wear Stripes . " D 'Amico was the first indictment in what became a federal investigation of ghost payrolling known as Operation Haunted Hall . In January 1995 , the Operation Haunted Hall grand jury subpoenaed the personnel records of three City Council Committees : Finance , Budget and Traffic . 
 Burke 's long @-@ time aldermanic secretary worked full @-@ time out of the downtown office of Burke 's law firm , even though her salary was paid by the city . The secretary was subpoenaed by the Operation Haunted Hall grand jury . Alderman Joe Moore asked , " Why is she over at the law firm ? It looks bad . It raises the appearance that she 's possibly doing not only city work but law firm work . " An attorney for the Finance Committee said , " I don 't have to explain why she 's at the law firm . [ Burke ] doesn 't have to explain . It makes no difference where she sits ... She 's a city employee and she does city work . " The secretary was transferred to City Hall . 
 Burke 's law firm had employed Joseph A. Martinez , a real estate tax appeal attorney , as a full @-@ time partner since about 1977 , when in 1981 Mayor Jane Byrne appointed Martinez to replace the resigning 31st Ward Alderman Chester Kuta . Martinez served out the remainder of Kuta 's term but declined to run for re @-@ election when the ward committeeman endorsed a challenger . Between 1985 and 1992 , Martinez received $ 91 @,@ 000 in wages and benefits for doing little or no work for City Council committees , and was a target of Operation Haunted Hall . In April 1995 , after the federal subpoena of Council committee personnel records , Martinez returned the $ 91 @,@ 000 , sending cash to City Hall in three installments . He was charged and pleaded guilty on January 23 , 1997 . In his plea agreement , he admitted he was a ghost <unk> on City Council committees , starting with the Finance Committee in 1987 , and said that he was employed in each committee job " in order to receive health insurance " . Martinez 's attorney said Burke got Martinez the jobs because Burke 's law firm did not provide health insurance . In a statement , Burke wrote , " A memorandum filed in Mr. Martinez 's case [ has ] asserted that I participated in a scheme that gave rise to these charges . This allegation is untrue . I have done nothing wrong in connection with this matter . " Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning columnist Mike Royko wrote , " You would think that a bright fellow such as Burke - whose father was a ward boss and an alderman - would know better ... " 
 Burke was corporate secretary of security firm SDI Security , Inc. from shortly after it was formed in 1989 until 1994 . Burke hired the President of SDI , Michael A. Pedicone , as an outside lawyer for the Finance Committee . SDI was owned by 11th ward Alderman Patrick Huels , chairman of the Council 's Transportation Committee , and Mayor Richard M. Daley 's floor leader , and Huels ' wife and brother . A federal grand jury subpoenaed Burke 's and Huels ' campaign finance records and ethics disclosures , and Pedicone 's billings . The Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission of the Illinois Supreme Court , the state agency that regulates the conduct of attorneys in Illinois , investigated Burke and subpoenaed all records on SDI from the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation . In late December 1997 a grand jury convened by the Cook County State 's Attorney 's office subpoenaed records on expenditures to SDI from Burke 's Finance and Huels ' Transportation Committees , notable in that local prosecutors rarely investigate local politicians . In a memo to aldermen , Burke wrote , " He [ Pedicone ] was not a ghost <unk> , " and that Pedicone had been paid about $ 490 @,@ 000 over eight years for handling more than 450 disability @-@ claim cases . Huels ' resignation was the first major public corruption scandal of Daley 's first two terms , and editorials called for Burke 's resignation as well . 
 At the sentencing hearing for a Chicago attorney , a federal agent testified that the attorney said that his job with Burke 's Finance Committee only required four hours of work a week , although he was paid a full @-@ time salary . On January 8 , 1998 , federal prosecutors in Operation Haunted Hall indicted another Chicago attorney for collecting $ 9 @,@ 223 in wages and benefits from the Finance Committee in 1991 and 1992 despite doing little or no work . 
 Burke hired criminal defense attorney Anton <unk> , a former U.S. attorney and a partner in the law firm Jenner and Block , to represent him . Burke was not charged with any wrongdoing in the probe . By 1999 , Operation Haunted Hall resulted in 34 guilty pleas , one conviction after trial , and one acquittal . 
 On December 4 , 2008 , Illinois State Representative Robert S. Molaro resigned after serving about 15 years in the state legislature , and was eligible to receive a public pension of about $ 64 @,@ 000 per year based on the standard of 85 % of his roughly $ 75 @,@ 000 annual salary . Burke hired the newly retired Molaro for $ 12 @,@ 000 for one month to write a 19 @-@ page white paper about Chicago 's perennially under @-@ funded pensions . When Molaro officially retired on January 1 , 2009 , his pensionable salary was annualized as $ 144 @,@ 000 , nearly doubling his pension . On August 16 , 2012 Illinois Governor Pat Quinn signed a bill which limited the state 's liability when former state legislators bolster their state pensions with short @-@ term jobs with cities , counties and other local governments . 
