 Initial reactions to Akane were mixed . Hiroko Yamamura from Japanator liked the way the first episode focused on Akane 's first day as a police officer and her opinions of it . Thomas Zoth from The Fandom Post said Akane 's personality is typical of those in dramas ; he called her a " naive waif who gets over her head with her first case " . Zoth said that in later episodes , he liked the relationship Akane established with Masaoka and Ginoza , which resulted in several interesting scenes . Zoth said he grew to care about Akane during the first half of the series in " a somewhat ironically ' moe ' way , as she 's grown as a character " . In a similar review , Rebecca Silverman from Anime News Network said Akane 's actions in the first episode " [ set ] her up as the clear @-@ eyed , albeit naïve , outsider of the story , willing to look at things differently " . 
 Bamboo Dong from Anime News Network was more critical of the character , calling her " a blank slate " . She said Akane is " uninteresting and forgettable , and her previous role in the show as the moral compass seems to have waned as well " . Chris Beveridge from The Fandom Post was more optimistic ; he said , " Akane provides a good voice for this , since she ’ s new to it all and wants to bring nuance to the numbers and the situations , but we see how experience plays out against her at times , but also that she does have something to offer with it " . 
 Despite mixed reactions to the character , her growth during the series earned praise . Silverman said that ever since her best friend 's death at Shogo Makishima 's hands , Akane underwent major character development as she " further distances herself from the bright @-@ eyed rookie she began as , recognizing the flaws in the system while not being entirely certain that she can be the force for change in it " . Silverman also praised the impact Akane brought to the climax and her relationship with Shinya Kogami . In a later review , Dong said the character 's uninteresting traits stop appearing in the second half of the series . 
 Zoth said episode 20 , in which " Akane finally snaps " , was one of his most expected parts from the story . Zoth also said , " Akane has grown as a character , and a detective , and in a bit of a heavy @-@ handed move , she ’ s shown transforming into Kogami in Ginoza 's eyes " . Similarly , Bamboo Dong said , " No longer the dull and meek woman she was for over half the series , [ Akane 's ] now confident and capable , doling out commands that are instantly followed and respected by her comrades " . Dong said Akane is an appealing main character who is " worth paying attention to , and her presence on screen is the perfect complement to the much more complex side characters that populate the show " . Richard Eisenbeis from Kotaku said he found Akane more interesting than Kogami because her overall development . Akane also won the " Miss Noitamina " award in an official poll involving characters that appeared in <unk> television series . In the 2013 Newtype anime awards , Akane was voted the third @-@ best female character . In 2015 , she once again took that place . The same year , a Charapedia poll , which asked fans to list their favourite " cool " women in anime , had Akane placed 10th with 257 votes . 
 = Nikita ( character ) = 
 Nikita Mears is the primary protagonist and eponymous character of Nikita , an American action and drama television series , which debuted in September 2010 on The CW Television Network . She is played by American actress Maggie Q. The series follows Nikita 's efforts in bringing down Division , a secret agency that trained her into becoming an agent and assassin , but betrayed her by killing Daniel Monroe , a civilian she fell in love with . She recruits Alexandra <unk> ( Lyndsy Fonseca ) into helping her destroy Division from within . 
 Q was in talks to appear on the series as the title character in February 2010 , and it was her first time working on a television series . She was chosen for the role because series creator Craig Silverstein believed Q had qualities that would fit the character : " beautiful , who could fight , " and be believable with a gun . The actress meanwhile was intrigued by the original Nikita film and Luc Besson 's creation of a flawed female character . The series also deals with Nikita and Michael 's romantic tension , then relationship , described by the fans as " Mikita . " The character and Q 's portrayal garnered mostly positive reactions from critics . Q performs her own stunts of the series . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Orphaned as a teenager , Nikita turns to drugs and crime . She comes across a halfway house run by Carla Bennett ( Erica Gimpel ) and temporarily gets clean until she relapses and murders a police officer . Nikita is arrested and sentenced to death . She attracts the attention of Division , a secret American agency that recruits young criminals by faking their deaths and then train them to become assassins . For three years , Nikita was trained under Michael ( Shane West ) , and committed assassinations . After she begins a relationship with civilian Daniel Monroe ( Sebastien Roberts ) , Nikita learns that Division has become corrupt under the leadership of Percy ( Xander Berkeley ) . In one mission , Nikita is part of a team to assassinate a family of Russian oligarchs ; the <unk> family . Nikita defies Division by saving the life of the daughter , Alexandra . After Division kills Daniel as it is against their policy for agents have relationships , She becomes a rogue agent intent on stopping Division , tracks down Alexandra ( Lyndsy Fonseca ) , who had since become a drug addict and sex slave , and saves and trains her . Nikita arranges Alex to be arrested for murdering a man Division was targeting . Inside , Alex helps Nikita stop Division 's illegal missions . 
 During the first season , Nikita gains some allies to aid in her fight against Division , including Owen Elliot ( Devon Sawa ) , a guardian to one of Division 's several black boxes ; hard drives contain files of Division 's missions , until Percy tried to have him killed , CIA analyst Ryan Fletcher ( Noah Bean ) who was investigating black operations invisible to the United States government , and eventually her trainer Michael , after he learns Percy was responsible for the deaths of his wife and daughter . The two would be in a relationship for the rest of the series ' run . By the first season finale , Alex learns that Nikita killed her father and leaves her to become a free agent for Amanda ( Melinda Clarke ) , Division 's psychologist who overthrew Percy to lead Division with the help of Oversight , a group of American politicians who ensure that Division 's existence remains secret from the public ( Alex would later return to fight alongside with Nikita again midway through season two ) . Michael is discovered to be working with Nikita and the two end up on the run together with a black box . 
 In the second season , Nikita and Michael team up with Seymour Birkhoff ( Aaron Stanford ) , a Division computer programmer who left the agency to avoid Amanda . In " Looking Glass " , Nikita learns that during an operation , Michael impregnated his asset , Cassandra Ovechkin ( Helena Mattsson ) and eventually tells him he has a son . The couple 's relationship faces some <unk> due to that development , but they appear to reconcile after Michael decides to put Cassandra and his son Max ( who calls her " The Gun Lady " ) behind him . In the meantime , Nikita learns about the existence of Oversight , and reunites with Carla Bennett , who is revealed to be one of the founders of Division , until her death . " Wrath " explores Nikita 's dark side when she is captured and tortured by Nicholas Brandt , an arms dealer Nikita tortured during her days in Division . Nikita confesses to Michael that " there is evil " in her , but Michael assures her it is only a part of her . After the two are rescued , the ordeal brings Michael and Nikita closer . The two eventually sneak into Division and kill Percy after he has regained control of it . 
 In the third season , Ryan takes charge of Division to clean up its own mess by recalling all the agents at which point President Kathleen Spencer ( Michelle <unk> ) will grant the agents freedom ( as all were recruited against their will ) . However , Nikita later learns the President will have Division terminated should they fail . Nikita and others work to find rogue agents who refused the recall order , nicknamed the " Dirty Thirty " , until her efforts are focused on Amanda , who is also on the run and later working with a company nicknamed " The Shop " , who developed sophisticated technologies , some of which was used by Division . Michael and Nikita become engaged , but their relationship faces further <unk> after Nikita cuts off his right hand to save his life . An advanced prosthetic is eventually discovered , but it is later revealed to have been laced with nano @-@ cells that would kill Michael unless Nikita assassinates Spencer . When Michael lies to her that a cure has been found , Nikita stands down . However Spencer shoots herself in the head ( she is later revealed to be a double by The Shop ; the real Spencer was captured and imprisoned ) . Framed for her death , Nikita becomes that most wanted person in the United States . She goes on the run , but leaves Michael behind . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 The CW was looking to create a female @-@ driven action series . Creator Craig Silverstein discussed with Warner Bros. about the previous incarnations of Nikita ( the original 1990 film , and La Femme Nikita ) and wished to make the current television series look fresh . Silverstein wanted to follow Nikita after she left the agency , as that chapter was yet to be told in the previous incarnations . He also believed it would have done the original story justice . Also , he wanted to include a highlight of Nikita 's original story in the pilot to earn the title , and then move on from there . Silverstein described Nikita 's transition in a Collider interview ; " It 's a dark fairytale . This girl is taken from one life , her identity is erased , she 's put in another life and she 's transformed . It 's like Alice in Wonderland . She 's told , " Eat this , drink that , steal this , kill that , " and she 's not told why . And , she begins to find her own identity through that . It 's just a great story . " 
 On February 2010 it was announced that Maggie Q was in talks to play the title character of Nikita . Q 's casting would mark the highest @-@ profile series role for an Asian actress on a broadcast drama series . Q was drawn to the series because she was intrigued by the original film and Luc Besson 's creation of an incredibly flawed female . According to the actress the process of her casting took about four to five days . In describing Q 's casting , Silverstein stated ; 
 Appearing on Nikita would be Q 's first television role . During an interview with IGN , Q explained that she had not been on television before " not because I didn 't want to . I just never thought about it , " adding " When this came up , everything just felt right . I knew McG and when Wonderland came on he was like , ' This is you , we 're not doing this without you . ' and I went ' That 's very sweet ! ' So it felt right . " 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Because the CW is a fashion @-@ orientated network , there were times Nikita had to be dressed in a certain way to get her noticed by her targets . Q liked the idea , but at the same time wanted Nikita 's dress sense to be " toned down a bit " because she is an assassin . In one scene in particular Q had to wear a red bikini in the pilot , which " mortified " her . She added " that red bikini was the bane of my existence . You 're not going to see me in a bikini again , that 's for sure . [ ... ] I was like , ' Danny , can you put me in a one @-@ piece ? , ' and he gave me that red bikini . I was like , ' That 's not a one @-@ piece . That 's a two @-@ piece with a string . ' " However , Q did not have to cover her tattoos like she had to in the films , as it was in keeping with who the character is ; a hardcore , street kid . 
 Q performs her own stunts in the series . The actress liked to have her character " be able to do her own thing , " as it is an action series where females play lead roles ; during her film career , she noted " but in movies , alongside big action men , we 've always got to take a step back and let the men shine . And in this , it 's about the women who know what they 're doing . " At some point Q set up a three @-@ week long training period for the rest of the cast to make their fight scenes in the series believable ; she had her partner , an action director , bring his stunt team to train them . In filming the stunts she was already used to working in an environment where filming in television would be faster than in American films , because of her time starring in films in Asia , which usually took two to six weeks . 
 One of the more prominent aspects of Nikita 's character development since the beginning of the series is her relationship with Michael , and has been dubbed by fans as " Mikita " . Unlike other works on film and television , Silverstein did not play the traditional " Will They / Won 't They ? " game between the two characters . Co @-@ star Shane West stated " It 's not hard to bring Michael and Nikita together , " but it is " really hard to keep them apart ... We 're barely into the season yet , so why not keep teasing ? " When the first season started airing , West also expected that their romance would come , citing Michael and Nikita 's past relationship while she was working with Division . Now that the two are together by the end of the first season , in the second season Silverstein wanted something to happen to get in their way , saying that no new tension would make the relationship boring , adding " I don 't think you can just have them happy and in love , kicking ass together forever . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Nikita and Maggie Q 's portrayal of the character was met with generally positive reactions from television critics . Nikita was included in TV Guide 's lists of " TV 's Sexiest Crime Fighters " and " TV 's Toughest Ladies " . Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times felt that Q was suited for the role , stating " she has a solemn , exotic beauty and hauteur that echo the heroine 's self @-@ possession and cool relentlessness , " adding " Nikita is noticeably more hard @-@ boiled and less girlish than the undercover agent played by Jennifer Garner on Alias , or the C.I.A. rookie that Piper Perabo plays on Covert Affairs . " Troy Patterson of Slate felt that " Ms. Q 's Nikita is only half so crush @-@ worthy as Bionic Woman 's Jaime Sommers or Dollhouse 's what 's @-@ her @-@ name , but her predicament is no less tasty . " Robert Bianco of USA Today believed Q 's performance was " a fairly sizable incentive " to watch the show , adding she " combines stunt @-@ fighting chops and lithe beauty with an unusual @-@ for @-@ the @-@ genre air of somber intelligence . Her Nikita is not above cracking a joke , but it 's clear from Q 's eyes and bearing that she has suffered at the hands of evil men , and she 's not going to take it anymore . " Alan Sepinwall of HitFix believed that Q " carries herself in a way that makes it believable she could be a hard @-@ core killer , and she has the requisite dramatic chops and charisma for the part . " Maureen Ryan of AOL TV said " Maggie Q , has real charisma and presence ; she invests Nikita 's drive to bring down the secretive Division with potent energy . You have to believe that Nikita would devote her life to wreaking vengeance on the people she views as her former captors , and you also have to buy her as a butt @-@ kicking , gun @-@ toting action heroine who also looks great in a cocktail gown . Maggie Q makes all those things look easy . " 
 Some other critics however , did not react so warmly towards Q 's Nikita . Chris Conaton of PopMatters felt that Q " seems to be a good choice for the title role , " but noted that the pilot did not call attention to the character 's background . That said Conaton stated " it 's still something of a novelty to build a TV series around an Asian American lead — though plenty of recent ensemble and reality TV shows have featured prominent cast members of Asian descent . " Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe felt that Q was " too much of a sad sack , " adding " Q doesn 't seem able to layer any other emotions over her cold resolve , " and compares the character to " a little bit like [ Saturday Night Live character ] Debbie Downer . " Mary McNamara of The Los Angeles Times believed that while Nikita " provides some sizzle , " her emotions " run that famous distance from A to B , as do virtually [ every other character ] . " 
 Before the show started airing , Q posed for several billboard posters . However , they were met with some controversy for being revealing , and several locations across the United States , including in areas of Chicago , Los Angeles and New York , refused to allow them to be put up , as they were located near churches and schools . Rick Haskins , the marketing executive for the CW , stated " we 've been down this road a few times with some of our campaigns . " 
 = Harry McNish = 
 Henry McNish ( 11 September 1874 — 24 September 1930 ) , often referred to as Harry McNeish or by the nickname Chippy , was the carpenter on Sir Ernest Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition of 1914 – 1917 . He was responsible for much of the work that ensured the crew 's survival after their ship , the Endurance , was destroyed when it became trapped in pack ice in the Weddell Sea . He modified the small boat , James Caird , that allowed Shackleton and five men ( including McNish ) to make a voyage of hundreds of miles to fetch help for the rest of the crew . 
 After the expedition he returned to work in the Merchant Navy and eventually emigrated to New Zealand , where he worked on the docks in Wellington until poor health forced his retirement . He died destitute in the <unk> Benevolent Home in Wellington . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harry " Chippy " McNish was born in 1874 in the former Lyons Lane near the present site of the library in Port Glasgow , Renfrewshire , Scotland . He was part of a large family , being the third of eleven children born to John and Mary Jane ( née Wade ) McNish . His father was a journeyman shoemaker . McNish held strong socialist views , was a member of the United Free Church of Scotland and detested bad language . He married three times : in 1895 to Jessie Smith , who died in February 1898 ; in 1898 to Ellen Timothy , who died in December 1904 ; and finally to Lizzie Littlejohn in 1907 . 
 There is some confusion as to the correct spelling of his name . He is variously referred to as McNish , McNeish , and in Alexander Macklin 's diary of the expedition , <unk> . The McNeish spelling is common , notably in Shackleton 's and Frank Worsley 's accounts of the expedition and on McNish 's headstone , but McNish is also widely used , and appears to be the correct version . On a signed copy of the expedition photo his signature appears as " H. <unk> " , but his spelling is in general idiosyncratic , as revealed in the diary he kept throughout the expedition . There also is a question regarding McNish 's nickname . " Chippy " was a traditional nickname for a shipwright ; both this and the shorter " Chips " ( as in wood chips from carpentry ) seem to have been used . 
 = = Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition = = 
 = = = Endurance = = = 
 The aim of the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition was to be the first to cross the Antarctic continent from one side to the other . McNish was apparently attracted by Shackleton 's advertisement for the expedition ( although there are doubts as to whether the advertisement ever appeared ) : 
 MEN <unk> : FOR <unk> <unk> . SMALL <unk> , <unk> COLD , LONG <unk> OF <unk> <unk> , CONSTANT <unk> , SAFE RETURN <unk> . <unk> AND <unk> IN CASE OF SUCCESS . SIR <unk> <unk> 
 McNish , at 40 , was one of the oldest members of the crew of the Endurance ( Shackleton though was seven months older ) . He suffered from piles and rheumatism in his legs . He was regarded as somewhat odd and unrefined , but also highly respected as a carpenter — Frank Worsley , the captain of the Endurance , refers to him as a " splendid shipwright " . The pipe @-@ smoking Scot was , however , the only man of the crew that Shackleton was " not dead certain of " . His Scots accent was described as rasping like " frayed cable wire " . 
 During the initial stage of the voyage to Antarctica from Buenos Aires , he was kept busy with a number of routine tasks . He worked on the pram dinghy Nancy Endurance ; made a small chest of drawers for Shackleton ; specimen shelves for the biologist , Robert Clark ; instrument cases for Leonard Hussey , the meteorologist ; and put up wind screens to protect the helmsman . He constructed a false deck , extending from the poop @-@ deck to the chart @-@ room to cover the extra coal that the ship had taken on board . He also acted as the ship 's barber . As the ship pushed into the pack ice in the Weddell Sea it became increasingly difficult to navigate . McNish constructed a six @-@ foot wooden semaphore on the bridge to enable the navigating officer to give the helmsman directions , and built a small stage over the stern to allow the propeller to be watched in order to keep it clear of the heavy ice . 
 When the ship became trapped in pack ice his duties expanded to constructing makeshift housing , and , once it became clear that the ship was doomed , to altering the sledges for the journey over the ice to open water . He built the quarters where the crew took their meals ( nicknamed The Ritz ) and cubicles where the men could sleep . These were all christened as well ; McNish shared The Sailors ' Rest with Alfred Cheetham , the Third Officer . Assisted by the crew , he constructed kennels for the dogs on the upper deck . Once Endurance became trapped , and the crew were spending the days on the ice , McNish erected goalposts and football became a daily fixture for the men . To pass the time in the evening , McNish joined Frank Wild , Tom Crean , James McIlroy , Worsley and Shackleton playing poker in the wardroom . 
 The pressure from the ice caused Endurance to start to take on water . To prevent the ship from flooding McNish built a cofferdam , caulking it with strips of blankets and nailing strips over the seams , standing for hours up to his waist in freezing water as he worked . He could not prevent the pressure from the ice crushing the ship though and was experienced enough to know when to stop trying . Once the ship had been destroyed he was put in charge of rescuing the stores from what had been The Ritz . With McNish in charge it took only a couple of hours to open the deck far enough to retrieve a good quantity of provisions . 
 = = = On the ice = = = 
 During his watch one night while the crew were camped on the ice , a small part of the ice floe broke away and he was only rescued due to the quick intervention of the men of the next watch who threw him a line allowing him to jump back to safety . Shackleton reported that McNish calmly mentioned his narrow escape the next day after further cracks appeared in the ice . Mrs. Chippy , the cat McNish had brought on board , had to be shot after the loss of the Endurance , as it was obvious he would not survive the harsh conditions . McNish apparently never forgave Shackleton for giving the order . 
 McNish proposed building a smaller craft from the wreckage of the ship , but was overruled , with Shackleton instead deciding to head across the ice to open water pulling the ship 's three lifeboats . McNish had been suffering with piles and homesickness from almost before the voyage had begun , and once the ship was lost his frustration began to grow . He vented his feelings in his diary , targeting his tent @-@ mates ' language : 
 I have been shipmates with all sorts of men both in sail and steam , but never nothing like some of our party - as the most filthy language is used as terms of endearment , and , worse of all , is tolerated . 
 In great pain while pulling sledges across the ice , McNish briefly rebelled , refusing to take his turn in the harness and protesting to Frank Worsley that since the Endurance had been destroyed the crew was no longer under any obligation to follow orders . Accounts vary as to how Shackleton handled this : some report that he threatened to shoot McNish ; others that he read him the ship 's articles , making it clear that the crew were still under obligation until they reached port . McNish 's assertion would have normally been correct : duty to the master ( and pay ) normally stopped when a ship was lost , but the articles the crew had signed for the Endurance had a special clause inserted in which the crew agreed " to perform any duty on board , in the boats , or on the shore as directed by the master and owner " . Aside from this , McNish really had no choice but to comply : he could not survive alone and could not continue with the rest of the party unless he obeyed orders . Eventually , Shackleton decided that the attempt to pull the boats had been a mistake , and decided that the only solution was to wait for the movement of the ice to bring the party to open water . 
 As supplies began to dwindle the party grew hungry . McNish records that he smoked himself sick trying to alleviate the pangs of hunger and although he thought the shooting of the dogs terribly sad , he was happy to eat the meat they provided stating " Their flesh tastes a treat . It is a big treat for us after being so long on seal meat . " 
 When the ice finally brought the camp to the edge of the pack ice , Shackleton decided that the three boats , the James Caird , Stancomb Wills , and Dudley Docker , should make initially for Elephant Island . McNish had prepared the boats as best he could for a long journey in the open ocean , building up their sides to give them a higher clearance from the water . 
 = = = Elephant Island and the James Caird = = = 
 On the sea journey to Elephant Island , McNish was in the James Caird with Shackleton and Frank Wild . As they approached the island , Wild , who had been at the tiller for 24 hours straight , was close to collapse , so Shackleton ordered McNish to relieve him . McNish was not in a much better state himself and , despite the terrible conditions , he fell asleep after half an hour . The boat swung around and a huge wave drenched him . This was enough to wake him , but Shackleton , seeing McNish too was exhausted , ordered him to be relieved . 
 After the crew had made it to Elephant Island , Shackleton decided to take a small crew and make for South Georgia , where there was a possibility that they would find crews from the whaling ships to help effect a rescue for the rest of the men . McNish was called upon by Shackleton to make the James Caird seaworthy for the long voyage and was selected as part of the crew , possibly because Shackleton was afraid of the effect he would have on morale if left behind with the other men . For his part , McNish seemed happy to go ; he was unimpressed by the island and the chances of survival for the men overwintering there : 
 I don 't think there are ever many fine days on this forlorn island ... I dont think there will be many <unk> if they have to put in a winter here . [ sic ] 
 McNish used the mast of another of the boats , the Stancomb Wills , to strengthen the keel and build up the small 22 foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) long boat , so it would withstand the seas during the 800 mile ( 1480 km ) trip . He caulked it using a mixture of seal blood and flour , and , using wood and nails taken from packing cases and the runners of the sledges , he built a makeshift frame which was then covered with canvas . Shackleton was worried the boat " bore a strong likeness to stage scenery " , only giving the appearance of sturdiness . He later admitted that the crew could not have lived through the voyage without it . When launching the boat McNish and John Vincent were thrown from the deck into the sea . Although soaked , both were unharmed , and managed to exchange some clothes with the Elephant Island party before the James Caird set off . The mood on board was buoyant and McNish recorded in his diary on 24 April 1916 : 
 We took Good bye with our companions . & set sail on our 870 miles to South Georgia for assistance ... we were in the open sea wet through but happy through it all . 
 The mood did not last though : conditions aboard the small craft during the trip were terrible , with the crew constantly soaked and cold . McNish impressed Shackleton with his ability to bear up under the strain ( more so than the younger Vincent , who collapsed from exhaustion and cold ) . The six men split into two watches of four hours : three of the men would handle the boat while the other three lay beneath the canvas decking attempting to sleep . McNish shared a watch with Shackleton and Crean . All the men complained of pains in their legs and , on the fourth day out from Elephant Island , McNish suddenly sat down and removed his boots , revealing his legs and feet were white and puffy with the early signs of trench foot . On seeing the state of McNish 's feet Shackleton ordered all the men to remove their boots . 
 = = = South Georgia = = = 
 The crew of the James Caird reached South Georgia on 10 May 1916 , 15 days after setting out from Elephant Island . They landed in Cave Cove on King Haakon Bay ; it was on the wrong side of the island , but it was a relief for all of them to make land ; McNish wrote in his diary : 
 I went to the top of the hill & had a lay on the grass & it put me in mind of old times at Home sitting on the hillside looking down at the sea . 
 They found albatross chicks and seals to eat , but despite the relative comfort of the island compared to the small boat , they still urgently needed to reach the whaling station at Husvik on the other side of the island to fetch help for the men on Elephant Island . It was clear that McNish and Vincent could not continue , so Shackleton left them in the care of Timothy McCarthy camped in the upturned James Caird , and with Worsley and Crean made the hazardous trip over the mountains . McNish took screws from the James Caird and attached them to the boots of the men making the journey to help them grip the ice . He also fashioned a crude sledge from driftwood he found on the beach , but it proved too clumsy to be practical . When Shackleton 's party set off on 18 May 1916 , McNish accompanied them for a few hundred yards but he was unable to go any further . He shook hands with each of the men , wished them good luck and then Shackleton sent him back . Putting McNish in command of the remaining men , Shackleton charged him to wait for relief and if none had come by the end of winter to attempt to sail to the east coast . Once Shackleton 's party had crossed the mountains and arrived in Husvik , he sent Worsley with one of the whaler 's ships , Samson , to pick up McNish and the other men . After seeing the emaciated and drawn McNish on his arrival at the whaling station , Shackleton recorded that he felt that the rescue had come just in time for him . 
 = = Polar Medal = = 
 Whatever the true story of the rebellion on the ice , neither Worsley nor McNish ever mentioned the incident in writing . Shackleton omitted it entirely from South , his account of the expedition , and referred to it only tangentially in his diary : " Everyone working well except the carpenter . I shall never forget him in this time of strain and stress " . The event was recorded in the ship 's log , but the log entry was struck during the sea voyage in the James Caird , Shackleton being impressed by the carpenter 's show of " grit and spirit " . Nevertheless , McNish 's name appeared on the list of the four men not recommended for the Polar Medal in the letter sent by Shackleton on his return . Macklin thought the denial of the medal unjustified : 
 I was disheartened to learn that McNeish , Vincent , Holness and Stephenson had been denied the Polar Medal ... of all the men in the party no @-@ one more deserved recognition than the old carpenter .... I would regard the withholding of the Polar Medal from McNeish as a grave injustice . 
 Macklin believed that Shackleton may have been influenced in his decision by Worsley who shared a mutual enmity with McNish , and had accompanied Shackleton back from Antarctica . Members of the Scott Polar Research Institute , New Zealand Antarctic Society and Caroline Alexander , the author of Endurance , have criticised Shackleton 's denial of the award to McNish , and there is an ongoing campaign to have him awarded the medal posthumously . 
 = = Later life , memorials and records = = 
 After the expedition McNish returned to the Merchant Navy , working on various ships . He often complained that his bones permanently ached due to the conditions during the journey in the James Caird ; he would reportedly sometimes refuse to shake hands because of the pain . He divorced Lizzie Littlejohn on 2 March 1918 , by which time he had already met his new partner , Agnes Martindale . McNish had a son named Tom and Martindale had a daughter named Nancy . Although she is mentioned frequently in his diary , it appears McNish was not Nancy 's father . He spent 23 years in the Navy in total during his life , but eventually secured a job with the New Zealand Shipping Company . After making five trips to New Zealand he moved there in 1925 , leaving behind his wife and all of his carpentry tools . He worked on the waterfront in Wellington until his career was ended by an injury . Destitute , he would sleep in the wharf sheds under a tarpaulin and relied on monthly collections from the dockworkers . He was found a place in the <unk> Benevolent Home , but his health continued to deteriorate and he died on 24 September 1930 in Wellington Hospital . He was buried in Karori Cemetery , Wellington , on 26 September 1930 , with full naval honours ; HMS Dunedin ( which happened to be in port at the time ) provided twelve men for the firing party and eight bearers . However , his grave remained unmarked for almost thirty years ; the New Zealand Antarctic Society ( <unk> ) erected a headstone on 10 May 1959 . In 2001 , it was reported that the grave was untended and surrounded by weeds , but in 2004 , the grave was tidied and a life size bronze sculpture of McNish 's beloved cat , Mrs. Chippy , was placed on his grave by <unk> . His grandson , Tom , believes this tribute would have meant more to him than receiving the Polar Medal . 
 In 1958 the British Antarctic Survey named a small island in his honour , " McNeish Island " , which lies in the approaches to King Haakon Bay , South Georgia . The island was renamed " McNish Island " in 1998 after his birth certificate was presented to the United Kingdom Antarctic Place @-@ Names Committee . On 18 October 2006 , a small , oval wall plaque commemorating his achievements was unveiled at the Port Glasgow Library in his home town , and earlier in the same year he was the subject of an exhibition at the McLean Museum and Art Gallery , Greenock . His journals are held in the Alexander Turnbull Library in Wellington , New Zealand . 
 = Bat 'leth = 
 The bat 'leth ( Klingon : betleH , pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a double sided scimitar / hook sword / deer horn knives hybrid @-@ edged weapon with a curved blade , four points and handholds on the back . It was designed and created by Star Trek : The Next Generation visual effects producer Dan Curry for the Star Trek franchise , where it is the characteristic melee weapon of Klingons . Curry has called the bat 'leth " one of the iconic images associated with the show " . It has spawned a smaller version , which became known as the " mek 'leth " ( Klingon : <unk> ) . Bat 'leths have become an enduring symbol of the franchise among fans and are occasionally referenced in other media . 
 = = Description = = 
 A bat 'leth is a curved blade approximately 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) long , with two spiked protrusions at each end and three handholds along the back which can be used to twist and spin the blade rapidly . 
 Dan Curry created the bat 'leth in 1990 for Worf , a character played by Michael Dorn in Star Trek : The Next Generation after receiving approval from producer Rick Berman . Curry based it on the " Chinese fighting crescent " . Curry — a martial artist — also developed a fighting style similar to t 'ai chi ch 'uan for the use of the weapon . In 1995 , he developed a smaller version of the bat 'leth , the " mek 'leth " — which is based on a Northern Tibetan cavalry sword . He designed the weapon for Dorn to use when Worf joined the crew of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Mek 'leths are intended for one @-@ handed use and shaped like a scimitar ; it is about half the length of the full @-@ size bat 'leth . 
 = = Use in Star Trek = = 
 In Star Trek lore , the Klingon Kahless created the bat 'leth around 625 A.D. According to Klingon mythology , he formed the blade by dropping a length of his hair into some lava from inside the Kri <unk> Volcano , then cooling , shaping , and hardening it in the lake of <unk> . He then united Qo 'noS , the Klingon homeworld by killing a tyrant named Molor with the weapon , which became known as the " Sword of Kahless " . The sword was later stolen by a species called the Hur <unk> during their invasion of Qo 'noS . In the Deep Space Nine episode " The Sword of Kahless " , Worf and another Klingon named Kor rediscover the artifact , but it is eventually transported into space to prevent them from using it to attack each other . The Sword of Kahless differs from normal bat 'leths as it has five points and one handhold compared to four points and three handholds . 
 In the Klingon language , the bat 'leth was originally referred to as <unk> <unk> , then was shortened to betleH . The word " bat 'leth " means " Sword of Honor " . Bat 'leths are made of a reinforced metal called <unk> and are normally 116 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 81 ft ) long and weigh 5 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 12 lb ) . 
 The bat 'leth appeared in 29 television episodes across the Star Trek franchise in Star Trek : The Next Generation , Star Trek : Voyager , Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and Star Trek : Enterprise . The Bat 'leth was also used in the 1994 film Star Trek Generations . The mek 'leth appeared in the television series Deep Space Nine and in the 1996 film Star Trek : First Contact . The Sword of Kahless appeared in the 2000 video game Star Trek : Armada and normal bat 'leths appeared in the 1996 video game Star Trek : Klingon . Some of the bat 'leth 's uses were in the debut episode " Reunion " , where Worf teaches his son Alexander how to use one . Worf used a bat 'leth to kill Duras — a Klingon who killed Worf 's mate K <unk> . Notable uses of the weapon occurred in the Voyager episode " Barge of the Dead " — in which Tuvok uses a bat 'leth to teach B 'Elanna Torres about her Klingon heritage , and in the Deep Space Nine episode " Tacking into the Wind " — in which Worf kills the leader of the Klingon High Council , Gowron in a bat 'leth duel to give the Klingon Chancellorship to General Martok . 
 = = Cultural legacy = = 
 The bat 'leth is considered an iconic image of the Star Trek universe . Replicas are widespread and are considered collectibles by some and a part of Klingon costume . A number of outlets , including replica merchants , weapons dealers and pawn shops sell them . Ronald D. Moore , who has worked on Star Trek and Battlestar Galactica , displays one in his office . However , due to the dangers of real bat 'leths , no officially licensed replicas of the weapon are available from either Curry or Paramount Pictures . 
 The rise in the popularity of the bat 'leth has led to the formation of martial arts teams aiming to develop a martial art distinct from the one Curry initially developed . Such teams have incorporated moves from ju @-@ jitsu , kendo , <unk> and nunchaku . Bat 'leth competitions have been held at conventions such as <unk> and <unk> . 
 The bat 'leth has appeared in television programs outside the Star Trek franchise . In 2002 , it was seen in Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode " The Other Guys " . In 2005 , a bat 'leth was in the background of the US detective series Monk episode " Mr. Monk vs. the Cobra " . In 2010 , one was seen in the " Chuck Versus the Beard " episode of American comedy series Chuck . In 2011 , a bat 'leth was used in American situation comedy The Big Bang Theory episode " The Zarnecki Incursion " . 
 = = Legality = = 
 Replicas of the bat 'leth are often made of metal and can be dangerous . A British police spokesman said that stainless steel bat 'leth could " literally , take someone 's head off " . Media reports documenting instances of replica bat 'leths being used in crimes have referred to the weapon as a " double @-@ pointed Klingon crescent @-@ shaped sword " , a " Klingon @-@ type sword " , a " Star Trek Klingon @-@ type sword " or as a " double @-@ pointed scimitar " . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , it is legal to possess a bat 'leth on private property ; however , they may be seized if they are considered to be " potential evidence of a criminal lifestyle . " They are classed as weapons , which makes it illegal to carry one in a public place . A replica bat 'leth was surrendered to Gloucestershire Constabulary as part of the 2006 knife amnesty in the UK . In 2008 , a miniature bat 'leth was seized in Oxford after a 17 @-@ year @-@ old was caught trying to smuggle it into a College . Police described the weapon as " most horrendous " . The person was arrested and sentenced to six months in a young offenders ' institution . In 2009 , a man from Billingham , County Durham , was arrested for possession of a miniature bat 'leth in a public street . In the court documents , it was referred to as a " multi @-@ bladed sword " , and the judge said " I 've never seen anything like it in my life before . " The accused pleaded guilty at Teesside Crown Court , and he was later sentenced to thirteen weeks in prison . The court ordered that the bat 'leth was to be forfeited and destroyed . A custom @-@ made bat 'leth was seized in 2009 in Accrington , Lancashire . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The legality of the bat 'leth in the United States differs between states . In 2009 , a replica bat 'leth was used in Colorado Springs , Colorado , in two armed robberies . The Colorado Springs Police Department said that it was a deadly weapon . In New Jersey , bat 'leths are considered weapons and are liable to be seized . The Federal Bureau of Investigation discovered and seized a bat 'leth as part of a cache of weapons in connection with a $ 4 million Medicare fraud investigation in 2010 . 
 = Syrgiannes Palaiologos = 
 Syrgiannes Palaiologos Philanthropenos ( Greek : <unk> Παλαιολόγος <unk> , c . 1290 – 1334 ) was a Byzantine aristocrat and general of mixed Cuman and Greek descent , who was involved in the civil war between Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos ( r . 1282 – 1328 ) and his grandson Andronikos III ( r . 1328 – 1341 ) . Loyal only to himself and his own ambitions , he switched sides several times , and ended up conquering much of Macedonia for the Serbian ruler Stefan Dušan ( r . 1331 – 1346 ) before being assassinated by the Byzantines . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family origins and early career = = = 
 Syrgiannes was born about 1290 . He was named after his father or possibly grandfather , a Cuman leader who became Megas <unk> ( Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Army ) under Emperor Andronikos II . At the time there were many Cumans in the Empire , who settled during the reign of John III Doukas Vatatzes ( r . 1221 – 1254 ) . The elder Syrgiannes 's original name was <unk> ( from Cuman @-@ Turkic <unk> , " mouse " ) ; it was Hellenized to Syrgiannes ( " master John " ) when he was baptized . The elder Syrgiannes rose in the hierarchy of the Byzantine army , eventually reaching the supreme rank of megas domestikos . The younger Syrgiannes 's mother was Eugenia Palaiologina , a member of the ruling Palaiologos family and niece of Emperor Michael VIII ( r . 1259 – 1282 ) . Conscious of the prestige of his mother 's family name , young Syrgiannes chose to use that in order to advance himself in the imperial hierarchy . Syrgiannes also had a sister , Theodora , who married Guy de Lusignan , later King of Armenian Cilicia as Constantine II . Syrgiannes makes his appearance in history in 1315 , when he was placed as military governor of a Macedonian province near the Serbian border . Despite the existing treaties , and against his instructions , he resolved to attack both Serbia and Epirus . Relieved of his post , he rebelled , was captured and imprisoned . Sometime before 1320 , however , he was eventually pardoned and appointed to a command in Thrace . 
 = = = Support of Andronikos III = = = 
 In 1320 , following the death of Michael IX Palaiologos ( eldest son of Andronikos II and co @-@ emperor from 1295 on ) , his son Andronikos III was crowned as co @-@ emperor by Andronikos II . Although initially popular with his grandfather , the younger Andronikos and his entourage of young nobles , to which Syrgiannes belonged , had by that time caused the elder emperor 's displeasure by their extravagance . Their excesses culminated in the mistaken @-@ identity murder of the young emperor 's younger brother , Manuel ; enraged , the elder Andronikos annulled his grandson 's titles , and a deep personal rift was opened between the two . 
 At that time , Syrgiannes and John Kantakouzenos bought for themselves governorships in Thrace , where discontent with the old emperor was rife , and they quickly mobilized support for the younger Andronikos . Together with Alexios Apokaukos and Theodore Synadenos , they prepared to overthrow the aged Andronikos II in favour of his grandson . In Easter 1321 , the younger Andronikos came to Adrianople , and the uprising broke out . Syrgiannes led a large army towards the capital , forcing the old emperor to negotiate . Consequently , on 6 June 1321 , an agreement was reached which partitioned the empire . Young Andronikos III was recognized as co @-@ emperor and given Thrace to govern as a quasi @-@ appanage , setting up his court at Adrianople , while Andronikos II continued to rule from the capital , Constantinople , as senior emperor . 
 Syrgiannes was dissatisfied with the new arrangements , feeling that he had not been sufficiently rewarded for his support of Andronikos III . He also resented the greater favour shown by the young emperor to Kantakouzenos , and developed a fierce rivalry with the latter . Furthermore , chroniclers also report a story whereby Andronikos III attempted to seduce Syrgiannes 's wife . In December 1321 , Syrgiannes switched sides , fleeing to Constantinople . Rewarded with the lofty title of megas doux , he convinced Andronikos II to resume the war against his grandson . In July 1322 , however , another agreement was reached between the two <unk> , which left Syrgiannes in an awkward position . His own schemes having failed , he began plotting to murder the aged Andronikos II and seize the throne for himself . The plot was foiled , however , and Syrgiannes was sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 = = = Governorship in Macedonia , defection to the Serbs and death = = = 
 In 1328 , Andronikos III finally overthrew his grandfather and established himself as sole emperor . Syrgiannes was freed , and was able to restore himself to Andronikos 's favour , to the extent that in late 1329 he was entrusted with the important governorship of Thessalonica , the Empire 's second @-@ largest city , and of western Macedonia and Albania . There , he was again suspected of plotting against Kantakouzenos , this time with the emperor 's mother , Empress Maria . She lived in Thessalonica , and was supposed to keep an eye on Syrgiannes ; instead , she became so infatuated with him that she had him adopted . Following the death of the Empress in late 1333 , the plot was uncovered and Syrgiannes was arrested and brought to Constantinople to face charges of treason . Syrgiannes , however , managed to escape and flee to the court of the Serbian ruler Stefan Dušan . 
 Dušan put Syrgiannes at the head of a large Serbian force , with which he invaded Byzantine Macedonia in 1334 . Syrgiannes 's abilities as a general , his knowledge of the Byzantine army 's dispositions and the friendships he had maintained with several local Byzantine officers resulted in the swift capture of many important Byzantine cities , including Ohrid , Prilep , Strumica , and Kastoria . The road was open for an advance towards Thessalonica , and Syrgiannes 's army encamped before the walls of the city , facing a Byzantine relief force . Both sides remained encamped confronting each other for several days , but on 23 August 1334 , Syrgiannes was lured away from his camp with only a few retainers and murdered by Sphrantzes Palaiologos , a Byzantine general who had defected on purpose to the Serbian camp a few days earlier . With the loss of their principal military leader , the Serbs settled for a negotiated peace with the Byzantines , which was very advantageous for them as they were left in possession of most of the cities won by Syrgiannes in northern Macedonia . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Syrgiannes 's ambition , inveterate plotting , and multiple betrayals made him one of the darkest figures of the era in the eyes of both contemporary and later historians : the 14th @-@ century historian Nikephoros Gregoras compared his flight to Serbia with Themistocles 's flight to the Persians , while Donald Nicol likened him to Alcibiades and Angeliki Laiou called him " the most evil presence " of the civil war . 
 = Kataragama temple = 
 <unk> temple ( Sinhalese <unk> ; Tamil <unk> ) in Kataragama , Sri Lanka , is a temple complex dedicated to Kataragama deviyo . It is one of the few religious sites in Sri Lanka that is venerated by the Sinhala Buddhists , Hindu Sri Lankan Tamils , Sri Lankan Moors and the Vedda people . It is a collection of modest shrines , of which the one dedicated to Kataragama deviyo , is the most important . For most of the past millennia , it was a jungle shrine very difficult to access ; today it is accessible by an all @-@ weather road . Almost all the shrines — and the nearby Kiri Vehera — are managed by Buddhists , apart from shrines dedicated to <unk> and Shiva and mosques . 
 Up until the 1940s a majority of the pilgrims were Tamil Hindus from Sri Lanka and South India who undertook an arduous <unk> or " pilgrimage on foot " . Since then most pilgrims tend to be Sinhala Buddhists and the cult of Kataragama deviyo has become the most popular amongst the Sinhalese people . 
 A number of legends and myths are associated with the deity and the location , differing by religion , ethnic affiliation and time . These legends are changing with the deity 's burgeoning popularity with Buddhists , as the Buddhist ritual specialists and clergy try to accommodate the deity within Buddhist ideals of <unk> . With the change in devotees , the mode of worship and festivals has changed from that of Hindu orientation to one that accommodates Buddhist rituals and theology . It is difficult to reconstruct the factual history of the place and the reason for its popularity amongst Sri Lankans and Indians based on legends and available archeological and literary evidence alone , although the place seems to have a venerable history . The lack of clear historic records and resultant legends and myths fuel the conflict between Buddhists and Hindus as to the ownership and the mode of worship at Kataragama . 
 The priests of the temple are known as <unk> and are believed to be descended from Vedda people . Veddas , too , have a claim on the temple , a nearby mountain peak and locality through a number of legends . There is a mosque and a few tombs of Muslim pious men buried nearby . The temple complex is also connected to other similar temples in Eastern Province dedicated to Murugan which are along the path of pilgrimage from Jaffna in the north to Kataragama in the south of the island ; Arunagirinathar traversed this pilgrimage route in the 15th century . The vicinity of the temple complex is used for secretive practices of sorcery and cursing peculiar to Sri Lanka . The entire temple complex was declared a holy place by the government of Sri Lanka in the 1950s ; since then political leaders have contributed for its maintenance and upkeep . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin theories = = = 
 There are number of theories as to the origin of the shrine . According to Heinz <unk> and Paul Younger , the mode of veneration and rituals connected with Kataragama deviyo is a survival of indigenous Vedda mode of veneration that preceded the arrival of Buddhist and Indo @-@ Aryan cultural influences from North India in Sri Lanka in the last centuries BCE , although Hindus , Buddhists and even Muslims have tried to co @-@ opt the deity , rituals and the shrine . But according to S. Pathmanathan , the original Kataragama shrine was established as an adjunct guardian deity shrine to Skanda @-@ Kumara within a Buddhist temple complex . This particular shrine then became idealized as the very spot where Valli met Murukan amongst local Tamils and Sinhalese , and Kataragama deviyo subsumed the identity of Skanda @-@ Kumara and became a deity on his own right with rituals and pilgrimage . According to Pathmanathan , it happened after the 13th century CE when Murukan became popular amongst Tamils and before the 15th century CE when the poet Arunagirinathar identified the very location as a sacred spot . 
 = = = Literary evidence = = = 
 The first literary mention of Kataragama in a context of a sacred place to Skanda @-@ Murukan is in its Tamil form <unk> in the 15th @-@ century devotional poems of Arunagirinathar . Tradition claims that he visited the forest shrine when he composed the poems . According to his poems , the deity dwelt on top of a mountain . The first mention of Kataragama deviyo in the form <unk> , as a guardian deity of Sri Lanka and its Buddhist relics , was in the Pali chronicle of <unk> written during the 16th century in what is today Thailand . ( see <unk> <unk> a popular Thai amulet , based on <unk> , a deity from Sri Lanka ) Kataragama village is first mentioned in the historical annals known as Mahavamsa written down in the 5th century CE . It mentions a town named <unk> from which important dignitaries came to receive the sacred Bo sapling sent from Ashoka ’ s Mauryan Empire on 288 BCE . ( According to Ponnambalam Arunachalam <unk> is derived from <unk> <unk> ( " City of Kartikeya " ) shortened to <unk> @-@ <unk> ) 
 = = = Archeological evidence = = = 
 The vicinity of the temple has number of ancient ruins and inscriptions . Based on dated inscriptions found , the nearby Kiri Vehera is believed to have been built or renovated around the 1st century BCE . There is an inscription , a votive offering to the Mangala <unk> , apparently the former name of Kiri Vehera on the orders of one <unk> <unk> , a son of king <unk> who ruled in 447 CE . There is also an inscription of <unk> I dated to the 7th century CE who built a sanctuary for Buddhist monks , but the inscription does not mention Kataragama by name . Nearby Tissamaharama was a trading town of antiquity by the 2nd century BCE , as indicated by Prakrit and Tamil Brahmi legends in coins and potsherds unearthed on the site . The region was part of the ancient kingdom of Ruhuna which played an important role in the political history of the island . 
 = = = Role of <unk> Swamy = = = 
 The medieval phase of the history of the shrine began with the arrival of <unk> Swamy from North India sometimes during the 16th or 17th century . He identified the very spot of the shrines and their mythic associations with characters and events as expounded in Skanda Purana . Following his re @-@ establishment of the forest shrine , it again became a place of pilgrimage for Indian and Sri Lankan Hindus . The shrine also attracted local Sinhala Buddhist devotees . The caretakers of the shrines were people of the forest who were of indigenous Vedda or mixed Vedda and Sinhalese lineages . The shrines popularity increased with the veneration of the place by the kings of the Kingdom of Kandy , the last indigenous kingdom before colonial occupation of the island . When Indian indentured workers were brought in after the British occupation in 1815 , they too began to participate in the pilgrimage in droves , thus the popularity of the shrine increased amongst all sections of the people . 
 = = Legends = = 
 = = = Hindu legends = = = 
 According to Hindus and some Buddhist texts , the main shrine is dedicated to Kartikeya , known as Murukan in Tamil sources . Kartikeya , also known as Kumara , Skanda , <unk> , <unk> or Mahasena , is a god of war . The Kushan Empires and the <unk> had his likeness minted in coins that they issued in the last centuries BCE . The deity 's popularity has waned in North India but has survived in South India . In South India , he became known as <unk> and was eventually fused with another local god of war known as Murukan among Tamils . Murukan is known independently from Sangam literature dated from the 2nd century BCE to the 6th century CE . Along the way , a number of legends were woven about the deity ’ s birth , accomplishments , and marriages , including one to a tribal princess known amongst Tamil and Sinhalese sources as Valli . The Skanda Purana , written in Sanskrit in the 7th or 8th century , is the primary corpus of all literature about him . A Tamil rendition of the Skanda Purana known as the Kandha Puranam written in the 14th century also expands on legends of Valli meeting Murukan . The Kandha Puranam plays an greater role for Sri Lankan Tamils than Tamils from India , who hardly know it . 
 In Sri Lanka the Sinhala Buddhists also worshiped Kartikeya as <unk> or Skanda @-@ Kumara since at least the 4th century , if not earlier . Skanda @-@ Kumara was known as one of the guardian deities until the 14th century , invoked to protect the island ; they are accommodated within the non @-@ theistic Buddhist religion . During the 11th and 12th century CE , the worship of Skanda @-@ Kumara was documented even among the royal family . At some point in the past Skanda @-@ Kumara was identified with the deity in Kataragama shrine , also known as Kataragama deviyo and Kataragama deviyo , became one of the guardian deities of Sri Lanka . Numerous legends have sprung about Kataragama deviyo , some of which try to find an independent origin for Katargamadevio from the Hindu roots of Skanda @-@ Kumara . 
 = = = Buddhist legends = = = 
 One of the Sinhala legends tells that when Skanda @-@ Kumara moved to Sri Lanka , he asked for refuge from Tamils . The Tamils refused , and he came to live with the Sinhalese in Kataragama . As a penance for their refusal , the deity forced Tamils to indulge in body piercing and fire walking in his annual festival . This legend tries to explain the location of the shrine as well as the traditional patterns of worship by Tamils . Another Sinhala legends attests that Kataragama deviyo was the deity worshiped by Dutugamunu in the 1st century BCE , before his war with <unk> , and that Dutugamunu had the shrine erected to Skanda @-@ Kumara at Kataragama after his victory . This legend has no corroboration in the Mahavamsa , the historic annals about Dutugamunu . Another Sinhala legend makes Kataragama deviyo a deification of a Tamil spy sent by Elara to live amongst the Sinhalese or a Tamil juggler who made the locals deify him after his death . Yet another legend says that Kataragama deviyo is a deification of the legendary king Mahasena , who is born as a bodhisattva or Buddha in waiting . Anthropologists Richard Gombrich and Gananath Obeyesekere were able to identify new strands of these legends and the originators of these legends since the 1970s , with the burgeoning popularity of the shrine and its deity amongst the Sinhala Buddhists . 
 According to the practice of cursing and sorcery peculiar to Sinhala Buddhists , Kataragama deviyo has his dark side represented by <unk> and Kadavara . The current <unk> shrine is located in an isolated place near <unk> . The shrine for Kadavara is in the town of Kataragama . His power to curse is carried out in secret outside the Main Kataragama deviyo shrine at a place at the Menik Ganga , where he receives animal sacrifices . <unk> <unk> is also directly invoked in sorcery practices . 
 = = = Muslim legends = = = 
 Muslim or Islamic legends about Kataragama are relatively newer . According to Muslims Kataragama is referred to as al @-@ Khidr or land of Khidr . A number of Muslim pious and holy men seems to have migrated from India and settled down in the vicinity . The earliest known one is one <unk> , whose simple residence became the mosque . Another one called Karima Nabi is supposed to have discovered a source of water that when drunk provides immortality . Historic figures such as Jabbar Ali Sha ( died 1872 ) and Meer Syed <unk> Alisha Bawa ( died 1945 ) also have mausoleums built over their tombs . 
 = = = Vedda legends = = = 
 The Veddas who have kept out of the mainstream culture of Sri Lanka do not subscribe to Kataragama deviyo as their deity . <unk> Veddas consider Kande Yakka or Gale Yakka ( Lord of the Rock ) as their primarily deity to be propitiated before hunts . They propitiate the deity by building a shrine made out of thatched leaves with a lance or arrow planted in the middle of the structure . They dance around the shrine with the shaman becoming possessed with the spirits of the dead ancestors who guide the hunting party in techniques and places to go hunt . Anthropologist Charles Gabriel Seligman felt that the Kataragama deviyo cult has taken on some aspects of the Kande Yakka rituals and traditions . A clan of Veddas who lived near to the shrine was known as Kovil Vanam ( Temple precincts ) . As a clan they are extinct but were to be found in the eastern province during the 19th century . Local Veddas believed that the nearby mountain peak of <unk> Kande ( The Mountain of Veddas ) was the abode of the deity . The deity after coming over the shore married a local Vedda woman named Valli , a daughter of a Vedda chief and resided in the mountain . Eventually he was coaxed into settling down at the current location . 
 = = Temple layout = = 
 Almost all the shrines are nondescript small rectangular buildings without any ornamentation . There is no representative of deities adorning the outside of the buildings . This is in contrast to any other Hindu temple in Sri Lanka or India . Almost all shrines are built of stone except that one dedicated to Valli which shows timber construction . They have been left as originally constructed and there are not any plans to improve upon them , because people are reluctant to tamper with the original shrine complex . 
 The most important one is known as Maha Devale or Maha Kovil and is dedicated to Skanda @-@ Murugan known amongst the Sinhalese as Kataragama deviyo . It does not have a statute of the deity ; instead it holds a Yantra , a spiritual drawing of the deity 's power . Of all the shrines in the complex , it is the largest and the first that all pilgrims come to visit . Although it does not have a representation of the deity , kept in an adjoining room is a statue of Shiva also known amongst Sinhalese as <unk> . Within it there is a clay arm chair known as <unk> <unk> that supposedly belonged to <unk> Swamy . It is covered by a leopard ’ s skin and on it has all the ceremonial instruments . To the left of the main shrine lies a smaller shrine dedicated to Hindu god Ganesha who is known as <unk> amongst Sinhalese . Tamils refer to him as the Manica Pillaiyar as well . It too is a small rectangular building without any decoration . To the left of Ganesha shrine stands the Vishnu Devale the shrine dedicated to Vishnu within which there is also a Buddha image . Behind this is a large Bo tree that tradition holds as sprung from the sapling of the original Bo tree in Anuradhapura , hence is very much held in high esteem by the visiting Buddhists . 
 Attached to the western wall of the shrine complex are shrines dedicated Kali , Pattini , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Outside the temple yard and beyond the northern gate lies the shrine to Teyvanai , the consort of Murugan . Teyvanai shrine is managed by the Sankara Mutt from Sringeri in Karnataka , India . The shrine dedicated to Valli , the consort of the main deity lies in front of the mosque . Close to the Valli shrine is a Kadamba tree that is sacred to Murugan . Within the mosque are number of tombs of Muslim holy men . There is also a separate shrine dedicated to the tomb of <unk> <unk> known amongst Tamils as <unk> <unk> . It is also known as the Siva Devale . 
 = = Murukan and Kataragama deviyo cults = = 
 Buddhism doesn ’ t encourage beliefs in gods or their veneration and yet Buddhists in Sri Lanka make an annual pilgrimage to Kataragama . The deity has attained the position of national god amongst the Sinhalese . This reflects the similar position held by Murukan amongst Tamils . 
 = = = Murukan cult = = = 
 Murukan is known from Sangam Tamil literature . The earliest reference to Murukan was as a god who was propitiated to help in good hunting . He was the primary god of hunter @-@ gatherer people from the mountainous region of southern Tamil Nadu very much like the Veddas of Sri Lanka . With the advancement of settled agriculture , Murukan became identified with the tribal chieftains as a god of war , becoming popular among all segments of the society . He was worshiped symbolically as lance and trees such as the Kadamba <unk> cadamba ) were considered to be sacred to him . Birds such as the peafowl or rooster were also identified with the deity . <unk> were a special class of priests identified with his worship . 
 With advent of North Indian traditions arriving with the Pallava and Kadamba dynasties , Murukan was infused with the aspects of Kartikeya or Skanda , a god of war from North India . All legends that were attributed to Kartikeya were also attributed to Murukan . The syncretic deity has six major temples in Tamil Nadu and countless many other smaller temples . Legends developed that bound the worship of syncretic Skanda @-@ Murukan to Tamil Nadu as a god of the Tamils . It included his marriage of Valli from <unk> . 
 = = = Katargamadevio cult = = = 
 Legends in Sri Lanka claimed that Valli was a daughter of a Vedda chief from Kataragama in the south of the island . The town of Kalutara , known in some sources as <unk> , became associated with Murukan worship as well . The cult of Murukan was grafted onto the worship of Skanda @-@ Kumara that was prevalent in Sri Lanka . Amongst the Sinhalese he became known as the god of Kataragama village , thus <unk> . Shrines of Katargamadevio are found in almost all Sinhala Buddhist villages and towns . He is recognized as one of the guardian deities . Worshipers take an arduous pilgrimage on foot through jungles to fulfill their vows to the deity . The pilgrimage included both Tamils from India and Sri Lanka as well as Sinhalese . Number of temples mostly in the east coast of Sri Lanka became identified with Kataragama temple and synchronized their festivals based on the arrival of pilgrims all the way from the north of the island . These include temples in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . In the interior of the island temples such as <unk> were built in the 15 to 17 the century CE to propitiate the Murukan aspect of <unk> by the Sinhalese elite . 
 Since the 1950s the cult of Kataragama has taken a nationalistic tone amongst the Sinhalese people . People visit the shrine year long , and during the annual festival it looks like a carnival . People get into trance and indulge in ecstatic rituals formerly associated with Hindus such as fire walking , Kavadi and even body piercing or hook swinging . These ecstatic rituals have carried through the island and are widely practiced . Prominent Sinhalese politicians such as Dudley Senanayake and <unk> <unk> have associated with the temple upkeep by building , renovation and cleaning projects . 
 = = Festivals = = 
 The festivals and daily rituals do not adhere to standard Hindu Agamic or Buddhist rituals . It follows what Paul Younger calls as ancient Vedda traditions of worship . Although since the medieval period Hindus , Buddhists and even Muslims have tried to co @-@ opt the temple , deity and its worship as their own , the rituals maintained by the native priests are still intact . The main festival known in Sinhalese as <unk> <unk> . It is celebrated during the months of July and August . About 45 days before the festival begins , the priests go into the forest and find two forked branches of a sacred tree . The branches are then immersed in the local river and kept at the shrines dedicated to Kataragama deviyo and Vali . When the main festival begins , the Yantra representing the deity is retrieved from its storage location , paraded through a street on top of an elephant , and carried to the Valli shrine . After two hours it is returned . On the last day of the festival the Yantra is left overnight at the Valli shrine and brought back to the main shrine . The priests conduct the rituals in silence , covering their mouths with white cloth . Associated with the main festival is fire walking arranged by a master of the ritual . Hundreds of devotees participate in fire walking , yet others participate in ecstatic dance forms called Kavadi and body piercing . Many of the pilgrims exhibit signs of being possessed . 
 = = Hindu and Buddhist conflicts = = 
 Sri Lanka has had a history of conflict between its minority Hindu Tamils and majority Buddhists since its political independence from Great Britain in 1948 . Paul <unk> in the 1930s wrote about tensions between Hindus and Buddhists regarding the ownership and mode of ritual practice in Kataragama . For the past millennia the majority of the pilgrims were Hindus from Sri Lanka and South India who undertook an arduous pilgrimage on foot . By the 1940 roads were constructed and more and more Sinhala Buddhists began to take the pilgrimage . This increased the tensions between the local Hindus and Buddhists about the ownership and type of rituals to be used . The government interceded on behalf of the Buddhists and enabled the complete takeover of the temple complex and in effect the shrines have become an adjunct to the Buddhist Kiri Vehera . Protests occurred upon this development in the 1940s , particularly when restrictions were placed on Tamil worship at the shrine . 
 Typical Tamil Hindu rituals at Kataragama such as fire walking , Kavadi dance and body piercing have been taken over by the Buddhists and have been spread to the rest of the island . The Buddhist takeover of the temple and its rituals has profoundly affected the rationale nature of austere Theravada Buddhism practiced in Sri Lanka to that of the personal Bhakti veneration of deities found amongst the Hindus of Sri Lanka and South India . The loss of Hindu influence within the temple complex has negatively affected the Sri Lankan Tamil Hindu society . According to Paul Younger , the Buddhist takeover was precipitated by the overwhelming participation of Buddhists in what are essentially Hindu rituals that worried the Buddhist establishment . There is a strong political and religious pressure to further modify the temple rituals to conform within an orthodox Theravada Buddhist world view . 
 = = Cited literature = = 
 = Residente o Visitante = 
 Residente o Visitante ( English : Resident or Visitor ) is the second studio album by Puerto Rican urban / hip hop band Calle 13 , released on April 24 , 2007 , by Sony BMG . Recorded in various countries while on tour in promotion of the duo 's debut album Calle 13 , Residente o Visitante marked an evolution in the band 's musical and lyrical style . While writing the album , the duo took a trip to South America to explore areas populated by Latin America 's indigenous and African @-@ descended minorities , a journey that greatly influenced the music on Residente o Visitante . The album features six guest artists and delves into genres such as tango , bossa nova , cumbia , and electronica . 
 Residente o Visitante debuted at number one on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , selling 12 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The record was also certified Gold in Argentina by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) . The first single released from the album , " Tango del Pecado " , reached number 14 on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Airplay chart . The record received positive reviews from critics , who praised the album 's experimental nature and unique lyrical themes . The album also won Best Urban Music Album and Best Urban Song for " Pal ' Norte " at the 8th Annual Latin Grammy Awards . A film entitled Sin Mapa documenting the group 's travel experiences while recording the album was released on July 29 , 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Calle 13 was formed when step @-@ brothers Residente ( real name René Pérez Joglar ) and Visitante ( real name Eduardo José Cabra Martínez ) began creating music together in 2004 . The step @-@ brothers hosted their music on a website , and began searching for a record label in order to release their music commercially . After sending demo tapes to White Lion Records , the duo was offered a record deal . The duo gained recognition for their controversial song " Querido FBI " , which responded to the killing of Filiberto Ojeda Ríos , a key figure for the Puerto Rican independence movement . 
 Soon after " Querido FBI " gained notoriety for Calle 13 , the band 's 2005 eponymously titled debut album was released and became commercially and critically successful in Latin America . The group was subsequently labeled as reggaeton , a genre that the duo wished to distance itself from . Visitante commented on the situation : " The truth is that the first record had only four <unk> . Those were the cuts used for promotional purposes , and so that ’ s the brand that was put on us . But from the beginning , to me , reggaeton never offered anything musically . My brother liked it , yes , but we always tried to execute it in an organic way , with real instruments and mixing it with other genres . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 While writing Residente o Visitante , the duo took a trip to South America to explore areas populated by Latin America 's indigenous and African @-@ descended minorities . Residente reflected on the journey , stating , " We saw horrible things , but also things that were incredibly beautiful . Some of the contrasts are really intense . " The duo was strongly influenced by the experience ; Visitante discovered and purchased several new musical instruments on the trip including a <unk> , a charango and a <unk> <unk> , all of which were used on the song " <unk> a Mi <unk> " . Residente and Visitante felt that writing on the road was conducive to the group 's creative output . The group 's journeys were documented in a film entitled Sin Mapa , which debuted on July 29 , 2009 at the New York International Latino Film Festival and later was released on DVD . 
 Residente o Visitante was recorded in various countries , as the band was on tour during the making of the album . Residente explained that the group did not feel any pressure to compete with the success of Calle 13 , and felt that the recording of Residente o Visitante was a smoother process than the first : " The main difference for us this time around was that we had more opportunities , more tools and more money . We were also on tour at the same time , unlike the first . I spent my time writing during the travels , while my brother would write the music . " Residente was invited by La Mala Rodriguez to come to Spain to collaborate on a song . He agreed , as he greatly admired La Mala 's work , and the two met for drinks where they discussed the kind of song they wanted to create before going to the studio to record what would later become " Mala <unk> Con el 13 " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On the record , the band wished to experiment more with live instruments and diverse styles of music . Margarita Diaz of NY Daily News referred to Residente o Visitante as " an exhilarating travelogue through the sounds and rhythms of [ South America ] . " Visitante , who composed the music on the album , credits the musical diversity to his past . He began playing classical piano at age six , and at age 17 , he joined a varied array of bands and played saxophone and keyboards . Residente o Visitante features more guest artists than the band 's debut , including collaborations with musicians such as Tego Calderón , La Mala Rodríguez and <unk> . 
 The introduction to the album , as described by Elijah Wald of the Los Angeles Times , " sounds like a lovely Baroque chorale - unless one speaks Spanish , in which case it becomes immediately evident that it 's an ornate canon of the filthiest words in Puerto Rican street slang . " " Tango del Pecado " mixes tango and reggaeton , and has been referred to as " tango @-@ <unk> " . The song features Argentinian music producer Gustavo Santaolalla and his <unk> Tango Club . Puerto Rican rapper Tego Calderón is featured on " Sin <unk> " , which contains guitar influenced by surf rock . Additionally , the song " Cumbia de los Aburridos " is strongly influenced by Colombian cumbia music , featuring an accordion and a horn section . " Un Beso De Desayuno " mixes electronica , rap and bossa nova . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Residente described the album as more introspective and autobiographical than its predecessor . With the lyrics on the record , Residente aimed for authenticity , attempting to tackle subjects not typically discussed in conventional reggaeton . He explained that listening to Residente o Visitante is similar to watching a movie , in the sense that the album depicts real life events and uses profanity to evoke emotion in the listener . Leila Cobo of Billboard wrote that the lyrical content of Residente o Visitante ranges from " sophomoric humor to outright perversion " . The song " Mala Suerte Con el 13 " , the group 's collaboration with La Mala Rodriguez , is a satire of the " Latin macho attitude " . He wished to defy and poke fun at traditional gender roles , citing feminist philosopher Judith Butler as an influence ; " I wanted to record a duet between a guy who 's weak and inadequate , and a woman who 's a sexual psychopath and has all the power in the world . A complete mockery of macho stereotypes " . In the same vein , " Sin <unk> " parodies the misogyny that Residente felt had saturated the reggaeton scene . 
 The album 's lead single , " Tango del Pecado " , is addressed to the parents of Residente 's then @-@ girlfriend , former Miss Universe Denise Quiñones , who did not approve of the couple 's relationship . He explains that the song expresses how he will still date her regardless of their opinions , and author Ed Morales observes that " It 's a calling out of the morality of Latin America . It 's just an invitation to turn everything upside @-@ down by embracing the ugly and profane in life and , you know , asking people to go on that journey . " " Tango del Pecado " also created controversy due to the repeated chanting of " <unk> el volumen a la <unk> <unk> " ( turn up the satanic music ) . Residente asserts that he did not add the line to create a reaction , saying , " I never do something expecting something . I do things because I like them . " " El <unk> Se Cae " depicts the thoughts of a drunken airplane passenger . In " Pal Norte " , Residente discusses the plight of immigrants in the United States . Commenting on the track 's lyrical themes , he explained " I had wanted to do that theme because I think it is an important topic . And not just for the immigrants in the United States but all over . It is a song that immigrants can identify with , Dominicans as well as Puerto Ricans . All the people leave one country for another for the same reasons . " Although much of the album addresses immigration and moving to different countries , " La Crema " is a celebration of living in Puerto Rico . 
 = = Title and artwork = = 
 The album 's name was inspired by an experience from Residente and Visitante 's childhood . When they were children , Visitante would visit his brother at the Calle 13 ( 13th Street ) of the El Conquistador subsection of Trujillo Alto , Puerto Rico every week . Since the subsection is a gated community , visitors were routinely asked " ¿ Residente o <unk> ? " ( " Resident or visitor ? " ) by a security guard when approaching the community 's main gate . Therefore , Visitante would identify himself as a visitor , while Residente would have to insist that he was a resident to clear the gate . The pair named themselves Calle 13 after the street their family 's house was on . The title is also meant to refer to the status of immigrants in the United States , a recurring theme on the record . 
 The album cover depicts a winged virgin with a canteen on her chest resembling the Sacred Heart of Jesus . Residente noted that the image represents Hispanic immigrants coming to the United States , in an attempt to both sanctify the immigrants and humanize the holy images common in Latin America . An image inside the CD booklet features Residente with stigmata in his hands . He noted that the photo is intended to portray Jesus as a " regular guy " who deals with struggles similar to those of people crossing borders . He further commented , " Obviously , [ the art of the CD ] is not made for people who are used to seeing the guy with the chick in a bikini in a car with all her jewelry . We don 't come here to <unk> the people more . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Residente o Visitante debuted on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart at number one , displacing Jennifer Lopez 's Spanish album Como Ama una Mujer , and on the Billboard 200 at number 52 , selling about 12 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album remained on the Billboard 200 for a total of four weeks . Additionally , the album debuted on the Billboard Rap Albums chart at number 13 . In Argentina , the album was certified Gold by Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) . 
 " Tango del Pecado " , the first single released from the album , reached number 14 on the Billboard Latin Rhythm Airplay chart . The second single , " Cumbia de los Aburridos " , peaked at number 31 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . " Pa 'l Norte " , the third single from the record , reached number 27 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and number 40 on the Regional Mexican Songs chart . The fourth and final single was " Un Beso de Desayuno " , which failed to chart . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album received positive reviews from critics . Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic gave Residente o Visitante 4 out of 5 stars , noting the disc 's diverse musical styles and unique lyricism : " Residente is a gifted rapper who matches Eminem in terms of wit and playfulness while Visitante is a similarly gifted producer who creates multi @-@ layered tracks that rarely sound alike . " Andrew Casillas of Stylus Magazine gave the album an A- grade , calling it a " trailblazing record " . Casillas praised Residente 's rapping on the record , calling his performance " a revelation " and referring to the song " Un Beso de Desayuno " as the band 's " most noble achievement : a fully formed reggaetón love song . " However , Casillas felt that the album was overly long and stated that " <unk> <unk> " sounds like " Donald Duck on a treadmill " . 
 Olivia Muñoz of The Philadelphia Inquirer referred to the record as " weird , seductive , thought @-@ provoking and hilarious all at once " , and despite noting the unconventional lyrical themes , she deemed many of the songs to be " surprisingly danceable " . Phil Freeman of The Village Voice called the album " more thoughtful and musically broad @-@ minded " than its predecessor , and noted that the album gave Residente " a platform for a more explicit political consciousness than some might have predicted " , referring to the songs " Pal Norte " and " La Cumbia de los Aburridos " . Agustin Gurza of the Los Angeles Times opined that the album is " more mature , though no less outrageous " than the band 's debut , and referred to " Tango del Pecado " and " Pal ' Norte " as " two of the most memorable songs of the year . " Nuria Net of Vibe felt that the " cutting edge appeal " of the debut album was " reduced to vulgar lyrics " on Residente o Visitante , writing , " though this second album shows impressive breadth , swaying from reggaeton to cumbia to tango , Calle 13 's powerful social critiques are but a memory . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At the 8th Annual Latin Grammy Awards on November 8 , 2007 Residente o Visitante received two Latin Grammy Awards : Best Urban Music Album and Best Urban Song for " Pal ' Norte " . It was also nominated for Album of the Year , and Best Short Form Music Video for the video of the first single " Tango del Pecado " . Calle 13 performed at the ceremony in a well @-@ received act featuring <unk> and the Stomp dance troupe . The performance was referred to by Agustin Gurza of the Los Angeles Times as " both a celebratory and seditious moment " . In late @-@ 2009 , the Latin music website Club Fonograma named it the 5th best album of the decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Residente , all music composed by Visitante . Adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Album certification = = 
 = Hlín = 
 In Norse mythology , Hlín ( Old Norse " protectress " ) is a goddess associated with the goddess Frigg . Hlín appears in a poem in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in kennings found in skaldic poetry . Hlín has been theorized as possibly another name for Frigg . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , Hlín receives a mention regarding the foretold death of the god Odin during the immense battle waged at Ragnarök : 
 Then is fulfilled Hlín 's 
 second sorrow , 
 when Óðinn goes 
 to fight with the wolf , 
 and Beli 's slayer , 
 bright , against Surtr . 
 Then shall Frigg 's 
 sweet friend fall . 
 In chapter 35 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Hlín is cited twelfth among a series of sixteen goddesses . High tells Gangleri ( earlier in the book described as King Gylfi in disguise ) that Hlín " is given the function of protecting people whom Frigg wishes to save from some danger . " High continues that , from this , " someone who escapes finds refuge ( <unk> ) . " In chapter 51 , the above @-@ mentioned Völuspá stanza is quoted . In chapter 75 of the book Skáldskaparmál Hlín appears within a list of 27 ásynjur names . 
 In skaldic poetry , the name Hlín is frequent in kennings for women . Examples include Hlín <unk> ( " Hlín of rings " ) , Hlín <unk> ( " Hlín of velvet " ) and arm @-@ Hlín ( " arm @-@ Hlín " ) . The name is already used frequently in this way by the 10th @-@ century poet Kormákr Ögmundarson and remains current in skaldic poetry through the following centuries , employed by poets such as Þórðr <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Einarr <unk> . The name remained frequently used in woman kennings in rímur poetry , sometimes as Lín . 
 In a verse in <unk> saga <unk> , the phrase á Hlín <unk> ( " fallen on Hlín " ) occurs . Some editors have emended the line while others have accepted the reading and taken Hlín to refer to the earth . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Andy Orchard says that in Völuspá , Hlín appears to be just another name for Frigg , and adds that " the numerous occurrences of the name in skaldic poetry in poetic <unk> or kennings for women do nothing to dispel the confusion . " Rudolf Simek agrees that Hlín seems to appear as another name for Frigg in Völuspá , and that in skaldic poetry Hlín was a well @-@ known mythological figure by the 10th century . Simek states that Hlín is likely simply another name for Frigg , and that Snorri " misunderstood her to be a goddess in her own right in his reading of the Völuspá stanza . " 
 However , in the same work , Rudolf Simek also says that the goddesses Sága , Hlín , <unk> , Snotra , Vár , and <unk> should be considered vaguely defined figures who " should be seen as female protective goddesses " that are all responsible for " specific areas of the private sphere , and yet clear differences were made between them so that they are in many ways similar to matrons . " John Lindow observes that if Hlín is indeed Frigg , then this means that Hlín 's " second sorrow " in Völuspá is the death of Odin , the first being the death of Baldr . 
 = One Sweet Day = 
 " One Sweet Day " is a song by American singer Mariah Carey and R & B group Boyz II Men . The song was written by Carey , Walter Afanasieff and Boyz II Men : Wanya Morris , Shawn Stockman , Nathan Morris , and Michael <unk> . " One Sweet Day " was produced by Carey and Afanasieff for her fifth studio album , Daydream , and was released as the album 's second single on November 14 , 1995 ( 1995 @-@ 11 @-@ 14 ) . The song speaks about death of a loved one , how the protagonist took their presence for granted and misses them , and finally about seeing the person in heaven . Both Carey and Boyz II Men wrote the song about specific people in their lives , being inspired by sufferers of AIDS epidemic , which was globally prevalent at that time . 
 " One Sweet Day " received universal acclaim from critics , many of whom praised its lyrical content and vocals , as well as calling it a standout track from Daydream . It was ranked first in Rolling Stone 's reader 's poll for the Best Collaboration of All Time . The song spent 16 weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States , becoming the longest running number one song on the chart . Subsequently , " One Sweet Day " became the Billboard 's most successful song of the 1990s , topping the Hot 100 decade @-@ end chart . Internationally , the song topped the charts in Canada and New Zealand , and reached the top @-@ ten in Australia , Belgium , France , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " One Sweet Day " live alongside Boyz II Men at the 38th Grammy Awards ceremony , held on February 26 , 1996 . Additionally , the song was performed at Princess Diana 's memorial service in September 1997 . " One Sweet Day " was part of the set list on several of Carey 's succeeding tours , making its debut during the album 's accompanying set of concerts , the Daydream World Tour . It is featured on her compilation albums , # 1 's ( 1998 ) , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) , The Ballads ( 2008 ) , and # 1 to Infinity ( 2015 ) . 
 The music video for " One Sweet Day " was filmed in February 1995 , and features snippets of Carey and Boyz II Men in and around the studio , and recording the song . The busy schedule of both Carey and Boyz II Men did not allow time to record a proper video . The singer later said that she was content a real music video was never filmed , fearing that no video could truly capture the song 's strong lyrical message . Critics felt the video choice was wise , and agreed that the simple concept paid homage to the song 's selfless message . 
 = = Background = = 
 " One Sweet Day " was a song that Carey wrote with the R & B group Boyz II Men . After Carey 's friend and past collaborator David Cole died , she began writing and developing a song that would pay homage to him and all the friends and family her fans had lost along the life 's journey . Carey had the idea and chorus composed , and after meeting with Boyz II Men , they realized they too had a similar idea in development . Together , using Carey 's chorus and idea , as well as the melody they had produced , they wrote and composed the song . The song was produced by Afanasieff , who built on the song 's melody and added various grooves and beats . Carey expressed how the song was " meant to be " and how all the pieces fit into place : 
 " I wrote the initial idea for ' One Sweet Day ' with Walter , and I had the chorus ... and I stopped and said , ' I really wanna do this with Boyz II Men , ' because ... obviously I 'm a big fan of theirs and I just thought that the work was crying out for them , the vocals that they do , so I put it away and said , ' Who knows if this could ever happen , but I just don 't wanna finish this song because I want it to be our song if we ever do it together . [ The ] whole idea of when you lose people that are close to you , it changes your life and changes your perspective . When they came into the studio , I played them the idea for the song and when [ it ] was finished , they looked at each other , a bit stunned , and told me that Nathan " Nate " Morris had written a song for his road manager who had passed away . It had basically the same lyrics and fitted over the same chord changes . It was really , really weird , we finished the song right then and there . We were all kinda flipped about it ourselves . Fate had a lot to do with that . I know some people won 't believe it , but we wouldn 't make up such a crazy story . " 
 After they began working on the song , Carey began to incorporate other lyrics into the chorus , trying to make the song relatable to the AIDS epidemic that was in full force in the mid @-@ 1990s . Additionally , Mariah 's sister Alison Carey had been diagnosed with HIV in 1988 when she was 27 , an event that ruined their relationship and tore them apart . Carey has stated that she wrote the song hoping that all her fans that have lost someone could relate to " One Sweet Day " and maybe help ease the pain of the loss . Carey described the song as " [ the ] whole idea of when you lose people that are close to you , it changes your life and changes our perspective . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " One Sweet Day " is a downtempo song that blends R & B and pop music . It incorporates organ instrumentation and different contemporary grooves and beats into its primary arrangement , adding percussion and synthesizers as well . The song is set in the time signature common time and moves at a slow tempo of 64 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A ♭ major and features a basic chord progression of A ♭ – D ♭ maj9 – A ♭ – D ♭ maj9 – G ♭ add9 , while the basic melodic line spans roughly an octave and a half from E ♭ 4 to A ♭ 5 ; the piano in the piece ranges from D ♭ 2 to A ♭ 5 . The song contains choral lyrics written by Carey , who also arranged and co @-@ produced the song alongside Walter Afanasieff . Author Chris Nickson complimented the song 's instrumentation and arrangement , calling its use of synthesizers " wise " and " efficient . " Additionally , he claimed Afanasieff 's production and Carey 's vocal and production arrangement helped the song 's vocals and lyrical content flow together . The song finishes with the last chorus and coda in the key of B major . 
 = = Reception and recognition = = 
 " One Sweet Day " has been lauded with universal acclaim from contemporary music critics . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the song for its craft and writing , commenting that " [ in ] " One Sweet Day , " a duet with Boyz II Men , Carey appeals to both audiences equally because of the sheer amount of craft and hard work she puts into her albums . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly felt the song truly highlighted the album , " [ One Sweet Day ] radiates a breezy sexiness that Carey , for all the brazen <unk> of her public persona , rarely permits herself to reveal in song . Stephen Holden from The New York Times shared similar sentiments and wrote " On ' One Sweet Day , ' the singer joins forces with Boyz II Men , those masters of pleading post @-@ doo @-@ wop vocal harmonies , for a tender eulogy that suggests that the singers have been personally touched by the AIDS crisis . " People felt the song was a " stand @-@ out track " and called Carey 's vocal performance " bravura belting " . 
 " One Sweet Day " won many prestigious awards throughout 1996 . At the Blockbuster Entertainment Awards , the song won the award for " Favorite Adult Contemporary Single Female ' One Sweet Day ' " . " One Sweet Day " also won the award for " Song of the Year " at the BMI Awards and a " Special Award for 16 weeks at # 1 " at the Billboard Music Awards . Together , Daydream and " One Sweet Day " were nominated for six Grammy Awards at the 38th annual ceremony , however , to Carey 's surprise , and to the shock of many critics , they lost all of the nominations . In a readers ' poll conducted by Rolling Stone , the song was ranked first for the category of the Best Collaboration of All Time . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " One Sweet Day " became Carey 's tenth chart topping single on the Billboard Hot 100 and Boyz II Men 's fourth . The song remained at the peak for a record @-@ breaking , 16 consecutive weeks , from December 2 , 1995 to March 16 , 1996 . Boyz II Men had previously held this record twice , with " End of the Road " ( 1992 ) spending 13 weeks at the top and " I 'll Make Love to You " ( 1994 ) spending 14 . The former song shares this record with Brandy and Monica 's " The Boy Is Mine " , and the latter song shared its record with Whitney Houston 's " I Will Always Love You " . Carey 's 2005 song " We Belong Together " , The Black Eyed Peas 's 2009 " I Gotta Feeling " and Mark Ronson 's 2014 track , " Uptown Funk " , managed to stay at number one for 14 weeks as well . " One Sweet Day " replaced " Exhale ( Shoop Shoop ) " by Whitney Houston at number one , and was replaced by Celine Dion 's " Because You Loved Me " . The single also debuted at number one , making Carey the first artist to have more than one number @-@ one debut , and one of the two artists ever to have two consecutive singles debut at the top of the chart , along with Britney Spears , with " 3 " ( 2009 ) and " Hold It Against Me " ( 2011 ) . One Sweet Day was the third best @-@ selling single of 1995 in the US , with sales of over 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 , with the second best @-@ selling single being Carey 's " Fantasy " . The song spent 26 weeks in the top 40 , was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and was ranked number one on Billboard 's " Decade @-@ End Charts " . To date the single sold 2 @,@ 334 @,@ 000 physical units . 
 Outside the U.S. , " One Sweet Day " was not as successful but did manage to reach the top @-@ ten in over 13 countries and topped the chart in Canada and New Zealand , where it was certified platinum . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Singles Chart at number 89 on the RPM issue dated December 4 , 1995 , and reached the top of the chart on January 22 , 1996 . It was present on the chart for a total of 24 weeks , and ranked 12th on the RPM Year @-@ end chart for 1996 . It reached the top @-@ two in Australia ( platinum ) , The Netherlands ; the top @-@ five in France ( silver ) and Ireland and the top @-@ ten in Belgium , Norway ( platinum ) , Sweden and the United Kingdom ( silver ) . In the UK , it is one of Carey 's best @-@ selling singles , with estimated sales of 255 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Larry Jordan . When Carey and Boyz II Men got together to record " One Sweet Day " , they did not have enough time to re @-@ unite and film a video . Instead , a filming crew was present during the song 's recording , and filmed bits of Carey and Boyz recording the song . Walter Afanasieff later told Fred Bronson that shooting the video was " crazy " , stating " They had film crews and video guys , while I 'm at the board trying to produce . And these guys were running around having a ball , because Mariah and them are laughing and screaming and they 're being interviewed . And I 'm tapping people on the shoulder . ' We 've got to get to the microphone ! ' They 're gone in a couple of hours , so I recorded everything they did , praying that it was enough . " After the song 's release , Carey expressed her content with the <unk> that she was happy a real music video was never filmed , fearing that no video could truly capture the song 's " precious message " . Critics agreed , feeling that the song was a perfect match for the video and its message . Aside from the recording sessions , the video also shared bits of Carey and Boyz bonding and sharing their ideas in the studio , where Carey felt they " bonded " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " One Sweet Day " was performed at the 38th Annual Grammy Awards , held on February 28 , 1996 . During the performance , Carey wore a long black dress and matching sleeveless blouse , while the group wore white jackets and black pants . After the song 's bridge , a choir of male and female vocalists took place on the rafters placed over the stage , all wearing white gowns . The song was also performed at the memorial service for Princess Diana in September 1997 , where other performers included Elton John . During the service and song recital , Carey wore a conservative long black sheer gown , with long golden curls . Boyz II Men all wore similar matching dark suit and garments . The song became part of Carey 's BET Christmas special in 2001 , where she sang the song alongside Boyz II Men . During the special , Carey wore a red gown in honor of the show 's holiday theme , and featured a long golden hairstyle . One of the male vocalists had already been switched , as one of the group members had already resigned . 
 Aside from live television appearances , the song was performed on many of Carey 's tours . " One Sweet Day " was performed at every show on her Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) , where Boyz II Men were featured on a large projection screen . The footage was taken from Carey 's filmed concert at Madison Square Garden in late @-@ 1995 , and was played in sync with Carey 's verses . A similar concept was used for her Butterfly World Tour ( 1998 ) , with the addition of several live back up vocalists joining on stage . Additionally , the song was performed on select dates on her The Adventures of Mimi tour ( 2006 ) . During the tour 's filmed show in Anaheim California , the group joined Carey live on stage and performed the song together . For the segment of the show , Carey wore a long turquoise gown , with several slits and cuts fashioned into the sides . During the Angels Advocate Tour in 2010 , Carey performed a snippet of the song in Singapore , with Trey Lorenz filling in for the group 's verses . Carey also performed the song as a part of her 2015 Las Vegas residency , Mariah Carey Number 1 's , with Lorenz reprising his role as well as Daniel Moore . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " One Sweet Day " was performed by the seven finalists on the seventh season of American Idol . The performance was taped due to the " Mariah Carey " themed week , where all the competitors sang songs from Carey 's repertoire . The song was additionally sung on the fifth season of the UK TV show The X Factor , by the British boy @-@ band JLS . Their performance received praise from all four judges , who commented how it was an " impossibly hard song to sing " because it was a " Mariah song " . The song was also performed by John Adeleye during the seventh season The X Factor . The theme of the night was " # 1 songs " . Shannon <unk> performed the song on the eleventh season of American Idol the week the contestants performed songs from their birth years . Andy Williams released a version in 2007 on his album , I Don 't Remember Ever Growing Up . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Daydream liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ production , songwriting , vocals 
 Walter Afanasieff – co @-@ production , songwriting 
 Nathan Morris – songwriting , vocals 
 Wanya Morris – songwriting , vocals 
 Shawn Stockman – songwriting , vocals 
 Michael <unk> – songwriting , vocals 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = 2000 – 01 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2000 – 01 season was the 103rd season of competitive football played by Arsenal . The club ended the campaign second in the Premier League , ten points behind reigning champions Manchester United . Arsenal reached the 2001 FA Cup Final at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff in May 2001 ; in spite of dominating against Liverpool , they conceded two late goals , both scored by Michael Owen . In Europe , Arsenal made it to the quarter @-@ finals of the UEFA Champions League for the first time since 1972 , only to be eliminated on the away goals rule by eventual finalists Valencia . 
 In the transfer window , Arsenal sold Marc Overmars and Emmanuel Petit to Barcelona for a combined fee of more than £ 30 million . Defender Lauren was signed as a direct replacement for Nigel Winterburn , who signed on a free transfer to West Ham United . French footballers Robert Pirès and Sylvain Wiltord were purchased from Marseille and Bordeaux respectively ; the latter 's arrival broke the club 's transfer record . 
 Midfielder Patrick Vieira was sent off in Arsenal ’ s first two league games of the season , though the team coped well in his absence and went unbeaten throughout September and October . Arsenal made it past the next phase of the Champions League by November , but continued to perform inconsistently in the Premier League away from home ; they lost at Everton , Leeds United and Liverpool in the space of a month . A 6 – 1 defeat to Manchester United in February prompted Wenger to rule out their chances of winning the league . The team finished in second on 70 points , three fewer than in the previous season . 
 35 different players represented the club in four competitions and there were 17 different goalscorers . Thierry Henry was Arsenal 's top goalscorer in the 2000 – 01 season ; he scored 22 goals in 53 appearances . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , Arsenal participated in the Premier League . Despite the loss of striker Nicolas Anelka to Real Madrid , the club significantly strengthened in the summer , signing defenders Oleg Luzhny and Sylvinho as well as forwards Davor Šuker and Thierry Henry . Inconsistent performances in the league against lowly opposition meant Arsenal never posed a serious title challenge , ending the campaign as runners @-@ up , 18 points behind Manchester United . The club had another poor season in the Champions League , finishing third in their group ; this won them a consolation place in the UEFA Cup and Arsenal managed to go all the way to the final , where they faced Galatasaray in Copenhagen . The match ended in a 0 – 0 draw with few chances for either side to score ; it went to penalties and Arsenal lost after Šuker and Patrick Vieira missed their spot @-@ kicks . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 Arsenal 's first signing in the transfer window was Cameroon international Lauren <unk> Mayer from Mallorca for an estimated fee of £ 7 million . Robert Pirès moved to Arsenal in July 2000 and was later joined by Brazilian Edu ; both players were transferred from Marseille and Corinthians respectively . Striker Guy <unk> signed for Arsenal a month later and after weeks of transfer speculation , Sylvain Wiltord joined on a club @-@ record fee from Bordeaux , believed to be £ 13 million . Defenders Igors Stepanovs and Sebastian Svärd were purchased during the season , as well as forward Tomas <unk> , who impressed on a trial spell . 
 After 13 years of building his career at Arsenal , defender Nigel Winterburn moved to West Ham United on a free transfer ; he was described by Wenger as a " consummate professional " , who " has not only shown a remarkable amount of commitment to Arsenal but has also proven that he is an excellent footballer . " Winterburn was joined by Šuker , who also signed for West Ham . Midfielders Marc Overmars and Emmanuel Petit joined Barcelona for a combined fee of £ 30 million . Other notable departures included Christopher Wreh to Saudi club Al @-@ Hilal and teenage striker Jay <unk> to Coventry City for £ 1 million . 
 = = = = In = = = = 
 = = = = Out = = = = 
 = = Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal opened the league season away to Sunderland on 18 August 2000 . A second @-@ half header from Niall Quinn was enough to earn the home team victory , in a match where Arsenal wasted numerous chances to equalise . Patrick Vieira was sent off for swiping his forearm at defender Darren Williams in injury time and Wenger was involved in an altercation with fourth official Paul Taylor in the stadium tunnel . He was later charged with " alleged threatening behaviour and physical intimidation " and found guilty by a FA disciplinary commission . Right back Lauren scored on his debut for Arsenal against Liverpool two days after ; Vieira was dismissed off the pitch for the second successive game , with Liverpool being reduced to nine men when midfielders Gary McAllister and Dietmar Hamann were also shown red cards . In Vieira 's final match before his five @-@ match suspension , he scored two goals against Charlton Athletic at Highbury in a 5 – 3 win . Arsenal earned a point away to Chelsea in the first week of September and drew 1 – 1 against Bradford City . Although the team beat Coventry City 2 – 1 , they needed a late goal scored by Dennis Bergkamp to draw away against promoted Ipswich Town . 
 An " spectacular " goal by Henry against Manchester United on 1 October 2000 inflicted the champions their first league defeat of the season . The Frenchman scored after receiving a pass from Gilles Grimandi in the 30th minute ; with his back to goal he flicked the ball up before pivoting to strike the ball over goalkeeper Fabian Barthez . Henry scored the winning goal against Aston Villa the following week and a further league victory , away at West Ham United moved Arsenal level on points with Manchester United . The month ended with a 5 – 0 win against Manchester City . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 A penalty scored by Henry against Middlesbrough ensured a fifth successive league win for Arsenal . They were held to a stalemate against Derby County ; this was followed by defeat at Goodison Park away to Everton in which Wenger called the team performance as " not acceptable " . Arsenal lost their second consecutive league match against Leeds United when a deflected Olivier Dacourt free @-@ kick went past goalkeeper Alex Manninger and into his net . A win against Southampton came before a 5 – 0 victory at home to Newcastle United where Ray Parlour scored a hat @-@ trick . 
 The Christmas period began with a 1 – 1 draw against local rivals Tottenham Hotspur . A 4 – 0 defeat away to Liverpool concerned Wenger , who noted a lack of goals being problematic : “ It has been our problem all season . We so very rarely score two in a match , and that makes life very difficult . " Henry scored a hat @-@ trick in a 6 – 1 win at home to Leicester City on Boxing Day . A draw against Sunderland , having been 2 – 0 up at half time meant Arsenal ended the calendar year in second place , eight points behind Manchester United . 
 Charlton Athletic recorded their first victory over Arsenal in 44 years , on New Years ’ Day ; Jonatan Johansson scored the winning goal in the first half . Back @-@ to @-@ back draws , first at Chelsea and then Leicester City , preceded a 2 – 0 win against Bradford City . Bergkamp scored the winning goal at Coventry City ; it was the club 's first away win since November . A 1 – 0 victory at home to Ipswich Town on 10 February 2001 moved the club five points clear of Liverpool . 
 Arsenal faced Manchester United at Old Trafford , needing a win to realistically have a chance of winning the league . Striker Dwight Yorke scored in the second minute for the home team , before Henry equalised . They conceded within 60 seconds , when Igors Stepanovs played Yorke onside to put the ball past Seaman . He completed his hat @-@ trick , before Roy Keane , Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Teddy Sheringham each scored to compound a 6 – 1 loss – Arsenal 's biggest defeat in the Premier League . Wenger rued the performance , saying " ... we were very naive and gave too much freedom to United . No one communicated . " 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Wiltord scored a hat @-@ trick in Arsenal 's 3 – 0 win over West Ham United on 3 March 2001 . A scoreless draw at Aston Villa was followed with a 2 – 0 win against Tottenham Hotspur ; both clubs observed a minute 's silence before the game , in honour of former Arsenal midfielder David Rocastle , who died at age 33 . Arsenal rested several first @-@ teamers for the trip to Manchester City and won the match 4 – 0 . However , defeat to Middlesbrough three days after handed the league championship to Manchester United , for the third consecutive season . Wenger refuted criticism over the team 's league performance , and said , " It 's not just Arsenal 's responsibility to push Manchester United . There are 10 to 15 teams with the potential quality of Arsenal . " 
 Following their exit in the Champions League in midweek , Arsenal beat Everton 4 – 1 on 21 April 2001 . They moved four points clear in second with a further win , this time away at Derby County . Wiltord scored the winning goal against Leeds United to secure a Champions League place for Arsenal ; a draw against Newcastle United confirmed the club as runners @-@ up for the third season running . Arsenal ended their league campaign against Southampton , in the final match played at The Dell . With the score 2 – 2 in the 89th minute , striker Matthew Le Tissier volleyed the ball from inside the penalty box and over goalkeeper Alex Manninger , to win the match for the home team . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the FA Cup in the third round , receiving a bye as a Premier League club . Their opening match was a 1 – 0 victory against Carlisle United ; Wiltord scored the winning goal in the 22nd minute . At Loftus Road , a 6 – 0 away win at Queens Park Rangers in the fourth round represented Wenger 's " best win as Arsenal manager " and the club 's best away win in the FA Cup for 64 years . Wiltord , who started the match against Chelsea as a substitute , came off the bench to score twice in the second half and sent Arsenal into the quarter @-@ finals , where they enjoyed a comfortable win against Blackburn Rovers of the First Division . Arsenal was drawn against Tottenham Hotspur in the semi @-@ final and it was their rivals who had taken the lead in the 14th minute . Vieira equalised before several players – " Pirès , Parlour and Wiltord continued to squander chances " . With 17 minutes remaining in the match , Pirès scored via a tap @-@ in to secure Arsenal 's passage into the final . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 In the final against Liverpool , played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , Arsenal began the brighter of the two teams , before being denied two penalty shouts – one involving Stéphane Henchoz , who cleared Henry 's shot with his hand . In the 72nd minute , Arsenal took a " deserved " lead , when Pirès played Ljungberg clean through to round goalkeeper Sander Westerveld and shoot . Liverpool equalised nine minutes after , through a Gary McAllister free @-@ kick , which was not cleared properly by Arsenal ; Michael Owen " waited for the loose ball to come down before drilling a rebound into Seaman 's bottom right corner " . Owen scored in the 88th minute , outpacing both Adams and Dixon to shoot the ball into the bottom right corner of the goalnet . The defeat prompted Wenger to admit new players would be brought in during the transfer window . 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 Together , with the other clubs playing in European football , Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the third round , where they were drawn at home to fellow Premier League club Ipswich Town . Despite dominating territorial advantage , the Arsenal team were beaten 2 – 1 – the winning goal scored late by substitute James Scowcroft . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = First group stage = = = 
 Arsenal won their first three matches in Group B , against Sparta Prague , Shakhtar Donetsk and Lazio . The club secured qualification into the second group stage with a 1 – 1 draw away at Lazio , before a win against Sparta Prague and defeat to Shakhtar Donetsk to end the first group stage with 13 points . Arsenal finished top of Group B due to a better head @-@ to @-@ head record . 
 = = = Second group stage = = = 
 Arsenal succumbed to a 4 – 1 defeat in their opening match against Spartak Moscow , which was the biggest loss inflicted on the club in 18 years . The team let slip a two @-@ goal lead against Bayern Munich at Highbury on 5 December 2000 , before winning 1 – 0 at Olympique Lyonnais to keep their aspirations of qualifying for the quarter @-@ finals attainable . In the reverse fixture , an equaliser scored by Edmílson in the last minute of normal time prompted Wenger to rue fatigue and the absence of captain Adams . Arsenal defeated Spartak Moscow by a solitary goal and in spite of losing to Bayern Munich on 14 March 2001 , Lyon 's draw with Spartak Moscow meant Arsenal qualified for the quarter @-@ finals by the head @-@ to @-@ head rule . 
 = = = Knockout stage = = = 
 = = = = Quarter @-@ finals = = = = 
 Arsenal faced Spanish club Valencia and won 2 – 1 at Highbury in the first leg , with goals scored by Henry and Parlour . The team however were beaten 1 – 0 at the Estadio Mestalla , thus being knocked @-@ out on away goals . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with name struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = Summer of ' 69 = 
 " Summer of ' 69 " is a song recorded by Canadian recording artist Bryan Adams , from his fourth studio album , Reckless ( 1984 ) . The song was written by Adams and Jim Vallance , a long @-@ time writing partner of Adams . " Summer of ' 69 " was produced by Adams and Bob Clearmountain . It was released in June 1985 under A & M Records as the fourth single from Reckless . As with most Adams songs , " Summer of ' 69 " is an up @-@ tempo rock song . 
 The song was released with two B @-@ side tracks ; " Kids Wanna Rock " and " The Best Was Yet to Come " , which had previously appeared on the albums Reckless and Cuts Like a Knife respectively . " Summer of ' 69 " received favourable reviews from music critics . The single had a strong effect on music charts internationally , with its highest peak being number four in the Netherlands , and its least successful charting country being Germany . The track was promoted with a music video , which was filmed by Steve Barron . The video features Adams and his backing band in a variety of settings , including running from the police . 
 = = Conception and themes = = 
 After a tour supporting his album Cuts Like a Knife , he immediately started the recording sessions for the new album , Reckless . " Summer of ' 69 " was finished on January 25 , 1984 , co @-@ written with Jim Vallance in his basement studio . The song went through a number of changes because neither Adams nor Vallance was convinced it was a strong enough song to be featured on the album . In their first draft , the lyric " summer of ' 69 " appeared only once . At that time the two were planning to title it " Best Days of My Life " instead . While the lyric " Best days of my life " appeared seven times in the first draft , on the final draft it had been replaced by " summer of ' 69 " and only appeared two times throughout the song . 
 When writing the lyrics " Jimmy quit , Jody got married " , Vallance suggested using " Woody quit and Gordy got married " , referring to members of his high school band , but Adams liked his version better . Adams mentioned once in an interview that " Jimmy " was one of his early drummers . " Jody " is a reference to Adams ' sound manager , Jody <unk> , who got married during the album 's recording session . 
 On the song 's very first demo , it started with a 12 @-@ string riff , just like the breakdown section in the middle of the song , but they replaced it with a chunky 6 @-@ string intro on the second demo . The song was recorded three to four times , in different ways , with both Adams and Vallance still not convinced that it was finished . 
 When Adams appeared on The Early Show in 2008 , he was asked about " Summer of ' 69 " and its lyrical meaning . Adams said the song was about sex and making love in the summertime . " 69 " is a reference to the sexual position , 69 . On the Reckless 25th anniversary , Adams told In the Studio that the song was built on the theme of nostalgia , such as the " cultural revolution " , the break @-@ up of The Beatles , his discovery of music and the moon landing , but also about a character who plays until his fingers bleed and sexual discovery . Vallance however has gone for the more conventional interpretation of the title being a reference to a year . He notes Jackson Browne 's " Running on Empty " , which contains references to 1965 and 1969 , as his own influence , and recalls Adams citing the film Summer of ' 42 as his . 
 " That song is 25 years old now so it 's had that many years to incubate . A lot of songs , like that one , hit big in America but really not anywhere else . It didn 't chart anywhere in Europe until at least 10 years after it was released . [ ... ] I think songs can have a life of their own regardless of the promotion . " 
 In 1985 the song won the BMI ( Broadcast Music Inc . ) Citation of Achievement for US radio airplay , the following year 1986 - <unk> Award ( Performing Rights Organization of Canada ) for Canadian radio airplay and in 2000 it won a <unk> Classics Award for more than 100 @,@ 000 Canadian radio performances . In a poll conducted by Decima Research in 2006 , " Summer of ' 69 " was voted the best driving song among Canadians who sing in their cars . The song topped the survey with both sexes , and with French and English @-@ speaking Canadians . In 2010 , the song was voted the " hottest summer song " in Germany . In another poll , this time by Canadian magazine Chart , " Summer of ' 69 " was voted the fourth best song of all @-@ time in 2000 , four years earlier it had been voted the twenty @-@ fourth best song of all @-@ time . The song was ranked # 17 on CBC Radio 's 50 Tracks : The Canadian Version . In 2008 , the song was voted the 87th best @-@ song of all @-@ time by radio listeners in Norway , becoming the second highest Adams song ranked , the highest being " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " from 1991 . It was voted the fourth best @-@ song ever on Radio 2 , a Belgian radio station , in 2008 . 
 " Summer of ' 69 " remains popular to this day in many countries around the world . The song has a dedicated following in Nepal and " always gets a warm reception " when played by the bands performing in the country . Bryan Adams sang " Summer of ' 69 " during the 2011 Cricket World Cup opening ceremony in Bangladesh . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 " Summer of ' 69 " has found itself in several " best of " lists compiled by various music publications and critics , including the following : 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Summer of ' 69 " was released as a single internationally in June 1985 and charted on the Billboard Hot 100 where it peaked at 5 . Like the previous single released from Reckless , " Heaven " , " Summer of ' 69 " was a commercial success worldwide . " Summer of ' 69 " debuted at number fifty @-@ nine , and managed to climb up the chart , and two weeks later reached its peak position 42 , on August 24 , 1985 , on the UK Singles Chart . The single remained on the country 's chart for four consecutive weeks from August to September 1985 , before falling out of the top 100 . The track debuted at number twenty @-@ two on September 22 , and peaked at number seven in the fifth week on the New Zealand Singles Chart . The song debuted at 95 on the Canadian RPM Singles Chart on June 29 , 1985 , jumping to fifty in its second week and peaking at eleven on September 14 , 1985 after spending seven weeks on the chart . 
 The song debuted at its peak position , number 9 , on August 10 , on the Norwegian Singles Chart and stayed there for another four weeks before falling off the charts . " Summer of ' 69 " charted on the Swedish Singles Chart for five consecutive weeks . Having debuted at number twenty on December 13 , and peaked at number thirteen two weeks later . The single spent another three weeks on the chart before falling off . The track peaked at number seventeen on the Austrian Singles Chart , and remained on the country 's chart for five weeks . The single 's most commercially successful charting territory was the Netherlands , where it peaked at number 4 on September 22 , 1990 . The single 's least successful chart territory was Germany . Having peaked on the country 's singles chart at number sixty @-@ two , the single spent the next five weeks fluctuating down the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , released in 1985 , was directed by Irish director Steve Barron . In 1985 the music video was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award in the category for Best Male Video . While the song did not win the award , it was one of the four nominated songs from Adams ' fourth studio album Reckless . The video includes appearances by Lysette Anthony and Garwin Sanford . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 All songs written by Bryan Adams and Jim Vallance 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bryan Adams - rhythm guitar , vocals 
 Keith Scott - lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Dave Taylor - bass 
 Pat Steward - drums 
 Tommy Mandel - keyboards 
 Bruce <unk> - backing vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = KevJumba = 
 Kevin Wu ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) ( born June 12 , 1990 ) is an American blogger and former comedian and actor . He was a YouTube celebrity best known by his YouTube username of KevJumba . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Jeff Yang has noted that Wu is not a comedian in the conventional sense but that by " just talking [ he ] is , well , pretty hilarious " due to his deadpan vocal delivery , animated facial expressions and tendency toward unexpected digressions . Wu previously appeared on The CW Television Network 's short @-@ lived Online Nation and co @-@ starred with Jessica Lee Rose and Philip DeFranco in Hooking Up from <unk> ( the online arm of HBO ) in 2008 . In 2010 , Wu and his father , Michael , competed as a team on the 17th season of The Amazing Race , placing seventh out of eleven teams . In 2014 , Wu starred in crime drama film Revenge of the Green Dragons ( executive produced by Martin Scorsese ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kevin Wu was born on June 12 , 1990 in Houston , Texas . His father , Michael Wu , a Taiwanese immigrant , is a computer engineer . Wu graduated from Clements High School in Sugar Land , Texas , in 2008 and attended the University of California , Davis before dropping out . He was living in downtown Los Angeles while in the entertainment business but now has relocated to Culver City , where he has retired . 
 = = Wu 's YouTube videos = = 
 Wu was known for posting humorous videos on YouTube . When Wu 's " I Have to Deal With Stereotypes " video was featured on YouTube 's home page , his number of viewers began to increase . In this video , Wu talks about stereotypes he has to deal with as an Asian @-@ American . He tries to disprove his cheapness by bragging about the recent purchase of a " brand new , top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , TI @-@ 84 calculator " . He acknowledges that this might make him nerdy but dismisses this stereotype too as he does not " make all A 's ... in school today [ he ] made a B + . " He is then greeted by a voice that was supposed to be his mother calling him a loser and accusing him of <unk> their family . Wu goes on to say he can prove his predominant social life with the constant ringing of his cell phone . At this point , his phone indeed rings , he answers it , and the voice on the other end to Wu 's disappointment says , " Hey , why did you tell me to call you ? " Wu has collaborated with fellow YouTube comedian Christine <unk> ( <unk> ) , making five videos with her . In one of Kevin 's older videos , he said he was an only child , which was later proven wrong by his father . 
 Following his video , " <unk> Hero " , Wu introduced his father , <unk> , onto his YouTube channel , and his father made several appearances in candid video clips taken by his son . Responding to Wu 's father 's growing popularity among viewers , his father made a debut in " I Love My Dad " , and has been featured alongside his son many times since . As of August 2014 , Wu had more than 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 subscribers and more than 350 million combined views on the videos in his main channel . His combined video views total over 343 @.@ 9 million . On February 26 , 2008 , the Los Angeles Times compared the web series <unk> 's viewership to Wu 's . At the time Wu was a " semi @-@ well known YouTube blogger " and had received 450 @,@ 000 views for a video describing how he broke his shin . <unk> , which had been picked up by NBC , had received only 100 @,@ 000 views on MySpace and 50 @,@ 000 views on YouTube . 
 By May 29 , 2008 , Wu had become one of three East Asians under the age of 21 to be in the top five of YouTube 's all @-@ time most subscribed users with 187 @,@ 000 subscribers and more than 5 @.@ 9 million views . By June 5 , 2008 , he had become the number one subscribed comedian on YouTube , and third most subscribed uploader overall . Wu 's videos have received replies from Ella Koon , Jessica Alba , and Baron Davis . In 2008 , Davis created a " longest stare " contest for <unk> , a site that he and Alba 's husband Cash Warren co @-@ founded . The contest began with Davis challenging Wu , who then challenged Alba , who responded to the challenge . 
 As of September 27 , 2013 , KevJumba has remained inactive with no new uploads to the channel . In early 2016 , Wu privatized his videos on the KevJumba account , disabling all content to the public . However , the 35 videos on Wu 's JumbaFund channel are still public . 
 In May 2016 , Wu made 7 private videos on his channel public again , including " Shed a Tear " , " Awkward " , and " Nice Guys " . 
 On May 21 , 2016 , Wu <unk> and <unk> more of his old videos on his main channel . 
 = = = Funemployed = = = 
 The web series Funemployed , launched in the summer of 2010 , stars Wu and Philip Wang of Wong Fu Productions and includes other notable YouTube stars such as Nigahiga , David Choi , Kina Grannis , and Chester See . With the large number of fans , this series quickly took off and became a hit , reaching 500 @,@ 000 viewers in only a few weeks . The series focuses on two good friends named Kyle ( Wu ) and Jason ( Philip Wang ) , and how they are dealing with unemployment after Jason is laid off at work . Kyle is characterized as the typical laid back guy , who comes off as somewhat of a slacker , while Jason is characterized as the more studious hard worker of the two . The two eventually come up with an idea of how to make money , believing that YouTube is the key , an allusion to Wu 's and Wang 's real life success with YouTube videos . " Funemployed " eventually came to an end on July 27 , 2010 , with their last episode entitled , " Gave it a Shot " . There were a total of eleven episodes and 30 sitcoms . 
 = = After YouTube = = 
 On April 21 , 2016 , Wu resurfaced on social media after an almost three @-@ year absence as he made a blog titled " <unk> " . Wu said on his blog that he left YouTube so he could meditate and go to college . According to his blog , Wu currently resides in Culver City , California and is attending the University of Houston . Answering fan 's question , he has no plans on coming back to YouTube . 
 = = Other work = = 
 In 2007 , Wu appeared on The CW Television Network 's short @-@ lived Online Nation . Online Nation compiled an hour of web clips , broadcast them during primetime , lasting four episodes . Wu , along with other popular YouTube personalities , is also paid to broadcast a streaming show on <unk> . He has been a member of <unk> since March 29 , 2008 , and as of November 2 , 2008 , he had produced 70 live and 23 recorded shows with over 300 @,@ 000 viewers of the live show and 100 @,@ 000 viewers of the recorded shows . 
 As of October 2008 , Wu starred with Jessica Rose and Phillip DeFranco in Hooking Up from <unk> ( the online arm of HBO ) , a scripted 10 @-@ episode web @-@ based series . Hooking Up is set at a fictional university where the students spend most of their time emailing and twittering , but still manage to <unk> . It is his first work on a scripted production . Guest appearances on Hooking Up will be made by Kevin Nalty , Michael Buckley , and other internet celebrities . The entire cast of Hooking Up is composed of YouTube video bloggers in the hope of attracting a young , internet knowledgeable audience . By the show 's second day on YouTube , it had received more than 450 @,@ 000 views . According to <unk> , an evolving consensus is that for an online video to be a hit , somewhere between 100 @,@ 000 and one million views are needed , giving Hooking Up a strong start . Maria Russo of the Los Angeles Times felt that Wu was better looking than star DeFranco and wondered why Wu plays the " tired role of the East Asian friend who helps the white guy get the chicks , " while Bobbie Johnson of The Guardian said that many web surfers had " scoffed at what they see as a cynical attempt to cash in . " On October 2 , 2011 , Wu hosted " Flicks " on Cartoon Network during an airing of Around the World in 80 Days . Wu has also announced he will be starring in the independent film Rock Jocks with Justin Chon , Felicia Day , and Gerry <unk> , which will be released in 2012 . 
 In 2011 , Wu began performing with Yesterday , Today , Forever ( <unk> ) along with other YouTube personalities . The group performed their first concert on October 9 , 2011 in Honolulu , Hawaii . 
 Wu also has another YouTube account going by the username JumbaFund , which donated all of its earnings to a charity that viewers suggested . Wu donated over 5 @,@ 000 dollars to a charity in Kenya , which later built a school after him , to build a new school in a span of 5 months from all of the profits he made through JumbaFund . He recently cited that he would now donate all earnings from this point on to Kenya in order to help finish and pay off the costs of the new secondary school being built there . Wu mentions this in his video and always records himself donating all the profits to the charity in order to show the viewers that his JumbaFund charity is not used for anything but to donate to the needy . On his JumbaFund videos , Wu went to Lenana in Kenya to meet with kids in a campaign by The Supply . In 2011 , a school in Kenya was built called the <unk> Lenana Academy . 
 In 2011 , Wu was a " sponsor " of Brian Wong of the K & N Pro Series West , who raced a car with Wu 's paint scheme in the Casino Arizona 125 at Phoenix International Raceway . 
 In June 2012 , Wu began starring in YouTube videos on a new channel called <unk> . He stars in his own series called , <unk> Takes All . 
 = = = The Amazing Race = = = 
 In May and June 2010 , Wu participated with his father in filming for the 17th season of The Amazing Race , an American reality television game show . Upon this announcement , it was also the first time his dad 's name , Michael , was revealed , which was kept anonymous since his debut . Wu officially announced his participation on Facebook on September 1 , and on YouTube a week later . The season premiered on September 26 , 2010 . Michael and Kevin 's best placement was a third @-@ place finish in Leg 2 and Leg 6 . Their worst placement was a last place finish ( 9th ) in Leg 3 , a non @-@ elimination leg . They ended up in seventh place and were eliminated in Leg 7 after being issued two 30 @-@ minute penalties for using a cab to travel between tasks on the leg when they were instructed to walk ; another team had also issued a similar penalty and checked in after them , but only had one half @-@ hour penalty , resulting in Kevin and Michael 's elimination . 
 = = = Hang Loose = = = 
 In December 2012 Wu released Hang Loose , his first full @-@ length feature film . Wu began working on the film in late 2011 with Dante Basco and Kinetic Films LLC . " Hang Loose " is a comedy in which Wu , who stars as himself , goes to Hawaii for his sister 's wedding , but finds himself on a misadventure with his future brother @-@ in @-@ law ( played by Dante Basco ) that changes his life . Other notable actors in the film include Justin Chon as the main antagonist , BJ . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Revenge of the Green Dragons ( 2014 ) 
 Man Up ( 2015 ) 
 = Hillel Slovak = 
 Hillel Slovak ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; April 13 , 1962 – June 25 , 1988 ) was an Israel @-@ born American musician best known as the original guitarist and founding member of the Los Angeles rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers . Prior to his death of a heroin overdose in 1988 , Slovak recorded two albums with the band , Freaky Styley ( 1985 ) and The Uplift Mofo Party Plan ( 1987 ) . His guitar work was primarily rooted in funk and hard rock , although he often experimented with other genres including reggae and speed metal . He is considered to have been a major influence on the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' early sound . 
 Born in Haifa , Israel , Slovak immigrated with his family to the United States in 1967 when he was five years old . Slovak met future band mates Anthony Kiedis , Flea , and Jack Irons while attending high school in Los Angeles . He joined the group Anthym along with Irons while attending Fairfax High School ; Flea would later join the group , which later changed its name to What Is This ? . Slovak , Flea , Kiedis , and Irons started Red Hot Chili Peppers in 1982 , which became popular in the Los Angeles area , playing various shows around the city . However , Slovak quit the band to focus on What is This ? , which had gotten a record deal , leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers to record their debut album without him . He rejoined the Chili Peppers in 1985 , and recorded the albums Freaky Styley and The Uplift Mofo Party Plan with the band . 
 During his career , Slovak developed a serious heroin addiction . He attempted to quit the drug many times , but ultimately succumbed to his addiction , dying of an overdose on June 25 , 1988 at age 26 . He was replaced by guitarist John Frusciante , who was greatly influenced by Slovak 's playing style . Several Red Hot Chili Peppers songs have been written as tributes to Slovak , including " Otherside " , " Knock Me Down " , " My Lovely Man " , and <unk> on the Flowers . In 1999 , his brother James Slovak published a book entitled Behind the Sun : The Diary and Art of Hillel Slovak , which features Slovak 's diaries and paintings . Slovak was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Red Hot Chili Peppers on April 14 , 2012 , with his brother accepting on his behalf . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Hillel Slovak was born in Haifa , Israel , to Jewish parents who were survivors of the Holocaust . The family emigrated to the U.S. when Slovak was five years old . They settled in the Queens borough of New York City , then in 1967 relocated to Southern California . As a child , Slovak developed an interest in art , and would often spend time painting with his mother , Esther . He attended Laurel Elementary School in West Hollywood and Bancroft Jr . High School in Hollywood , where he met future bandmates Jack Irons and Michael " Flea " Balzary . Slovak received his first guitar at age 13 as a bar mitzvah present , and would often play the instrument into the late hours of the night . During this time , he was highly influenced by hard rock music such as Jimi Hendrix , Led Zeppelin , and Kiss . 
 As a freshman at Fairfax High School , Slovak formed a band with Irons on drums and two other high school friends , Alain Johannes and Todd Strassman . They called their band Chain Reaction , then changed the name to Anthem after their first gig . After one of the group 's shows , Slovak met audience member Anthony Kiedis , and invited him to his house for a snack . Kiedis later described the experience in his autobiography Scar Tissue : " Within a few minutes of hanging out with Hillel , I sensed that he was absolutely different from most of the people I 'd spent time with ... He understood a lot about music , he was a great visual artist , and he had a sense of self and a calm about him that were just riveting . " Slovak , Kiedis and Flea became best friends and often used LSD , heroin , cocaine and methamphetamine recreationally . 
 The original bassist for Anthem , which renamed to Anthym , was deemed unsatisfactory , so Slovak began teaching Flea to play bass . Following several months of commitment to the instrument , Flea developed proficiency and a strong musical chemistry with Slovak . When Strassman saw Flea playing Anthym songs on his equipment he quit the band , with Flea quickly replacing him . Shortly afterwards Anthym entered a local Battle of the Bands contest and won second place . Anthym started to play at local nightclubs , despite the fact that the members were all underage . After graduating from high school , the band changed their name to What Is This ? . Flea left Anthym around this time to accept an offer of playing bass in the prominent L.A. punk band Fear . What Is This ? continued on and performed many shows along the California coast . 
 = = Red Hot Chili Peppers = = 
 Slovak , Kiedis , and Flea began to create their own music after finding inspiration in a punk @-@ funk fusion band called <unk> . The three formed a band with former Anthym @-@ drummer Jack Irons called Tony Flow and the Miraculously Majestic Masters of Mayhem . The band had only one song , entitled " Out in L.A. " , and was formed for the purpose of playing the song once . The song was based on a guitar riff that Slovak wrote while " jamming " with Irons , and was not meant to become a real song until Kiedis decided to rap over the music . Following the group 's first show at The Rhythm Lounge , the owner of the bar asked them to return , but with two songs instead of one . After several more shows , and the addition of several songs to their repertoire , the band 's name was changed to Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 After the band started to gain popularity amongst the L.A. club scene , Kiedis began writing more lyrics . The lyrics would eventually become songs such as " Green Heaven " and " True Men Don 't Kill Coyotes " , and the band 's concert repertoire quickly grew to nine songs as a result of months of playing local nightclubs and bars . Over the course of the next six months , the Red Hot Chili Peppers played many shows in L.A. clubs and became something of an underground hit . Slovak , Kiedis , and Flea moved into a small house in a high @-@ crime area in Hollywood where they collaborated musically and continued their drug addictions . The threesome traveled to New York City to perform more shows and to " spread Chili <unk> " . Shortly after the trip , Slovak moved out of the group 's shared house to live with his girlfriend . 
 The Red Hot Chili Peppers entered Bijou Studios to record a demo tape and subsequently secured a record deal with EMI . Flea left Fear to pursue the Red Hot Chili Peppers . At the same time , What is This ? had also gotten a record deal . Since Slovak considered the Chili Peppers to merely be a side project and not a serious commitment , he left them to concentrate on What is This ? Flea ultimately respected the decision , but felt the band would suffer musically without them . He and Kiedis hired drummer Cliff Martinez and guitarist Jack Sherman to fill Irons ' and Slovak 's places , respectively . During the recording of the second What is This ? album , Slovak became frustrated with the band and contacted Flea about rejoining the Red Hot Chili Peppers . This came at an opportune time , as the group was dissatisfied with Slovak 's replacement , Jack Sherman . Kiedis felt that Sherman 's guitar work " didn 't have the same spirit " that Slovak contributed to the band 's sound . When Flea asked Kiedis how he felt about Slovak rejoining the band , Kiedis responded by saying " I 'd give my firstborn son to get him back in the band . " After the culmination of the promotional tour for their first album , Sherman was fired and Slovak rejoined the band . 
 Slovak returned to the Chili Peppers for their second album , Freaky Styley , which was released on August 16 , 1985 . What is This ? had finally disbanded , and Irons returned to the Chili Peppers in mid 1986 after Martinez was fired . Flea , Slovak and Kiedis especially were involved in heavy drug use and their relationships became strained . Flea recalled that " it began to seem ugly to me and not fun ; our communication was not healthy " . Kiedis became dependent on heroin , leaving the rest of the group to work on much of the album 's material by themselves . The band lived in Detroit for a portion of the recording of the album , where Kiedis and Slovak indulged in heavy cocaine use . When Slovak was under the influence , he would often wear brightly colored clothing and dance in a " shuffling " fashion , which became the inspiration for the song " Skinny Sweaty Man " from the band 's next album . After Kiedis completed a stint in rehab , he rejoined the Red Hot Chili Peppers in Los Angeles to record their third album The Uplift Mofo Party Plan . Slovak felt a deep connection to the album ; he reflected in his diary " It was so fun . I 'm so extremely proud of everybody 's work — it is at times genius . " Slovak was the subject of the songs " Skinny Sweaty Man " , " Me and My Friends " , & " No Chump Love Sucker " . He was nicknamed " Slim Bob Billy " , " Slim " , or " Huckleberry " , and throughout the albums Kiedis calls him by these nicknames before he starts a guitar solo . On The Uplift Mofo Party Plan , Slovak experimented with different musical styles , playing the sitar on the song " Behind the Sun " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Slovak and Kiedis became addicted to heroin early in their careers , and Slovak often attempted to conceal his addiction from his friends and family . The band was generally more worried about Kiedis 's addiction , which was much more open and noticeable to the other members , while Slovak was " much more subtle and much more cunning in his disguise . " During the tour in support of Freaky Styley , Slovak 's health began to deteriorate . Slovak and Flea would wrestle regularly on tour , but Slovak became too weak to participate . Kiedis commented on the situation : " I could tell that Hillel had no inner core of strength ; he had been robbed by his addiction of the life force that allows you to at least defend yourself . It was a sad moment . " A roadie of the band who was concerned for Slovak 's health contacted his brother , James , who had been unaware that Slovak had ever used heroin . 
 Deciding to give sobriety a chance , both Kiedis and Slovak stopped using drugs prior to their European tour in support of The Uplift Mofo Party Plan , and decided to help each other " steer clear " of heroin . An entry from Slovak 's diary on January 21 , 1988 discusses his attempts to " begin a new drug @-@ free phase of [ his ] life " . During the tour both experienced intense heroin withdrawal , with Slovak much more unstable than Kiedis . His withdrawal symptoms took a toll on his ability to play his instrument ; at one point Slovak had a mental breakdown and was unable to play a show , leaving the rest of the band to play an entire set with no guitar . He recovered a few days later , but was briefly kicked out of the band and replaced by DeWayne McKnight for a few shows . After a few days with McKnight , the band decided to give Slovak another chance , and he rejoined for the European leg of the tour . Kiedis attempted to take Slovak to drug addiction counseling , but Slovak had difficulty admitting that his addiction was serious enough to require medical help . 
 Upon returning home , Slovak isolated himself from the rest of his bandmates , and struggled to resist the drug without the support of his friends , and Kiedis in particular . He stopped painting and writing in his diary during this time , and little is known about his life the weeks following the tour , aside from a phone call to his brother on June 24 , in which Slovak told him that he was having difficulty staying clean despite his desire to stop taking heroin . A few weeks after the band returned from the tour , the members attempted to contact Slovak , but were unable to for several days . Slovak was found dead by police in his Hollywood apartment on June 27 , 1988 . After his autopsy , authorities determined that he had died two days earlier due to a heroin overdose . He is interred at Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery in Hollywood Hills , California . 
 Following Slovak 's death Kiedis fled town and did not attend the funeral , considering the situation to be surreal and dreamlike . Although he found the death to be a shock , he was not initially " scared straight " and continued to use heroin . However , a few weeks later his friend convinced him both to check into rehab and visit Slovak 's grave , which inspired him to get clean for five years . Irons was unable to cope with Slovak 's death and subsequently quit the band , saying that he did not want to be part of something that resulted in the death of his friend . Irons has suffered from severe depression since Slovak 's death . Kiedis and Flea decided to continue making music , hoping to continue what Slovak " helped build " . They hired John Frusciante and Chad Smith as replacements shortly after . 
 = = Musical style and legacy = = 
 Slovak was primarily influenced by hard rock artists such as Jimi Hendrix , Santana , and Led Zeppelin . His playing method was markedly based on improvisation , a style commonly used in funk music . He was also noted for his aggressive playing style ; he would often play with such force that his fingers would " come apart . " Kiedis observed that his playing evolved during his time away from the group in What is This ? , with Slovak adopting a more fluid style featuring " sultry " elements as opposed to his original hard rock techniques . On Uplift , Slovak experimented with genres outside of traditional funk music including reggae and speed metal . His guitar riffs would often serve as the basis of the group 's songs , with the other members writing their parts to complement his guitar work . His melodic riff featured in the song " Behind the Sun " inspired the group to create " pretty " songs with an emphasis on melody . Kiedis describes the song as " pure Hillel inspiration " . Slovak also used a talk box on songs such as " Green Heaven " and " Funky Crime " , in which the sounds of his amplified guitar would be played through a tube into his mouth and then back into a microphone , creating psychedelic voice @-@ like effects . Slovak helped to incorporate new sounds in the group 's work , including adding occasional drum machines . Despite the fact that the group billed itself as " The Organic Anti @-@ Beat Box Band " , Kiedis states that Slovak showed the group that drum machines could be used as artistic instruments . 
 Slovak 's work was one of the major contributing factors to the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' early sound . When Kiedis and Flea were searching for a new guitarist to replace Slovak , Kiedis likened the experience to " shopping for a new Mom and Dad " because of his influence over the band . Flea , who originally listened exclusively to jazz , added that Slovak introduced him to a new genre of music , saying that " it was Hillel who first got me into hard rockin ' " . He was also a huge influence on a young John Frusciante , who would later replace him as guitarist in the band . Frusciante based a lot of his playing style on Slovak 's work , and explained , " I learned everything I needed to know about how to sound good with Flea by studying Hillel 's playing and I just took it sideways from there . " Just like Slovak before him , Frusciante developed a heroin addiction . Unlike Slovak , Frusciante eventually managed to break and defeat the habit . The songs " Knock Me Down " ( from Mother 's Milk ) , " My Lovely Man " ( from Blood Sugar Sex Magik ) , and " <unk> on the Flowers " ( from The Getaway ) were written as tributes to Slovak . In 1999 , a book titled Behind the Sun : The Diary and Art of Hillel Slovak was published . The book was authored by Slovak 's brother , James Slovak , and features writings from his brother 's diaries , paintings , photos and hand written notes from Kiedis and Flea . 
 On December 7 , 2011 , the Red Hot Chili Peppers were announced as 2012 inductees to the Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Kiedis expressed his excitement with Slovak 's induction , explaining " He 's a beautiful person that picked up a guitar in the 1970s and didn 't make it out of the 1980s , and he is getting honored for his beauty " . Flea echoed those comments on the same day : " Hillel grew up loving rock and roll so much , he hasn 't been here for some time , but I know how much it would mean to him . It 's a powerful thing . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 With Addie <unk> 
 <unk> - EP – ( 1984 ) 
 With What Is This ? 
 Squeezed - EP – ( 1984 ) 
 What Is This – ( 1985 ) 
 3 Out Of 5 Live - EP – ( 1985 ) 
 With Red Hot Chili Peppers 
 The Red Hot Chili Peppers – ( 1984 ) 
 Co @-@ wrote " Baby Appeal " , " Get Up and Jump " , " Green Heaven " , " Out In L.A. " , and " Police Helicopter " 
 Freaky Styley – ( 1985 ) 
 The Uplift Mofo Party Plan – ( 1987 ) 
 The Abbey Road E.P. – ( 1988 ) 
 Mother 's Milk – ( 1989 ) 
 Performs on only one track , " Fire " 
 What Hits ! ? – ( 1992 ) 
 Out in L.A. – ( 1994 ) 
 Under the Covers : Essential Red Hot Chili Peppers – ( 1998 ) 
 The Best of Red Hot Chili Peppers – ( 1998 ) 
 = $ pringfield ( or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) = 
 " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , also known as " $ pringfield " , is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 16 , 1993 . In the episode , Springfield decides to legalize gambling to revitalize its economy . A casino owned by Mr. Burns is created and Homer gets a job as a blackjack dealer . Meanwhile , Marge develops a gambling addiction , Bart starts his own casino , and Burns develops an odd personality in a parody of Howard Hughes . 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Wes Archer . Gerry Cooney and Robert Goulet guest starred as themselves . The episode features cultural references to films such as Dr. Strangelove or : How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb , The Wizard of Oz , Rain Man , and 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The economy of Springfield is in decline , so Mayor Quimby listens to suggestions from citizens on how to improve it . Principal Skinner states that legalized gambling has helped rejuvenate run @-@ down economies , and that it can work for Springfield as well . Everybody , even Marge , likes the idea . Mr. Burns and Mayor Quimby work together to build a casino , where Homer gets a job as a blackjack dealer . The casino is designed by Mr. Burns himself , as the proposals he received were not to his liking . While Marge waits for Homer 's shift to end at the casino , she finds a quarter on the floor and uses it to play a slot machine . She wins and almost immediately becomes addicted to gambling . Meanwhile , since Bart is too young to gamble at Burns ' Casino , he starts his own casino for his friends to play in his treehouse , and intercepts Robert Goulet to perform there . Burns also grows even richer , but in the process becomes a Howard Hughes @-@ type hermit , developing a profound fear of microscopic germs , urinates in jars , and wears tissue boxes instead of shoes . 
 Due to her addiction , Marge spends every waking moment at the casino and neglects her family . For instance , she forgets to help Lisa make a costume for her geography pageant . Enraged , Homer bursts into the casino and barges around searching for Marge . The security cameras capture Homer 's rampage , and when Burns sees him he demotes him back to his old job at the power plant . After realizing how much he misses the plant , Burns decides to return . Homer confronts Marge with her behavior , and she finally realizes that she has a problem . Lisa does win a special prize in the geography pageant , as Homer 's poor costume design gives Lisa the appearance that she did the work all by herself . Ralph Wiggum receives the same prize , as his costume is simply a note taped to his shirt that reads " Idaho " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Wes Archer . The story of the episode originated from a newspaper article that Oakley and Weinstein found about a town in Mississippi that was introducing riverboat gambling . Oakley said another inspiration for it was that there had not been many episodes about Springfield as a whole and how " crummy " the town was , so they filled the whole first act with scenes showing how " crummy " and " dismal " Springfield was . Oakley particularly liked the animation of the lights inside the casino on the slot machines and the lamps in the ceiling . The " way they radiate out " had always amazed him . Archer , who directed the animation of the episode , also thought they turned out well . The lights were especially hard for them to animate back then because the show was animated traditionally on cels , so Archer was pleased with the results . A deleted scene from the episode shows Homer dealing cards to James Bond . The staff liked the scene , so they decided to put it in the clip show episode " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " . 
 There was a brief period when the episode had a different subplot that revolved around the restaurant chain Planet Hollywood . Groening had been told by a spokesperson that if he put Planet Hollywood in The Simpsons , the creators of the restaurant , Arnold Schwarzenegger , Bruce Willis , and Sylvester Stallone , would agree to make guest appearances on the show . The writers of The Simpsons were excited about this so they wrote a new subplot for the episode that featured Planet Hollywood and the three actors . However , for unknown reasons , they were unable to appear in the episode . Instead , Gerry Cooney and Robert Goulet guest starred as themselves . Executive producer David Mirkin enjoyed directing Goulet because he was " such a good sport " and had " a great sense of humor " . Oakley thought it was nice that Goulet was willing to make fun of himself in the episode , which at the time was rare for guest stars on The Simpsons . This episode features the first appearances of Gunter and Ernst , the Siegfried and Roy @-@ esque casino magicians who are attacked by their white tiger , Anastasia . Ten years after this episode first aired , Roy Horn was attacked by one of the duo 's white tigers . The Simpsons production team dismissed the novelty of the prediction by saying that it was " bound to happen " sooner or later . The Rich Texan also makes his debut appearance in this episode , referred to as " Senator " by Homer . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title is a reference to the 1964 film Dr. Strangelove or : How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb . Burns ' bed looks similar to the one occupied by Keir Dullea 's character Dave Bowman in the end of the 1968 film , 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Dustin Hoffman and Tom Cruise appear at the casino to reprise their roles from the 1988 film Rain Man . Homer is impressed by the card @-@ counting abilities of a man who resembles Raymond Babbitt , Hoffman 's character in the film . Krusty 's show at midnight is similar to Bill Cosby 's 1971 album For Adults Only , which was recorded at a casino at midnight . Marge reminds Homer that his lifelong dream was to be a contestant on the television show The Gong Show . 
 Burns 's paranoid obsession with germs and cleanliness , and his refusal to leave his bedroom once the casino opens , parodies American magnate Howard Hughes , who had obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder , and was involved in the casino business in his later years . The " Spruce Moose " , an absurdly tiny wooden plane Burns makes in the episode , is a parody of Hughes ' impractically enormous wooden plane , derisively nicknamed the " Spruce Goose " . Homer parodies the scene in the 1939 film Wizard of Oz when Scarecrow demonstrates his newly acquired intelligence by ( incorrectly ) reciting the law that governs the lengths of the sides of an isosceles triangle . Unlike in the film , somebody correctly points out that the Pythagorean theorem recited applies only to right triangles , not all isosceles triangles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " $ pringfield " finished 35th in the ratings for the week of December 13 to December 19 , 1993 , with a Nielsen Rating of 11 @.@ 7 , translating to 11 million households . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that " this excellent episode includes a surprising number of concurrent plots . Homer also works in the casino and tries to care for the family without Marge . It balances them deftly and provides great laughs along the way . " Adam Suraf of Dunkirkma.net named it the third best episode of the season . He also praised the episode 's cultural references . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " There 's a lovely nod to the earlier episodes in which Marge protests the citizenry 's hare @-@ brained ideas at council meetings . A series of bizarre moments rather than a story — we 're especially fond of Homer 's photographic memory and Mr Burns ' descent into insanity — but great fun . " Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A , and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave it a score of 4 out of 5 . The episode is Sarah Culp of The Quindecim 's eleventh @-@ favorite episode of the show , and one of Les <unk> of Box Office Prophets 's favorite episodes . A scene from the episode where former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger meets Burns was included in the 2002 documentary film The Trials of Henry Kissinger . 
 = The Mask of Zorro = 
 The Mask of Zorro is a 1998 American swashbuckler film based on the character of the masked outlaw Zorro created by Johnston McCulley . It was directed by Martin Campbell and stars Antonio Banderas , Anthony Hopkins , Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones , and Stuart Wilson . The film features the original Zorro , Don Diego de la Vega ( Hopkins ) , escaping from prison to find his long @-@ lost daughter ( Zeta @-@ Jones ) and avenge the death of his wife at the hands of the corrupt governor Rafael Montero ( Wilson ) . He is aided by his successor ( Banderas ) , who is pursuing his own vendetta against the governor 's right @-@ hand man while falling in love with de la Vega 's daughter . 
 Producer Steven Spielberg had initially developed the film for TriStar Pictures with directors Mikael Salomon and Robert Rodriguez , before Campbell signed on in 1996 . Salomon cast Sean Connery as Don Diego de la Vega , while Rodriguez brought Banderas in the lead role . Connery dropped out and was replaced with Hopkins , and The Mask of Zorro began filming in January 1997 at Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City , Mexico . The film was released in the United States on July 17 , 1998 to financial and critical success . The Legend of Zorro , a sequel also starring Banderas and Zeta @-@ Jones and directed by Campbell , was released in 2005 , but did not fare as well as its predecessor . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1821 , Don Diego De La Vega ( Anthony Hopkins ) fights against the Spanish in the Mexican War of Independence as Zorro , a mysterious swordsman who defends the Mexican peasants and commoners of Las <unk> . Don Rafael Montero ( Stuart Wilson ) , the governor of the region , learns of De La Vega 's alter ego , and attempts to arrest him . De La Vega 's wife is killed during the scuffle . Montero imprisons De La Vega and takes his infant daughter , Eléna , as his own . Twenty years later Montero returns to California as a civilian , alongside Eléna ( Catherine Zeta Jones ) , who has grown into a beautiful woman . Montero 's reappearance coincides with De La Vega 's escape from prison . He encounters a thief , Alejandro Murrieta ( Antonio Banderas ) , who , as a child , once did Zorro a favor . De La Vega decides that fate has brought them together , and agrees to make Alejandro his protégé , grooming him to be the new Zorro . Murrieta agrees to undergo De La Vega 's training regimen in order to be able to take revenge on Captain Harrison Love ( Matt Letscher ) , Montero 's right @-@ hand man , who was responsible for killing Murrieta 's brother , Joaquin . 
 While still being trained , Murrieta steals a black stallion resembling Tornado from the local garrison . De La Vega scolds Murrieta , claiming that Zorro was a servant of the people , not a thief and adventurer . He challenges Alejandro to gain Montero 's trust instead . Murrieta poses as visiting nobleman named Don Alejandro del Castillo y García , with De La Vega as his servant , and attends a party at Montero 's hacienda . At the party he gains Eléna 's admiration and enough of Montero 's trust to be invited to a secret meeting where several other noblemen are present . Montero hints at a plan to retake California for the Dons by buying it from General Santa Anna , who needs money to fund his upcoming war with the United States . 
 Montero takes Murrieta and the noblemen to a secret gold mine known as " El Dorado " , where peasants and prisoners are used for slave labor . Montero plans to buy California from Santa Anna using gold mined from Santa Anna 's own land . De La Vega uses this opportunity to become closer to Eléna , though he identifies himself as " Bernardo " the servant , learning that Montero told Eléna that her mother died in childbirth . While walking in a market , Eléna meets the woman who was her nanny . De La Vega sends Murrieta , dressed as Zorro , to steal Montero 's map leading to the gold mine . Zorro duels Montero , Love , and their guards at the hacienda . When Zorro escapes , Eléna attempts to retrieve Montero 's map from the swordsman , but he seduces her , leading to a passionate kiss before he flees . 
 Terrified of Santa Anna 's retribution if he discovers that he is being paid with his own gold , Montero decides to destroy the mine and kill the workers . De La Vega tells Murrieta to release the workers on his own so that De La Vega can reclaim Eléna . Murrieta sets off , feeling betrayed by Diego 's vendetta . De La Vega corners Montero at the hacienda and reveals his identity , but Montero captures him by threatening Eléna . As he is taken away , De La Vega tells Eléna the name of the flowers she recognized upon her arrival in California , convincing her that he is her father . She releases De La Vega from his cell and they proceed to the mine , where Murrieta and De La Vega defeat Love and Montero . Eléna and Murrieta free the workers before the explosives go off , and then find the mortally wounded De La Vega . He makes peace with Murrieta before dying , passing the mantle of Zorro to him , and gives his blessings for his marriage to Eléna . In a closing sequence they are shown to be living together with a son named Joaquin , in honor of Murrieta 's brother . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Antonio Banderas as Alejandro Murrieta / Zorro : Despite claims made by several media outlets and Antonio Banderas , Banderas was not the first Spanish actor to portray Zorro . Spanish actor José Suárez was cast as Zorro in the 1953 film La <unk> sin ley , and in the 1960s @-@ 70s Spanish actor Carlos Quiney ( aka Charles Quiney ) portrayed Zorro in three films : Zorro Il Cavaliere della Vendetta , Zorro Il <unk> and Zorro la <unk> della Vendetta . Banderas was paid $ 5 million for the role . The character of Alejandro Murrieta was conceived as the fictional brother of the real @-@ life Joaquin Murrieta , making the character either Mexican or Chilean . To prepare for his role , Banderas practiced with the Olympic fencing team in Spain for four months , before studying additional fencing and swordsmanship with Anthony Hopkins and Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones . The three were trained by Bob Anderson during pre @-@ production in Mexico , spending 10 hours a day for two months specifically on fight scenes from the film . During interviews for The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring , Anderson rated Banderas the best natural talent he worked with . " We used to call him Grumpy Bob on the set , he was such a perfectionist , " director Martin Campbell reflected . " He was incredibly inventive , and also refused to treat any of the actors as stars . They would complain about the intensity of the training , but having worked with him there 's nobody I 'd rather use . " 
 José María de <unk> portrays a young Alejandro Murrieta . 
 Anthony Hopkins as Don Diego de la Vega / Zorro : Hopkins was cast in December 1996 , one month before filming began . Hopkins , known for his dramatic acting , took up the role over his enthusiasm to be in an action film . 
 Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones as Elena Montero : The actress signed on in November 1996 , when Spielberg saw her performance in the Titanic miniseries and recommended her to Campbell . Despite being a Welsh actress portraying a Latina character , Zeta @-@ Jones discovered similarities between her " volatile " Celtic temper and the Latin temperament of Eléna . Izabella Scorupco , who worked with Campbell on GoldenEye , and Judith <unk> both screen tested for the part . The actress credits The Mask of Zorro as her breakthrough in entering A @-@ list recognition . 
 María and Mónica Fernández Cruz portray Elena de la Vega ( infant ) . 
 Stuart Wilson as Don Rafael Montero : Armand Assante had initially been cast in the role , but dropped out due to scheduling conflicts with The Odyssey . Stuart Wilson , who Campbell previously directed in No Escape , was cast in Assante 's place four months after . 
 Matt Letscher as Captain Harrison Love 
 Tony Amendola as Don Luiz 
 Pedro Armendáriz , Jr. as Don Pedro 
 Victor Rivers as Joaquín Murrieta 
 Diego <unk> as Young Joaquín Murrieta 
 L. Q. Jones as Three @-@ fingered Jack 
 Julieta Rosen as Esperanza De La Vega , Don Diego 's beloved wife and Elena 's mother 
 Maury Chaykin as Prison Warden 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In October 1992 , TriStar Pictures and Steven Spielberg 's Amblin Entertainment were planning to start production on Zorro the following year , and hired Joel Gross to rewrite the script after they were impressed with his adaptation of The Three Musketeers . At the time , Spielberg was producing Zorro with the potential to direct . Gross completed his rewrite in March 1993 , and TriStar entered pre @-@ production , creating early promotion for the film that same month at the ShoWest trade show . By December 1993 , Branko Lustig was producing the film with Spielberg , and Mikael Salomon was attached as director . In August 1994 , Sean Connery was cast as Don Diego de la Vega , while Salomon stated that the rest of the major cast would be Hispanic or Latino . Pre @-@ production proceeded even further in August when Salomon compiled test footage for a planned April 1995 start date . 
 Connery and Salomon eventually dropped out , and in September 1995 , Robert Rodriguez , fresh from the success of Desperado , signed to direct with Antonio Banderas , who had also starred in Desperado , playing the title role . TriStar and Amblin had been surprised by Rodriguez 's low @-@ budget filming techniques for his action films , El Mariachi and Desperado , and shifted away from their initial plans with Salomon to make a big @-@ budget version of Zorro . Spielberg had hoped Rodriguez would start filming in January 1996 for a Christmas release date , but the start date was pushed back to July . The release date was later moved to Easter 1997 . Rodriguez pulled out of the film ' in June 1996 over difficulties coming to terms with TriStar on the budget . The studio projected a range of $ 35 million , while Rodriguez wanted $ 45 million . They both attempted to compromise when Rodriguez lowered it to $ 42 million , but the studio refused and set $ 41 million as their highest mark . Banderas remained with the production , and Martin Campbell signed on later that month , turning down the chance to direct Tomorrow Never Dies . The finished screenplay would be written by John <unk> , Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio , based on a story by Elliott , Rossio , and Randall <unk> . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The principal photography for the film began in Mexico on January 27 , 1997 on a $ 60 million budget . The Mask of Zorro was mostly shot at Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City . Production stalled for four days in February when the director , Martin Campbell , was hospitalized for bronchitis . Filming resumed in Tlaxcala , three hours east of Mexico City , where the production crew constructed the Montero hacienda and town set pieces . Sony sent David Foster to join the project as a producer to help fill the void left by Steven Spielberg , Walter F. Parkes , and Laurie MacDonald , who were busy running DreamWorks . Foster and David S. Ward , who went uncredited , re @-@ wrote some scenes ; the troubled production caused The Mask of Zorro to go $ 10 million over its budget . In December , the producers were frustrated by customs agents when some props and other items , including Zorro 's plastic sword , were held for nine days . During the post @-@ production phase , Spielberg and Campbell decided that Diego de la Vega 's death in the arms of his daughter was too depressing . The ending , where Alejandro and Eléna are happily married with their infant son , was added three months after filming had ended . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 On January 24 , 2001 , Sony Pictures Entertainment filed a lawsuit in United States District Court , Central District of California , Western Division , against Fireworks Entertainment Group , the producers of the syndicated television series Queen of Swords . Sony alleged copyright infringement and other claims , saying the series " copied protectable elements from [ the ] ' Zorro ' character and ' Zorro ' related works " . On April 5 , 2001 , U.S. District Judge Collins denied Sony 's motion for a preliminary injunction , noting " that since the copyrights in [ Johnson McCulley 's 1919 short story ] The Curse of Capistrano and [ the 1920 movie ] The Mark of Zorro lapsed in 1995 or before , the character Zorro has been in the public domain . " As to specific elements of The Mask of Zorro , the judge found that any similarities between the film and the TV series ' secondary characters and plot elements were insufficient to warrant an injunction . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 James Horner was hired to compose the film score in September 1997 . Horner 's work on The Mask of Zorro was influenced by Miklós Rózsa 's score from El Cid . The soundtrack , released by Sony Classical Records and Epic Soundtrax , was commercially successful and propelled by the rising profile of the Latin heartthrobs of Marc Anthony and Australian singer Tina Arena . Their duet , " I Want to Spend My Lifetime Loving You " , plays in the closing credits of the film and was released as a single in Europe . The song went # 3 on the French singles and # 4 on the Dutch singles charts . 
 = = Historical references = = 
 The Mask of Zorro and its sequel The Legend of Zorro incorporate certain historical events and people into their narrative . Antonio Banderas ' character , Alejandro Murrieta , is a fictional brother of Joaquin Murrieta , a real Mexican outlaw who was killed by the California State Rangers led by Harry Love ( portrayed in the film as Texas Army Captain " Harrison Love " ) in 1853 . The confrontation in the film takes place more than a decade earlier , in 1841 . The capture of Murrieta 's right @-@ hand man Three @-@ Fingered Jack by Love was also historical ; however , the real person was a Mexican named Manuel Garcia rather than an Anglo @-@ American . As he did in the movie , the actual Harry Love preserved both Murrieta 's head and Jack 's hand in large , alcohol @-@ filled glass jars . The opening sequence is set during the aftermath of the Mexican War of Independence , and an original ending on the DVD includes an appearance by Antonio López de Santa Anna , who is only mentioned in the finished film . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Mask of Zorro was initially set for release on December 19 , 1997 before the release date was changed to March 1998 . There was speculation within the media about whether TriStar changed the date in an attempt to avoid competition with Titanic . In reality Zorro had encountered production problems that extended its shooting schedule . In addition , Sony Pictures Entertainment , TriStar 's parent company , wanted an action film for its first quarter releases of 1998 . The release date was once again pushed back , this time to July 1998 , when pick @-@ ups were commissioned . The delay from March to July added $ 3 million in interest costs . 
 To market Zorro , TriStar purchased a 30 @-@ second advertising spot at Super Bowl XXXII for $ 1 @.@ 3 million . Sony , who had been known for their low @-@ key presence at the ShoWest trade show , showed clips from the film , while actors Antonio Banderas and Anthony Hopkins presented a panel at the conference on May 10 , 1998 . The studio also attached Zorro 's trailer to prints of Godzilla . Sony launched an official website in June 1998 . Internet marketing was an emerging concept in the late @-@ 1990s , and Zorro was Sony 's first film to use <unk> . 
 The Mask of Zorro caught the attention of European Royalty with the film 's foreign premieres . Spain 's King Juan Carlos I , Queen Sophia , and Princess Elena attended the first Royal premiere in Madrid in seven years . On December 10 , 1998 , a Royal Command Performance for Zorro was <unk> by Prince Charles and his sons . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Mask of Zorro was released on DVD on December 1 , 1998 by Columbia TriStar Home Video . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Based on 69 reviews aggregated by Rotten Tomatoes , 83 % of the critics enjoyed The Mask of Zorro , giving it an average score of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . Metacritic gave the film an average score of 63 / 100 , based on 22 reviews . Richard Schickel of Time magazine praised Zorro as a summer blockbuster which paid tribute to the classical Hollywood swashbuckler films . " The action in this movie , most of which takes the form of spectacular stunt work performed by real , as opposed to digitized , people , " Schickel stated , " is motivated by simple , powerful emotions of an old @-@ fashioned and rather melodramatic nature . " Zorro exceeded Roger Ebert 's expectations , who was surprised by the screenplay 's display of traditional film craftsmanship . " It 's a reminder of the time when stunts and special effects were integrated into stories , rather than the other way around . " Ebert later called The Mask of Zorro " probably the best Zorro movie ever made . " Despite giving credit to Anthony Hopkins for his masculine portrayal of an older Zorro , Mick LaSalle , writing in the San Francisco Chronicle , found that the actor 's " performance presents a slight problem : The film asks us to believe that no one has figured out that Zorro and his real @-@ life persona are the same person , even though they are the only guys in Mexico who talk with a British accent . " 
 Todd McCarthy of Variety found the film 's length to be " somewhat overlong " and lacking " the snap and concision that would have put it over the top as a bang @-@ up entertainment , but it 's closer in spirit to a vintage Errol Flynn or Tyrone Power swashbuckler than anything that 's come out of Hollywood in quite some time . " In his review for Rolling Stone magazine , Peter Travers criticized the casting choices for the Mexican roles , which included Banderas , a Spaniard , as well as Hopkins and Zeta @-@ Jones , who are both Welsh . Disappointed with the film 's entertainment value , Travers also expected the film to be a failure with audiences . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli compared the tone and style of The Mask of Zorro to producer Steven Spielberg 's Raiders of the Lost Ark . " While The Mask of Zorro isn 't on the same level , it 's not an altogether ridiculous comparison . Even though Zorro doesn 't feature the non @-@ stop cliffhanger adventure of Raiders , " Berardinelli continued , " there 's still plenty of action , tumult , and derring @-@ do . " He was undecided whether the film would be a box office success , and that it would depend on the on @-@ screen chemistry between Banderas and Zeta @-@ Jones . In one of the film 's most popular scenes , Alejandro renders Eléna topless with a flurry of sword slashes . One critic placed it on his list of " Erotic [ Film ] Scenes in the 90s " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Mask of Zorro was released in the United States on July 17 , 1998 in 2 @,@ 515 theaters , earning $ 22 @,@ 525 @,@ 855 in its opening weekend . The film dropped from its number one position in the second week with the releases of Saving Private Ryan and There 's Something About Mary . The Mask of Zorro eventually earned $ 94 @,@ 095 @,@ 523 within the US , and $ 156 @,@ 193 @,@ 000 internationally , coming to a worldwide total of $ 250 @,@ 288 @,@ 523 . With the commercial success of the film , Sony sold the TV rights of Zorro for $ 30 million in a joint deal to CBS and Turner Broadcasting System ( TBS ) . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Geastrum welwitschii = 
 Geastrum welwitschii is a species of fungus in the earthstar family . When young and unopened , the fruit bodies resemble small spheres lying in the soil . As the mushroom matures , the thick leathery outer layer of tissue ( the peridium ) splits star @-@ like to form a number of fleshy arms , which curve downward to reveal the inner spore sac that contains the fertile tissue known as the gleba . The spore sac has a narrow grooved opening at the top where the spores are released . Fully expanded , the fruit bodies are up to 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) wide and 58 mm ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) tall . First collected from Spain in the mid @-@ 19th century , the fungus is distributed in Europe , North America , and Bermuda . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The fungus was first collected in Spain by the Austrian explorer and botanist Friedrich <unk> . British mycologist Miles Joseph Berkeley obtained the specimens and thought them to be Geastrum fimbriatum . He sent a specimen to the French mycologist Camille Montagne in 1856 , who named it Geaster <unk> ( Geaster is an orthographical variant of Geastrum ) . Patricio Ponce de León in his 1968 world monograph of Geastrum , considered the species a fornicate variety of G. <unk> , and described it as Geastrum <unk> var. welwitschii ; this is now a synonym . 
 According to Stanek 's infrageneric ( ranks below the level of genus ) concept of the genus Geastrum , G. welwitschii is classified in the section <unk> , which includes species in which the outer part of the mycelial layer do not incorporate sand and encrusting debris . It is further classified in the subsection Laevistomata because its peristome ( an opening at the top of the spore sac ) is even to fibrillose ( with fibrils ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The mature fruit body of G. welwitschii is small to medium @-@ sized , with a fornicate spore sac , meaning that the spore sac is raised into the air as the rays press down . Unlike some other earthstar fungi , the mycelial layer does not encrust debris as the fruit body develops . The peristome is even , and has an indistinct boundary . The young fruit bodies just prior to opening are found near the surface of the ground , and are rounded , with or without an umbo , and attached to the substrate with a basal mycelial tuft or cord . The expanded fruit body is small to medium @-@ sized . The fornicate exoperidium ( outer peridium ) has the upper , arched part ( fibrous and pseudoparenchymatous layers ) split to about the half @-@ way point or more into 4 – 7 rays . The mycelial cup is free ( only attached at its base ) , with 4 – 7 more or less well @-@ developed lobes corresponding to the 4 – 7 rays . The width of the fruit body is about 20 – 35 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) , and in height about 40 – 58 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 3 in ) ( including the 15 – 20 mm high mycelial cup ) . The diameter of the exoperidium is about 39 – 72 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 The pseudoparenchymatous layer ( a layer of thin @-@ walled , usually angular , randomly arranged cells that are tightly packed ) is initially beige , later brownish , in age dark brown , cracked and if moist reddish @-@ brown . The fibrous layer is beige @-@ colored , with its outer side free from the mycelial layer except at the tips of the rays . The mycelial layer has a beige brown to somewhat yellowish @-@ brown , felted to tufted outer surface , darkening to reddish brown if moist . It is not encrusted with debris , but some debris and sand may adhere . The inner side is smooth , dull to somewhat glossy , and hazelnut brown . 
 The spore sac is stalked , and roughly spherical , with a diameter of about 8 – 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) . The stalk is short but distinct , up to 1 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 059 in ) high , light beige in color , and sometimes indistinctly developed . The endoperidium ( inner peridium ) is more or less smooth to the unaided eye , but densely protruding light to grayish @-@ brown hyphal tips are present . The peristome is indistinctly delimited ( without distinct boundaries ) , and the mouth area fibrillose . The columella is not well @-@ developed , and broadly club @-@ shaped to columnar ; in cross @-@ section it is whitish to pale beige . The mature gleba is brown and powdery . 
 The spores of Geastrum welwitschii are roughly spherical , sometimes contain an oil droplet , and measure 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 μm in diameter . Scanning electron microscopy has revealed that the spore surface is covered with column @-@ like processes , up to 0 @.@ 45 μm high , that may be more or less confluent . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Geastrum welwitschii is morphologically similar to G. fornicatum in having fornicate , mostly 3 – 6 rays , of <unk> and a cup @-@ shaped mycelial layer . Geastrum welwitschii is distinguished from G. fornicatum by its epigeal mycelial cup with a felted or tufted outer surface . 
 Geastrum welwitschii also has similar morphological characters to G. minimum in having small fruit bodies , whitish spore sacs , and fibrillose <unk> . However G. welwitschii is differentiated from G. minimum by its fornicate , mostly 3 – 6 , rays of the <unk> , and the mycelial layer that easily loosens from the fibrous layer to form a mycelial cup . G. welwitschii is distinguished from G. <unk> by its dark and sessile endoperidium , and smaller spores ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 μm ) . 
 According to mycologists <unk> and Desjardin , the most common earthstar in the coastal Casuarina forests of Hawaii is a species " closely allied " with G. welwitschii , which they name Geastrum aff. welwitschii . It differs from the main species in its much coarser pyramidal warts on the exoperidial surface , a sessile and sac @-@ shaped endoperidial body , and smaller spores . They likened the roughened outer surface of the exoperidium to lychee fruit . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fungus is saprobic , and grows on the ground , in leaf litter , or on decomposing wood . It has been collected in Spain , South Carolina , Florida , and Bermuda . 
 = History of Lithuania ( 1219 – 95 ) = 
 The history of Lithuania between 1219 and 1295 concerns the establishment and early history of the first Lithuanian state , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . The beginning of the 13th century marks the end of the prehistory of Lithuania . From this point on the history of Lithuania is recorded in chronicles , treaties , and other written documents . In 1219 , 21 Lithuanian dukes signed a peace treaty with Galicia – Volhynia . This event is widely accepted as the first proof that the Baltic tribes were uniting and consolidating . Despite continuous warfare with two Christian orders , the Livonian Order and the Teutonic Knights , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was established and gained some control over the lands of Black Ruthenia , Polatsk , Minsk , and other territories east of modern @-@ day Lithuania that had become weak and vulnerable after the collapse of Kievan Rus ' . 
 The first ruler to hold the title of Grand Duke was Mindaugas . Traditionally he is considered the founder of the state , the one who united the Baltic tribes and established the Duchy . Some scholars , however , challenge this perception , arguing that an organized state existed before Mindaugas , possibly as early as 1183 . After quelling an internal war with his nephews , Mindaugas was baptized in 1251 , and was crowned as King of Lithuania in 1253 . In 1261 , he broke the peace with the Livonian Order , perhaps even renouncing Christianity . His assassination in 1263 by Treniota ended the early Christian kingdom in Lithuania . For another 120 years Lithuania would remain a pagan empire , fighting against the Teutonic and Livonian Orders during the Northern Crusades during their attempts to Christianize the land . 
 After Mindaugas ' death , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania entered times of relative instability , as reflected by the fact that seven Grand Dukes held the title over the course of the next 32 years . Little is known about this period , but the Gediminid dynasty was founded in about 1280 . Despite the instability , the Grand Duchy did not disintegrate . Vytenis assumed power in 1295 , and during the next 20 years laid solid foundations for the Duchy to expand and grow under the leadership of Gediminas and his son Algirdas . While the Grand Duchy was established between 1219 and 1295 , the years after 1295 marked its expansion . 
 = = Establishment of the state = = 
 = = = Baltic unification = = = 
 The Balts were largely driven to unite by external threats from aggressive German religious orders . In 1202 , the Order of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword was established by Albert , the Bishop of Riga , to promote the Christianization and conquest of the <unk> , <unk> , Semigallians , and Estonians near the Gulf of Riga . The Order waged a number of successful campaigns and posed a great danger to the Lithuanian territories . The Order 's progress was halted by its defeat at the Battle of Saule in 1236 , after which it almost collapsed . The following year , it merged into the Teutonic Knights . 
 In 1226 , Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to defend his borders and subdue the Prussians , offering the Knights the use of Chełmno ( Kulm ) as a base for their campaign . In 1230 , they settled in Chełmno , built a castle , and began attacking Prussian lands . After 44 years , and despite two Prussian uprisings against them , they had conquered most of the Prussian tribes . Afterwards , the Knights spent nine years conquering the Nadruvians , Skalvians , and Yotvingians , and from 1283 , they were better positioned to threaten the young Lithuanian state from the west . 
 Further unification of the Lithuanian tribes was facilitated by the social changes that took place in Lithuania during this period . Private land ownership was established ( <unk> , Lithuanian : <unk> ) , which would later evolve into a feudal system . As attested by many chronicles , it was the principal form of organization governing land ownership in the 13th century . Under this system , known in England as primogeniture , only the eldest son could inherit lands , which allowed dukes to consolidate their holdings . Social classes and divisions of labor also began taking shape . There were classes of experienced soldiers ( <unk> ) , of free peasants ( <unk> ) , and of " unfree " people ( <unk> and <unk> ) . In order to enforce this social structure , a united state was needed . Another force behind unification was the desire to take advantage of Ruthenian lands , which were suffering from the Mongol invasion . Temporary alliances among Lithuanian dukes often sufficed for military ventures into , and plundering of , these lands ( including Pskov , plundered in 1213 ) . Altogether , between 1201 and 1236 , Lithuanians launched at least 22 incursions into Livonia , 14 into Rus , and 4 into Poland . The ongoing administration of conquered territories , however , required a strong and unified central power . 
 = = = Galicia – Volhynia Treaty = = = 
 Some evidence suggests that Lithuanians began combining their forces at the dawn of the 13th century . For example , in 1207 , soldiers were recruited across Lithuania to fight the German religious orders , and in 1212 , Daugirutis ' treaty with Novgorod shows that he exerted some degree of influence over a vast area . During the first twenty years of the 13th century , Lithuanians organized some thirty military expeditions to Livonia , Russia , and Poland . Historian Tomas Baranauskas argues that a Lithuanian state could be said to exist as early as 1183 . 
 However , the first conclusive evidence that the Balts were uniting is considered to be the treaty with Galicia – Volhynia signed in 1219 . The treaty 's signatories include 21 Lithuanian dukes ; it specifies that five of those were elder and thus took precedence over the remaining sixteen . Presumably , the eldest Duke was <unk> , since his name was mentioned first . Mindaugas , despite his youth , and his brother Dausprungas , are listed among the elder dukes . That would imply that they inherited their titles . The remaining two elder dukes were <unk> ( mentioned second ) and his brother <unk> ( mentioned last of the five ) . 
 The treaty is important for several reasons . It shows that the Lithuanian Dukes were co @-@ operating ; the signatories include Dukes who ruled lands such as Samogitia , which probably had no contact with Galicia – Volhynia . Their participation implies a perception of common interest , an indication of a nascent state . However , the designation of five Dukes as " elder " shows that the process of unification was still in transition . The inclusion of 21 Dukes indicates that the various lands in Lithuania were powerful and semi @-@ independent . Historians consider the treaty an interesting documentation of the long and complex process of a state 's formation . The progress of unification was uneven ; for example , after the deaths of Dukes Daugirutis in 1213 and <unk> in 1214 , fewer raids were organized by Lithuanians . 
 = = = Rise of Mindaugas = = = 
 Mindaugas , the duke who governed southern Lithuania between the Neman and Neris Rivers , eventually became the founder of the state . Mindaugas is referred to as the ruler of all Lithuania in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle in 1236 . The means by which he managed to acquire this title are not well known . Russian chronicles mention that he murdered or expelled various other dukes , including his relatives . 
 In 1236 , Duke Vykintas led the Samogitian forces to victory in the Battle of Saule , where the Livonian Order suffered a catastrophic defeat . It seems that Vykintas did not receive support from Mindaugas . Vykintas ' personal power grew . The Livonian Order was on the brink of collapse and was forced to become a branch of the Teutonic Knights . The combined Orders focused on the conquest of Samogitia , since only this land prevented them from consolidating their territories . The union of these aggressive powers could not have passed without notice in Lithuanian lands , and might have furthered the unification process . In about 1239 Mindaugas took over the weakened Black Ruthenia and appointed his son Vaišvilkas to govern it . During the early 1240s , Mindaugas strengthened and established his power in various Baltic lands . In 1245 , Mindaugas sent his nephews Tautvilas and Edivydas , the sons of Dausprungas and Vykintas , to conquer Smolensk , but they were unsuccessful . In 1249 , an internal war erupted as Mindaugas sought to seize his nephews ' and Vykintas ' lands . 
 Tautvilas , Edivydas , and Vykintas formed a powerful coalition with the Samogitians , the Livonian Order , Daniel of Galicia ( Tautvilas and Edivydas ' brother @-@ in @-@ law ) , and Vasilko of Volhynia in opposition to Mindaugas . Only Poles , invited by Daniel , declined to take part in the coalition against the Lithuanians . The dukes of Galicia and Volhynia managed to gain control over Black Ruthenia , an area ruled by Mindaugas ' son Vaišvilkas . Tautvilas traveled to Riga , where he was baptized by the Archbishop . In 1250 , the Order organized two major raids , one against <unk> land and the other against the domains of Mindaugas and those parts of Samogitia that still supported him . 
 Attacked from the north and south and facing the possibility of unrest elsewhere , Mindaugas was placed in an extremely difficult position , but managed to use the conflicts between the Livonian Order and the Archbishop of Riga in his own interests . He succeeded in bribing Andreas von <unk> , the master of the Order , who was still angry at Vykintas for the defeat in 1236 . In 1251 , Mindaugas agreed to receive baptism and relinquish control over some lands in western Lithuania , for which he was to receive a crown in return . In 1252 , Tautvilas and his remaining allies attacked Mindaugas in Voruta , sometimes considered to be the first capital of Lithuania . The attack failed and Tautvilas ' forces retreated to defend themselves in <unk> Castle , in the present @-@ day <unk> municipality . Vykintas died in or about 1253 , and Tautvilas was forced to rejoin Daniel of Galicia . Daniel reconciled with Mindaugas in 1254 ; the Black Ruthenian lands were transferred to Roman , the son of Daniel . Vaišvilkas , the son of Mindaugas , decided to join a monastery . Tautvilas recognized Mindaugas ' superiority and received Polatsk as a fiefdom . 
 = = Kingdom of Lithuania = = 
 As promised , Mindaugas and his wife Morta were crowned at some time during the summer of 1253 , and the Kingdom of Lithuania , proclaimed by the pope in 1251 , was soundly established . 6 July is now celebrated as " Statehood Day " ( Lithuanian : Valstybės <unk> ) ; it is an official holiday in modern Lithuania . However , the exact date of the coronation is not known ; the scholarship of historian Edvardas Gudavičius , who promulgated this date , is sometimes challenged . The location of the coronation also remains unknown . 
 Pope Innocent IV supported Mindaugas , hoping that a new Christian state could stem the inroads being made by the Golden Horde , a state of the Mongol Empire . On 17 July 1251 , the pope signed two crucial papal bulls . One of them ordered the Bishop of Chełmno to crown Mindaugas as King of Lithuania , appoint a bishop for Lithuania , and to build a cathedral . The other bull specified that the new bishop was to be directly subordinate to the pope . This was a welcome development to the Lithuanians , since they were concerned that their long @-@ standing antagonists , the Livonian Order , would exert too much control over the new state . 
 It took some time before a Bishop of Lithuania was appointed because of various conflicts of interest . The Bishop of Gniezno appointed Vito ( Lithuanian : Vitas ) , a monk of the Dominican Order , to this position , but he was not recognized by Mindaugas or accepted by the populace . The activities of Vito in Lithuania are unknown , although he is sometimes associated with Mindaugas ' Cathedral . Finally , in 1254 , Christian ( Lithuanian : <unk> ) from the Livonian Order was appointed . Mindaugas endowed him with some lands in Samogitia , but not much is known about his activities . Historical sources do not mention any sponsorship of missionaries , education of priests , or construction of churches during that time , and Bishop Christian went back to Germany in 1259 , where he died in 1271 . The establishment of Mindaugas ' Cathedral remains problematic , but recent archeological research found the remains of a 13th @-@ century brick building on the site of the present @-@ day Vilnius Cathedral . The general assumption is that the remains are those of Mindaugas Cathedral , built to satisfy the agreement with the pope . However , as later events showed , Lithuanians resisted Christianization , and Mindaugas ' baptism had only a temporary impact on further developments . 
 Immediately after his coronation , Mindaugas transferred some western lands to the Livonian Order – portions of Samogitia , <unk> , and Dainava . There is some discussion as to whether in later years ( 1255 , 1257 , 1259 , 1261 ) Mindaugas gave even more lands to the Order . The deeds might have been falsified by the Order ; the case for this scenario is bolstered by the fact that some of the documents mention lands that were not actually under the control of Mindaugas . Whatever the case , relative peace and stability was established for about eight more years . Mindaugas used this opportunity to concentrate on expansion to the east . He strengthened his influence in Black Ruthenia , in Pinsk , and took advantage of the collapsed Kievan Rus ' by conquering Polatsk , a major center of commerce in the Daugava River basin . He also negotiated a peace with Galicia – Volhynia , and married a daughter to Svarn , the son of Daniel of Galicia , who would later become Grand Duke of Lithuania . Diplomatic relations with western Europe and the Holy See were also reinforced . In 1255 , Mindaugas received permission from Pope Alexander IV to crown his son as King of Lithuania . In the domestic arena , Mindaugas strove to establish state institutions : his own noble court , administrative systems , a diplomatic service , and a monetary system . Silver Lithuanian long currency ( Lithuanian : Lietuvos <unk> ) circulated , providing an <unk> of statehood . 
 The Livonian Order used this period to consolidate their control over Samogitian lands . They built three castles along the border : <unk> ( Klaipėda ) , <unk> ( Jurbarkas ) , and <unk> ( Durbe in Latvia ) . The Samogitians responded by electing <unk> as their war leader , and attacked Courland , as the Order had limited battlefield successes . In 1259 , the Livonian Order lost the Battle of <unk> , and in 1260 , it lost the Battle of Durbe . The first loss encouraged a rebellion by the Semigalians , and the later loss spurred the Prussians into an uprising against the Order . The Great Prussian Uprising lasted for 14 years . Encouraged by Treniota , his nephew , Mindaugas broke peace with the Order . Some chronicles hint that he also returned to his former pagan beliefs , but this is disputable . Nevertheless , all the diplomatic achievements made since his coronation were lost . 
 Mindaugas then formed an alliance with Alexander Nevsky of Novgorod and marched against the Order . Treniota led an army to Cēsis and battled Masovia , hoping to encourage all the conquered Baltic tribes to rise up against the Orders and unite under Lithuanian leadership . He waged successful battles , but did not manage to capture the fortified castles or spark a coalition of Baltic forces against the Order . His personal influence grew because Mindaugas was concentrating on the conquest of Russian lands , dispatching a large army to Bryansk . Treniota and Mindaugas began to pursue different priorities . In the midst of these events , Mindaugas ' wife Morta died , and Mindaugas expressed the wish to marry Daumantas ' wife . Daumantas and Treniota responded to this insult by assassinating Mindaugas and two of his sons , <unk> and <unk> , in 1263 . Lithuania lapsed into years of internal instability . 
 = = Years after Mindaugas = = 
 = = = Years of instability = = = 
 After Mindaugas ' death , the state did not disintegrate and Treniota took over the title of Grand Duke . However , his power was fragile ; he was challenged by Tautvilas , who had not forgotten his own claims to power . Tautvilas was also assassinated by Treniota . However , just a year later , in 1264 , Treniota was killed by Mindaugas ' former servants . His son Vaišvilkas and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Shvarn from Volhynia took over the control in Lithuania . Daumantas was forced to flee to Pskov , was baptized <unk> , ruled successfully from 1266 to 1299 and even became a saint . In 1265 Vaišvilkas , as a Christian , reconciled with the Livonian Order and , without support from Lithuania , the rebellions among the Balts that had been fueled by Treniota began to subside . In 1267 he returned to a monastic life and transferred the Grand Duchy to Shvarn . 
 Little is known about Shvarn and his rule , but historians believe he was unable to take control of all Lithuania , and ruled only over its southern portions . He died in 1269 or 1271 in Galicia . 
 = = = Reign of Traidenis = = = 
 The circumstances surrounding the advance to power in 1269 of the next ruler , Traidenis , are not clear . From the outset his relationships with Galicia – Volhynia were tense and eventually resulted in the 1274 – 1276 war . Traidenis was successful in battle , and his control over Black Ruthenia was strengthened . Traidenis , known for his strong anti @-@ German attitude , was also successful in fighting with the Livonian Order . In 1270 he won the Battle of <unk> , fought on ice near Saaremaa . However , in 1272 the Order retaliated , attacking <unk> and building Dünaburg ( Daugavpils ) Castle in 1273 on lands nominally controlled by Traidenis . Several years later , in 1281 , Traidenis conquered <unk> Castle in the present @-@ day <unk> District , and was able to exchange it for the Dünaburg Castle . Dünaburg remained a Lithuanian outpost until 1313 . In 1279 the Order attacked Lithuanian lands , reaching as far as Kernavė , but on their way back they suffered a major defeat in the Battle of <unk> . The Order 's master , Ernst von <unk> , died in the battle , and the conquered Semigallians rebelled . The Semigallians were now willing to acknowledge Lithuania 's superiority and asked Traidenis for assistance . However , Traidenis died soon afterwards , and the rebellion was not successful . 
 Traidenis ' reign was the longest and most stable regime during the period of unrest . After his death the Orders finalized their conquests : the conquered Baltic tribes did not rebel again and the Orders could now concentrate on Lithuania . In 1274 the Great Prussian Rebellion ended , and the Teutonic Knights proceeded to conquer other Baltic tribes : the Nadruvians and Skalvians in 1274 – 1277 , and the Yotvingians in 1283 ; the Livonian Order completed its conquest of <unk> , the last Baltic ally of Lithuania , in 1291 . The Orders could now turn their full attention to Lithuania . The " buffer zone " composed of other Baltic tribes had disappeared , and Lithuania was left to battle the Orders on its own . 
 = = = Rise of Gediminids = = = 
 There is considerable uncertainty about the identities of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania between Traidenis ' death in 1282 and Vytenis ' assumption of power in 1295 . This is in part because the two main sources for Lithuanian history in the 13th century , the Hypatian Codex and the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle , end in the early 1290s . In 1285 , one chronicle mentions Daumantas as Grand Duke . He attacked the Bishop of Tver and was severely wounded or even killed in the battle . However , that is the only information about him . 
 The Gediminid dynasty began its ascent in Lithuania during this time with the emergence of its first leader , Butigeidis . In 1289 , leading about 8 @,@ 000 troops , he attacked Sambia . In 1289 the Teutonic Knights built a castle in present @-@ day <unk> ( Tilsit ) and their raids intensified . Butigeidis was the first to build strong castles along the Neman River . He died in 1290 or 1292 , and his brother Butvydas ( also known as <unk> ) inherited the crown . Butvydas was the father of Vytenis and probably of Gediminas . During his short reign Butvydas tried to defend the duchy against the Teutonic Knights ; he also attacked Masovia , an ally of the knights . His son , Vytenis , advanced to power in 1295 and ended the period of relative instability . His reign marks the transition from the state 's establishment to the point at which it was poised for expansion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The state united and ruled by Mindaugas constituted the first Lithuanian state . The state effectively protected Lithuanians and Samogitians from assimilation induced by the Teutonic Knights and the Livonian Order , the destiny of Prussians , Skalvians , <unk> , <unk> and other Baltic tribes . Mindaugas ruled about 100 @,@ 000 km2 ( 39 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of Lithuanian ethnic territory , an area with an estimated population of 300 @,@ 000 . The Slavic lands under his control and influence occupied another 100 @,@ 000 km2 ( 39 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . By about 1430 , at its peak during the reign of Vytautas the Great , the Grand Duchy controlled some 930 @,@ 000 km2 ( 360 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and almost 2 @.@ 5 million people . 
 The period from 1219 to 1295 also shaped future conflicts : the pagan Lithuanians were surrounded by the aggressive Roman Catholic Orders to its north and southwest , and by adherents of the Orthodox Church in the east . The Catholic Orders ' raids intensified after they overcame the " buffer zone " created by Prussians , Nadruvians , Skalvians , Yotvingians , and Semigalians by 1283 . The Lithuanian relationships with the Orthodox Church were more peaceful . The people were allowed to practise their religion ; Lithuanian dukes did not hesitate to marry daughters of Orthodox dukes ; at least some of the dukes ' scribes must have been Orthodox as well . Struggles with the Teutonic Knights and expansion to the east were characteristic of the years from 1295 to 1377 . It was inevitable that Lithuania could not endure religious , political , and cultural isolation forever and would have to choose either Roman Catholicism or Eastern Orthodoxy . In 1386 , Grand Duke Jogaila elected baptism in the Catholic rite to marry Jadwiga of Poland and become King of Poland ; the last pagan state in Europe was converted to Christianity . 
 = Squall Leonhart = 
 Squall Leonhart ( Japanese : <unk> ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is a fictional character and the primary protagonist of Final Fantasy VIII , a role @-@ playing video game by Square ( now Square Enix ) . He was designed by Tetsuya Nomura , with input from game director Yoshinori Kitase . Squall has appeared in several other games , including Chocobo Racing , Itadaki Street Special , and the Kingdom Hearts series , as Leon ( <unk> , Reon ) . His weapon , a gunblade , also appears in other works . 
 In Final Fantasy VIII , Squall is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old student at Balamb Garden , a prestigious military academy for elite mercenaries ( known as " SeeDs " ) . As the story progresses , Squall befriends Quistis Trepe , Zell Dincht , Selphie Tilmitt and Irvine Kinneas and falls in love with Rinoa Heartilly . These relationships , combined with the game 's plot , gradually change him from a loner to an open , caring person . Squall had a varied reaction from critics , with some judging him poorly compared to other Final Fantasy heroes ( due to his coldness and angst ) and others praising his character development . 
 = = Creation and design = = 
 The first character Nomura designed for Final Fantasy VIII , Squall was inspired by actor River Phoenix , although Nomura said that " [ n ] obody understood it . " Squall is 177 cm ( 5 ft 10 in ) tall , initially with longer hair and a more feminine appearance . After objections by game director Yoshinori Kitase , Nomura made the character more masculine . He added the scar across Squall 's brow and the bridge of his nose impulsively ( to make the character more recognizable ) , leaving the description of its origin up to scenario writer Kazushige Nojima . Nomura 's design of Squall included fur lining along his jacket collar as a challenge for the game 's full motion video designers . In Final Fantasy VIII Nojima worked to give players insight into what Squall was thinking , in contrast to Final Fantasy VII ( which encouraged players to speculate ) . 
 Nomura created Squall 's gunblade with silver accessories . The weapon is a sword with components of a revolver , sending vibrations through the blade when triggered ; this inflicts additional damage if the player presses the R1 trigger on the controller as Squall strikes an enemy . Although the weapon was intended as a novel way for players to control weapons in battle , Nomura said he feels ( in retrospect ) that it looks odd . Square 's Hiroki Chiba said that his favorite moment in the Final Fantasy franchise was when Squall and Rinoa embrace in space due to the use of Faye Wong 's " Eyes On Me " music in the background and having to work every frame to make it work . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy VIII = = = 
 At the beginning of Final Fantasy VIII , Squall is known as a " lone wolf " because he never shows his feelings and seems cold to his associates . His superiors ( such as teacher Quistis Trepe ) consider him difficult to deal with , but respect his talents . Squall is stoic , with his taciturn nature used for comic relief . In the cutscene where he meets Rinoa , she coerces him into dancing with her at the SeeD graduation party . Awkward and confused , he bumps into other party @-@ goers because he is looking at his feet . Rinoa perseveres , and Squall later reveals that he really can dance ( since it was a mandatory part of his training ) . 
 He is dragged into a heroic role when Cid , headmaster of Balamb Garden , appoints him leader of the academy midway through the game . During a late battle against Galbadia Garden , Squall has difficulty exhibiting leadership because of his lingering isolation . Although other characters try to pull him out of his shell and Rinoa Heartilly expends considerable energy pursuing him , it takes time for him to accept the others ' friendship , fall in love with Rinoa and care for her . Squall is more comfortable later in a leadership role , especially when he must fight Ultimecia . 
 Throughout the game , he has a rivalry with Seifer Almasy . The opening sequence features the duel where Squall receives his facial scar ( giving Seifer a mirror image ) , and scenes where Squall and Seifer are supposed to cooperate are characterized by squabbles between the cadets . Although Seifer later allies with the Sorceress ( requiring Squall to fight him several times ) , Squall still feels a camaraderie with him . 
 According to flashbacks during the game , Squall grew up in an orphanage with the other playable characters ( except Rinoa ) and it is implied that Laguna Loire is his father . On the airship Ragnarok late in the game , Kiros and Ward comment on Squall 's resemblance to his mother and dissimilarity to his father ( Nomura designed him to contrast with Laguna ) . The orphans were cared for by Edea ; although Squall remembers little about his past , he becomes an emotionally detached , cynical and introverted boy whose original goal is to go through life without any emotional ties or dependence . He gradually warms , and it is later revealed that his detachment from his companions is a defensive mechanism to protect himself from the emotional pain he suffered when he and his older sister were separated . 
 After Ultimecia is defeated , the time and space that she had absorbed begin to return to normal , pulling Squall 's comrades back into their places in the timeline , while Squall returns to the orphanage and meets a younger Edea . Since she does not want to involve the children , she absorbs the dying Ultimecia 's powers as part of the cycle of sorceresses ( a sorceress must pass her powers to a successor before she can die peacefully ) . Squall plants the ideas for Garden and SeeD in her mind , creating an origin paradox : Squall must become leader of Balamb Garden so he can pass its version of SeeD tradition to Edea , who teaches them to her husband Cid ( who co @-@ founds Balamb Garden , which admits Edea 's orphans — including Squall ) . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Squall appears as a non @-@ playable character in Kingdom Hearts . He wears a short leather jacket with red wings on the back ( resembling the decorations on Rinoa 's duster ) and his <unk> necklace . Squall takes the name Leon as an alias , because he was ashamed of not protecting those he loved from the Heartless when his home world ( the Radiant Garden ) was consumed by darkness . Leon is voiced by David Boreanaz in the English version of the game and Hideo Ishikawa in the Japanese version . His role in Kingdom Hearts is to help guide the protagonist , Sora , in his battle ( with other Final Fantasy characters ) against the Heartless . Although Squall 's appearance and age differ ( he is 25 in Kingdom Hearts and 17 in Final Fantasy VIII ) , his personality remains the same . A memory @-@ based version of Squall ( as Leon ) appears in Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories teaching gameplay in a tutorial . He returns in Kingdom Hearts II , voiced in the English version by Doug Erholtz . Erholtz said in an interview that he had a " fun journey " voicing Leon and it was a " really fun role to play " . Leon 's jacket later has a fur lining on its collar , which did not appear in the first Kingdom Hearts game . In this game , he works with his friends to restore their world . Squall also appears as an opponent in Olympus Coliseum tournaments , often paired with other Final Fantasy characters . His virtual replica appears in Kingdom Hearts coded , where it meets Sora 's virtual replica . 
 Squall is a secret character in Chocobo Racing and Itadaki Street Special , and a sprite version occasionally appears on the loading screen of the PlayStation version of Final Fantasy VI ( part of the Final Fantasy Anthology ) . He is the hero representing Final Fantasy VIII in Dissidia : Final Fantasy . Squall appears with the cast of the prequel Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , where his Kingdom Hearts design is downloadable content . He is a playable character in Itadaki Street Portable and the main character , representing Final Fantasy VIII , in the rhythm games Theatrhythm Final Fantasy and Theatrhythm Final Fantasy : Curtain Call . Squall also appears as a premium character in <unk> Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy : All The Bravest both for Android and iOS . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reaction to Squall was mixed . Journalist Jack Patrick Rodgers of PopMatters said that Squall 's cynicism and frustration with those around him made him a strong character , but " coldly inhuman " . GamesRadar called Squall the fifth @-@ best Final Fantasy hero of all time , praising the development of his personality and his improved interactions with other characters . GameZone rated him the fourth @-@ best character in the franchise , saying that while fans " either love or hate this guy " he became the " ultimate anti @-@ hero " ( despite little dialogue ) of an entertaining journey . The website called Squall and Rinoa the best couple created by Square Enix , noting the differences between them and the fact that their relationship was the first in the series to drive the plot of a game . They were on The Inquirer 's list of most @-@ memorable video @-@ game love teams , with comments again focused on the differences between them . GameSpot said that while Squall could be viewed as a " jerk " , he could also be seen as " standoffish because of some repressed Wagnerian <unk> , in which case he was kind of interesting " . Allgame said that they initially hated Squall , but although he originally seemed " cold and uncaring " , his romance changed him for the better . RPGamer called Squall " everyone 's favorite orphan " and said that although he tries to distance himself from others , " he can 't help but draw people to him , be it sorceresses or gun @-@ slinging ladies ' men " . GameDaily ranked him sixth on their list of the " Top 25 Gaming Hunks " , stating that while critics described the character as a " jerk " , his character design , notably his scar , made him visually appealing . Arnold Katayev of PSXextreme praised Squall 's redesign in Kingdom Hearts as the game 's best . In a 2008 Oricon poll , Squall was voted the tenth @-@ most @-@ popular video @-@ game character . He was voted the 29th @-@ best video @-@ game character by Famitsu readers in February 2010 . 
 However , IGN said that " the problem [ with Final Fantasy VIII ] is that the character at the heart of everything , Squall , is basically a pouty jerk ... When your story is character @-@ centered , you 'd better center it on a character the audience can care about . Squall ... just doesn 't fit the bill " . 1UP.com ranked Squall second on its list of the " Top 5 Most Irritating RPG Protagonists " and stated that although he was an attempt to " cater to the fedora @-@ wearing , trench @-@ coat @-@ clad folks " , his lack of social skills alienated players . Edge compared Squall unfavorably with Final Fantasy VII protagonist Cloud Strife , saying that Squall 's angst " didn 't seem to have any context " ( unlike Cloud 's , which developed from one of the pivotal events in Final Fantasy VII ) . His relationship with Rinoa was criticized by Edge : " He [ Squall ] suddenly falls in " love " with [ Rinoa ] at the end [ of Final Fantasy VIII ] . " In GamesRadar 's humorous " RPG Emo @-@ Off " , Squall was defeated in heartbreak by Cloud . Squall was featured in the 1UP.com article " Top 5 Final Fantasy Character Types " in the second category , " The Sullen Asshole " , with Cloud and Cecil from Final Fantasy IV . GameSpy featured him in its comical " Videogame Characters Who Would Suck in Real Life " , saying that in reality he would be a terrible soldier . 
 = Unknown ( magazine ) = 
 Unknown ( also known as Unknown Worlds ) was an American pulp fantasy fiction magazine , published from 1939 to 1943 by Street & Smith , and edited by John W. Campbell . Unknown was a companion to Street & Smith 's science fiction pulp , Astounding Science Fiction , which was also edited by Campbell at the time ; many authors and illustrators contributed to both magazines . The leading fantasy magazine in the 1930s was Weird Tales , which focused on shock and horror . Campbell wanted to publish a fantasy magazine with more finesse and humor than Weird Tales , and put his plans into action when Eric Frank Russell sent him the manuscript of his novel Sinister Barrier , about aliens who own the human race . Unknown 's first issue appeared in March 1939 ; in addition to Sinister Barrier , it included H. L. Gold 's " Trouble With Water " , a humorous fantasy about a New Yorker who meets a water gnome . Gold 's story was the first of many in Unknown to combine commonplace reality with the fantastic . 
 Campbell required his authors to avoid simplistic horror fiction and insisted that the fantasy elements in a story be developed logically : for example , Jack Williamson 's " Darker Than You Think " describes a world in which there is a scientific explanation for the existence of werewolves . Similarly , L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt 's Harold Shea series , about a modern American who finds himself in the worlds of various mythologies , depicts a system of magic based on mathematical logic . Other notable stories included several well @-@ received novels by L. Ron Hubbard and short stories such as Manly Wade Wellman 's " When It Was Moonlight " and Fritz Leiber 's " Two Sought Adventure " , the first in his Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser series . 
 Unknown was forced to a bimonthly schedule in 1941 by poor sales , and cancelled in 1943 when wartime paper shortages became so acute that Campbell had to choose between turning Astounding into a bimonthly or ending Unknown . The magazine is generally regarded as the finest fantasy fiction magazine ever published , despite the fact that it was not commercially successful , and in the opinion of science fiction historian Mike Ashley it was responsible for the creation of the modern fantasy publishing genre . 
 = = Background and publication history = = 
 In May 1923 , the first issue of Weird Tales appeared , from Rural Publications in Chicago . Weird Tales was a pulp magazine that specialized in fantasy stories and material that no other magazine would accept . It was not initially successful , but by the 1930s had established itself and was regularly publishing science fiction ( sf ) as well as fantasy . Weird Tales was the first magazine to focus solely on fantasy , and it remained the pre @-@ eminent magazine in this field for over a decade . In the meantime , science fiction was starting to form a separately marketed genre , with the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine edited by Hugo Gernsback . In 1930 pulp publisher Clayton Publications launched Astounding Stories of Super Science , but the company 's bankruptcy in 1933 led to the acquisition of the magazine by Street & Smith . The title was shortened to Astounding Stories , and it became the leading magazine in the science fiction field over the next few years under the editorship of F. Orlin Tremaine . At the end of 1937 John W. Campbell took over as editor . 
 By 1938 , Campbell was planning a fantasy companion to Astounding : Weird Tales was still the leader in the fantasy genre , though competitors such as Strange Stories were also being launched . Campbell began acquiring stories suitable for the new magazine , without a definite launch date in mind . When Eric Frank Russell sent him the manuscript of his novel Sinister Barrier , Campbell decided it was time to put his plans into action . The first issue of Unknown appeared in March 1939 . It was a monthly at first , but poor sales forced a switch to a bimonthly schedule beginning in February 1941 . In December 1940 the subtitle Fantasy Fiction was added , and in October 1941 the main title was changed to Unknown Worlds ; both changes were intended to make the genre of the magazine clearer to potential readers . When wartime paper shortages became severe in late 1943 , Campbell made the choice to keep Astounding monthly and cancel Unknown , rather than switch the former to a bimonthly schedule as well . The last issue was dated October 1943 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 Campbell 's plans for Unknown were laid out in the February 1939 issue of Astounding , in the announcement of the new magazine . He argued that " it has been the quality of the fantasy that you have read in the past that has made the very word anathema ... [ Unknown ] will offer fantasy of a quality so far different from that which has appeared in the past as to change your entire understanding of the term " . The first issue , the following month , led with Russell 's Sinister Barrier , the novel that had persuaded Campbell to set his plans for a fantasy magazine into motion : the plot , involving aliens who own the human race , has been described by sf historian Mike Ashley as " a strange mixture of science fiction and occult fantasy " . Campbell asked Russell for revisions to the story to emphasize the fantastic elements , but still demanded that Russell work out the logical implications of his premises . This became a defining characteristic of the fiction published in Unknown ; in Ashley 's words , Campbell " brought the science fiction rationale to fantasy " . The first issue also contained Horace L. Gold 's " Trouble with Water " , a comic fantasy about a modern New Yorker who offends a water gnome ; in its whimsicality and naturalistic merging of a modern background with a classic fantasy trope , " Trouble with Water " was a better indication than Sinister Barrier of the direction Unknown would take . Campbell commented in a letter at the time that Sinister Barrier , " Trouble with Water " , and " ' Where Angels Fear ... ' " by Manly Wade Wellman were the only stories in the first issue that accurately reflected his goals for the magazine . 
 Under Campbell 's editorial supervision , the fantasy element in Unknown stories had to be treated rigorously . This naturally led to the appearance in Unknown of writers already comfortable with similar rigor in science fiction stories , and Campbell soon established a small group of writers as regular contributors , many of whom were also appearing in the pages of Astounding . L. Ron Hubbard , Theodore Sturgeon , and L. Sprague de Camp were among the most prolific . Hubbard contributed eight lead novels including Typewriter in the Sky , Slaves of Sleep , and Fear , described by Ashley as a " classic psychological thriller " ; sf historian and critic Thomas Clareson describes all eight as " outstanding " . De Camp , in collaboration with Fletcher Pratt , contributed three stories featuring Harold Shea , who finds himself in a world where magic operates by rigorous rules . The title of one of these , " The Mathematics of Magic " , is , according to sf critic John Clute , " perfectly expressive of the terms under which magic found easy mention in Unknown " . 
 Other Astounding writers who wrote for Unknown included Robert A. Heinlein , whose " The Devil Makes the Law " ( reprinted as " Magic , Inc . " ) depicts a world where magic is a part of normal everyday life . Heinlein also contributed " The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag " and " They " , described by Ashley as " perhaps the ultimate solipsist fantasy " . A.E. van Vogt , a frequent Astounding contributor , appeared in the final issue with " The Book of <unk> " ( later expanded into a novel ) . Isaac Asimov , despite multiple attempts to write for Unknown , never appeared in the magazine . On his sixth attempt , he sold " Author ! Author ! " to Campbell , but the magazine was cancelled before it could appear . It eventually appeared in the anthology The Unknown Five . 
 In addition to the overlap between the writers of Unknown and Astounding , there was a good deal of overlap between their readerships : Asimov records that during the war , he read only these two magazines . Sf historian Paul Carter has argued that the spectrum of fantastic fiction from Weird Tales through Unknown to Astounding was far less cleanly separated than is sometimes assumed : many stories in the early science fiction magazines such as Wonder Stories were more like the works of Edgar Allan Poe than they were tales of scientific imagination . 
 Fritz Leiber 's first published story was " Two Sought Adventure " , which appeared in the August 1939 issue of Unknown ; this was the first story in his long @-@ running Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser series about a pair of adventurers in a sword and sorcery setting . Four more Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories appeared in Unknown in as many years , and Leiber 's novel Conjure Wife , about a man who discovers that all women are secretly witches , was the lead story in the April 1943 issue . The protagonist , a university professor , " is forced to abandon scepticism and discover the underlying equations of magic , via symbolic logic " , in critic David Langford 's description . Leiber also contributed " Smoke Ghost " in October 1941 , described by Ashley as " arguably the first seriously modern ghost story " . Another writer whose first story appeared in Unknown was James H. Schmitz , whose " <unk> " appeared in the August 1943 issue . 
 Other notable stories that appeared in Unknown include Jack Williamson 's " Darker Than You Think " ( December 1940 ) , which provides a scientific basis for a race of werewolves living undetected alongside human beings . Expanded into a novel in 1948 , it remains Williamson 's best @-@ known fantasy , and sf historian Malcolm Edwards comments that the two protagonists ' relationship is " depicted with a tortured ( and still haunting ) erotic frankness unusual in genre literature of the 1940s " . In addition to the Harold Shea pieces , de Camp published several other well @-@ received stories , including " The Wheels of If " ( October 1940 ) and " Lest Darkness Fall " ( December 1939 ) , an alternate history story about a time @-@ traveler who attempts to save the Roman Empire from the coming Dark Ages ; Edwards and Clute comment that the story is " the most accomplished early excursion into history in magazine sf , and is regarded as a classic " . Also highly regarded is Wellman 's " When It Was Moonlight " ( December 1940 ) , a story about Poe . 
 The first sixteen issues of Unknown had cover paintings , but from July 1940 the cover style was changed to a table of contents , with a small ink drawing usually accompanying the summary of each story , in an attempt to make the magazine appear more dignified . The cover art came almost entirely from artists who did not contribute to many science fiction or fantasy magazines : six of the sixteen paintings were by H. W. Scott ; Manuel Islip , Modest Stein , Graves Gladney , and Edd Cartier provided the others . Cartier was the only one of these who regularly contributed to sf and fantasy periodicals ; he painted four of Unknown 's last six covers before the change to a text @-@ heavy design . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Unknown was , along with Weird Tales , an important early influence on the fantasy genre . In the foreword to From Unknown Worlds , in 1948 , Campbell commented that fantasy before Unknown had been too much infused with " gloom and terror " ; his approach in Unknown had been to assume that the " creatures of mythology and folklore " could be characters in an amusing tale as easily as they could be made part of a horror story . Horror stories , he said , had a place , but " horror injected with a sharp and poisoned needle is just as effective as when applied with the blunt @-@ instrument technique of the so @-@ called Gothic horror tale " . Campbell insisted on the same rational approach to fantasy that he required of his science fiction writers , and in the words of Clareson , this led to the destruction of " not only the prevalent narrative tone but also most of the trappings that had dominated fantasy from The Castle of Otranto and The Monk through the nineteenth century to Weird Tales " . Unknown quickly separated itself from Weird Tales , whose fantasies still primarily aimed to produce fear or shock . The closest predecessor to Unknown was Thorne Smith , whose prohibition @-@ era " Topper " stories also mixed fantasy with humor . Before Unknown , fantasy had received little serious attention , though on occasion writers such as James Branch Cabell had achieved respectability . In Ashley 's opinion , Unknown created the modern genre of fantasy , though commercial success for the genre had to wait until the 1970s . 
 Clareson also suggests that Unknown influenced the science fiction that appeared in Astounding after Unknown folded . According to this view , stories such as Clifford Simak 's City series would not have appeared without the destruction of genre boundaries that Campbell oversaw . Clareson further proposes that Galaxy Science Fiction and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction , two of the most important and successful science fiction and fantasy magazines , were direct descendants of Unknown . 
 Unknown is widely regarded as the finest fantasy magazine ever published : Ashley says , for example , that " Unknown published without doubt the greatest collection of fantasy stories produced in one magazine . " Despite its lack of commercial success , Unknown is the most lamented of all science fiction and fantasy magazines ; Lester del Rey describes it as having gained " a devotion from its readers that no other magazine can match " . Edwards comments that Unknown " appeared during Campbell 's peak years as an editor ; its reputation may stand as high as it does partly because it died while still at its best " . 
 In a conversation with David G. Hartwell in 1962 , Shirley Jackson stated she owned a complete run of Unknown and expressed strong admiration for the publication , stating " It 's the best " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Unknown was edited by John W. Campbell and published by Street & Smith Publications throughout its run . It was pulp @-@ sized from its launch through August 1941 , and then bedsheet @-@ sized from October 1941 to April 1943 . The last three issues were pulp @-@ sized again . Street & Smith had planned to switch it to digest size with the December 1943 issue , but it was cancelled before that issue appeared . The price began at 20 cents and rose to 25 cents with the change to bedsheet size ; it remained at 25 cents when the size changed back to pulp . It had 164 pages when pulp @-@ sized and 130 pages while it was bedsheet @-@ sized . It began as a monthly and switched to bimonthly from December 1940 on . The volume numbering was regular , with six volumes of six numbers and a final volume of three numbers . The title began as simply Unknown . In December 1940 " Fantasy Fiction " was added as a subtitle , and with the following issue the title became Unknown Worlds . 
 The first six U.S. issues were available directly in the UK , but thereafter an abridged British reprint edition was issued by Atlas Publications , beginning in September 1939 . It was pulp @-@ sized , and priced at 9d ( nine pence ) throughout . It appeared on a regular monthly schedule until December 1940 , after which the schedule became quite irregular , with two or three issues appearing each year until 1949 . The volume numbering initially followed the corresponding U.S. editions , with some omitted numbers in 1942 and 1943 , and then disappeared for four issues ; from the twenty @-@ eighth issue ( Spring 1945 ) the magazine was numbered as if it had been given volumes of twelve numbers since the start of the run . The title was changed from Unknown to Unknown Worlds with the March 1942 issue . 
 = = = Related publications = = = 
 In 1948 , Street & Smith reprinted several stories from Unknown in a bedsheet @-@ sized magazine format , priced at 25 cents , with the title From Unknown Worlds . This was an attempt to determine if there was a market for a revived Unknown . Street & Smith printed 300 @,@ 000 copies , against the advice of John Campbell , but although it sold better than the original , too many copies were returned for the publisher to be willing to revive the magazine . The issue was reprinted in Britain in 1952 , reduced in size to 7 by 9 @.@ 5 inches ( 180 mm × 240 mm ) and cut from 130 pages to 124 ; it was priced at 2 / 6 ( two shillings and six pence ) . Part of the run was issued in a hardcover binding at a higher price . One story from the U.S. version was omitted : " One Man 's Harp " by Babette <unk> . 
 Three anthologies of stories from Unknown were published in the early 1960s . The Unknown Five includes four stories reprinted from Unknown and the first print appearance of " Author ! Author ! " , by Isaac Asimov , which was sold to Unknown shortly before Street & Smith shut it down . Two additional Unknown anthologies were published in the late 1980s . 
 = Khris Middleton = 
 James <unk> " Khris " Middleton ( born August 12 , 1991 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Milwaukee Bucks of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He attended Porter @-@ Gaud School , where he was coached by John Pearson . As a junior and senior , he was named South Carolina Player of the Year , and was a McDonald 's All @-@ American nominee . He went on to play college basketball for Texas A & M University , where he started the majority of the games in his freshman year . In his sophomore season , he earned second @-@ team All @-@ Big 12 honors after leading the Aggies in scoring with 14 @.@ 3 points per game . Middleton was selected by the Detroit Pistons with the 39th overall pick of the 2012 NBA draft . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Middleton was born on August 12 , 1991 in Charleston , South Carolina to James and Nichelle Middleton . He has one older sister named Brittney , and his cousin , Josh Powell , has played in the NBA . Another cousin , Kenny <unk> , plays basketball for Wichita State University and was teammates with Middleton on the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) team Carolina Celtics . Two other teammates on the Carolina Celtics accepted Division I basketball scholarships , Jamal Curry ( Radford ) and Devin Booker ( Clemson ) . 
 Middleton attended Porter @-@ Gaud School and played basketball for the Cyclones under coach John Pearson . As a sophomore , he averaged 12 points and eight rebounds per game . In his junior season , Middleton posted averages of 21 points and 8 @.@ 6 rebounds per game and was named state player of the year . He repeated as player of the year as a senior , scoring 22 @.@ 4 points per game and grabbing 8 @.@ 6 rebounds per game in leading Porter @-@ Gaud to the state title game . Middleton was named Most Valuable Player of the Porter @-@ Gaud Holiday Classic , scoring 22 points in the championship . He was nominated for the 2009 McDonald 's All @-@ American Boys Game , but was not selected to participate . 
 ESPN ranked him the 64th best prospect in the Class of 2009 , and noted he was the best shooter at his position . Middleton was recruited by Texas A & M , Virginia Tech , South Carolina , Michigan , and Saint Joseph 's . He chose Texas A & M , and signed with the Aggies on May 30 , 2008 . He liked the college town atmosphere , and got along well with the coaching staff . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Coming into his freshman year , Middleton expected to fill the three point shooting void of departed senior Josh Carter . Middleton 's college career started slowly , connecting on 1 @-@ of @-@ 12 field goals in limited action of his first three games . After a season @-@ ending leg injury to Derrick Roland on December 11 , 2009 , Middleton was forced to take a larger role in the offense and started 18 of the last 20 games . On February 3 , 2010 , he scored 16 points to help Texas A & M erase an 11 @-@ point second half deficit to defeat Missouri 77 @-@ 74 . In a 69 @-@ 53 NCAA Tournament Round of 64 victory over Utah State , Middleton scored a season @-@ high 19 points on 7 @-@ of @-@ 10 shooting . Texas A & M 's season ended with a loss in the Round of 32 to Purdue ; the Aggies finished with a record of 24 @-@ 10 . Overall Khris Middleton averaged 7 @.@ 2 points and 3 @.@ 7 rebounds per game and led the team in scoring five times . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 As a sophomore , Middleton led the team and finished ninth in the Big 12 in scoring at 14 @.@ 3 points per game while also contributing 5 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . He hit 45 percent of his shots from the floor and 78 @.@ 4 percent of his free throws . Middleton scored in excess of 10 points in 27 games and led the team in scoring 16 times . He scored a career @-@ high 31 points in a 71 @-@ 62 overtime victory over Arkansas , including 11 of the team 's las 12 points in regulation . This earned him Big 12 Player of the Week and Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week honors for the week of December 13 – 19 , 2010 . On January 15 , 2011 , Middleton tallied 28 points , including 11 in overtime , to defeat Missouri 91 @-@ 89 . 
 Middleton @-@ led Texas A & M went 24 @-@ 9 and lost in the NCAA Tournament Round of 64 to Florida State 57 @-@ 50 , in a contest in which Middleton contributed 16 points . He was selected to the All @-@ Big 12 Second Team at the conclusion of the regular season . The U.S. Basketball Writers Association named Middleton to the 10 @-@ man All @-@ District VII team covering college basketball players in the states of Texas , Arkansas , and Louisiana . He was recognized as an All @-@ Eighth District second @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All ‐ America teams . Since the Big 12 Conference was its own district , this is equivalent to being named second team All @-@ Big 12 by the NABC . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Prior to Middleton 's junior season , head coach Mark Turgeon left to take the same position at the University of Maryland and was replaced by Billy Kennedy of Murray State . Middleton was impressed with Kennedy 's coaching acumen and chose to remain an Aggie . He was listed on the preseason watchlist for the Wooden Award . Middleton was a unanimous choice to the preseason All @-@ Big 12 team . 
 Despite being the preseason co @-@ favorite in the league , Texas A & M finished 14 @-@ 18 overall and 4 @-@ 14 in the Big 12 . The team was hampered by a rash of injuries , including a knee injury that forced Middleton to sit for 12 games . He averaged 13 @.@ 2 points and 5 @.@ 0 rebounds per game , down from the previous season . On April 9 , 2012 , Middleton declared for the NBA Draft , forgoing his final season of collegiate eligibility . He thanked Texas A & M in a statement . 
 = = = College statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Detroit Pistons ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Middleton was selected by the Detroit Pistons with the 39th overall pick in the 2012 NBA draft . On August 15 , 2012 , he signed his rookie scale contract with the Pistons . On December 12 , 2012 , he was assigned to the Fort Wayne Mad Ants of the NBA Development League . A week later , he was recalled by the Pistons . He finished his rookie season having managed just 27 games for the Pistons while averaging 6 @.@ 1 points , 1 @.@ 9 rebounds and 1 @.@ 0 assists in 17 @.@ 6 minutes per game . 
 = = = Milwaukee Bucks ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 On July 31 , 2013 , Middleton was traded , along with Brandon Knight and Viacheslav <unk> , to the Milwaukee Bucks in exchange for guard Brandon Jennings . In contrast to his limited action in 2012 – 13 , Middleton played all 82 games in 2013 – 14 , while starting 64 and averaging 12 @.@ 1 points , 3 @.@ 8 rebounds , 2 @.@ 1 assists and 1 @.@ 0 steals in 30 @.@ 0 minutes per game . On December 6 , 2013 , he scored a then career @-@ high 29 points in a 109 – 105 win over the Washington Wizards . 
 On December 15 , 2014 , the Bucks were down by one to the Phoenix Suns with under four seconds remaining in regulation as Middleton hit a contested game @-@ winning buzzer beater to defeat the Suns , 96 – 94 . In just under 29 minutes of action off the bench , he recorded 14 points , 3 assists , 1 rebound and 1 steal . On March 7 , 2015 , he scored a then career @-@ high 30 points on 11 @-@ of @-@ 20 shooting in a 91 – 85 win over the Washington Wizards . In his second season with the Bucks , Middleton emerged as an important " 3 @-@ and @-@ D " player , shooting 46 @.@ 7 percent from the floor and 40 @.@ 7 percent from behind the three @-@ point arc . He averaged 13 @.@ 4 points , 4 @.@ 4 rebounds and 2 @.@ 3 assists per game . 
 On July 9 , 2015 , Middleton re @-@ signed with the Bucks to a five @-@ year , $ 70 million contract , with a player option for the fifth year . This constituted a significant pay raise for Middleton , as he earned $ 915 @,@ 000 the prior year . On December 29 , 2015 , in a loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder , he scored a career @-@ high 36 points on 13 @-@ of @-@ 22 from the field and 6 @-@ of @-@ 9 from three @-@ point range . On March 4 , 2016 , in a win over the Minnesota Timberwolves , he scored 32 points on 11 @-@ of @-@ 16 shooting , including 8 @-@ of @-@ 9 on three @-@ pointers , marking the most three @-@ pointers made by a Bucks player since Carlos Delfino had eight on March 18 , 2011 . He tied his career high of 36 points on April 10 , 2016 in a 109 – 108 overtime win over the Philadelphia 76ers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Middleton is a Christian . 
 On July 7 , 2015 , Middleton penned a column in The Players ' Tribune about the 2015 Charleston church shooting . He explained that the shooting affected him deeply because he grew up in Charleston and his grandmother , Juanita Middleton , knew four of the nine people slaughtered . Khris Middleton had personally met one of the victims , Cynthia Hurd , as she dropped her nephew off at a basketball camp not long before the shooting . " In Charleston , we ’ re staying strong , but the wounds are still deep , " he wrote . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = Bedminster railway station = 
 Bedminster railway station is on the Bristol to Exeter Line and serves the districts of Bedminster and Windmill Hill in Bristol , England . It is 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) to the west of Bristol Temple Meads , and 119 miles ( 192 km ) from London Paddington . Its three letter station code is BMT . It was opened in 1871 by the Bristol and Exeter Railway , was resited slightly further to the west in 1884 and was rebuilt in 1932 . The station , which has three through @-@ lines and two island platforms , but minimal facilities , is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly an hourly service between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . 
 There is local support for the line to be electrified , as an extension of the planned electrification of the London to Bristol route , and the level of service will be increased by two trains per hour between Portishead and Bristol when the Portishead Branch Line reopens to passengers in 2019 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The station is built on the lower northern slopes of Windmill Hill , on the Bristol to Exeter Line 119 miles 22 chains ( 191 @.@ 95 km ) from London Paddington and 71 chains ( 1 @.@ 43 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . It the first station along the line from Bristol . To the south of the station is a primarily residential area , with terraced houses and several tower blocks ; while to the north is an industrial estate and shopping area . The railway line serves as the boundary between the <unk> and Windmill Hill council wards , although the area is generally considered part of Bedminster , it is not part of the Bedminster council ward . The area is also served by Parson Street railway station , 74 chains ( 1 @.@ 49 km ) further along the line . 
 The station has two island platforms , each 240 yards ( 220 m ) long , but only the first 100 – 110 yards ( 90 – 100 m ) are in use , the rest fenced off . Platform 1 is on the north side of the southern island , on the " Down Main " line serving westbound trains , the other side of the island is not in use , having been converted to a carriage siding . Platforms 2 and 3 are on the northern island . Platform 3 , on the north side " Up Relief " line , is used exclusively for eastbound trains . Platform 2 , on the south side " Up Main " line , is used mostly for eastbound trains , but can be used for westbound services , as the line is signalled for bidirectional running . There is a carriage siding on the south side of the southern island , coming from the east and terminating within the station limits . The speed limit through the station is 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) on the Down Main and eastbound on the Up Main . The Up Relief and westbound Up Main have a speed limit of 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) , the siding has a speed limit of 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) . The line is not electrified . 
 Access between the platforms is via a subway with ramps at the west end of the platforms , although the station is not considered completely accessible as the ramps are steeper than 1 in 12 . The subway exits onto Fraser Street , which is the sole entrance to the station . The subway is decorated with murals painted by local schoolchildren , reflecting the history and culture of Bristol . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – there is a metal and glass shelter on each of the two islands , and a bench on the eastbound island . The station is completely unstaffed , and there are no facilities for buying tickets . There are customer help points , giving next train information for both platforms . There is no car park or taxi rank , and the nearest bus stop is 200 yards ( 180 m ) away on Malago Road . There is some cycle storage available . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who also operate all rail services from the station . As of the May 2016 timetable , the basic service from Monday to Friday consists of one train in each direction per hour between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , calling at all stations . Some trains working between Cardiff and Taunton or Exeter St Davids call at peak hours and in the evening . All weekday trains at Bedminster also stop at Parson Street westbound and Bristol Temple Meads eastbound . On Saturday there is a similar pattern , but with no services beyond Bristol Parkway or Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare except during the early morning and late evening . Sunday sees a reduced service , with no trains eastbound until afternoon , and no trains westbound until 3pm . After that there is approximately one train every two hours , most of which do not call at Parson Street . 
 Services are formed by a mix of Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . CrossCountry services between Scotland and the South West pass non @-@ stop throughout the day , with Great Western Railway services between London Paddington and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare passing through during the morning and evening peaks . 
 The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 4 minutes , while to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare takes 33 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway 's main line opened on 14 June 1841 between Bristol and Bridgwater . The station at Bedminster , originally known as Ashton , opened in 1871 , on the site of an earlier excursion platform which had closed in about 1870 . Sited approximately 57 chains ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) from the Bristol & Exeter 's northern terminus at Bristol Temple Meads and 119 miles 08 chains ( 191 @.@ 7 km ) from the Great Western Railway 's London terminus at Paddington , there were two tracks , both originally 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge , but the line was reconstructed as a mixed gauge line to accommodate local 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) -gauge traffic by 1 June 1875 . On 1 January 1876 , the Bristol and Exeter was amalgamated into the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) , who took over services . The station had been renamed Bedminster by 1884 , when on 27 May the original station closed and a new station was opened some 14 chains ( 280 m ) west . There were two separate platforms , one on each side of the two tracks . Broad @-@ gauge trains ceased operation on 20 May 1892 , and in 1908 the new station was extended , with the addition of ornate station buildings and a footbridge at the west end of the platforms . Until the opening of Parson Street in 1927 , Bedminster had served as the first station for trains heading for the Portishead Branch Line , which served the town of Portishead , the villages of Pill and Portbury , and the south side of the River Avon . 
 The station was rebuilt in 1932 , opening on 30 April . The ornate buildings were demolished to enable the line to be four @-@ tracked , and were replaced by more austere buildings on two island platforms between the tracks , including two waiting rooms , ticket and parcel offices . The new station was accessed , as now , by a subway from Fraser Street . The station employed 15 men in 1938 . There was a 74 lever signal box to the east of the northern platform , and also a small siding to serve local coal merchants . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , the GWR became the Western Region of British Railways . Goods traffic at Bedminster ceased from 1 June 1964 , traffic to Portishead ended with the closure of that line in September the same year , and the station became unstaffed from September 1968 . The signal box was taken out of service in April 1970 , and by 1979 all the station buildings had been demolished . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Bedminster passed to Regional Railways . Local services were franchised to Wales & West when the railway was privatised in 1997 , which was in turn succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded in 2015 as Great Western Railway . 
 In 2010 , the Severnside Community Rail Partnership began a comprehensive scheme to improve the station . The work included removing foliage from the platforms , new lighting and artwork for the subway , community display panels and the installation of help points . The subway artwork came third in the arts category at the 2011 Community Rail Awards . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined an option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise , of which services at Bedminster are a part , beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , so Bedminster will continue to be served by diesel trains . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . " Sprinter " units , which currently operate the train service , are expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . 
 Bedminster is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . As part of this scheme , the Portishead Branch Line , which runs along the south side of the River Avon from a junction just beyond Parson Street railway station , will be reopened . Trains along the line will likely serve Bedminster , with an aspiration of two trains per hour in peak periods . The line was built in the 1860s , but closed to passenger traffic in 1964 , leaving Portishead as one of Britain 's largest towns without a railway station . The line was reopened for freight traffic to serve Royal Portbury Docks in 2001 . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . A consultation on the plans was held between 22 June and 3 August 2015 to gather views from the community and stakeholders before moving on to detailed designs . The detailed proposals will be subject to a second consultation before the plans are finalised . Trains along the reopened line will operate between Portishead and Bristol Temple Meads , with two trains per hour in each direction . Services would call at Pill and Parson Street , with aspirations to also call at Bedminster and a reopened Ashton Gate . Trains could also be extended on to the Severn Beach Line . The line will be operated as part of the Greater Western passenger franchise , with services due to start in Spring 2019 . 
 The Down Relief line between Bristol Temple Meads and Parson Street is to be partially reinstated as part of the MetroWest scheme in order to ease congestion . According to the Great Western Route Utilisation Strategy , in the December 2007 timetable period , the line through Parson Street was running at over 75 % capacity in the morning peak between 8 and 9am . It was predicted that by 2019 , trains working the line would be completely full during peak hours . While the three tracks could cope with traffic generated by the reopening of the Portishead Line , campaigners note it would leave little room for growth . Parson Street Junction will also be upgraded during the works . 
 = = Incidents = = 
