 There have been several railway incidents in the Bedminster area over the years . On 1 May 2001 , a Class 153 unit passed a red signal near Bedminster , but was stopped before it could head on to the Main line from the Relief line in front of a High Speed Train . Three years later , on 23 September 2004 , the 12 : 10 Wessex Trains service from Penzance to Bristol Temple Meads struck and killed a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy on the Up Relief line , who had been hiding under the platform . The death was ruled accidental . 
 What used to be the westbound relief line at Bedminster was converted into a carriage siding , and is used to stable trains to avoid clogging the platforms at Bristol Temple Meads . However , as the tracks are fairly easily accessible , such trains can be a magnet for vandals , causing First Great Western to offer a reward of £ 1000 in March 2007 to catch vandals who had been damaging and spray @-@ painting the trains . More generally , there were 19 crimes reported at Bedminster railway station in 2007 , and 14 in 2008 . British Transport Police statistics noted a 53 % reduction in reported crime at Bristol area stations between 2007 and 2012 . 
 On 6 January 2009 , the Windmill Hill bridge , just to the west of Bedminster station , was hit by a vehicle , causing some delays to train services while it was assessed for damage . The bridge was struck again on 17 December 2009 , which stopped services for 40 minutes . 
 = The Tale of Benjamin Bunny = 
 The Tale of Benjamin Bunny is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , and first published by Frederick Warne & Co. in September 1904 . The book is a sequel to The Tale of Peter Rabbit ( 1902 ) , and tells of Peter 's return to Mr. McGregor 's garden with his cousin Benjamin to retrieve the clothes he lost there during his previous adventure . In Benjamin Bunny , Potter deepened the rabbit universe she created in Peter Rabbit , and , in doing so , suggested the rabbit world was parallel to the human world but complete and sufficient unto itself . 
 Benjamin Bunny was an instant commercial and popular success , and thousands of copies were in print by the end of 1904 . The Times Literary Supplement thought Potter 's illustrations " pencil perfect " , but suggested that she engage a literary assistant for future productions . Potter created a nursery wallpaper tapping Benjamin 's image , and Benjamin returned as an adult rabbit in the Flopsy Bunnies and Mr. Tod . In 1992 , Benjamin Bunny was adapted as an episode of the BBC animated television series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Mr. McGregor and his wife leave home in their gig , Benjamin Bunny and his cousin Peter Rabbit venture into Mr. McGregor 's garden to retrieve the clothes Peter lost there in The Tale of Peter Rabbit . They find the blue jacket and brown shoes on a scarecrow , but Peter is apprehensive about lingering in the garden because of his previous experience . Benjamin delays their departure by gathering onions , which he wraps in Peter 's handkerchief , hoping to give them to his aunt , Peter 's mother . He then takes a casual stroll around the garden , followed by an increasingly nervous Peter . 
 Rounding a corner , they see a cat and hide under a basket , but the cat then sits on top of the basket for hours , trapping the pair . Benjamin 's father enters the garden looking for his son . He drives the cat from the basket and locks her in the greenhouse , then rescues Benjamin and Peter . But he also punishes them for going to Mr. McGregor 's garden by whipping them with a switch he had brought . Once home , Peter gives the onions to his mother , who forgives his adventure because he has recovered his jacket and shoes . Following his return , Mr. McGregor is puzzled by the scarecrow 's missing clothes and the cat locked in the greenhouse . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1901 , Potter privately published The Tale of Peter Rabbit , and , in 1902 , Frederick Warne & Co. published a trade edition of the book , which was hugely successful . In 1904 , she followed Peter Rabbit with its sequel , The Tale of Benjamin Bunny , and continued the rabbit saga in 1909 with The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies and in 1912 with The Tale of Mr. Tod . All the tales were in part inspired by Joel Chandler Harris 's Uncle Remus stories , which Potter illustrated as early as 1893 in an attempt to find a career direction . Potter was unable to successfully translate Harris 's characters to the English country garden , but she transformed the American author 's " lippity @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ lippity " to " lippity @-@ lippity " in Peter Rabbit , and used his " rabbit tobacco " ( lavender ) in Benjamin Bunny and Mr. Tod . None of her rabbit characters were based on Br 'er Rabbit ; Harris 's rabbit wins by cunning , but Potter 's Benjamin and Peter win by pure luck . The rabbit universe in Potter is decidedly a more pleasant place than that found in Harris 's stories . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 In July 1903 , Potter suggested to her publisher Frederick Warne & Co. that the book to follow The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin and The Tailor of Gloucester ought to be something less complex than the two previous productions . She had several possible stories in mind and outlined them for the firm , but was anxious to settle on a choice as quickly as possible to guide her sketching while on holiday . It was decided between Potter and her publisher that one of the two books for 1904 would be Benjamin Bunny . Benjamin Bunny had been mentioned in the manuscript of the privately printed edition of Peter Rabbit but had been dropped as irrelevant to the tale . A picture of his father was included in the private edition although he has no part in the story . 
 Potter was sensitive to the beginnings and endings of her books and usually avoided the conventional at those key places . The publisher did not like the Benjamin Bunny ending , but she refused to alter it to their suggested " happily ever after " because such an ending in her estimation was " rather trite " and " inexact " . She suggested the last paragraph as it now appears in the book with the comment , " I would like the book to end with the word ' rabbit @-@ tobacco ' , it is a rather fine word . " She rewrote several other passages including twice rewriting the passage depicting Mr. McGregor 's discovery of the cat locked in the greenhouse . 
 <unk> at Fawe Park in Keswick , Cumbria with her parents , Potter filled her sketchbook with pictures of the estate 's several gardens including the kitchen garden and its greenhouses , cold frames , potting shed , and <unk> fruit trees . Her father photographed Fawe Park and Potter probably used his photographs ( or her own ) as an aid in her work . The picture of Old Mr. Bunny attacking the cat did not satisfy her publisher , and she redrew it as she did the picture of Benjamin and Peter standing on the garden wall . In Peter Rabbit , Mr. McGregor 's garden was in Perthshire , but in Benjamin Bunny , the rabbit clan and the garden setting were moved to the Lake District , where they remained for The Tale of Mr. Tod , the final book of the Peter Rabbit saga . 
 During her London winter , Potter developed her work , and , by the middle of June 1904 , Benjamin Bunny was almost finished . Many of the sketches from her Fawe Park holiday were little altered in their migration to the book , and , upon completion of the work , Potter declared she was relieved to be finished with the rabbits . 
 The book was dedicated to " the children of Sawrey from old Mr. Bunny " . Beginnings and endings of tales were important to Potter and she specified Benjamin Bunny was to end with the words , " rabbit tobacco " – a term from Uncle Remus she had made her own . 
 Twenty thousand copies were published and released in September 1904 . Within a month , reprints were ordered , and another ten thousand copies were printed at year 's end . Much to her embarrassment , Potter realized " <unk> " ( a muff worn at the wrist ) was misspelled , but the error was not corrected until the third printing . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 Potter borrowed a cat , and took a pet rabbit to Fawe Park as models . Her meticulous preparation before finalizing an illustration was noted in a letter to Warne : " I think I have done every imaginable rabbit background and miscellaneous sketches as well – about seventy ! I hope you will like them , though rather scribbled . " <unk> or not , the work is of the highest quality with the sketches of onions and red carnations ( which were dropped as the frontispiece ) being chief examples . The illustrations communicate her obvious appreciation and love for the humble pots , onions , and flowers of the garden . Many of the objects in the illustrations – the gate , the potting shed , the wall – have changed little over the years and are recognizable today from her illustrations . Aware the type of story she was writing was set primarily in colours of fawn , brown , and soft green , Potter wrote that , " the ( red ) handkerchief will make a good bit of colour all through the book . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The tale was well received by the Scotsman , but The Times Literary Supplement was not entirely enthusiastic : 
 Among the little books that have become as much a manifestation of autumn as falling leaves , one looks first for whatever Miss Beatrix Potter gives ... In her new book ... although there is no diminution in the charm and drollery of the drawings , Miss Potter 's fancy is not what it was . The story is inconclusive . Next year we think she must call in a literary assistant . We have no hesitation in calling her pencil perfect . 
 Potter biographer Linda Lear notes that none of the rabbit books subsequent to Peter Rabbit appealed to Potter with the passion she experienced for the original , but , in Benjamin Bunny , she successfully wrote a simple , didactic tale for very young children that was less complicated than The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin and The Tailor of Gloucester . Benjamin Bunny however lacked the vitality of her previous efforts because it was made to order rather than allowed to flower from a picture letter to real children in the manner of Peter Rabbit and Squirrel Nutkin . The weak story line of Benjamin Bunny is evidence of her dwindling interest in continuing the Peter Rabbit saga , but the book displays a delight in place , a deep understanding of rabbit anatomy and behaviour , and beautifully miniaturized illustrations of vegetable gardens . Benjamin Bunny presented demands upon Potter she had not encountered in her previous three tales . She had depleted all her sketchbook backgrounds in the production of the other tales and was forced to create new ones , but the greatest challenge to Potter 's artistry was consciously working to satisfy both her publisher 's demand for another commercial success and her public 's expectation of a tale as delightful as her others while labouring under the pressure to produce a sequel to a work of genius . 
 = = Merchandising and adaptations = = 
 Benjamin became a motif in a nursery wallpaper designed by Potter shortly after the tale 's publication . Benjamin and Peter made a cameo appearance in the artwork of Potter 's The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy @-@ Winkle ( 1905 ) , and returned as adult rabbits in The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies ( 1909 ) and The Tale of Mr. Tod ( 1912 ) . 
 In 1992 , an animated adaptation of the story was integrated with The Tale of Peter Rabbit and telecast on the BBC anthology series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . Benjamin also appeared in the episodes , The Tale of Mr. Tod and The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies and Mrs. Tittlemouse . Also in the BBC adaptation , Peter Rabbit 's mother 's first name is revealed to be Josephine , while in the actual books , her first name is not given . 
 = Steamer Maxwell = 
 Frederick George " Steamer " Maxwell ( May 19 , 1890 – September 11 , 1975 ) was a Canadian amateur ice hockey player . He played rover in the days of seven @-@ man hockey at the turn of the 20th century , spending six seasons with the Winnipeg Monarchs of the Manitoba Hockey League ( MHL ) between 1909 and 1915 . Considered one of the top players of his era , he won two Manitoba provincial championships with the Monarchs and was a member of the team that won the 1915 Allan Cup as Canadian senior amateur champions . Maxwell spurned multiple offers to turn professional and ultimately quit playing hockey when he learned some of his peers at the senior amateur level were getting paid . 
 A long @-@ time coach at the senior level , Maxwell led the Winnipeg Falcons to an Allan Cup championship in 1920 ; the team went on to win an Olympic Gold medal as Canada 's representative in the 1920 Olympic ice hockey tournament . He coached into the 1930s , leading several teams to senior and junior championships . Maxwell is an honoured member of the Manitoba Sports and Hockey Halls of Fame and was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1962 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Quick on his feet , Maxwell 's skating ability at rover earned him the nickname " Steamer " . He began his senior career in 1909 – 10 , appearing in one game with the Winnipeg Monarchs of the Manitoba Hockey League ( MHL ) . In 1910 – 11 , he scored six goals for the Monarchs in five games and was named to the league 's second All @-@ Star team . He scored seven goals in seven games for the Monarchs in 1911 – 12 , and by the following season had been named the team 's captain . 
 Maxwell scored three goals and two assists for the Monarchs in the 1913 – 14 season as the team won the city and provincial championships . By virtue of the title , the team was granted possession of the Allan Cup , emblematic of Canada 's national senior @-@ amateur championship . The team initially refused to defend the trophy against a challenge by the Kenora Thistles after the Cup 's trustees ruled Dick Irvin ineligible . Facing the possibility of having to play with only six players against Kenora 's seven , the Monarchs threatened to default . The game , held March 11 , 1914 , was ultimately played – with Irvin in the line @-@ up – and Maxwell 's speed and skating helped lead the Monarchs to a 6 – 2 victory . The team was unable to defend the trophy against a second challenge , played two nights later against the Regina Victorias . Maxwell scored a goal in a 5 – 4 defeat . 
 The Monarchs repeated as Manitoba provincial champions in 1914 – 15 as Maxwell again scored three goals and two assists during regular league play . The team reached the 1915 Allan Cup finals , where they challenged the Saskatchewan champion Melville Millionaires who held the Cup . Unlike the previous year 's single @-@ game contests , the 1915 final was played as a two @-@ game , total @-@ goals series . Melville defeated Winnipeg by a 4 – 3 score in the first game , but the Monarchs overcame a two @-@ goal deficit in the second match to win 4 – 2 and win the series on an aggregate total of six to five . There were no further challenges , and Maxwell and the Monarchs ended the season as Allan Cup champions . 
 Throughout his playing career , Maxwell received several offers to turn <unk> the National Hockey Association 's Toronto Blueshirts offered him $ 1 @,@ 500 to join their team , while representatives of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association made an offer of $ 1 @,@ 800 the following season . He turned both offers down , preferring to remain an amateur . His feelings on what constituted an amateur player were so strong that he quit playing hockey following the 1915 Allan Cup as the nature of the senior game at the time failed to meet his expectations : " When I played , I bought my own skates and boots . When I found out some of the others were getting paid , I quit . " 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Maxwell remained in the game , turning to coaching . He served two seasons as coach of the Winnipeg Monarchs before moving to the cross @-@ town rival Winnipeg Falcons . He led the Falcons to the 1920 Allan Cup , defeating the University of Toronto Varsity Blues by scores of 8 – 3 and 3 – 2 . The victory also earned his team the right to represent Canada at the first Olympic ice hockey tournament at the Summer Games in Antwerp . His business interests outside of hockey prevented Maxwell from travelling to Belgium with his team ; however the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) lists him as the coach for the gold medal winning Canadians , who outscored their opponents 29 – 1 in three games played . 
 Maxwell coached several Winnipeg teams throughout the 1920s and 1930s . He led the Winnipeg Rangers , Winnipeg Winnipegs and Elmwood Millionaires to Manitoba provincial senior championships in 1926 , 1927 and 1930 , respectively . He led the Millionaires ' junior team to a provincial title that same season . 
 Maxwell briefly coached in the professional ranks , with the Winnipeg Maroons of the American Hockey Association in 1927 – 28 . The Toronto Maple Leafs attempted to sign him to coach their National Hockey League club in 1931 , however team owner Conn Smythe chose to hire Dick Irvin instead after Maxwell insisted on a three @-@ year contract . Instead , Maxwell returned to the Winnipeg Monarchs , where he led their junior team to the western Canadian championship in 1931 – 32 . In the Memorial Cup final , Maxwell 's squad lost to the eastern champion Sudbury Cub Wolves . 
 Coaching the senior Monarchs , Maxwell led the team to the Manitoba Championship in 1933 – 34 . Canadian Amateur Hockey Association invited the team to represent Canada at the 1935 World Championship . However , as with 1920 , Maxwell was unable to travel to Europe with his team . The Monarchs went on to win the World Championship . 
 In addition to coaching , Maxwell was a long time referee . He frequently officiated matches in both Allan and Memorial Cup playoffs , as well as professional teams that traveled through Western Canada . He was recognized numerous times for his playing and coaching career . Maxwell is an honoured member of the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame , and was inducted into the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame in 1988 . That honour followed his 1962 induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Outside of hockey , Maxwell owned a lumber business , F. G. Maxwell Co . Ltd , which he operated until his retirement in 1967 . He was a partner with fellow Hall of Famer Charlie Gardiner until the latter 's death in 1934 . The company , which focused on plywood supply , was successful and ultimately made Maxwell a millionaire . Following his retirement , Maxwell turned to photography and world travel . He and his wife Ann resided in his hometown of Winnipeg . He had two sisters , Genevieve and Beatrice . Genevieve was herself a champion tennis player in Western Canada . 
 An avid baseball fan , Maxwell was among the founders of the Winnipeg Arena baseball club in 1908 , and became the team 's manager in 1912 . At its peak , the team drew as many as 5 @,@ 000 fans per game . As a player , manager or general manager , Maxwell was a member of eight Arena teams that won the Winnipeg city championship between 1908 and 1923 . He was known for his quick , and often barbed , wit ; His friends often told a story of an Arenas baseball game where , after failing to convince the umpire that it was too dark to play , Maxwell sent his players onto the field with lighted candles . In his later years , he served on the advisory board of the Winnipeg Goldeyes professional club . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Rudolf Hess = 
 Rudolf Walter Richard <unk> , also spelled Hess ( 26 April 1894 – 17 August 1987 ) , was a prominent politician in Nazi Germany . Appointed Deputy Führer to Adolf Hitler in 1933 , he served in this position until 1941 , when he flew solo to Scotland in an attempt to negotiate peace with the United Kingdom during World War II . He was taken prisoner and eventually was convicted of crimes against peace , serving a life sentence . 
 Hess enlisted in the 7th Bavarian Field Artillery Regiment as an infantryman at the outbreak of World War I. He was wounded several times over the course of the war , and won the Iron Cross , 2nd class , in 1915 . Shortly before the war ended , Hess enrolled to train as an aviator , but he saw no action in this role . He left the armed forces in December 1918 with the rank of Leutnant der Reserve . 
 In 1919 , Hess enrolled in the University of Munich , where he studied geopolitics under Karl Haushofer , a proponent of the concept of Lebensraum ( " living space " ) , which later became one of the pillars of Nazi Party ( National Socialist German Workers Party ; NSDAP ) ideology . Hess joined the NSDAP on 1 July 1920 , and was at Hitler 's side on 8 November 1923 for the Beer Hall Putsch , a failed Nazi attempt to seize control of the government of Bavaria . Whilst serving time in jail for this attempted coup , Hess helped Hitler write his opus , Mein Kampf , which became a foundation of the political platform of the NSDAP . 
 After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933 , Hess was appointed Deputy Führer of the NSDAP and received a post in Hitler 's cabinet . He was the third most powerful man in Germany , behind only Hitler and Hermann Göring . In addition to appearing on Hitler 's behalf at speaking engagements and rallies , Hess signed into law much of the legislation , including the Nuremberg Laws of 1935 , which stripped the Jews of Germany of their rights in the lead @-@ up to the Holocaust . 
 Hess continued to be interested in aviation , learning to fly the more advanced aircraft that were coming into development at the start of World War II . On 10 May 1941 he undertook a solo flight to Scotland , where he hoped to arrange peace talks with the Duke of Hamilton , whom he believed to be prominent in opposition to the British government . Hess was immediately arrested on his arrival and was held in British custody until the end of the war , when he was returned to Germany to stand trial in the Nuremberg Trials of major war criminals in 1946 . Throughout much of the trial , he claimed to be suffering from amnesia , but later admitted this was a ruse . Hess was convicted of crimes against peace and conspiracy with other German leaders to commit crimes and was transferred to Spandau Prison in 1947 , where he served a life sentence . Repeated attempts by family members and prominent politicians to win him early release were blocked by the Soviet Union . Still in custody in Spandau , he died by suicide in 1987 at the age of 93 . After his death the prison was demolished to prevent it from becoming a neo @-@ Nazi shrine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hess , the oldest of three children , was born on 26 April 1894 in Alexandria , Egypt , into the ethnic German family of Fritz Hess , a prosperous merchant from Bavaria , and Clara Hess ( née Münch ) . His brother , Alfred , was born in 1897 and his sister , Margarete , was born in 1908 . The family lived in a villa on the Egyptian coast near Alexandria , and visited Germany often from 1900 , staying at their summer home in <unk> ( now part of <unk> ) in the <unk> Mountains . Hess attended a German language Protestant school in Alexandria from 1900 to 1908 , when he was sent back to Germany to study at a boarding school in Bad Godesberg . He demonstrated an aptitude for science and mathematics , but his father wished him to join the family business , Hess & Co . , so he sent him in 1911 to study at the École supérieure de commerce in Neuchâtel , Switzerland . After a year there , Hess took an apprenticeship at a trading company in Hamburg . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Within weeks of the outbreak of World War I , Hess enlisted in the 7th Bavarian Field Artillery Regiment . His initial posting was against the British on the Somme ; he was present at the First Battle of Ypres . On 9 November 1914 Hess transferred to the 1st Infantry Regiment , stationed near Arras . He was awarded the Iron Cross , second class , and promoted to Gefreiter ( corporal ) in April 1915 . After additional training at the Munster Training Area , he was promoted to <unk> ( senior non @-@ commissioned officer ) and received the Bavarian Military Merit Cross . Returning to the front lines in November , he fought in Artois , participating in the battle for the town of Neuville @-@ Saint @-@ Vaast . After two months out of action with a throat infection , Hess served in the Battle of Verdun in May , and was hit by shrapnel in the left hand and arm on 12 June 1916 in fighting near the village of <unk> . After a month off to recover , he was sent back to the Verdun area , where he remained until December . 
 Hess was promoted to platoon leader of the 10th Company of the 18th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment , which was serving in Romania . He was wounded on 23 July and again on 8 August 1917 ; the first injury was a shell splinter to the left arm , which was dressed in the field , but the second was a bullet wound that entered the upper chest near the armpit and exited near his spinal column , leaving a pea @-@ sized entry wound and a cherry stone @-@ sized exit wound on his back . By 20 August he was well enough to travel , so he was sent to hospital in Hungary and eventually back to Germany , where he recovered in hospital in Meissen . In October he received promotion to Leutnant der Reserve and was recommended for , but did not receive , the Iron Cross , first class . At his father 's request , Hess was transferred to a hospital closer to home , arriving at <unk> on 25 October . 
 While still convalescing , Hess had requested that he be allowed to enrol to train as a pilot , so after some Christmas leave with his family he reported to Munich , where he passed the required tests and underwent aeronautical training . By 14 October he had been assigned to Jagdstaffel <unk> , a Bavarian fighter squadron equipped with Fokker D.VII biplanes . He saw no action with Jagdstaffel <unk> , as the war ended on 11 November 1918 , before he had the opportunity . 
 Hess was discharged from the armed forces in December 1918 . The family fortunes had taken a serious downturn , as their business interests in Egypt had been expropriated by the British . Hess joined the Thule Society , an antisemitic right @-@ wing Völkisch group , and a Freikorps , one of many such volunteer paramilitary organisations active in Germany at the time . Bavaria witnessed frequent and often bloody conflicts between right @-@ wing groups such as the Freikorps and left @-@ wing forces as they fought for control of the state during this period . Hess was a participant in street battles in the spring of 1919 and led a group which distributed thousands of antisemitic pamphlets in Munich . 
 In 1919 Hess enrolled in the University of Munich , where he studied history and economics . His geopolitics professor was Karl Haushofer , a proponent of the concept of Lebensraum ( " living space " ) , which Haushofer cited to justify the proposal that Germany should forcefully conquer additional territory in Eastern Europe . Hess later introduced this concept to Adolf Hitler , and it became one of the pillars of Nazi Party ideology . Hess became friends with Haushofer and his son Albrecht , a social theorist and lecturer . 
 Ilse <unk> , a fellow student at the university , met Hess in April 1920 when they by chance rented rooms in the same boarding house . They married on 20 December 1927 and their son Wolf Rüdiger Hess was born ten years later , in 1937 . 
 = = Relationship with Hitler = = 
 After hearing NSDAP leader Hitler , a powerful orator , speak for the first time in 1920 at a Munich rally , Hess became completely devoted to him . They held a shared belief in the stab @-@ in @-@ the @-@ back myth , the notion that Germany 's loss in World War I was caused by a conspiracy of Jews and Bolsheviks rather than a military defeat . Hess joined the NSDAP on 1 July as member number 16 . As the party continued to grow , holding rallies and meetings in ever larger beer halls in Munich , he focused his attention on fundraising and organisational activities . On 4 November 1921 he was injured while protecting Hitler when a bomb planted by a Marxist group exploded at the <unk> during a party event . Hess joined the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) by 1922 and helped organise and recruit its early membership . 
 Meanwhile , problems continued with the economy ; hyperinflation caused personal fortunes to be rendered worthless . When the German government failed to meet their reparations payments and French troops marched in to occupy the industrial areas along the Ruhr in January 1923 , widespread civil unrest was the result . Hitler decided the time was ripe to attempt to seize control of the government with a coup d 'état modelled on Benito Mussolini 's 1922 March on Rome . Hess was with Hitler on the night of 8 November 1923 when he and the SA stormed a public meeting organised by Bavaria 's de facto ruler , <unk> ( state commissioner ) Gustav von Kahr , in the <unk> , a large beer hall in Munich . <unk> a pistol , Hitler interrupted Kahr 's speech and announced that the national revolution had begun , declaring the formation of a new government with World War I General Erich Ludendorff . The next day , Hitler and several thousand supporters attempted to march to the Ministry of War in the city centre . Gunfire broke out between the Nazis and the police ; fourteen marchers and four police officers were killed . Hitler was arrested on 11 November . 
 Hess and some SA men had taken a few of the dignitaries hostage on the night of the 8th , driving them to a house about 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from Munich . When Hess left briefly to make a phone call the next day , the hostages convinced the driver to help them escape . Hess , stranded , called Ilse <unk> , who brought him a bicycle so he could return to Munich . He went to stay with the <unk> and then fled to Austria , but they convinced him to return . He was arrested and sentenced to 18 months in prison for his role in the attempted coup , which later became known as the Beer Hall Putsch . Hitler was sentenced to five years imprisonment , and the NSDAP and SA were both outlawed . 
 Both men were incarcerated in Landsberg Prison , where Hitler soon began work on his memoir , Mein Kampf ( " My Struggle " ) , which he dictated to fellow prisoners Hess and Emil Maurice . Edited by publisher Max Amann , Hess and others , the work was published in two parts in 1925 and 1926 . It was later released in a single volume , which became a best @-@ seller after 1930 . This book , with its message of violent antisemitism , became the foundation of the political platform of the NSDAP . 
 Hitler was released on parole on 20 December 1924 and Hess ten days later . The ban on the NSDAP and SA was lifted in February 1925 , and the party grew to 100 @,@ 000 members in 1928 and 150 @,@ 000 in 1929 . They received only 2 @.@ 6 per cent of the vote in the 1928 election , but support increased steadily up until the seizure of power in 1933 . 
 Hitler named Hess his private secretary in April 1925 at a salary of 500 Reichsmarks per month , and named him as personal adjutant on 20 July 1929 . Hess accompanied Hitler to speaking engagements around the country and became his friend and confidante . In December 1932 Hess was named party Political Central Commissioner . 
 Retaining his interest in flying after the end of his active military career , Hess obtained his private pilot 's licence on 4 April 1929 . His instructor was World War I flying ace Theodor <unk> . In 1930 Hess became the owner of a <unk> <unk> monoplane sponsored by the party newspaper , the Völkischer Beobachter . He acquired two more Messerschmitt aircraft in the early 1930s , logging many flying hours and becoming proficient in the operation of light single @-@ engine aircraft . 
 = = Deputy Führer = = 
 On 30 January 1933 Hitler was appointed Reich Chancellor , his first step in gaining dictatorial control of Germany . Hess was named Deputy Führer of the NSDAP on 21 April and was appointed to the cabinet , with the post of Reich Minister without Portfolio , on 1 December . With offices in the Brown House in Munich and another in Berlin , Hess was responsible for several departments , including foreign affairs , finance , health , education and law . All legislation passed through his office for approval , except that concerning the army , the police and foreign policy , and he wrote and co @-@ signed many of Hitler 's decrees . An organiser of the annual Nuremberg Rallies , he usually gave the opening speech and introduced Hitler . Hess also spoke over the radio and at rallies around the country , so frequently that the speeches were collected into book form in 1938 . Hess acted as Hitler 's delegate in negotiations with industrialists and members of the wealthier classes . As Hess had been born abroad , Hitler had him oversee the NSDAP groups such as the NSDAP / AO that were in charge of party members living in other countries . Hitler instructed Hess to review all court decisions that related to persons deemed enemies of the Party . He was authorised to increase the sentences of anyone he felt got off too lightly in these cases , and was also empowered to take " merciless action " if he saw fit to do so . This often entailed sending the person to a concentration camp or simply ordering the person killed . Hess was given the rank of Obergruppenführer in the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) in 1934 , the second @-@ highest SS rank . 
 The Nazi regime began to persecute Jews soon after the seizure of power . Hess 's office was partly responsible for drafting Hitler 's Nuremberg Laws of 1935 , laws that had far @-@ reaching implications for the Jews of Germany , banning marriage between non @-@ Jewish and Jewish Germans and depriving non @-@ Aryans of their German citizenship . Hess 's friend Karl Haushofer and his family were subject to these laws , as Haushofer had married a half @-@ Jewish woman , so Hess issued documents exempting them from this legislation . 
 Hess did not build a power base or develop a coterie of followers . He was motivated by his loyalty to Hitler and a desire to be useful to him ; he did not seek power or prestige or take advantage of his position to accumulate personal wealth . He lived in a modest house in Munich . Although Hess had less influence than other top NSDAP officials , he was popular with the masses . After the Invasion of Poland and the start of World War II in September 1939 , Hitler made Hess second in line to succeed him , after Hermann Göring . Around the same time , Hitler appointed Hess 's chief of staff , Martin Bormann , as his personal secretary , a post formerly held by Hess . 
 Hess was obsessed with his health to the point of hypochondria , consulting many doctors and other practitioners for what he described to his captors in Britain as a long list of ailments involving the kidneys , colon , gall bladder , bowels and heart . Like Hitler , Hess was a vegetarian , and he did not smoke or drink . He brought his own food to the Berghof , claiming it was biologically dynamic , but Hitler did not approve of this practice , so he discontinued taking meals with the Führer . 
 Hess was interested in music , enjoyed reading and loved to spend time hiking and climbing in the mountains with Ilse . He and his friend Albrecht Haushofer shared an interest in astrology , and Hess also was keen on clairvoyance and the occult . Hess continued to be interested in aviation . He won an air race in 1934 , flying a <unk> <unk> in a circuit around Zugspitze Mountain and returning to the airfield at Munich with a time of 29 minutes . He placed sixth of 29 participants in a similar race held the following year . With the outbreak of World War II , Hess asked Hitler to be allowed to join the Luftwaffe as a pilot , but Hitler forbade it , and ordered him to stop flying for the duration of the war . Hess convinced him to reduce the ban to one year . 
 = = Attempted peace mission = = 
 As the war progressed , Hitler 's attention became focused on foreign affairs and the conduct of the war , to the exclusion of all else . Hess , not directly engaged in either of these endeavours , though he felt qualified to do so , became increasingly sidelined from the affairs of the nation and from Hitler 's attention ; Bormann had successfully supplanted Hess in many of his duties and usurped his position at Hitler 's side . Also concerned that Germany would face a war on two fronts as plans progressed for Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union scheduled to take place in spring 1941 , Hess decided to boldly attempt to bring Britain to the negotiating table by travelling there himself to seek meetings with the British government . He asked the advice of Albrecht Haushofer , who suggested several potential contacts in Britain . Hess settled on fellow aviator Douglas Douglas @-@ Hamilton , the Duke of Hamilton , whom he had never met . On Hess 's instructions , Haushofer wrote to Hamilton in September 1940 , but the letter was intercepted by MI5 and Hamilton did not see it until March 1941 . Hamilton was chosen in the mistaken belief that he was one of the leaders of an opposition party opposed to war with Germany , and because he was a friend of Haushofer . 
 A letter Hess wrote to his wife dated 4 November 1940 shows that in spite of not receiving a reply from Hamilton , he intended to proceed with his plan . He began training on the Messerschmitt Bf 110 , a two @-@ seater twin @-@ engine aircraft , in October 1940 under instructor Wilhelm <unk> , the chief test pilot at Messerschmitt . He continued to practice , including logging many cross @-@ country flights , and found a specific aircraft that handled well — a Bf <unk> @-@ 1 / N — which was from then on held in reserve for his personal use . He asked for a radio compass , modifications to the oxygen delivery system , and large long @-@ range fuel tanks to be installed on this plane , and these requests were granted by March 1941 . 
 After a final check of the weather reports for Germany and the North Sea , Hess took off at 17 : 45 on 10 May 1941 from the airfield at Augsburg @-@ <unk> in his specially prepared aircraft . It was the last of several attempts to depart on his mission ; previous efforts had to be called off due to mechanical problems or poor weather . Wearing a leather flying suit bearing the rank of captain , he brought along a supply of money and toiletries , a torch , a camera , maps and charts , and a collection of 28 different medicines , as well as dextrose tablets to help ward off fatigue and an assortment of homeopathic remedies . 
 = = = Flight to Scotland = = = 
 Initially setting a course towards Bonn , Hess used landmarks on the ground to orient himself and make minor course corrections . When he reached the coast near the Frisian Islands , he turned and flew in an easterly direction for some twenty minutes to stay out of range of British radar . He then took a heading of 335 degrees for the trip across the North Sea , initially at low altitude , but travelling for most of the journey at 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) . At 20 : 58 he changed his heading to 245 degrees , intending to approach the coast of North East England near the town of Bamburgh , Northumberland . As it was not yet sunset when he initially approached the coast , Hess backtracked , zigzagging back and forth for some 40 minutes until it grew dark . Around this time his auxiliary fuel tanks were exhausted , so he released them into the sea . Also around this time , at 22 : 08 , the British Chain Home station at <unk> Moss near Newcastle upon Tyne detected his presence and passed along this information to the Filter Room at Bentley Priory . Soon he had been detected by several other stations , and the aircraft was designated as " Raid 42 " . 
 Two Spitfires of No. 72 Squadron RAF , No. 13 Group RAF that were already in the air were sent to attempt an interception , but failed to find the intruder . A third Spitfire sent from Acklington at 22 : 20 also failed to spot the aircraft ; by then it was dark and Hess had dropped to an extremely low altitude , so low that the volunteer on duty at the Royal Observer Corps ( ROC ) station at <unk> was able to correctly identify it as a Bf 110 , and reported its altitude as 50 feet ( 15 m ) . Tracked by additional ROC posts , Hess continued his flight into Scotland at high speed and low altitude , but was unable to spot his destination , <unk> House , so he headed for the west coast to orient himself and then turned back inland . At 22 : 35 a Boulton Paul Defiant sent from No. 141 Squadron RAF based at Ayr began pursuit . Hess was nearly out of fuel , so he climbed to 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) and parachuted out of the plane at 23 : 06 . He injured his foot , either while exiting the aircraft or when he hit the ground . The aircraft crashed at 23 : 09 , about 12 miles ( 19 km ) west of <unk> House . He would have been closer to his destination had he not had trouble exiting the aircraft . Hess considered this achievement to be the proudest moment of his life . 
 Before his departure from Germany , Hess had given his adjutant , Karlheinz Pintsch , a letter addressed to Hitler that detailed his intentions to open peace negotiations with the British . Pintsch delivered the letter to Hitler at the Berghof around noon on 11 May . Albert Speer later said Hitler described Hess 's departure as one of the worst personal blows of his life , as he considered it a personal betrayal . Hitler worried that his allies , Italy and Japan , would perceive Hess 's act as an attempt by Hitler to secretly open peace negotiations with the British . For this reason , Hitler ordered that the German press should characterise Hess as a madman who made the decision to fly to Scotland entirely on his own , without Hitler 's knowledge or authority . Some members of the government , including Göring and Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels , believed this only made matters worse , because if Hess truly were mentally ill , he should not have been holding an important government position . Hitler stripped Hess of all of his party and state offices , and secretly ordered him shot on sight if he ever returned to Germany . He abolished the post of Deputy Führer , assigning Hess 's former duties to Bormann , with the title of Head of the Party Chancellery . Hitler initiated Aktion Hess , a flurry of hundreds of arrests of astrologers , faith healers and occultists that took place around 9 June . The campaign was part of a propaganda effort by Goebbels and others to denigrate Hess and to make scapegoats of occult practitioners . 
 American journalist H. R. Knickerbocker , who had met both Hitler and Hess , speculated that Hitler had sent Hess to deliver a message informing Winston Churchill of the forthcoming invasion of the Soviet Union , and offering a negotiated peace or even an anti @-@ Bolshevik partnership . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin believed that Hess 's flight had been engineered by the British . Stalin persisted in this belief as late as 1944 , when he mentioned the matter to Churchill , who insisted that they had no advance knowledge of the flight . 
 Peter Padfield 's Hess , Hitler and Churchill ( 2013 ) explores the mystery of Hess 's flight to Britain . Padfield suggests that Hess was carrying documents with detailed proposals from Hitler which would have meant peace between Germany and Britain , which would stand neutral in a planned German war against the Soviet Union , in return for which Germany was willing to withdraw from Western Europe . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 Hess landed at Floors Farm , <unk> , south of Glasgow , where he was discovered still struggling with his parachute by local ploughman David McLean . Identifying himself as " Hauptmann Alfred Horn " , Hess said he had an important message for the Duke of Hamilton . McLean helped Hess to his nearby cottage and contacted the local Home Guard unit , who escorted the captive to their headquarters in Busby , East Renfrewshire . He was next taken to the police station at Giffnock , arriving sometime after midnight ; he was searched and his possessions confiscated . Hess repeatedly requested to meet with the Duke of Hamilton during questioning undertaken with the aid of an interpreter by Major Graham Donald , the area commandant of Royal Observer Corps . After the interview Hess was taken under guard to Maryhill Barracks in Glasgow , where his injuries were treated . By this time some of his captors suspected Hess 's true identity , though he continued to insist his name was Horn . 
 Hamilton had been on duty as Wing Commander at RAF Turnhouse near Edinburgh when Hess had arrived , and his station had been one of those that had tracked the progress of the flight . He arrived at Maryhill Barracks the next morning , and after examining Hess 's effects , he met alone with the prisoner . Hess immediately admitted his true identity and outlined the reason for his flight . Hamilton told Hess that he hoped to continue the conversation with the aid of an interpreter ; Hess could speak English well , but was having trouble understanding Hamilton . After the meeting , Hamilton examined the remains of the Messerschmitt in the company of an intelligence officer , then returned to Turnhouse , where he made arrangements through the Foreign Office to meet Prime Minister Winston Churchill , who was at Ditchley for the weekend . They had some preliminary talks that night , and Hamilton accompanied Churchill back to London the next day , where they both met with members of the War Cabinet . Churchill sent Hamilton with foreign affairs expert <unk> Kirkpatrick , who had met Hess previously , to positively identify the prisoner , who had been moved to Buchanan Castle overnight . Hess , who had prepared extensive notes to use during this meeting , spoke to them at length about Hitler 's expansionary plans and the need for Britain to let the Nazis have free rein in Europe , in exchange for being allowed to keep its overseas possessions . Kirkpatrick held two more meetings with Hess over the course of the next few days , while Hamilton returned to his duties . Hess , in addition to being disappointed at the apparent failure of his mission , began claiming that his medical treatment was inadequate and that there was a plot afoot to poison him . 
 Hess 's flight , but not his destination or fate , was first announced by Munich Radio in Germany on the evening of 12 May . On 13 May Hitler sent Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop to give the news in person to Mussolini , and the British press was permitted to release full information about events that same day . On 14 May Ilse Hess finally learned that her husband had survived the trip when news of his fate was broadcast on German radio . 
 The wreckage of the aircraft was salvaged by 63 Maintenance Unit between 11 and 16 May 1941 and was taken to Oxford to be stored . The aeroplane was armed with four machine guns in the nose but carried no ammunition . Several pieces of the plane are still extant , including the two engines , one of which is at the Royal Air Force Museum London . The other engine and a piece of the fuselage are at the Imperial War Museum in London . 
 = = Trial and imprisonment = = 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 From Buchanan Castle , Hess was transferred briefly to the Tower of London and then to Mytchett Place in Surrey , a fortified mansion , designated " Camp Z " , where he stayed for the next thirteen months . Churchill issued orders that Hess was to be treated well , though he was not allowed to read newspapers or listen to the radio . Three intelligence officers were stationed onsite and 150 soldiers were placed on guard . By early June , Hess was allowed to write to his family . He also prepared a letter to the Duke of Hamilton , but it was never delivered , and his repeated requests for further meetings were turned down . Major Frank Foley , the leading German expert in MI6 and former British Passport Control Officer in Berlin , took charge of a year @-@ long abortive debriefing of Hess , according to Foreign Office files released to the National Archives . Dr Henry V. Dicks and Dr John Rawlings Rees , psychiatrists who treated Hess during this period , note that while he was not insane , he was mentally unstable , with tendencies toward hypochondria and paranoia . Hess repeated his peace proposal to John Simon , 1st Viscount Simon , then serving as Lord Chancellor , in an interview on 9 June . Lord Simon noted that the prisoner 's mental state was not good ; Hess claimed he was being poisoned and was being prevented from sleeping . He would insist on swapping his dinner with that of one of his guards , and attempted to get them to send samples of the food out for analysis . 
 In the early morning hours of 16 June , Hess rushed his guards and attempted suicide by jumping over the railing of the staircase at Mytchett Place . He fell onto the stone floor below , fracturing the femur of his left leg . The injury required that the leg be kept in traction for twelve weeks , with a further six weeks bed rest before he was permitted to walk with crutches . Captain Munro Johnson of the Royal Army Medical Corps , who assessed Hess , noted that another suicide attempt was likely to occur in the near future . Hess began around this time to complain of amnesia . This symptom and some of his increasingly erratic behaviour may have in part been a ruse , because if he were declared mentally ill , he could be repatriated under the terms of the Geneva Conventions . 
 Hess was moved to <unk> Court Hospital on 26 June 1942 , where he would remain for the next three years . The facility was chosen for its added security and the need for fewer guards . Hess was allowed walks on the grounds and car trips into the surrounding countryside . He had access to newspapers and other reading materials ; he wrote letters and journals . His mental health remained under the care of Dr Rees . Hess continued to complain on and off of memory loss and made a second suicide attempt on 4 February 1945 , when he stabbed himself with a bread knife . The wound was not serious , requiring two stitches . Despondent that Germany was losing the war , he took no food for the next week , only resuming eating when he was threatened with being force @-@ fed . 
 Germany surrendered unconditionally on 8 May 1945 . Hess , facing charges as a war criminal , was ordered to appear before the International Military Tribunal and was transported to Nuremberg on 10 October 1945 . 
 = = = Nuremberg Trials = = = 
 The Allies of World War II held a series of military tribunals and trials , beginning with a trial of the major war criminals from November 1945 to October 1946 . Hess was tried with this first group of twenty @-@ three defendants , all of whom were charged with four counts — conspiracy to commit crimes , crimes against peace , war crimes and crimes against humanity , in violation of international laws governing warfare . 
 On his arrival in Nuremberg , Hess was reluctant to give up some of his possessions , including samples of food he claimed had been poisoned by the British ; he proposed to use these for his defence during the trial . The commandant of the facility , Colonel Burton C. Andrus of the United States Army , advised him that he would be allowed no special treatment ; the samples were sealed and confiscated . Hess 's diaries indicate that he did not acknowledge the validity of the court and felt the outcome was a foregone conclusion . He was thin when he arrived , weighing 65 kilograms ( 143 lb ) , and had a poor appetite , but was deemed to be in good health . As one defendant , Robert Ley , had managed to hang himself in his cell on 24 October , the remaining prisoners were monitored around the clock . Because of his previous suicide attempts , Hess was handcuffed to a guard whenever he was out of his cell . 
 Almost immediately after his arrival , Hess began exhibiting amnesia , which may have been feigned in the hope of avoiding the death sentence . Medical personnel who examined Hess reported he was not insane and was fit to stand trial . At least two examiners , the British doctor and the Soviet one , noted their belief that Hess 's amnesia might be fake . Efforts were made to trigger his memory , including bringing in his former secretaries and showing old newsreels , but he persisted in showing no response to these stimuli . When Hess was allowed to make a statement to the tribunal on 30 November , he admitted that he had faked memory loss as a tactic . He spoke to the tribunal again on 31 August 1946 , the last day of closing statements . 
 The prosecution 's case against Hess was presented by Mervyn Griffith @-@ Jones beginning on 7 February 1946 . By quoting from Hess 's speeches , he attempted to demonstrate that Hess had been aware of and agreed with Hitler 's plans to conduct a war of aggression in violation of international law . He declared that as Hess had signed important governmental decrees , including the decree requiring mandatory military service , the Nuremberg racial laws , and a decree incorporating the conquered Polish territories into the Reich , he must share responsibility for the acts of the regime . He pointed out that the timing of Hess 's trip to Scotland , only six weeks before the German invasion of the Soviet Union , could only be viewed as an attempt by Hess to keep the British out of the war . Hess resumed showing symptoms of amnesia at the end of February , partway through the prosecution 's case . 
 The case for Hess 's defence was presented from 22 – 26 March by his lawyer , Dr Alfred Seidl . He noted that while Hess accepted responsibility for the many decrees he had signed , he said these matters were part of the internal workings of a sovereign state and thus outside the purview of a war crimes trial . He called to the stand Ernst Wilhelm Bohle , the man who had been head of the NSDAP / AO , to testify on Hess 's behalf . When presented by Griffith @-@ Jones with questions about the organisation 's spying in several countries , Bohle testified that any warlike activities such as espionage had been done without his permission or knowledge . Seidl called two other witnesses , former mayor of Stuttgart Karl <unk> and Hess 's brother Alfred , both of whom refuted the allegations that the NSDAP / AO had been spying and fomenting war . Seidl presented a summation of the defence 's case on 25 July , in which he attempted to refute the charge of conspiracy by pointing out that Hitler alone had made all the important decisions . He noted that Hess could not be held responsible for any events that took place after he left Germany in May 1941 . Meanwhile , Hess mentally detached himself from what was happening , declining visits from his family and refusing to read the newspapers . 
 The court deliberated for nearly two months before passing judgement on 30 September , with the defendants being individually sentenced on 1 October . Hess was found guilty on two counts : crimes against peace ( planning and preparing a war of aggression ) , and conspiracy with other German leaders to commit crimes . He was found not guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity . He was given a life sentence , one of seven Nazis to receive prison sentences at the trial . These seven were transported by aircraft to the Allied military prison at Spandau in Berlin on 18 July 1947 . The Soviet member of the tribunal , Major @-@ General Iona <unk> , filed a document recording his dissent of Hess 's sentence ; he felt the death sentence was warranted . 
 = = = Spandau Prison = = = 
 Spandau was placed under the control of the Allied Control Council , the governing body in charge of the military occupation of Germany . It consisted of representatives from four member states : Britain , France , the United States and the Soviet Union . Each country supplied guards for the prison for a month at a time on a rotating basis . After the inmates were given medical examinations — Hess refused his body search , and had to be held down — they were provided with prison garb and assigned the numbers by which they would be addressed throughout their stay . Hess was Number 7 . The prison had a small library , and inmates were allowed to file special requests for additional reading material . Writing materials were limited ; each inmate would be allowed four pieces of paper per month for letters . The prisoners were not allowed to speak to one another without permission and were expected to work in the facility , helping with cleaning and gardening chores . The inmates were taken for outdoor walks around the prison grounds for an hour each day , separated about 10 yards ( 9 m ) apart . Some of the rules became more relaxed as time went on . 
 Visits to Spandau of half an hour per month were allowed , but Hess forbade his family to visit until December 1969 , when he was a patient at the British Military Hospital in West Berlin for a perforated ulcer . By this time Wolf Rüdiger Hess was 32 years old and Ilse 69 ; they had not seen Hess since his departure from Germany in 1941 . After this illness , he allowed his family to visit regularly . His daughter @-@ in @-@ law Andrea , who often brought photos and films of his grandchildren , became a particularly welcome visitor . Hess 's health problems , both mental and physical , were ongoing during his captivity . He cried out in the night , claiming he had stomach pains . He continued to suspect that his food was being poisoned and complained of amnesia . A psychiatrist who examined him in 1957 deemed he was not ill enough to be transferred to a mental hospital . Another unsuccessful suicide attempt took place in 1977 . 
 Other than his stays in hospital , Hess spent the rest of his life in Spandau Prison . His fellow inmates Konstantin von Neurath , Walther Funk and Erich Raeder were released because of poor health in the 1950s ; Karl Dönitz , Baldur von Schirach and Albert Speer served their time and were released , Dönitz in 1956 , Schirach and Speer in 1966 . The 600 @-@ cell prison continued to be maintained for its lone prisoner from Speer and Schirach 's release until Hess 's death in 1987 , at an estimated cost of DM 800 @,@ 000 . Conditions were far more pleasant in the 1980s than in the early years ; Hess was allowed to move more freely around the cell block , setting his own routine and choosing his own activities , which included television , films , reading and gardening . A lift was installed so he could more readily access the garden , and he was provided with a medical orderly from 1982 onward . 
 Numerous appeals for Hess 's release were launched by his lawyer , Dr Seidl , beginning as early as 1947 . These were denied , mainly because the Soviets repeatedly vetoed the proposal . Spandau was located in West Berlin , and its existence gave the Soviets a foothold in that sector of the city . Additionally , Soviet officials believed Hess must have known in 1941 that an attack on their country was imminent . In 1967 Wolf Rüdiger Hess began a campaign to win his father 's release , garnering support from notable politicians such as Geoffrey Lawrence , 1st Baron Oaksey in Britain and Willy Brandt in Germany , but to no avail , in spite of the prisoner 's advanced age and deteriorating health . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 Hess died on 17 August 1987 at the age of 93 in a summer house that had been set up in the prison garden as a reading room . He took an extension cord from one of the lamps , strung it over a window latch , and hanged himself . Death occurred by asphyxiation . A short note to his family , thanking them for all they had done , was found in his pocket . The Four Powers released a statement on 17 September ruling the death a suicide . Initially buried at a secret location to avoid media attention or demonstrations by Nazi sympathisers , Hess was re @-@ interred in a family plot at <unk> on 17 March 1988 , and his wife was buried beside him when she died in 1995 . Spandau Prison was demolished to prevent it from becoming a neo @-@ Nazi shrine . 
 His lawyer , Dr Seidl , felt Hess was too old and frail to have managed to kill himself . Wolf Rüdiger Hess repeatedly claimed that his father had been murdered by the British Secret Intelligence Service to prevent him from revealing information about British misconduct during the war . Abdallah <unk> , who served as Hess 's medical orderly from 1982 to 1987 , was dismissed from his position at his local district parliament 's Immigration and Integration Advisory Council after he wrote a self @-@ published book on a similar theme . According to an investigation by the British government in 1989 , the available evidence did not back up the claim that Hess was murdered , and Solicitor General Sir Nicholas Lyell saw no grounds for further investigation . Moreover , the autopsy results support the conclusion that Hess had killed himself . A report released in 2012 again raised the question of whether Hess was murdered . Historian Peter Padfield claims the suicide note found on the body appears to have been written when Hess was hospitalised in 1969 . 
 After the town of <unk> became the scene of pilgrimages and neo @-@ Nazi demonstrations every August on the date of Hess 's death , the parish council decided not to allow an extension on the grave site 's lease when it expired in 2011 . With the consent of his family , Hess 's grave was re @-@ opened on 20 July 2011 and his remains were exhumed , and then cremated . His ashes were scattered at sea by family members ; the gravestone , which bore the epitaph " Ich hab 's <unk> " ( " I have dared " ) , was destroyed . 
 = Tropical Storm Alberto ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Alberto was the first tropical storm of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season . Forming on June 10 in the northwestern Caribbean , the storm moved generally to the north , reaching a maximum intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) before weakening and moving ashore in the Big Bend area of Florida on June 13 . Alberto then moved through eastern Georgia , North Carolina , and Virginia as a tropical depression before becoming extratropical on June 14 . 
 Across the Western Caribbean , the storm produced heavy rainfall , causing some minor damage . In Florida , a moderate storm tide caused coastal damage and flooding , while Alberto 's outer rainbands produced several tornadoes . The storm was indirectly responsible for two drownings off the coast of Tampa Bay . In North Carolina , heavy rainfall caused locally severe flooding , and one child drowned in a flooded storm drain near Raleigh . The remnants of Alberto produced strong winds and left four people missing in Atlantic Canada . Overall , damage was minor along Alberto 's path . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early June 2006 , an area of convection persisted across Central America and the western Caribbean in association with a broad , nearly stationary trough of low pressure . Thunderstorms increased and became more concentrated on June 8 after a tropical wave moved into the western Caribbean , and an upper @-@ level low to its west increased outflow over the system . The disturbance moved slowly north @-@ northwestward , and development was initially inhibited by marginally favorable upper @-@ level winds and land interaction . The system gradually organized , and by June 10 a circulation formed with sufficiently organized convection for the National Hurricane Center to classify it Tropical Depression One . At this point the storm was located about 140 miles ( 225 km ) south of the western tip of Cuba . 
 The depression tracked to the northwest through the Yucatán Channel into an area of increased wind shear , which left the center exposed and elongated . Despite its poor structure , the system maintained strong winds in its eastern semicircle . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Alberto early on June 11 about 260 miles ( 420 km ) southwest of the Dry Tortugas , based on Hurricane Hunters ' reports of flight level winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in a few convective bands . Upon becoming a tropical storm , the low @-@ level circulation had become better defined , though forecasts predicted the wind shear would increase , preventing significant strengthening of the storm . One forecaster at the National Hurricane Center remarked the system resembled a subtropical cyclone . However , deep convection developed and built westward against the wind shear as the overall organization improved . At the same time Alberto turned northeastward under the influence of an approaching trough . On June 12 , the circulation abruptly reformed under the area of deepest convection , which coincided with the storm 's passage over the loop current ; consequentially , Alberto quickly strengthened to reach peak winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) about 220 miles ( 350 km ) west @-@ northwest of Tampa , Florida . 
 Though it was projected to track over cooler waters and stay in an area of increased shear , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted Alberto would attain hurricane status and make landfall at that intensity . The storm maintained peak intensity for about 18 hours , and while accelerating northeastward , Alberto 's convection diminished as the cloud pattern became elongated . On June 13 , dry air became entrained in the circulation , leaving the center exposed from the convection and the wind field greatly broadened . A partial eyewall developed in the western semicircle of the center ; however , winds were well below hurricane force . Alberto continued to weaken , and made landfall at about 1630 UTC on June 13 with 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds in Taylor County , Florida , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) southeast of Tallahassee . 
 The storm maintained a well @-@ organized structure and banding features over land , while continuing to produce winds of tropical storm force as it moved into Georgia . Early on June 14 , the storm weakened to tropical depression status while located near the city of Millen , Georgia . Alberto began to lose tropical characteristics soon thereafter , and about six hours after weakening to a tropical depression it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Late on June 14 it accelerated northeastward to emerge into the Atlantic Ocean , and on June 15 , it entered the area of responsibility of the Canadian Hurricane Centre . While over open waters , Alberto 's remnants began to re @-@ intensify ; later that day , the extratropical remnant low attained winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and a pressure of 969 mbar while a short distance south of Nova Scotia . At this time , the low presented a well @-@ defined comma structure . After passing near Sable Island , the remnants of Alberto crossed the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland on June 16 . The extratropical storm turned to the east @-@ northeast and later to the east as it continued its rapid forward motion , and on June 19 the remnants of Alberto merged with an approaching cold front near the British Isles . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 By June 12 , the Cuban government had evacuated over 25 @,@ 000 people in the western portion of the country due to the threat of flooding . The National Hurricane Center recommended tropical storm warnings for the Isle of Youth and the Pinar del Río Province early on June 10 , but they were not issued by the Cuban government . 
 In northwestern Florida , officials issued a mandatory evacuation order a day before the storm moved ashore for about 21 @,@ 000 citizens in Levy County , Citrus County , and Taylor County . Several schools were closed as well , and converted into shelters . In all , about 350 coastal residents took refuge in emergency shelters . Prior to the arrival of the storm , Florida governor Jeb Bush declared a state of emergency for the state . A tropical storm watch was first issued for portions of the Florida Panhandle about 43 hours prior to landfall . As Alberto was predicted to continue intensifying , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane warning from Longboat Key to the mouth of the Ochlockonee River approximately 25 hours before landfall . A tropical storm warning extended southward to Englewood and westward to Indian Pass . A tropical storm warning was also issued from Flagler Beach , Florida to the mouth of the Santee River in South Carolina . As the storm moved inland , local National Weather Service offices issued flood watches for portions of North Carolina , Virginia , and the Delmarva Peninsula . Additionally , flood and flash flood warnings were issued for some portions of the country from South Carolina through Virginia . 
 While Alberto was becoming extratropical over land , the Canadian Hurricane Centre issued gale warnings for offshore waters of Nova Scotia , and later for Newfoundland . In addition , the Atlantic Storm Prediction Center issued inland wind warnings for coastal regions of Nova Scotia . Due to the prediction for precipitation , the Atlantic Storm Prediction Center posted rainfall warnings for all Atlantic coastal regions of Nova Scotia . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 In its early stages of development , the tropical depression which later became Alberto produced heavy rainfall across the western Caribbean . A station on Grand Cayman reported 22 @.@ 72 inches ( 577 mm ) of rain in one 24 @-@ hour period . In Cuba , rainfall amounted to 17 @.@ 52 inches ( 445 mm ) in Pinar del Río province , where one station recorded 4 @.@ 06 inches ( 103 mm ) in one hour . On the Isle of Youth , precipitation accrued to 15 @.@ 67 inches ( 398 mm ) in Sumidero . Air and marine travel was disrupted between the Cuban mainland and the Isle of Youth . In Havana Province rainfall totaled 8 @.@ 46 inches ( 215 mm ) at Playa Baracoa . Much of the precipitation fell during a fairly short time , and was beneficial , as the area had been suffering from severe drought conditions . In Pinar del Río province , the precipitation flooded 50 sq mi ( 130 km2 ) of crop land . The storm damaged about 50 houses across the country , about half of which in Havana . 
 Alberto dropped light amounts of rainfall across Mexico , with a 24 @-@ hour total peaking at 4 inches ( 100 mm ) in Peto , Yucatán . Light rain was also reported throughout Quintana Roo and in eastern Campeche . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 The large area of convection associated with Alberto dropped rainfall across Florida for several days . The statewide precipitation maximum reached 7 @.@ 08 inches ( 180 mm ) at a station 5 miles ( 8 km ) east of Tarpon Springs . The highest sustained winds from the storm were officially clocked at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in St. Petersburg , which also saw reports of wind gusts of up to 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) . Upon making landfall on the Florida Panhandle , the storm produced a storm tide which unofficially peaked at 7 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) at Crystal River Power Plant . The combination of high surf and the storm tide caused surge flooding along the Florida Panhandle . Six tornadoes were spawned in the state from the outer rainbands of Alberto , none of which caused serious damage . 
 Across coastal areas , the storm surge flooding caused minor damage to dozens of homes and closed several roads . Near Homosassa , two people who did not evacuate required water rescue . At Egmont Key State Park , a woman fell off of a boat when a band of showers and surging currents made navigation difficult ; her husband and a friend drowned after jumping in to save her without life jackets , though the woman returned safely to the boat . The rainfall caused some temporary road flooding , though precipitation was mostly beneficial in alleviating drought conditions . Moderate wind gusts caused scattered power outages and downed some trees across the northeast portion of the state . Overall , property damage in the state rose to about $ 390 @,@ 000 ( 2006 USD ) in total . 
 = = = Southeast United States = = = 
 While the storm moved through the state of Georgia , moderate winds of up to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) occurred along the coastline . Rainfall ranged from 3 – 5 inches ( 75 – 125 mm ) across the southeast portion of the state , with isolated higher maxima of up to 7 @.@ 05 inches ( 179 mm ) in Rincon . Alberto produced a storm tide of 8 @.@ 53 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) at Fort Pulaski National Monument , causing some beach erosion along the coastline . 
 Alberto produced winds of tropical storm force along the South Carolina coastline ; the highest official wind gust was 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) at Edisto Beach . The storm dropped precipitation across much of the state , including a state maximum of 4 @.@ 42 inches ( 112 mm ) at <unk> . Storm tides reached 7 @.@ 81 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above the mean low @-@ level water mark along Fripp Island , leading to some beach erosion along portions of the coastline . While in the process of becoming extratropical , the rainbands of Alberto spawned seven confirmed tornadoes in the state , most of which rated F0 ; a National Weather Service report indicated additional tornadoes may have occurred in the state . The tornadoes caused some minor damage , though overall damage in the state was minimal . 
 The remnants of Alberto dropped heavy precipitation across North Carolina , including a nationwide high of 7 @.@ 16 inches ( 182 mm ) at the Raleigh National Weather Service Office . Some totals broke previous rainfall records , including the station at Raleigh @-@ Durham International Airport which broke the all @-@ time daily precipitation record for that station . The rainfall led to flooding across the central portion of the state , with 45 flash flood warnings issued by the Raleigh National Weather Service . Police and firefighters in Wake County performed 47 water rescues . Additionally , the Raleigh @-@ Wake 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 center received more than 1 @,@ 076 calls for help . Flash flooding occurred throughout the area , which caused the Crabtree Creek in Raleigh to crest at 23 @.@ 77 feet ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) ; this was the second highest flood stage on record for the creek . The overflown creek flooded a few cars to their rooftops , and resulted in the closure of the Crabtree Valley Mall . Major flooding was reported elsewhere throughout the region , which closed several roads and damaged some houses . In Franklin County , an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy drowned after getting sucked into a flooded drainage system ; the death is considered indirect because the boy was chasing a ball into the drainage system . Near the coast , the storm produced several waterspouts , some of which moved ashore in Dare and Carteret counties . Isolated reports of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) wind gusts resulted in downed trees and minor damage . 
 Rainfall from the storm extended into Virginia , the Eastern Shore of Maryland , and extreme southeastern Delaware . Precipitation totaled 5 @.@ 8 inches ( 147 mm ) in Virginia Beach , which caused flash flooding in the Hampton Roads area . The flooding closed several roads , though no major damage was reported . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 The extratropical remnant of Alberto produced strong winds across the Canadian Maritimes , including gusts of 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) in the Barrington district of Nova Scotia . Sustained winds reached 51 mph ( 83 km / h ) . Rainfall from the storm was moderate , with some locations reporting 0 @.@ 4 inches ( 10 mm ) per hour ; totals exceeded 2 inches ( 50 mm ) in numerous areas . Due to wet grounds , the winds knocked down some trees and several tree limbs , and also downed some power lines , causing localized power outages . Moderate winds and rainfall affected Newfoundland , as well . According to a press report , the storm left four sailors missing about 230 miles ( 370 km ) south of Nova Scotia . 
 = Flagstaff , Arizona = 
 Flagstaff is a city located in northern Arizona , in the southwestern United States . In 2015 , the city 's estimated population was 70 @,@ 320 . The combined metropolitan area of Flagstaff has an estimated population of 139 @,@ 097 . It is the county seat of Coconino County . The city is named after a ponderosa pine flagpole made by a scouting party from Boston ( known as the " Second Boston Party " ) to celebrate the United States Centennial on July 4 , 1876 . 
 Flagstaff lies near the southwestern edge of the Colorado Plateau , along the western side of the largest contiguous Ponderosa Pine forest in the continental United States . Flagstaff is located adjacent to Mount Elden , just south of the San Francisco Peaks , the highest mountain range in the state of Arizona . Humphreys Peak , the highest point in Arizona at 12 @,@ 633 feet ( 3 @,@ 851 m ) , is located about 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Flagstaff in Kachina Peaks Wilderness . 
 Flagstaff 's early economy was based on the lumber , railroad , and ranching industries . Today , the city remains an important distribution hub for companies such as Nestlé Purina PetCare , and is home to Lowell Observatory , The U.S. Naval Observatory , the United States Geological Survey Flagstaff Station , and Northern Arizona University . Flagstaff has a strong tourism sector , due to its proximity to Grand Canyon National Park , Oak Creek Canyon , the Arizona Snowbowl , Meteor Crater , and historic Route 66 . The city is also a center for medical device manufacturing , since Flagstaff is home to W. L. Gore and Associates . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1855 Samuel Clark Hudson had been a surveyor for building the Santa Fe Railroad through Colorado , New Mexico and Arizona . Out by themselves with a team and a wagon on the 4th of July , he and his partner decided to climb a tall pine tree nearby and tying a flag to the top then trimming off the branches as they came down . A few days later the other crews came along and were surprised to find an American flag flying high . The railroad built a tow nearby , and the name of it is Flagstaff , Arizona . 
 The first permanent settlement was in 1876 , when Thomas F. McMillan built a cabin at the base of Mars Hill on the west side of town . During the 1880s , Flagstaff began to grow , opening its first post office and attracting the railroad industry . The early economy was based on timber , sheep , and cattle . By 1886 , Flagstaff was the largest city on the railroad line between Albuquerque and the west coast of the United States . A circa 1900 diary entry by journalist <unk> Hall described the houses in the city at the time as a " third rate mining camp " , with unkempt air and high prices of available goods . 
 In 1894 , Massachusetts astronomer Percival Lowell hired A. E. Douglass to scout an ideal site for a new observatory . Douglass , impressed by Flagstaff 's elevation , named it as an ideal location for the now famous Lowell Observatory , saying : " other things being equal , the higher we can get the better " . Two years later , the specially designed 24 @-@ inch ( 610 mm ) Clark telescope that Lowell had ordered was installed . In 1930 , Pluto was discovered using one of the observatory 's telescopes . In 1955 the U.S. Naval Observatory joined the growing astronomical presence , and established the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station , where Pluto 's satellite , Charon , was discovered in 1978 . 
 During the Apollo program in the 1960s , the Clark Telescope was used to map the moon for the lunar expeditions , enabling the mission planners to choose a safe landing site for the lunar modules . In homage to the city 's importance in the field of astronomy , asteroid 2118 Flagstaff is named for the city , and <unk> <unk> for the Flagstaff Symphony Orchestra . 
 The Northern Arizona Normal School was established in 1899 , renamed Northern Arizona University in 1966 . Flagstaff 's cultural history received a significant boost on April 11 , 1899 , when the Flagstaff Symphony made its concert debut at Babbitt 's Opera House . The orchestra continues today as the Flagstaff Symphony Orchestra , with its primary venue at the <unk> Auditorium on the campus of Northern Arizona University . 
 The city grew rapidly , primarily attributable to its location along the east @-@ west transcontinental railroad line in the United States . In the 1880s , the railroads purchased land in the west from the federal government , which was then sold to individuals to help finance the railroad projects . By the 1890s , Flagstaff found itself located along one of the busiest railroad corridors in the U.S. , with 80 @-@ 100 trains travelling through the city every day , destined for Chicago , Los Angeles , and elsewhere . 
 Route 66 was completed in 1926 and ran through Flagstaff . Flagstaff was incorporated as a city in 1928 , and in 1929 , the city 's first motel , the Motel Du Beau , was built at the intersection of Beaver Street and Phoenix Avenue . The Daily Sun described the motel as " a hotel with garages for the better class of motorists . " The units originally rented for $ 2 @.@ 60 to $ 5 @.@ 00 each , with baths , toilets , double beds , carpets , and furniture . Flagstaff went on to become a popular tourist stop along Route 66 , particularly due to its proximity to the Grand Canyon . 
 Flagstaff grew and prospered through the 1960s . During the 1970s and 1980s , however , many businesses started to move from the city center , and the downtown area entered an economic and social decline . Sears and J.C. Penney left the downtown area in 1979 to open up as anchor stores in the new Flagstaff Mall , joined in 1986 by Dillard 's . By 1987 , the Babbitt Brothers Trading Company , which had been a retail fixture in Flagstaff since 1891 , had closed its doors at Aspen Avenue and San Francisco Street . 
 In 1987 , the city drafted a new master plan , also known as the Growth Management Guide 2000 , which would transform downtown Flagstaff from a shopping and trade center into a regional center for finance , office use , and government . The city built a new city hall , library , and the Coconino County Administrative Building in the downtown district , staking an investment by the local government for years to come . In 1992 , the city hired a new manager , Dave Wilcox , who had previously worked at revitalizing the downtown areas of Beloit , Wisconsin and Missoula , Montana . During the 1990s , the downtown area underwent a revitalization , many of the city sidewalks were repaved with decorative brick facing , and a different mix of shops and restaurants opened up to take advantage of the area 's historical appeal . 
 On October 24 , 2001 , Flagstaff was recognized by the International Dark @-@ Sky Association as the world 's first " International Dark @-@ Sky City . " 
 The Railroad Addition Historic District ( Flagstaff , Arizona ) was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Flagstaff is located at 35 ° 11 ′ 57 ″ N 111 ° 37 ′ 52 ″ W. According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 63 @.@ 9 square miles ( 165 @.@ 5 km2 ) , of which only 0 @.@ 03 square miles ( 0 @.@ 08 km2 ) ( 0 @.@ 08 % ) is water . 
 At 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 130 m ) elevation , located adjacent to the largest contiguous Ponderosa Pine forest in North America , Flagstaff is located on a mountain surrounded by volcanoes , in the heart of the Coconino national forest . Any type of desert climate can be found below its elevation 100 miles from Flagstaff . The city is situated on the Rio de Flag , and is about 130 miles ( 210 km ) north of Phoenix . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Downtown Flagstaff lies immediately to the east of Mars Hill , the location of Lowell Observatory . Streets in the downtown area are laid out in a grid pattern , parallel to Route 66 and the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Rail Line , running east @-@ west through the city . Milton Road branches off from Route 66 west of downtown , and travels south , adjacent to the Northern Arizona University campus , to the junction of Interstate 17 and Interstate 40 . Milton Road becomes I @-@ 17 . A road called Beulah Boulevard , which also runs south , becomes State Route 89A , and travels through Oak Creek Canyon to Sedona . Traveling north from downtown , Fort Valley Road ( U.S. 180 ) connects with the Museum of Northern Arizona , Arizona Snowbowl , and Grand Canyon National Park . Traveling east from downtown , Route 66 and the railroad run in parallel toward East Flagstaff ( and beyond ) , at the base of Mount Elden . Much of Flagstaff 's industry is located east of downtown , adjacent to the railroad tracks , as well as in East Flagstaff . 
 Several towns are located close to Flagstaff along Interstates 40 and 17 . Approximately 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south are the small urban areas of Kachina Village ( west of I @-@ 17 ) and <unk> ( east of I @-@ 17 ; 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) ) . About 35 miles ( 56 km ) to the west is Williams , 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south is Munds Park , and 30 miles ( 48 km ) to the south on Arizona Highway 89A is Sedona . 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the east of Flagstaff is the town of Winona , mentioned in the famous song , Route 66 . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Flagstaff has a rather dry semi @-@ continental climate ( Köppen Dsb / Csb ) . Flagstaff has five distinct seasons : a cold and snowy winter , with extended dry periods punctuated with deep snows about once every 3 – 4 weeks ; a dry and windy spring with occasional snows ; a very dry and hot early summer from May to early July ; a wet and humid monsoon season from July to early September ; and a dry and pleasant fall which lasts until the first snows in November . 
 The combination of high elevation and low humidity provide mild weather conditions throughout most of the year . The predominantly clear air and high elevation radiates daytime heating effectively resulting in overnight temperatures generally much lower than the daytime temperature . This means a 55 degree day in January can drop to 15 at night . Winter nights in fact can be extremely cold , with temperatures dropping below 0 ° F ( − 17 @.@ 8 ° C ) on 5 to 6 nights per year . 
 Winter weather patterns in Flagstaff are cyclonic and frontal in nature , originating in the eastern Pacific Ocean . These deliver periodic , widespread snowfall followed by extended periods of sunny weather . The area 's generally stable weather pattern is broken by brief , but often intense , afternoon downpours and dramatic thunderstorms common during the monsoon of July and August . Summer temperatures are moderate and high temperatures average around 82 ° F ( 27 @.@ 8 ° C ) . Extreme temperatures range from − 30 ° F ( − 34 @.@ 4 ° C ) on January 22 , 1937 up to 97 ° F ( 36 @.@ 1 ° C ) on July 5 , 1973 , respectively . The weather in Flagstaff is generally sunny , with much more sunshine than other snowy cities like New York City , Chicago , Boston and even Denver . Flagstaff is the only city in Arizona never to have reported temperatures of 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) or higher . 
 The annual snowfall averages 100 @.@ 3 inches ( 254 @.@ 76 cm ) , placing Flagstaff among the snowiest incorporated cities in the United States . Overall , the city features an average of 277 days without measurable precipitation each year . Despite snowstorms often being spread weeks apart , snow often covers the ground for weeks after major winter storms due to the low night temperatures refreezing the snowpack , even when daytime temperatures are above freezing . The maximum daily snow cover has been 83 inches ( 210 @.@ 82 cm ) on December 20 , 1967 , although the mean maximum for a full winter is only 20 inches ( 50 @.@ 80 cm ) and the lowest maximum only 6 inches ( 15 @.@ 24 cm ) in the dry winter of 1955 – 56 . However , due to the infrequent and scattered nature of the snowstorms , persistent snow pack into spring is rare . One notable exception occurred during the severe winter of 1915 – 16 , when successive Pacific storms buried the city under over 70 inches ( 177 @.@ 80 cm ) of snow , and some residents were snowbound in their homes for several days . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2010 census , the population of the city was 65 @,@ 870 . The population density was 831 @.@ 9 people per square mile ( 321 @.@ 2 / km ² ) . There were 26 @,@ 254 housing units at an average density of 336 @.@ 5 per square mile ( 129 @.@ 9 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 73 @.@ 4 % White , 1 @.@ 9 % Black or African American , 11 @.@ 7 % Native American , 1 @.@ 9 % Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % Pacific Islander , 7 @.@ 3 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 6 % from two or more races . 18 @.@ 4 % of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race . The city 's African American population is considerably lower than the U.S. average ( 1 @.@ 9 % versus 12 @.@ 6 % ) , while the Native American population is markedly higher ( 11 @.@ 7 % vs. 0 @.@ 9 % ) . This is primarily attributable to the city 's proximity to several Native American reservations , including the Navajo , Hopi , Havasupai , and Yavapai . Flagstaff 's Native American community is chiefly Navajo , and there are about 5 @,@ 500 people of Navajo ancestry living in the city . 
 As of 2000 , there were 19 @,@ 306 households out of which 32 @.@ 8 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 44 @.@ 0 % were married couples living together , 11 @.@ 6 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 39 @.@ 9 % were non @-@ families . 23 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals and 3 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 59 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 13 . 
 The age distribution was 24 @.@ 3 % under the age of 18 , 21 @.@ 7 % from 18 to 24 , 30 @.@ 5 % from 25 to 44 , 18 @.@ 2 % from 45 to 64 , and 5 @.@ 3 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 27 years . For every 100 females there were 98 @.@ 3 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96 @.@ 4 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 37 @,@ 146 , and the median income for a family was $ 48 @,@ 427 . Males had a median income of $ 31 @,@ 973 versus $ 24 @,@ 591 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 18 @,@ 637 . About 10 @.@ 6 % of families and 17 @.@ 4 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 17 @.@ 6 % of those under age 18 and 7 @.@ 0 % of those age 65 or over . 
 As a college town , Flagstaff 's population is considerably more educated than the U.S. average . 89 @.@ 8 % of the population has a high school diploma or higher , while the national average is 80 @.@ 4 % . 39 @.@ 4 % of the population has a bachelor 's degree or higher , compared to the national average of 24 @.@ 4 % . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 For 2012 , the FBI 's Uniform Crime Report indicated for Flagstaff a rate of 262 cases of violent crime per 100 @,@ 000 population and 2 @,@ 834 cases of property crime per 100 @,@ 000 population . 
 A 1988 Arizona state law made it a crime to be " present in a public place to beg . " The Flagstaff Police Department and City Attorney aggressively enforced this law , which resulted in a First Amendment lawsuit filed on June 25 , 2013 . The American Civil Liberties Union filed the lawsuit on behalf of Food Not Bombs , in addition to three people who were arrested , threatened with arrest , or feared being arrested for " loitering to beg . " On October 4 , 2013 , U.S. District Court Judge Neil Wake overturned the law . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In its early days , the city 's economic base comprised the lumber , railroad , and ranching industries . Today , that has largely been replaced by tourism , education , government , and transportation . Some of the larger employers in Flagstaff are Northern Arizona University , the Flagstaff Medical Center , and the Flagstaff Unified School District . Tourism is a large contributor to the economy , as the city receives over 5 million visitors per year . 
 Scientific and high tech research and development operations are located in the city , including the Lowell Observatory , Northern Arizona University , the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station ( NOFS ) and the United States Geological Survey 's ( USGS ) Flagstaff campus . Lowell Observatory continues to be an active astronomical observatory and a popular visitors center which hosts educational displays and tours . It has a distributed network of small telescopes which together create images of celestial bodies with much higher resolutions than any other single telescope can produce . Current research is involved in observations of near @-@ Earth phenomena such as asteroids and comets . The observatory is also involved in a $ 30 million project with the Discovery Channel to build the Discovery Channel Telescope , a sophisticated , ground @-@ based telescope with advanced optical capabilities for future projects . Lowell Observatory and NOFS are also collaborators on the major project , the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer , on nearby Anderson Mesa . NOFS is heavily involved with the science of star catalogs and astrometry , or the positions and distances of stars and celestial objects . 
 There are five industrial parks in the city , situated near I @-@ 40 and I @-@ 17 . Major manufacturers in Flagstaff include W. L. Gore & Associates , widely known as the maker of Gore @-@ Tex ; Nestlé Purina PetCare , manufacturer of pet food ; SCA Tissue , a major tissue paper producer ; and Joy Cone , manufacturer of ice cream cones . Walgreens operated a distribution center in the city until 2014 . In July 2014 , Walgreens announced that their Flagstaff distribution center would be closing within 9 months . 
 With proximity to Grand Canyon National Park , the city also has a thriving travel and tourism industry , with numerous hotel and restaurant chains . The downtown area is home to two historic hotels , the Weatherford Hotel and the Hotel Monte Vista . The first hotel of the Ramada Inn chain opened in 1954 at the intersection of U.S. Route 66 , 89 and 89A adjacent to what was then Arizona State College ( now Northern Arizona University ) . The original building is still intact , operating as a Super 8 Motel . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 Flagstaff has an active cultural scene . The city is home to the Flagstaff Symphony Orchestra , which plays concerts from September through April at <unk> Auditorium on the NAU campus . The city also attracts folk and contemporary acoustic musicians , and offers several annual music festivals during the summer months , such as the Flagstaff Friends of Traditional Music Festival , the Flagstaff Music Festival , and Pickin ' in the Pines , a three @-@ day bluegrass and acoustic music festival held at the Pine Mountain Amphitheater at Fort Tuthill Fairgrounds . Popular bands play throughout the year at the Orpheum Theater , and free concerts are held during the summer months at Heritage Square . 
 Flagstaff is home to an active theater scene , featuring several groups . Northern Arizona University Department of Theatre is an active and successful theatre program that produces quality productions for the community as well as the campus . The department has won many prestigious awards including multiple invitations to the Kennedy Center American College Theatre Festival . NAU Theatre performs in two facilities including the Clifford E. White Theatre ( named for long @-@ time Theatre professor Clifford E. White ) and the Studio Theatre . Both facilities are housed in the Fine and Performing Arts Building on <unk> season includes 4 <unk> and numerous second stage productions and a summer collaboration with <unk> Theatre Company . <unk> Theatre Company , the community theater company , was founded in 1972 in the basement of the Weatherford Hotel , and today puts on five major productions per year . The group recently moved into a new venue in 2002 , the Doris @-@ Harper White Community Playhouse , a downtown building which was built in 1923 as an Elks Lodge and later became the Flagstaff library . Since 1995 , the Flagstaff Light Opera Company has performed a variety of musical theatre and light opera productions throughout the year at the <unk> High School auditorium . There are several dance companies in Flagstaff , including Coconino Community College Dance Program , Northern Arizona Preparatory Company and Canyon Movement , which present periodic concerts and collaborate with the Flagstaff Symphony for free concerts during the summer and holiday seasons . 
 A variety of weekend festivals occur throughout the year . The annual Northern Arizona Book Festival , held in the spring , brings together nationally known authors to read and display their works . The Flagstaff Mountain Film Festival is held every October , and features a variety of independent films and documentaries focusing on extreme sports , environmental issues , and global topics . The festival is four days long and consists of several sessions of films . The screenings are held at the Orpheum Theater in the historic downtown area . The summer months feature several festivals , including Hopi and Navajo Festivals of Arts and Crafts , the Arizona Highland Celtic Festival , Pride in the Pines , and the Made in the Shade Beer Tasting Festival . For more than 20 years Flagstaff has hosted the 10 @-@ day Flagstaff Festival of Science in September . It is a family event which features open houses , lectures , informal talks , and hands @-@ on activities at area museums , observatories , other scientific facilities , and the university . In @-@ school programs also are an important part of the festival . The festival begins with the annual Eugene Shoemaker keynote address . Guest speakers have included famous astronauts , arctic explorers , storm chasers , and scientists from many disciplines . The Coconino County Fair is held every September at the Fort Tuthill County Fairgrounds , featuring a demolition derby , livestock auction , carnival rides , and other activities . 
 On New Year 's Eve , people gather around the Weatherford Hotel as a 70 @-@ pound , 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , metallic pine cone is dropped from the roof at midnight . The tradition originated in 1999 , when Henry Taylor and Sam Green ( owners of the Weatherford Hotel ) , decorated a garbage can with paint , lights , and pine cones , and dropped it from the roof of their building to mark the new millennium . By 2003 the event had become tradition , and the current metallic pine cone was designed and built by Frank Mayorga of Mayorga Welding in Flagstaff . 
 The Museum of Northern Arizona includes displays of the biology , archeology , photography , anthropology , and native art of the Colorado Plateau . The Arboretum at Flagstaff is a 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) arboretum featuring 2 @,@ 500 species of drought @-@ tolerant native plants representative of the high @-@ desert region . 
 Route 66 , which originally ran between Chicago and Los Angeles , greatly increased the accessibility to the area , and enhanced the culture and tourism in Flagstaff . Route 66 remains a historic route , passing through the city between Barstow , California , and Albuquerque , New Mexico . In early September , the city hosts an annual event , Route 66 Days , to highlight its connection to the famous highway . 
 = = Sports = = 
 There are no major @-@ league professional sports teams based in Flagstaff . However , from 1988 to 2012 ( with the exception of the 2005 season , due to an outbreak of a flu @-@ like virus ) , the Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League held their summer training camp at Northern Arizona University The NAU training camp location has been cited as one of the top five training camps in the NFL by Sports Illustrated .. The Cardinals left Flagstaff beginning in Summer 2013 . 
 Northern Arizona University sponsors 15 sports at the Division I level , including a football team that competes at the Division I Football Championship Series level . All sports are members of the Big Sky Conference with the exception of the Women 's Swimming & Diving team , which competes in the Western Athletic Conference . The Men 's Cross Country team has featured four straight top ten finishes at the NCAA Division I Cross Country championships , which are held each year in Terre Haute , Indiana . The track and field team is home to several All @-@ Americans including NCAA Champion / Olympian Lopez <unk> , two time NCAA Champion David McNeill and current All @-@ American / future 2012 Olympian Diego Estrada . 
 = = Parks and outdoor recreation = = 
 Flagstaff has acquired a reputation as a magnet for outdoor enthusiasts , and the region 's varied terrain , high elevation , and amenable weather attract campers , backpackers , climbers , recreation and elite runners , and mountain bikers from throughout the southwestern United States . There are 679 @.@ 2 acres ( 274 @.@ 9 ha ) of city parks in Flagstaff , the largest of which are Thorpe Park and Buffalo Park . Wheeler Park , located adjacent to city hall , is the location of summer concerts and other events . The city maintains an extensive network of trails , the Flagstaff Urban Trails System , or " FUTS " includes more than 50 miles of paved and unpaved trails for hiking , running , and cycling . The trail network extends throughout the city and is widely used for both recreation and transportation . 
 The area is a recreational hub for road cycling and mountain biking clubs , organized triathlon events , and annual cross country ski races . Several major river running operators are headquartered in Flagstaff , and the city serves as a base for Grand Canyon and Colorado River expeditions . 
 Flagstaff 's proximity to Grand Canyon National Park , about 75 miles ( 121 km ) north of the city , has made it a popular tourist destination since the mid @-@ 19th century . Other nearby outdoor attractions include Walnut Canyon National Monument , Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument , <unk> National Monument , and Barringer Crater . Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Lake Powell are both about 135 mi ( 217 km ) north along U.S. Route 89 . 
 = = Government = = 
 The city government is organized under a council @-@ manager form of government . The current mayor of Flagstaff is Jerry <unk> , who was elected in May 2012 , and the current town council consists of the mayor and six councilmembers : Celia <unk> ( vice mayor ) , Karla Brewster , Coral Evans , Jeff <unk> , Scott Overton and Mark Woodson . The city 's current city manager is Kevin Burke . Regular meetings of the city council are held on the first and third Tuesday of every month . 
 Flagstaff is the county seat of Coconino County . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are 19 public schools , with 11 @,@ 500 students and 800 faculty and staff , in the Flagstaff Unified School District . In 1997 , Mount Elden Middle School was named an A + School , citing an outstanding school climate , progressive use of technology and zero @-@ tolerance approach to discipline . The 1999 National Science Teacher of the Year , David Thompson , teaches physics at Coconino High School . Three Arizona Teachers of the Year from 2001 through 2003 teach at Flagstaff High School . 
 In addition to the numerous public schools , there are several charter schools operating in the Flagstaff area including Flagstaff Junior Academy , Northland Preparatory Academy ( ranked No. 52 in USA News 's America 's Top 100 Best High Schools ) , the Flagstaff Arts and Leadership Academy , Pine Forest Charter School , <unk> Flagstaff and the Montessori Schools of Flagstaff . 
 Flagstaff is home to two institutions of higher education , Northern Arizona University ( one of the three public state universities in Arizona ) and Coconino Community College . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Flagstaff is at the northern terminus of Interstate 17 , which runs 145 miles ( 233 km ) south to Phoenix . Interstate 40 runs east @-@ west through the city , traveling to Barstow , California in the west and Albuquerque , New Mexico ( and beyond ) in the east . Historic Route 66 also runs east @-@ west through the city , roughly parallel to I @-@ 40 , and is a major thoroughfare for local traffic . Butler Avenue connects I @-@ 40 with downtown Flagstaff , and the major north @-@ south thoroughfare through town is Milton Road . State Route 89A travels through the city ( concurrently as parts of Milton Rd. and Route 66 ) , going south through Oak Creek Canyon to Sedona . 
 The major rail corridor running through Flagstaff is the Southern Transcon , originally built by the Santa Fe Railway and now owned and operated by the BNSF Railway . Passenger rail service is provided by Amtrak at the downtown station , connecting on east @-@ west routes to Los Angeles and Albuquerque via the Southwest Chief line . Amtrak also provides connecting Thruway Motorcoach service via Open Road Tours , which has an office inside the Flagstaff depot . Local bus service is provided throughout the city by the Mountain Line . 
 Air travel is available through Flagstaff Pulliam Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> , FAA LID : <unk> ) , located just south of the city . The airport is primarily a small , general aviation airport with a single 6 @,@ 999 feet ( 2 @,@ 133 m ) runway . The airport finished a major expansion project to add 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) to the north end of the current runway and lengthen the taxiway in 2007 . The primary purpose of the project was to increase its viability for commercial and regional jets . Service to connecting flights at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport ( IATA : PHX , ICAO : <unk> , FAA LID : PHX ) is provided by US Airways Express operated by Mesa Airlines . 
 Flagstaff is fairly bike @-@ friendly ; there are bike lanes on many major streets , and the Flagstaff Urban Trails System ( FUTS ) includes more than 50 miles of off @-@ street trails that wind throughout the community . In 2006 Flagstaff was designated a Bicycle @-@ Friendly Community by the League of American Bicyclists . About nine percent of trips in Flagstaff are made by bicycle . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Electricity generation in Flagstaff is provided by Arizona Public Service , an electric utility subsidiary operated by parent company Pinnacle West . The primary generating station near Flagstaff is the coal @-@ fired , 995 @-@ MW Cholla Power Plant , near Holbrook , Arizona , which uses coal from the McKinley Mine in New Mexico . Located near Page , Arizona is the coal @-@ fired , 750 @-@ MW Navajo Power Plant , supplied by an electric railroad that delivers coal from a mine on the Navajo and Hopi reservations in northern Arizona . Flagstaff is also home to Arizona 's first commercial solar power generating station , which was built in 1997 and provides 87 kW of electricity . Combined with 16 other solar power locations in Arizona , the system provides over 5 MW of electricity statewide . 
 Drinking water in Flagstaff is produced from conventional surface water treatment at the Lake Mary Water Treatment Plant , located on Upper Lake Mary , as well as from springs at the inner basin of the San Francisco Peaks . Groundwater from several water wells located throughout the city and surrounding area provide additional sources of drinking water . Water and wastewater services are provided by the City of Flagstaff . 
 Natural gas is provided by <unk> Energy Services . CenturyLink QC is the incumbent local exchange carrier . Cable television service is offered by <unk> Communications . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 The city 's primary hospital is the 270 – bed Flagstaff Medical Center , located on the north side of downtown Flagstaff . The hospital was founded in 1936 , and serves as the major regional trauma center for northern Arizona . 
 = = Media and popular culture = = 
 The major daily newspaper in Flagstaff is the Arizona Daily Sun . Northern Arizona University 's weekly newspaper The Lumberjack and " <unk> " an online only publication , also cover Flagstaff news , while the other publications that serve the city include weeklies Flagstaff Live and the Navajo Hopi Observer , and <unk> Mountain Living Magazine and The Noise . 
 Several radio stations operate in the area , some of which operate transmitters in Prescott as well . 
 Flagstaff is included in the Phoenix Designated market area ( DMA ) , the 13th largest in the U.S. Over @-@ the @-@ air television service is provided mostly by low @-@ powered repeaters of the Phoenix stations . There is one local broadcast television station serving the city , KFPH @-@ 13 ( <unk> ) . 
 In the early 20th century , the city was considered as a site for the film The Squaw Man by Jesse Lasky and Cecil B. DeMille , but was abandoned in favor of Hollywood . Several recent movies have been filmed , at least in part , in Flagstaff . A small scene in Midnight Run was filmed in Flagstaff at the train depot , the city was also referenced in the film . Several of the running scenes in Forrest Gump were filmed in and around the area , including a memorable scene where Forrest is seen jogging in downtown Flagstaff and gives inspiration to a bumper sticker designer ( " Shit happens " ) . Parts of 2007 Academy Award winner Little Miss Sunshine were filmed at the junction of I @-@ 40 and I @-@ 17 in Flagstaff , and Terminal Velocity was partially filmed in the city . 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , over 100 western movies were filmed in nearby Sedona and Oak Creek Canyon . The Hotel Monte Vista in Flagstaff hosted many film stars during this era , including Jane Russell , Gary Cooper , Spencer Tracy , John Wayne , and Bing Crosby . A scene from the movie Casablanca was filmed in one of the rooms of the hotel . Scenes from downtown Flagstaff and the Santa Fe railroad freight depot are seen in the 1969 movie " Easy Rider " during the opening credits [ 2 ] starring Peter Fonda , Dennis Hopper ( Director ) and Jack Nicholson . 
 The city has been mentioned in several novels , such as The Monkey Wrench Gang by Edward Abbey , depicting an encounter with a Flagstaff policeman . Frank Poole discusses his childhood growing up in Flagstaff in Arthur C. Clarke 's novel 3001 : The Final Odyssey . 
 In 2005 , Extreme Makeover : Home Edition built a home just outside Flagstaff for slain soldier Lori Piestewa 's two children and parents . Grizzly Peak Films also filmed Sasquatch Mountain , a feature @-@ length film for the Science Fiction Channel about a Yeti , in Flagstaff and nearby Williams . In December 2007 , talk show hostess Ellen DeGeneres selected Flagstaff as the winner of her show 's , " Wish You Were Here " , contest . 
 In the comic series Halo : Escalation , it is noted that Flagstaff and Phoenix agreed to become one city , as the populations and boundaries of both cities grew to intersect . The new city became known as " New Phoenix " . New Phoenix 's population became " composed " by the Forerunner known as the " Didact " in Halo 4 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Flagstaff has four sister cities : 
 = Mary I of England = 
 Mary I ( 18 February 1516 – 17 November 1558 ) was the Queen of England and Ireland from July 1553 until her death . Her executions of Protestants led to the posthumous sobriquet " Bloody Mary " . 
 She was the only child of Henry VIII and his first wife Catherine of Aragon to survive to adulthood . Her younger half @-@ brother Edward VI ( son of Henry and Jane Seymour ) succeeded their father in 1547 . When Edward became mortally ill in 1553 , he attempted to remove Mary from the line of succession because of religious differences . On his death their first cousin once removed , Lady Jane Grey , was proclaimed queen . Mary assembled a force in East Anglia and deposed Jane , who was ultimately beheaded . Mary was — excluding the disputed reigns of Jane and the Empress Matilda — the first queen regnant of England . In 1554 , Mary married Philip of Spain , becoming queen consort of Habsburg Spain on his accession in 1556 . 
 As the fourth crowned monarch of the Tudor dynasty , Mary is remembered for her restoration of Roman Catholicism after her half @-@ brother 's short @-@ lived Protestant reign . During her five @-@ year reign , she had over 280 religious dissenters burned at the stake in the Marian persecutions . After her death in 1558 , her re @-@ establishment of Roman Catholicism was reversed by her younger half @-@ sister and successor Elizabeth I , daughter of Henry and Anne Boleyn . 
 = = Birth and family = = 
 Mary was born on 18 February 1516 at the Palace of Placentia in Greenwich , London . She was the only child of King Henry VIII and his first wife , Catherine of Aragon , to survive infancy . Her mother had many miscarriages ; before Mary 's birth , four previous pregnancies had resulted in a stillborn daughter and three short @-@ lived or stillborn sons , including Henry , Duke of Cornwall . She was baptised into the Catholic faith at the Church of the Observant Friars in Greenwich three days after her birth . Her godparents included her great @-@ aunt the Countess of Devon , Lord Chancellor Thomas Wolsey , and the Duchess of Norfolk . Henry VIII 's cousin once removed , Margaret Pole , Countess of Salisbury , stood sponsor for Mary 's confirmation , which was held immediately after the baptism . The following year , Mary became a godmother herself when she was named as one of the sponsors of her cousin Frances Brandon . In 1520 , the Countess of Salisbury was appointed Mary 's governess . Sir John Hussey , later Lord Hussey , was her chamberlain from 1530 , and his wife , Lady Anne , daughter of George Grey , 2nd Earl of Kent , was one of Mary 's attendants . 
 = = Education and early marriage plans = = 
 Mary was a precocious child . In July 1520 , when scarcely four and a half years old , she entertained a visiting French delegation with a performance on the virginals ( a type of harpsichord ) . A great part of her early education came from her mother , who consulted the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives for advice and commissioned him to write De <unk> <unk> Christianae , a treatise on the education of girls . By the age of nine , Mary could read and write Latin . She studied French , Spanish , music , dance , and perhaps Greek . Henry VIII doted on his daughter and boasted to the Venetian ambassador Sebastian Giustiniani , " This girl never cries " . Also , as the miniature portrait of her shows , Mary had , like both her parents , a very fair complexion , pale blue eyes and red or reddish @-@ golden hair . She was also ruddy cheeked , a trait she inherited from her father . 
 Despite his affection for Mary , Henry was deeply disappointed that his marriage had produced no sons . By the time Mary was nine years old , it was apparent that Henry and Catherine would have no more children , leaving Henry without a legitimate male heir . In 1525 , Henry sent Mary to the border of Wales to preside , presumably in name only , over the Council of Wales and the Marches . She was given her own court based at Ludlow Castle and many of the royal prerogatives normally reserved for the Prince of Wales . Vives and others called her the Princess of Wales , although she was never technically invested with the title . She appears to have spent three years in the Welsh Marches , making regular visits to her father 's court , before returning permanently to the home counties around London in mid @-@ 1528 . 
 Throughout Mary 's childhood , Henry negotiated potential future marriages for her . When she was only two years old , she was promised to the Dauphin , the infant son of King Francis I of France , but the contract was repudiated after three years . In 1522 , at the age of six , she was instead contracted to marry her 22 @-@ year @-@ old first cousin , Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. However , the engagement was broken off within a few years by Charles with Henry 's agreement . Cardinal Wolsey , Henry 's chief adviser , then resumed marriage negotiations with the French , and Henry suggested that Mary marry the Dauphin 's father , King Francis I himself , who was eager for an alliance with England . A marriage treaty was signed which provided that Mary marry either Francis I or his second son Henry , Duke of Orleans , but Wolsey secured an alliance with France without the marriage . 
 According to the Venetian Mario <unk> , Mary was developing into a pretty , well @-@ proportioned young lady with a fine complexion . 
 = = Adolescence = = 
 Meanwhile , the marriage of Mary 's parents was in jeopardy . Disappointed at the lack of a male heir , and eager to remarry , Henry attempted to have his marriage to Catherine annulled , but Pope Clement VII refused his requests . Henry claimed , citing biblical passages ( Leviticus 20 : 21 ) , that his marriage to Catherine was unclean because she was the widow of his brother ( Mary 's uncle ) Arthur . Catherine claimed that her marriage to Arthur was never consummated and so was not a valid marriage . Her first marriage had been annulled by a previous pope , Julius II , on that basis . Clement may have been reluctant to act because he was influenced by Charles V , Catherine 's nephew and Mary 's former betrothed , whose troops had surrounded and occupied Rome in the War of the League of Cognac . 
 From 1531 , Mary was often sick with irregular menstruation and depression , although it is not clear whether this was caused by stress , puberty or a more deep @-@ seated disease . She was not permitted to see her mother , who had been sent to live away from court by Henry . In early 1533 , Henry married Anne Boleyn , who was pregnant with his child , and in May Thomas Cranmer , the Archbishop of Canterbury , formally declared the marriage with Catherine void , and the marriage to Anne valid . Henry broke with the Roman Catholic Church and declared himself Supreme Head of the Church of England . Catherine was demoted to Dowager Princess of Wales ( a title she would have held as the widow of Arthur ) , and Mary was deemed illegitimate . She was styled " The Lady Mary " rather than Princess , and her place in the line of succession was transferred to her newborn half @-@ sister , Elizabeth , Anne 's daughter . Mary 's own household was dissolved ; her servants ( including the Countess of Salisbury ) were dismissed and in December 1533 she was sent to join the household of the infant Elizabeth at Hatfield , Hertfordshire . 
 Mary determinedly refused to acknowledge that Anne was the queen or that Elizabeth was a princess , further enraging King Henry . Under strain and with her movements restricted , Mary was frequently ill , which the royal physician attributed to her " ill treatment " . The Imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys became her close adviser , and interceded , unsuccessfully , on her behalf at court . The relationship between Mary and her father worsened ; they did not speak to each other for three years . Although both she and her mother were ill , Mary was refused permission to visit Catherine . When Catherine died in 1536 , Mary was " inconsolable " . Catherine was interred in Peterborough Cathedral , while Mary grieved in semi @-@ seclusion at Hunsdon in Hertfordshire . 
 = = Adulthood = = 
 In 1536 , Queen Anne fell from the king 's favour and was beheaded . Elizabeth , like Mary , was downgraded to the status of Lady and removed from the line of succession . Within two weeks of Anne 's execution , Henry married Jane Seymour , who urged her husband to make peace with Mary . Henry insisted that Mary recognise him as head of the Church of England , repudiate papal authority , acknowledge that the marriage between her parents was unlawful , and accept her own illegitimacy . She attempted to reconcile with him by submitting to his authority as far as " God and my conscience " permitted , but she was eventually bullied into signing a document agreeing to all of Henry 's demands . Reconciled with her father , Mary resumed her place at court . Henry granted her a household ( which included the reinstatement of Mary 's favourite Susan Clarencieux ) . Mary 's privy purse expenses for this period show that Hatfield House , the Palace of Beaulieu ( also called Newhall ) , Richmond and Hunsdon were among her principal places of residence , as well as Henry 's palaces at Greenwich , Westminster and Hampton Court . Her expenses included fine clothes and gambling at cards , one of her favourite pastimes . Rebels in the North of England , including Lord Hussey , Mary 's former chamberlain , campaigned against Henry 's religious reforms , and one of their demands was that Mary be made legitimate . The rebellion , known as the Pilgrimage of Grace , was ruthlessly suppressed . Along with other rebels , Hussey was executed , but there was no suggestion that Mary was directly involved . The following year , 1537 , Jane died after giving birth to a son , Edward . Mary was made godmother to her half @-@ brother and acted as chief mourner at the queen 's funeral . 
 Mary was courted by Duke Philip of Bavaria from late 1539 , but Philip was Lutheran and his suit for her hand was unsuccessful . Over 1539 , the king 's chief minister , Thomas Cromwell , negotiated a potential alliance with the Duchy of Cleves . Suggestions that Mary marry the Duke of Cleves , who was the same age , came to nothing , but a match between Henry and the Duke 's sister Anne was agreed . When the king saw Anne for the first time in late December 1539 , a week before the scheduled wedding , he did not find her attractive but was unable , for diplomatic reasons and in the absence of a suitable pretext , to cancel the marriage . Cromwell fell from favour and was arrested for treason in June 1540 ; one of the unlikely charges against him was that he had plotted to marry Mary himself . Anne consented to the annulment of the marriage , which had not been consummated , and Cromwell was beheaded . 
 In 1541 , Henry had the Countess of Salisbury , Mary 's old governess and godmother , executed on the pretext of a Catholic plot , in which her son ( Reginald Pole ) was implicated . Her executioner was " a wretched and blundering youth " who " literally hacked her head and shoulders to pieces " . In 1542 , following the execution of Henry 's fifth wife , Catherine Howard , the unmarried Henry invited Mary to attend the royal Christmas festivities . At court , while her father was between marriages and without a consort , Mary acted as hostess . In 1543 , Henry married his sixth and last wife , Catherine Parr , who was able to bring the family closer together . Henry returned Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession , through the Act of Succession 1544 , placing them after Edward . However , both remained legally illegitimate . 
 In 1547 , Henry died and Edward succeeded him , as Edward VI . Mary inherited estates in Norfolk , Suffolk and Essex , and was granted Hunsdon and Beaulieu as her own . Since Edward was still a child , rule passed to a regency council dominated by Protestants , who attempted to establish their faith throughout the country . For example , the Act of Uniformity 1549 prescribed Protestant rites for church services , such as the use of Thomas Cranmer 's new Book of Common Prayer . Mary remained faithful to Roman Catholicism and defiantly celebrated the traditional mass in her own chapel . She appealed to her cousin Charles V to apply diplomatic pressure demanding that she be allowed to practice her religion . 
 For most of Edward 's reign , Mary remained on her own estates and rarely attended court . A plan between May and July 1550 to smuggle her out of England to the safety of the European mainland came to nothing . Religious differences between Mary and Edward continued . When Mary was in her thirties , she attended a reunion with Edward and Elizabeth for Christmas 1550 , where 13 @-@ year @-@ old Edward embarrassed Mary , and reduced both her and himself to tears in front of the court , by publicly reproving her for ignoring his laws regarding worship . Mary repeatedly refused Edward 's demands that she abandon Catholicism , and Edward repeatedly refused to drop his demands . 
 = = Accession = = 
 On 6 July 1553 , at the age of 15 , Edward VI died from a lung infection , possibly tuberculosis . He did not want the crown to go to Mary , because he feared she would restore Catholicism and undo his reforms as well as those of Henry VIII , and so he planned to exclude her from the line of succession . His advisers , however , told him that he could not disinherit only one of his sisters , but that he would have to disinherit Elizabeth as well , even though she was a Protestant . Guided by John Dudley , 1st Duke of Northumberland , and perhaps others , Edward excluded both of his sisters from the line of succession in his will . 
 Contradicting the Succession Act , which restored Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession , Edward named Dudley 's daughter @-@ in @-@ law Lady Jane Grey , the granddaughter of Henry VIII 's younger sister Mary , as his successor . Lady Jane 's mother was Frances Brandon , Mary 's cousin and goddaughter . Just before Edward VI 's death , Mary was summoned to London to visit her dying brother . She was warned , however , that the summons was a pretext on which to capture her and thereby facilitate Lady Jane 's accession to the throne . Therefore , instead of heading to London from her residence at Hunsdon , Mary fled into East Anglia , where she owned extensive estates and Dudley had ruthlessly put down Kett 's Rebellion . Many adherents to the Catholic faith , opponents of Dudley 's , lived there . On 9 July , from Kenninghall , Norfolk , she wrote to the privy council with orders for her proclamation as Edward 's successor . 
 On 10 July 1553 , Lady Jane was proclaimed queen by Dudley and his supporters , and on the same day Mary 's letter to the council arrived in London . By 12 July , Mary and her supporters had assembled a military force at Framlingham Castle , Suffolk . Dudley 's support collapsed , and Mary 's grew . Jane was deposed on 19 July . She and Dudley were imprisoned in the Tower of London . Mary rode triumphantly into London on 3 August 1553 , on a wave of popular support . She was accompanied by her half @-@ sister Elizabeth and a procession of over 800 nobles and gentlemen . 
 One of Mary 's first actions as queen was to order the release of the Roman Catholic Duke of Norfolk and Stephen Gardiner from imprisonment in the Tower of London , as well as her kinsman Edward Courtenay . Mary understood that the young Lady Jane was essentially a pawn in Dudley 's scheme , and Dudley was the only conspirator of rank executed for high treason in the immediate aftermath of the coup . Lady Jane and her husband , Lord Guildford Dudley , though found guilty , were kept under guard in the Tower rather than immediately executed , while Lady Jane 's father , Henry Grey , 1st Duke of Suffolk , was released . Mary was left in a difficult position , as almost all the Privy Counsellors had been implicated in the plot to put Lady Jane on the throne . She appointed Gardiner to the council and made him both Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellor , offices he held until his death in November 1555 . Susan Clarencieux became Mistress of the Robes . On 1 October 1553 , Gardiner crowned Mary at Westminster Abbey . 
 = = = Spanish marriage = = = 
 At age 37 , Mary turned her attention to finding a husband and producing an heir , thus preventing the Protestant Elizabeth ( still next @-@ in @-@ line under the terms of Henry VIII 's will and the Act of Succession of 1544 ) from succeeding to the throne . Edward Courtenay and Reginald Pole were both mentioned as prospective suitors , but her cousin Charles V suggested she marry his only son , Prince Philip of Spain . Philip had a son from a previous marriage and was heir apparent to vast territories in Continental Europe and the New World . As part of the marriage negotiations , a portrait of Philip , by Titian , was sent to her in September 1553 . 
 Lord Chancellor Gardiner and the House of Commons unsuccessfully petitioned her to consider marrying an Englishman , fearing that England would be relegated to a dependency of the Habsburgs . The marriage was unpopular with the English ; Gardiner and his allies opposed it on the basis of patriotism , while Protestants were motivated by a fear of Catholicism . When Mary insisted on marrying Philip , insurrections broke out . Thomas Wyatt the younger led a force from Kent to depose Mary in favour of Elizabeth , as part of a wider conspiracy now known as Wyatt 's rebellion , which also involved the Duke of Suffolk , the father of Lady Jane . Mary declared publicly that she would summon Parliament to discuss the marriage , and if Parliament decided that the marriage was not to the advantage of the kingdom , she would refrain from pursuing it . On reaching London , Wyatt was defeated and captured . Wyatt , the Duke of Suffolk , his daughter Lady Jane , and her husband Guildford Dudley were executed . Courtenay , who was implicated in the plot , was imprisoned , and then exiled . Elizabeth , though protesting her innocence in the Wyatt affair , was imprisoned in the Tower of London for two months , then was put under house arrest at Woodstock Palace . 
 Mary was — excluding the brief , disputed reigns of the Empress Matilda and Lady Jane Grey — England 's first queen regnant . Further , under the English common law doctrine of jure uxoris , the property and titles belonging to a woman became her husband 's upon marriage , and it was feared that any man she married would thereby become King of England in fact and in name . While Mary 's grandparents , Ferdinand and Isabella , had retained sovereignty of their own realms during their marriage , there was no precedent to follow in England . Under the terms of Queen Mary 's Marriage Act , Philip was to be styled " King of England " , all official documents ( including Acts of Parliament ) were to be dated with both their names , and Parliament was to be called under the joint authority of the couple , for Mary 's lifetime only . England would not be obliged to provide military support to Philip 's father in any war , and Philip could not act without his wife 's consent or appoint foreigners to office in England . Philip was unhappy at the conditions imposed , but he was ready to agree for the sake of securing the marriage . He had no amorous feelings toward Mary and sought the marriage for its political and strategic gains ; Philip 's aide Ruy Gómez de Silva wrote to a correspondent in Brussels , " the marriage was concluded for no fleshly consideration , but in order to remedy the disorders of this kingdom and to preserve the Low Countries . " 
 To elevate his son to Mary 's rank , Emperor Charles V ceded to Philip the crown of Naples as well as his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem . Therefore , Mary became Queen of Naples and titular Queen of Jerusalem upon marriage . Their wedding at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting . Philip could not speak English , and so they spoke in a mixture of Spanish , French , and Latin . 
 = = = False pregnancy = = = 
 In September 1554 , Mary stopped menstruating . She gained weight , and felt nauseated in the mornings . For these reasons , almost the entirety of her court , including her doctors , believed her to be pregnant . Parliament passed an act making Philip regent in the event of Mary 's death in childbirth . In the last week of April 1555 , Elizabeth was released from house arrest , and called to court as a witness to the birth , which was expected imminently . According to Giovanni Michieli , the Venetian ambassador , Philip may have planned to marry Elizabeth in the event of Mary 's death in childbirth , but in a letter to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Maximilian of Austria , Philip expressed uncertainty as to whether his wife was pregnant . 
 Thanksgiving services in the diocese of London were held at the end of April after false rumours that Mary had given birth to a son spread across Europe . Through May and June , the apparent delay in delivery fed gossip that Mary was not pregnant . Susan Clarencieux revealed her doubts to the French ambassador , Antoine de Noailles . Mary continued to exhibit signs of pregnancy until July 1555 , when her abdomen receded . There was no baby . Michieli dismissively ridiculed the pregnancy as more likely to " end in wind rather than anything else " . It was most likely a false pregnancy , perhaps induced by Mary 's overwhelming desire to have a child . In August , soon after the disgrace of the false pregnancy , which Mary considered to be " God 's punishment " for her having " tolerated heretics " in her realm , Philip left England to command his armies against France in Flanders . Mary was heartbroken and fell into a deep depression . Michieli was touched by the queen 's grief ; he wrote she was " extraordinarily in love " with her husband , and was disconsolate at his departure . 
 Elizabeth remained at court until October , apparently restored to favour . In the absence of any children , Philip was concerned that after Mary and Elizabeth , one of the next claimants to the English throne was the Queen of Scots , who was betrothed to the Dauphin of France . Philip persuaded Mary that Elizabeth should marry his cousin , Emmanuel Philibert , Duke of Savoy , to secure the Catholic succession and preserve the Habsburg interest in England , but Elizabeth refused to comply and parliamentary consent was unlikely . 
 = = = Religious policy = = = 
 In the month following her accession , Mary issued a proclamation that she would not compel any of her subjects to follow her religion , but by the end of September leading Protestant churchmen — including John Bradford , John Rogers , John Hooper , Hugh Latimer , and Thomas Cranmer — were imprisoned . Mary 's first Parliament , which assembled in early October 1553 , declared the marriage of her parents valid and abolished Edward 's religious laws . Church doctrine was restored to the form it had taken in the 1539 Six Articles , which ( among other things ) re @-@ affirmed clerical celibacy . Married priests were deprived of their benefices . 
 Mary had always rejected the break with Rome instituted by her father and the establishment of Protestantism by her brother 's regents . Philip persuaded Parliament to repeal Henry 's religious laws , thus returning the English church to Roman jurisdiction . Reaching an agreement took many months and Mary and Pope Julius III had to make a major concession : the monastery lands confiscated under Henry were not returned to the church but remained in the hands of their influential new owners . By the end of 1554 , the pope had approved the deal , and the Heresy Acts were revived . 
 Under the Heresy Acts , numerous Protestants were executed in the Marian persecutions . Around 800 rich Protestants , including John Foxe , chose exile instead . The first executions occurred over a period of five days in early February 1555 : John Rogers on 4 February , Laurence Saunders on 8 February , and Rowland Taylor and John Hooper on 9 February . Thomas Cranmer , the imprisoned archbishop of Canterbury , was forced to watch Bishops Ridley and Latimer being burned at the stake . Cranmer recanted , repudiated Protestant theology , and rejoined the Catholic faith . Under the normal process of the law , he should have been absolved as a repentant . Mary , however , refused to reprieve him . On the day of his burning , he dramatically withdrew his recantation . In total , 283 were executed , most by burning . The burnings proved so unpopular that even Alfonso de Castro , one of Philip 's own ecclesiastical staff , condemned them and another adviser , Simon Renard , warned him that such " cruel enforcement " could " cause a revolt " . Mary persevered with the policy , which continued until her death and exacerbated anti @-@ Catholic and anti @-@ Spanish feeling among the English people . The victims of the persecutions became lauded as martyrs . 
 Reginald Pole , the son of Mary 's executed governess and once considered a suitor , arrived as papal legate in November 1554 . He was ordained a priest and appointed Archbishop of Canterbury immediately after Cranmer 's death in March 1556 . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Furthering the Tudor conquest of Ireland , under Mary 's reign English colonists were settled in the Irish Midlands . Queen 's and King 's Counties ( now Counties Laois and Offaly ) were founded , and their plantation began . Their principal towns were respectively named Maryborough ( now Portlaoise ) and Philipstown ( now <unk> ) . 
 In January 1556 , Mary 's father @-@ in @-@ law abdicated and Philip became King of Spain , with Mary as his consort . They were still apart ; Philip was declared king in Brussels , but Mary stayed in England . Philip negotiated an unsteady truce with the French in February 1556 . The following month , the French ambassador in England , Antoine de Noailles , was implicated in a plot against Mary when Sir Henry Dudley , a second cousin of the executed Duke of Northumberland , attempted to assemble an invasion force in France . The plot , known as the Dudley conspiracy , was betrayed , and the conspirators in England were rounded up . Dudley remained in exile in France , and Noailles prudently left Britain . 
 Philip returned to England from March to July 1557 to persuade Mary to support Spain in a renewed war against France . Mary was in favour of declaring war , but her councillors opposed it because French trade would be jeopardised , it contravened the marriage treaty , and a bad economic legacy from Edward VI 's reign and a series of poor harvests meant England lacked supplies and finances . War was only declared in June 1557 after Reginald Pole 's nephew , Thomas Stafford , invaded England and seized Scarborough Castle with French help in a failed attempt to depose Mary . As a result of the war , relations between England and the Papacy became strained , since Pope Paul IV was allied with Henry II of France . In January 1558 , French forces took Calais , England 's sole remaining possession on the European mainland . Although the territory was financially burdensome , it was an ideological loss that damaged Mary 's prestige . According to Holinshed 's Chronicles , Mary later lamented , " When I am dead and opened , you shall find ' Calais ' lying in my heart " , although this may be apocryphal . 
 = = = Commerce and revenue = = = 
 The years of Mary 's reign were consistently wet . The persistent rain and subsequent flooding led to famine . Another problem was the decline of the Antwerp cloth trade . Despite Mary 's marriage to Philip , England did not benefit from Spain 's enormously lucrative trade with the New World . The Spanish guarded their trade routes jealously , and Mary could not condone illicit trade or piracy against her husband . In an attempt to increase trade and rescue the English economy , Mary 's counsellors continued Northumberland 's policy of seeking out new commercial opportunities . She granted a royal charter to the Muscovy Company , whose first governor was Sebastian Cabot , and commissioned a world atlas from Diogo Homem . Adventurers such as John Lok and William <unk> sailed south in an attempt to develop links with the coast of Africa . 
 Financially , Mary 's regime tried to reconcile a modern form of government — with correspondingly higher spending — with a medieval system of collecting taxation and dues . Mary retained the Edwardian appointee William Paulet , 1st Marquess of Winchester , as Lord High Treasurer and assigned him to oversee the revenue collection system . A failure to apply new tariffs to new forms of imports meant that a key source of revenue was neglected . To solve this problem , Mary 's government published a revised " Book of Rates " ( 1558 ) , which listed the tariffs and duties for every import . This publication was not extensively reviewed until 1604 . 
 English coinage was debased under both Henry VIII and Edward VI . Mary drafted plans for currency reform but they were not implemented until after her death . 
 = = Death = = 
 After Philip 's visit in 1557 , Mary thought she was pregnant again , with a baby due in March 1558 . She decreed in her will that her husband would be the regent during the minority of their child . However , no child was born , and Mary was forced to accept that Elizabeth was her lawful successor . 
 Mary was weak and ill from May 1558 . In pain , possibly from ovarian cysts or uterine cancer , she died on 17 November 1558 , aged 42 , at St. James 's Palace , during an influenza epidemic that also claimed the life of Reginald Pole later the same day . She was succeeded by her half @-@ sister . Philip , who was in Brussels , wrote to his sister Joan : " I felt a reasonable regret for her death . " 
 Although Mary 's will stated that she wished to be buried next to her mother , she was interred in Westminster Abbey on 14 December , in a tomb she would eventually share with Elizabeth . The Latin inscription on their tomb , Regno <unk> et <unk> , hic <unk> Elizabetha et Maria <unk> , in spe resurrectionis ( affixed there by James I when he succeeded Elizabeth ) , translates to : " Consorts in realm and tomb , we , sisters Elizabeth and Mary , here lie down to sleep in hope of resurrection . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At her funeral service , John White , bishop of Winchester , praised Mary : " She was a king 's daughter ; she was a king 's sister ; she was a king 's wife . She was a queen , and by the same title a king also . " She was the first woman to succeed in claiming the throne of England , despite competing claims and determined opposition , and enjoyed popular support and sympathy during the earliest parts of her reign , especially from the Roman Catholics of England . 
 Catholic historians , such as John Lingard , thought Mary 's policies failed not because they were wrong but because she had too short a reign to establish them and because of natural disasters beyond her control . However , her marriage to Philip was unpopular among her subjects and her religious policies resulted in deep @-@ seated resentment . The military losses in France , poor weather , and failed harvests increased public discontent . Philip spent most of his time abroad , while his wife remained in England , leaving her depressed at his absence and undermined by their inability to have children . After Mary 's death , he sought to marry Elizabeth but she refused him . Thirty years later , he sent the Spanish Armada to overthrow her , without success . 
 By the seventeenth century , Mary 's persecution of Protestants had led to her sobriquet Bloody Mary . John Knox attacked her in his First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women ( 1558 ) , and she was prominently featured and vilified in Actes and Monuments ( 1563 ) , published by John Foxe , five years after her death . Subsequent editions of the book remained popular with Protestants throughout the following centuries and helped shape enduring perceptions of Mary as a bloodthirsty tyrant . In the mid @-@ twentieth century , H. F. M. Prescott attempted to redress the tradition that Mary was intolerant and authoritarian by writing more objectively , and scholarship since then has tended to view the older , simpler , partisan assessments of Mary with greater scepticism . Although Mary 's rule was ultimately ineffectual and unpopular , the policies of fiscal reform , naval expansion , and colonial exploration that were later lauded as Elizabethan accomplishments were started in Mary 's reign . 
 = = Titles , style , and arms = = 
 When Mary ascended the throne , she was proclaimed under the same official style as Henry VIII and Edward VI : " Mary , by the Grace of God , Queen of England , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , and of the Church of England and of Ireland on Earth Supreme Head " . The title Supreme Head of the Church was repugnant to Mary 's Catholicism , and she omitted it from Christmas 1553 . 
 Under Mary 's marriage treaty with Philip , the official joint style reflected not only Mary 's but also Philip 's dominions and claims : " Philip and Mary , by the grace of God , King and Queen of England , France , Naples , Jerusalem , and Ireland , Defenders of the Faith , Princes of Spain and Sicily , Archdukes of Austria , Dukes of Milan , Burgundy and Brabant , Counts of Habsburg , Flanders and Tyrol " . This style , which had been in use since 1554 , was replaced when Philip inherited the Spanish Crown in 1556 with " Philip and Mary , by the Grace of God King and Queen of England , Spain , France , both the Sicilies , Jerusalem and Ireland , Defenders of the Faith , Archdukes of Austria , Dukes of Burgundy , Milan and Brabant , Counts of Habsburg , Flanders and Tyrol " . 
 Mary I 's coat of arms was the same as those used by all her predecessors since Henry IV : Quarterly , Azure three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lys Or [ for France ] and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or ( for England ) . Sometimes , her arms were impaled ( depicted side @-@ by @-@ side ) with those of her husband . She adopted " Truth , the Daughter of Time " ( Latin : Veritas <unk> Filia ) as her personal motto . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Both Mary and Philip were descended from legitimate children of John of Gaunt , 1st Duke of Lancaster , by his first two wives , a relationship which was used to portray Philip as an English king . Mary descended from the Duke of Lancaster by all three of his wives , Blanche of Lancaster , Constance of Castile , and Katherine Swynford . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = = = Pedigree = = = 
 = 2000 Sugar Bowl = 
 The 2000 Sugar Bowl was the designated Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) National Championship Game for the United States 1999 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season and was played on January 4 , 2000 , at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans , Louisiana . The Florida State Seminoles , representing the Atlantic Coast Conference , defeated the Virginia Tech Hokies , representing the Big East Conference , by a score of 46 – 29 . With the win , Florida State clinched the 1999 BCS national championship , the team 's second national championship in its history . 
 An estimated total of 79 @,@ 280 people attended the game in person , while approximately 18 @.@ 4 million US viewers watched the game on ABC television . The resulting 17 @.@ 5 television rating was the third @-@ largest ever recorded for a BCS college football game . Tickets were in high demand for the game , <unk> tens of thousands of fans from both teams attending , many using scalped tickets to gain entry . 
 The game kicked off at 8 p.m. EST , and Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the game . Though Tech advanced down the field , Florida State scored first and took advantage of a blocked punt for a touchdown , giving the Seminoles a 14 – 0 lead in the first quarter . Tech answered with a touchdown drive of its own before the end of the quarter , but Florida State scored two quick touchdowns to begin the second quarter . Virginia Tech scored a touchdown before halftime , but halfway through the game , Florida State held a 28 – 14 lead . In the third quarter , Virginia Tech 's offense gave the Hokies a lead with a field goal and two touchdowns . Tech failed to convert two two @-@ point conversions , but held a 29 – 28 lead at the end of the third quarter . Florida State answered in the fourth quarter , however , taking a 36 – 29 lead with a touchdown and successful two @-@ point conversion early in the quarter . From this point , the Seminoles did not relinquish the lead , extending it to 46 – 29 with another touchdown and a field goal . 
 For his performance in the game , Florida Statewide receiver Peter Warrick was named the game 's most valuable player . Although Tech lost the game , several of its players won postseason awards — most notably Michael Vick , who earned an ESPY for his performance during the Sugar Bowl and the regular season . Several players from each team entered the National Football League after graduation , being selected either in the 2000 NFL Draft or later editions of that selection process . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 By contract , the top two teams in the BCS Poll at the conclusion of the regular season were invited to the BCS national championship game . In 2000 , the BCS Poll was a combination of four different systems : media and coaches ' polls ( Associated Press college football poll and USA Today Coaches ' Poll ) , team records , a collection of eight different computer ranking systems , and a strength @-@ of @-@ schedule component based on opponent records . Under the BCS , the site of the national championship game rotated every year . In 2000 , there were four BCS bowl games : the Rose Bowl , the Sugar Bowl , the Orange Bowl , and the Fiesta Bowl . The national championship game rotated to a different location each year , and the other three games served as bowl games for lower @-@ ranked teams . Later , in 2007 , the BCS National Championship was created , adding a fifth BCS bowl . In 2000 , the Sugar Bowl was scheduled to host the national championship game . 
 = = = Florida State = = = 
 The Florida State Seminoles ended the 1998 college football season with a 23 – 16 loss to the Tennessee Volunteers in the 1999 Fiesta Bowl , which was the national championship game that year . The loss was only the second of the season for Florida State , which had entered the game ranked No. 2 and favored against the No. 1 ranked Volunteers . Florida State players and coaches entered the off @-@ season hoping to improve upon their runner @-@ up finish in the national championship game the year before , and were voted the No. 1 team in the country in the annual Associated Press preseason poll . 
 Florida State lived up to its No. 1 ranking in its first game of the 1999 college football season , routing unranked Louisiana Tech , 41 – 7 . The following week , in their ACC opener , the Seminoles had a closer contest against Georgia Tech , but still earned a 41 – 35 victory . As the weeks went by , the wins continued to accumulate . FSU defeated North Carolina State , 42 – 11 ; North Carolina , 42 – 10 ; and Duke , 51 – 23 . In the seventh week of the college football season , the Seminoles faced off against a traditional rival : the Miami Hurricanes . Heading into the game , the Seminoles were without star wide receiver and potential Heisman Trophy candidate Peter Warrick , who was suspended from the team after being arrested for participating in a scheme to <unk> for clothes at a Tallahassee , Florida clothing store . Despite the loss of Warrick , Florida State eked out a 31 – 21 victory over the Hurricanes after being tied , 21 – 21 , at halftime . 
 The week after the Miami game , the Seminoles had an even closer call against the Clemson Tigers — their closest , in fact , of the entire season . Despite the return of Peter Warrick , who was cleared of charges in a Florida courtroom , Florida State fell behind the Tigers in the first half . Trailing in Clemson , South Carolina , 14 – 3 at halftime , Florida State cut the gap to 14 – 6 with a field goal midway through the third quarter , then tied the game at the end of the third quarter with a touchdown and two @-@ point conversion . The Seminoles clinched the victory after a field goal late in the fourth quarter gave them a 17 – 14 lead and cemented the victory when a Clemson attempt to even the score with a field goal fell short . The victory was FSU head coach Bobby Bowden 's 300th win and came against his son , Tommy Bowden , coach of the Tigers . 
 Florida State earned easy wins with a 35 – 10 victory over Virginia and a 49 – 10 win over Maryland before facing the rival Florida Gators in the final game of the Seminoles ' regular season . Florida State led throughout the game , but had to fend off a last @-@ minute Florida drive in order to clinch a 30 – 23 win and just the third perfect regular season in Florida State history . This season later was termed the " Wire to Wire " season as the Seminoles kept their No. 1 ranking the entire season . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 Like Florida State , the Virginia Tech Hokies began the 1999 college football season with raised expectations . In 1998 , the Hokies had gone 9 – 3 during the regular season and had posted a 5 – 2 record against fellow Big East Conference teams . The Hokies concluded that 1998 season — which was supposed to be a rebuilding year — in the 1998 Music City Bowl , where the Hokies defeated the Alabama Crimson Tide , 38 – 7 . With the addition of redshirt freshman quarterback Michael Vick to a team that had allowed an average of just 12 @.@ 9 points per game on defense , there was the possibility that Tech could improve upon its previous season 's performance . Sports Illustrated , for example , predicted that the Hokies might challenge Miami for the Big East football championship , and the preseason Coaches ' Poll ranked the Hokies No. 14 prior to the first game of the season . 
 In their first game of the season , the Hokies lived up to expectations , shutting out James Madison University , 47 – 0 . The game was the first time Tech had shut out an opponent in a season opener since 1953 . The game was marred , however , by a leg injury to Michael Vick that caused him to leave the game . The following week , against the University of Alabama Birmingham , Vick did not play . Despite his absence , the Hokies still managed a 31 – 10 win . This was followed by a 31 – 11 Thursday @-@ night victory over Clemson in Virginia Tech 's first game against a Division I @-@ A opponent during the season . 
 Following the win over Clemson , Tech faced traditional rival Virginia in the annual battle for the Commonwealth Cup . Despite the rivalry and the fact that Virginia was ranked the No. 24 team in the country , the Cavaliers put up even less of a struggle than Clemson . Virginia Tech won , 31 – 7 . Now No. 5 in the country , Tech began to distance itself from other highly ranked teams with consecutive wins over Rutgers and Syracuse . The 62 – 0 shutout of No. 16 Syracuse was the largest victory ever recorded against a team ranked in the AP Poll . By this time , the Hokies were being described in media reports as a national championship contender . 
 Following a 30 – 17 victory at Pittsburgh , Virginia Tech traveled to Morgantown , West Virginia , to face the West Virginia Mountaineers in the annual battle for the Black Diamond Trophy . In West Virginia , Virginia Tech eked out a 22 – 20 victory with a last @-@ second field goal from placekicker Shayne Graham . It was Tech 's closest victory of the season and moved the Hokies to the No. 2 ranking in the country . 
 Following the win over West Virginia , Tech defeated Miami , 43 – 10 , and Temple , 62 – 7 , to clinch the Big East championship . In the final game of the regular season , the Hokies beat Boston College , 38 – 14 , cementing the third unbeaten season in Virginia Tech history and the Hokies ' first since 1954 . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 In the month prior to the Sugar Bowl , media attention focused on Virginia Tech 's sudden rise to national prominence and Florida State 's perennial appearance in the national championship game . The Seminoles had the most top @-@ 5 finishes and the most national championship game appearances of any team in the 1990s , including a national championship victory in 1993 . Many media stories focused on the apparent David and Goliath showdown between the two teams , with the Seminoles in the role of the <unk> and the Hokies in the role of the underdog . Because of this fact , spread bettors favored Florida State to win the game by 5 @.@ 5 points . 
 Tens of thousands of fans from both teams traveled to the game , often purchasing ticket and travel packages for thousands of dollars . The limited numbers of tickets available for the game were in high demand by fans of both teams . 
 = = = Florida State offense = = = 
 The Seminoles threw for no fewer than 229 passing yards in every game during the regular season and averaged 12 @.@ 7 points per game more than its opponents . On the ground , the Seminoles averaged 122 @.@ 8 rushing yards per game . 
 Leading the Florida State offense was quarterback Chris Weinke , a former baseball player who , at 27 years old , was by far the oldest player on the Seminoles ' team . After suffering a neck injury in the 1998 college football season , Weinke recovered to complete 232 of 377 pass attempts for 3 @,@ 103 yards , 25 touchdowns , and 14 interceptions . 
 Weinke 's favorite target was wide receiver Peter Warrick , who led all Seminole receivers with 71 receptions and 931 yards in just nine games during the regular season . Five times , Warrick earned more than 100 receiving yards in a game . Warrick 's season was shortened by a two @-@ game suspension following his arrest for underpaying for clothes , but he still was named an All @-@ America selection at wide receiver , signifying his status as one of the best players in the country at the position . 
 Florida State placekicker Sebastian Janikowski , who was born in Poland , also was a key component of the Seminoles ' scoring offense . In his career at Florida State prior to the Sugar Bowl , Janikowski made 65 of 83 field goal attempts , including 33 of his previous 38 kicks of less than 50 yards . Janikowski also handled kickoffs , kicking the ball so hard that 57 of his 83 kickoffs were touchbacks . Janikowski was considered to have the potential to be an early selection in the 2000 NFL Draft by several scouts for professional teams . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 During the regular season , Virginia Tech 's offense outscored opponents by an average of 31 points per game . Tech averaged 254 yards rushing per game , the eighth @-@ highest average in the nation . Important to that success was running back Shyrone Stith , who had 1 @,@ 119 rushing yards during the regular season . Even more important to the Hokies ' success , however , was quarterback Michael Vick . 
 Vick was recognized by multiple nationwide publications for his performance during the regular season . His passer rating was the highest of any quarterback in the country , and he completed 59 @.@ 2 percent of his 152 passes for 1 @,@ 840 yards , 12 touchdowns , and five interceptions . In addition , He rushed for 585 yards and eight touchdowns on 108 carries . Vick was named Big East Offensive Player of the Year and was the runner @-@ up in voting for the Associated Press Player of the Year . Vick 's average of 242 yards of total offense per game were the most in the country , and his 184 passing yards per game were the second @-@ most . In addition , Vick finished third in the voting for the Heisman Trophy , traditionally given to the best college football player in the country . He was featured in multiple national publications , including on the cover of Sports Illustrated twice .. 
 A handful of days before the Sugar Bowl , Tech wide receiver Ricky Hall broke a bone in his foot during practice and was considered unlikely to play . Hall was Tech 's second @-@ leading receiver , having caught 25 passes for 398 yards and three touchdowns . In addition , Hall was the Hokies ' starting punt returner , and had returned 40 kicks for 510 yards and one touchdown , setting a school record for punt return yardage . 
 Tech placekicker Shayne Graham won Big East Special Teams Player of the Year honors after scoring 107 points during the regular season . That mark set a Big East record , and Graham 's 372 career points during his four years with the Hokies were a NCAA record at the time . Graham 's award ensured Tech won all five of the Big East 's player and coach of the year awards . 
 = = = Florida State defense = = = 
 The Florida State defense was considered key to reining in Tech quarterback Vick . The Seminoles allowed less than 100 rushing yards per game on average , and intercepted 22 passes during the regular season . The Seminoles were ranked 15th nationally in pass defense at the end of the regular season but had allowed increasing amounts of pass yardage in the latter games of the season . Despite that fact , the Florida State defense 's main concern was Michael Vick 's ability to run the football . Said Florida State defensive coordinator Mickey Andrews : " A guy like that usually gives us problems , considering the type of ( 4 – 3 gap ) defense we run . When a quarterback gets out of the pocket , that could hurt us for big yardage . " 
 The Seminole defense was led by nose guard Corey Simon , who accumulated 48 solo tackles , four sacks , and one interception . For his accomplishments during the regular season , Simon earned consensus first @-@ team All @-@ America honors . Despite his accomplishments , Simon was not the Seminoles ' leading tackler . That honor went to linebacker Tommy Polley , who accumulated 67 tackles during the season . Fellow linebacker Brian Allen contributed five quarterback sacks , the most in that statistical category for Florida State . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 In the important category of scoring defense , the Hokies were the top @-@ ranked defense in the country , allowing only 10 @.@ 5 points per game . The team was ranked No. 3 in the country in both total defense and rushing defense . On average , Tech allowed just 247 @.@ 3 total yards and 75 @.@ 9 rushing yards per game . Tech 's pass defense was No. 7 in the country , allowing an average of 171 @.@ 4 passing yards per game . The Hokies permitted no more than 226 passing yards to any team during the regular season , and no opposing player earned 100 receiving yards . Tech defenders also accumulated 58 sacks during the season . 
 Virginia Tech defensive end Corey Moore was the top performer on the Hokie defense . Moore accumulated 55 tackles and 17 sacks during the regular season , and was named Big East Defensive Player of the Year and to the Associated Press All @-@ America team . In the first week of December , Moore was awarded the Bronko Nagurski Trophy , given to the best defensive college football player in the country . Tech 's other defensive end was John Engelberger , who earned seven sacks , six other tackles for loss and 16 quarterback hurries . Engelberger was projected by pro scouts to be the first Tech player selected in the 2000 NFL Draft . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2000 Sugar Bowl kicked off at 8 p.m. EST on January 4 , 2000 , at the Louisiana Superdome , in New Orleans , Louisiana . A crowd of 79 @,@ 280 people attended the game in person , and an estimated 18 @.@ 4 million people watched the game 's television broadcast on ABC , earning the broadcast a television rating of 17 @.@ 5 , the third @-@ highest rating ever recorded for a BCS game . ABC estimates were higher , speculating that at least 54 million people watched at least a portion of the broadcast . Brent Musburger , Gary Danielson , Lynn Swann , and Jack Arute were the television commentators for the event , and Ron Franklin , Mike Gottfried , and Adrian Karsten provided commentary for the ESPN Radio broadcast of the game . In exchange for their performance at the game , Virginia Tech and Florida State each received more than $ 4 million . 
 The traditional pregame singing of the national anthem was performed by the Zion <unk> , a New Orleans gospel quartet . Steve Shaw was the referee . Actor John Goodman performed the ceremonial pre @-@ game coin toss to determine first possession of the ball . Florida State won the coin toss and elected to kick off to Virginia Tech to begin the game . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech received the game 's opening kickoff in their end zone for a touchback , and the Tech offense began at its 20 @-@ yard line . On the game 's first play , Tech committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty . Running back Shyrone Stith was stopped for a loss on the first non @-@ penalty play of the game , but Tech made up both that loss and the penalty when quarterback Michael Vick scrambled for 25 yards and a first down . Vick then ran for another nine yards , pushing the line of scrimmage near midfield . Tech executed an option run to Stith , who ran inside the Florida State 30 @-@ yard line . Tech picked up a few yards with a run up the middle , then Vick completed a pass to Davis , giving the Hokies a first down at the Florida State 13 @-@ yard line . Stith picked up seven yards on a rush to the six @-@ yard line , but the Seminole defense stiffened , and Tech was unable to pick up the remaining three yards needed for a first down . Facing a fourth down and needing less than a yard to pick up another first down inside the Florida State three @-@ yard line , Tech head coach Frank Beamer kept his offense on the field to attempt to gain the first down rather than kick a field goal . On the attempt , however , Vick fumbled the ball forward into the end zone , where Florida State recovered it for a touchback . Virginia Tech was thus denied the first score of the game , and Florida State 's offense entered the game for the first time . 
 Starting at their 20 @-@ yard line after the touchback , Florida State 's first play was a five @-@ yard rush by running back Travis Minor . Quarterback Chris Weinke then completed a three @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Peter Warrick , who was stopped short of the first down . After the next play failed to gain positive yardage , the Seminoles were forced to punt . Virginia Tech 's offense began their second series after a short punt return to the 31 @-@ yard line . After an incomplete pass from Vick , Stith picked up a Tech first down with two running plays . From their 43 @-@ yard line , Tech executed an end @-@ around for a first down . Florida State also committed a five @-@ yard facemask penalty that pushed Tech to the Seminoles ' 40 @-@ yard line . Tech was stopped for losses on subsequent plays and committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty , but Vick completed an 18 @-@ yard pass to Davis for a first down , making up the losses . Tech was unable to make good the losses accumulated on the next three plays , when Vick was sacked after throwing two incomplete passes . Tech punted , the ball rolled into the end zone , and Florida State 's offense began again at its 20 @-@ yard line . Weinke threw two incomplete passes before connecting on a first @-@ down throw to wide receiver Ron Dugans . On the next play , Weinke connected on a 64 @-@ yard throw to Warrick for a Florida State touchdown and the first points of the game . The extra point attempt was successful , and Florida State took a 7 – 0 lead with 3 : 22 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Following Florida State 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff , Virginia Tech 's offense began its third possession of the game at the Tech 24 @-@ yard line after a short kick return . Running back Andre Kendrick ran for a short gain , but on the next play Vick was called for an intentional grounding penalty while attempting to avoid a sack . The Hokies were unable to make up the yardage lost by the penalty and punted after failing to gain a first down . Owing to the penalty , Tech punter Jimmy Kibble was forced to kick from his own end zone . Florida State was able to break through the Tech offensive line during the punt and blocked the kick . The ball was picked up by Florida State defender Jeff Chaney , who dashed into the end zone for Florida State 's second touchdown of the game . The score and extra point gave Florida State a 14 – 0 lead with 2 : 14 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Florida State 's kickoff was downed for a touchback , and Tech began at its 20 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the possession , Florida State committed a 15 @-@ yard pass interference penalty that gave Tech a first down at its 35 @-@ yard line . Tech was further aided by two five @-@ yard penalties against Florida State that gave the Hokies another first down , and Vick completed a short pass across midfield . On the first play in Florida State territory , Vick completed a 49 @-@ yard throw to wide receiver Andre Davis for Tech 's first touchdown of the game . The extra point attempt was good , and with 30 seconds remaining in the quarter , Tech narrowed Florida State 's lead to 14 – 7 . 
 Following Virginia Tech 's kickoff and a touchback , Florida State 's offense started work at its 20 @-@ yard line . Tech committed a five @-@ yard penalty , and as the final seconds of the quarter ticked off , Florida State ran up the middle for five yards and a first down . At the end of the first quarter , the score was 14 – 7 , Florida State leading . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Florida State in possession of the ball , facing a first down at its 30 @-@ yard line . After picking up short yardage on two consecutive plays , Weinke completed a 63 @-@ yard pass to Dugans , who ran down the field for a touchdown . The extra point was successful , and with 13 : 45 remaining in the second quarter , Florida State extended its lead to 21 – 7 . Following the Florida State kickoff , Virginia Tech returned the ball to the 33 @-@ yard line , where Tech 's offense began operations . Tech committed an offensive pass interference penalty , and Tech was forced to punt after being unable to gain a first down after the penalty . The Seminoles ' Peter Warrick was assigned to return the punt , and he fielded the ball at the Florida State 41 @-@ yard line . Thanks to several key blocks from other Florida State players , Warrick was able to run 59 unimpeded yards to the end zone for a touchdown . With 11 : 34 still remaining before halftime , the Seminoles extended their lead to 28 – 7 . 
 Following the Florida State kickoff , Virginia Tech attempted to answer Florida State 's kick @-@ return touchdown with one of its own . Kendrick fielded the ball at the Virginia Tech goal line and returned it 63 yards , all the way to the Florida State 37 @-@ yard line , where the Hokie offense began work . Despite the good field position , Tech was unable to gain a first down . Tech kicker Shayne Graham was sent into the game , seemingly to attempt a 51 @-@ yard field goal . Instead of kicking the ball , Graham attempted to run the ball for a first down . Graham fumbled short of the first down , and Florida State took over on offense with 9 : 43 remaining in the first half . 
 On the Seminoles ' first offensive play of the drive , they attempted a flea flicker pass , which was caught by Warrick at the Virginia Tech 33 @-@ yard line for a 33 @-@ yard gain . Following the play , Weinke was sacked for the first time by the Tech defense . This was followed immediately by Tech 's second sack , which pushed Weinke back into the Seminoles ' side of the field . On the third play of the Seminole drive , Weinke attempted to scramble for yardage , but was stopped short of the needed mark . Florida State 's punt was downed at the Virginia Tech one @-@ yard line , which was where the Tech offense began work . Florida State 's defense prevented the Hokies from gaining a first down , and Tech again had to punt from its end zone . 
 Following the kick and a short return , Florida State began a drive at the Tech 34 @-@ yard line , seemingly in excellent field position . But on the first play of the State drive , the Seminoles were stopped for a loss . State was able to pick up a short gain on the second play , but on the third , Weinke was sacked for the third time in the game . After the Seminole punt and a touchback , Tech 's offense started at its 20 @-@ yard line . The Hokies picked up a first down with an option run to Stith , then Vick ran for a long gain and another first down at the Florida State 20 @-@ yard line . Stith picked up seven yards on a rush up the middle of the field , then Vick completed a first @-@ down pass to Derek Carter inside the Seminole 10 @-@ yard line . Kendrick advanced the ball to the Seminole three @-@ yard line , then Vick ran the remaining yardage for a touchdown . Following the extra point , Tech cut Florida State 's lead to 28 – 14 with 37 seconds remaining in the first half . 
 After the Virginia Tech kickoff and a Florida State return to their 17 @-@ yard line , Florida State began running out the clock to bring the half to an end . At halftime , Florida State held a 28 – 14 lead over Virginia Tech . 
 = = = Halftime = = = 
 At halftime , several organizations and groups performed under the overarching theme of a " Gospel Jubilee . " The halftime show was organized by Douglas K. Green and Bowl Games of America , a company founded to provide similar services to bowl games across the United States . Multiple high school bands and dance teams from Kansas to Florida entertained the crowd . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the game , Florida State received the ball to begin the second half . The Seminoles returned the kickoff to their 22 @-@ yard line , and on the first play of the second half attempted a lateral pass . Virginia Tech defender Corey Moore knocked the ball down and out of bounds , causing a loss of 16 yards . Despite the loss , Weinke was able to make good the needed yards with a 28 @-@ yard pass to Minor . Minor picked up short yardage on a run up the middle , then Weinke passed for another first down , advancing the ball to the State 45 @-@ yard line . On first down , Weinke fumbled , but managed to recover the ball after a five @-@ yard loss . Unlike before , State was unable to regain the lost yardage and was forced to punt . Virginia Tech returned the kick to their 33 @-@ yard line , where the Tech offense began work . 
 Vick passed for six yards , then ran an option for 12 yards and a first down . Now on State 's side of the field , however , the Tech offense was unable to gain another first down and punted back to Florida State , which returned the kick to its 21 @-@ yard line . State was stopped short on consecutive plays , committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty , then was stopped for no gain on third down . After going three and out , State punted back to the Hokies , who returned the ball to the Seminoles ' 41 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the drive , Vick completed a 26 @-@ yard pass to the Tech fullback , Hawkins . After three rushes failed to pick up the first down at the Florida State five @-@ yard line , Tech coach Frank Beamer sent in Graham to kick a 23 @-@ yard field goal . The kick was successful , and with 7 : 54 remaining in the quarter , Tech cut Florida State 's lead to 28 – 17 . 
 Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was downed for a touchback , and Florida State 's offense started a drive at its 20 @-@ yard line . Weinke completed one pass , but two others fell incomplete , and Florida State punted after again going three and out . The Hokies returned the State kick to the Seminoles ' 36 @-@ yard line with a 45 @-@ yard return . Vick threw an incomplete pass , ran for seven yards , then handed it off to Kendrick , who broke through the Florida State defense and ran ahead 29 yards for a touchdown . Rather than attempt an extra point , Beamer ordered a two @-@ point conversion in an attempt to cut Florida State 's lead to just three points . The play , which was Tech 's first two @-@ point attempt that season , failed . Even without an extra point , the touchdown still cut Florida State 's lead to 28 – 23 . 
 After the post @-@ score kickoff and return , Florida State began at its 22 @-@ yard line . Weinke completed a first @-@ down pass to Warrick , but Warrick committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty in the process . On the next play , Weinke attempted a long pass downfield , but Tech defender Anthony Midget intercepted the ball at the Tech 41 @-@ yard line . Trailing by five , Tech 's offense began a drive to potentially further cut Florida State 's lead or put the Hokies in the lead themselves . After slipping on the field and taking a loss , Vick completed a 20 @-@ yard pass to Hawkins , who picked up a first down and pushed Tech to the Florida State 39 @-@ yard line . After a short rush by Kendrick , Vick scrambled to the State 21 @-@ yard line for another first down . On the next play , Vick was sacked for a seven @-@ yard loss , but recovered the lost ground by running for 22 yards on the next play . With a first down at the Seminoles ' seven @-@ yard line , Vick handed the ball to Kendrick , who ran seven yards straight ahead for a Tech touchdown , giving the Hokies the lead for the first time in the game . Again , Beamer ordered a two @-@ point conversion attempt , but again , Florida State stopped the Hokies short . Despite that failure to pick up the two @-@ point conversion , Tech took a 29 – 28 lead with 2 : 13 remaining in the quarter . 
 The Seminoles returned Tech 's post @-@ score kick to their 15 @-@ yard line , where Florida State 's offense began work again , hoping to regain the lead for State . Weinke completed a seven @-@ yard pass to Warrick , then was sacked by the Virginia Tech defense . Weinke overcame the loss on the next play with a 19 @-@ yard first @-@ down pass . State continued to advance the ball with short passes , as Weinke completed a five @-@ yard throw . Chaney gained three yards on a rush to the right as the final seconds of the third quarter ticked off the clock , setting up an important third @-@ down play . With one quarter remaining , Virginia Tech led Florida State , 29 – 28 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Florida State began the fourth quarter in possession of the ball and facing a third down , needing three yards for a first down . Weinke completed a pass for just short of the needed three yards . Instead of punting the ball away , Florida State head coach Bobby Bowden ordered the team to attempt to convert the first down . He brought backup quarterback Marcus <unk> into the game as a misdirection move , and instead of running a quarterback sneak as anticipated , <unk> tossed the ball to Minor , who ran for 16 yards and a first down . During the play , Virginia Tech committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty that advanced the ball further and gave Florida State a first down at the Virginia Tech 23 @-@ yard line . Weinke returned to the game and threw a 10 @-@ yard pass to Chaney for another first down . Weinke threw an incomplete pass , then Tech stopped a rush up the middle for no gain . On third down , Weinke connected on a touchdown pass to Dugans , returning the lead to Florida State . The Seminoles , as had Virginia Tech before them , elected to attempt a two @-@ point conversion . Unlike Virginia Tech 's failed two @-@ point conversions , the Seminoles successfully earned two points with a pass to Warrick , and the scores gave Florida State a 36 – 29 lead with 12 : 59 remaining . 
 Tech received Florida State 's kickoff at its goal line and returned the ball to the 11 @-@ yard line , where Tech 's offense took over . Kendrick ran for 12 yards and a first down , but then Vick fumbled on a rush to the left . Florida State recovered the ball , and the Seminoles ' offense was given the ball at the Virginia Tech 35 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the fumble , Chaney broke free for a long run that gave State a first down inside the Virginia Tech 10 @-@ yard line . The Seminoles were pushed backward on two consecutive plays and committed a chop block before Bowden was forced to send in Janikowski to kick a 32 @-@ yard field goal . The kick gave Florida State a 39 – 29 lead with 10 : 26 remaining in the game . 
 Janikowski 's post @-@ score kickoff was downed for a touchback , and Vick and the Tech offense began at their 20 @-@ yard line . On the Hokies ' first play , Davis ran for 16 yards and a first down on an end @-@ around similar to the one he ran in the first quarter . Despite that success , the Hokies were unable to gain another first down . Appearing to punt the ball away , Tech ran a trick play where the punter attempted to rush for a first down . He was stopped short of the needed mark , however , and Florida State 's offense returned to the field , beginning at the Tech 43 @-@ yard line . On the first play after taking over , Weinke completed a 43 @-@ yard pass to Warrick for a touchdown . The score and extra point gave Florida State a 46 – 29 lead with 7 : 42 remaining in the game . 
 With less than half a quarter remaining and down by three scores , Virginia Tech had a nearly insurmountable deficit to overcome . The Hokies fielded the kickoff for a touchback , and the Tech offense began at its 20 @-@ yard line . On the Hokies ' first and second plays of the drive , Vick was sacked for losses . The third play was an incomplete pass , and the Hokies were forced to punt . After fielding the kick at their 38 @-@ yard line , Florida State began running out the clock by running the ball . After failing to gain a first down on two consecutive rushes and an incomplete pass , Florida State punted . The ball rolled into the end zone , and Tech 's offense began again at its 20 @-@ yard line . Vick threw for short yardage , then Kendrick ran for a first down at the Tech 37 @-@ yard line . Vick completed a 23 @-@ yard first down pass to Emmet Johnson , and the Hokies entered Florida State territory with the clock ticking steadily down . On the first play in Seminoles ' territory , Vick completed another 23 @-@ yard pass , this time to Davis , who picked up a first down at the Florida State 23 @-@ yard line . Thanks to a holding penalty against the Seminoles , Tech was granted a first down at the State eight @-@ yard line . Vick threw an incomplete pass , ran for three yards , and then threw another pass to a player who was stopped short of the goal line . Facing fourth down and needing just two yards for a touchdown , Tech attempted to pass for the touchdown , but Vick was sacked and turned the ball over on downs with 1 : 12 remaining . With almost no time remaining , Florida State continued running down the clock and earned the 46 – 29 victory . 
 = = Scoring summary = = 
 1st Quarter 
 FSU @-@ Peter Warrick 64 yard pass from Chris Weinke ( Sebastian Janikowski kick ) 3 : 22 FSU 7 VT 0 
 FSU @-@ Jeff Chaney 6 yard blocked punt return ( Sebastian Janikowski kick ) 2 : 14 FSU 14 VT 0 
 VT @-@ Andre Davis 49 yard pass from Michael Vick ( Shayne Graham kick ) 0 : 30 FSU 14 VT 7 
 2nd Quarter 
 FSU @-@ Ron Dugans 63 yard pass from Chris Weinke ( Sebastian Janikowski kick ) 13 : 45 FSU 21 VT 7 
 FSU @-@ Peter Warrick 59 yard punt return ( Sebastian Janikowski kick ) 11 : 40 FSU 28 VT 7 
 VT @-@ Michael Vick 3 yard run ( Shayne Graham kick ) 0 : 37 FSU 28 VT 14 
 3rd Quarter 
 VT @-@ Shayne Graham 23 yard field goal 7 : 54 FSU 28 VT 17 
 VT @-@ Andre Kendrick 29 yard run ( 2 @-@ pt pass failed ) 5 : 57 FSU 28 VT 23 
 VT @-@ Andre Kendrick 6 yard run ( 2 @-@ pt pass failed ) 2 : 13 VT 29 FSU 28 
 4th Quarter 
 FSU @-@ Ron Dugans 14 yard pass from Chris Weinke ( Peter Warrick pass from Chris Weinke ) 12 : 59 FSU 36 VT 29 
 FSU @-@ Sebastian Janikowski 32 yard field goal 10 : 26 FSU 39 VT 29 
 FSU @-@ Peter Warrick 43 yard pass from Chris Weinke ( Sebastian Janikowski kick ) 7 : 42 FSU 46 VT 29 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Florida Statewide receiver Peter Warrick was named the game 's most valuable player . Warrick caught six passes for 163 yards and two touchdowns , leading all receivers in yardage and scores . Warrick also had a 59 @-@ yard punt return for a touchdown and a two @-@ point conversion , accounting for 20 of the Seminoles ' 46 points . The 20 points scored by Warrick were a Sugar Bowl record for most points scored by an individual player . 
 Despite Warrick 's individual performance , Virginia Tech was more successful in a team effort , compiling 503 total yards compared to Florida State 's 359 yards . Virginia Tech quarterback Michael Vick completed 15 of 29 passes for 225 passing yards and one passing touchdown . Vick also ran the ball 23 times for 97 yards in his performance as the game 's leading rusher . Florida State quarterback Chris Weinke was the game 's best passer , completing 20 of his 34 pass attempts for 329 yards , four touchdowns , and one interception . 
 Weinke 's favorite target was game MVP Peter Warrick , but several other Seminoles also benefited from Weinke 's passing efficiency . Ron Dugans caught five passes for 99 yards and two touchdowns , Minnis caught two passes for 25 yards , and Minor caught two for 23 yards . For Virginia Tech , Davis caught seven passes for 108 yards and a touchdown , Hawkins caught two passes for 49 yards , and Kendrick caught two passes for 27 yards . 
 In terms of rushing offense , the two teams differed wildly . Virginia Tech , led by Vick , ran for 278 rushing yards . Florida State , meanwhile , ran for just 30 yards . The Seminoles were led on the ground by Chaney , who carried the ball four times for 43 yards , and Minor , who carried the ball nine times for 35 yards . Much of these two players ' rushing total was negated by Chris Weinke , who lost 41 yards on seven carries . Virginia Tech , bolstered by Vick 's 97 rushing yards , also saw André Kendrick accumulate 69 yards and two touchdowns with 12 carries and Shyrone Stith pick up 68 yards on 11 carries . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Florida State 's victory earned it the 1999 BCS national championship and brought the Seminoles ' season to an end with an undefeated 12 – 0 record . By beginning the season at No. 1 and ending it in the same position , Florida State became the first college football team to stay ranked No. 1 for every week of the season after being ranked No. 1 in the preseason poll . Virginia Tech 's loss brought it to a final record of 11 – 1 , but the Hokies still completed their first 11 @-@ win season in school history . The 75 total points scored in the 2000 Sugar Bowl were a Sugar Bowl record at that point in the game 's history . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 Both teams made changes to their respective coaching staffs in the weeks that followed the Sugar Bowl . Chuck Amato resigned from his position as linebackers coach for Florida State to take the head coaching position at North Carolina State . His role as linebackers coach was filled by Joe <unk> , whom Bobby Bowden hired from the University of Georgia . Amato 's role as assistant head coach was filled by Jim Gladden , who had been a coach at Florida State for more than 25 years at the time he was named the assistant head coach . At Virginia Tech , head coach Frank Beamer also made some changes to his coaching staff , promoting several position coaches to higher positions in the Tech football hierarchy . 
 = = = Postseason awards = = = 
 In recognition of their achievements during the regular season and during the 2000 Sugar Bowl , multiple players and coaches from each team earned awards and recognition after the conclusion of the game . Tech quarterback Michael Vick , despite leading the losing team in the Sugar Bowl , won an ESPY for college football player of the year on February 14 , more than a month after the Sugar Bowl . In addition , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer won multiple coach of the year awards , most notably the Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award , which was presented to Beamer on March 6 . One of Beamer 's assistant coaches , Bud Foster , was named the top defensive coordinator in Division I @-@ A football by American Football Coach Magazine in its annual award . Florida State quarterback Chris Weinke won the 2000 Heisman Trophy after the conclusion of the 2000 college football season . 
 = = = 2000 NFL Draft = = = 
 Several players from each team were picked by professional teams to play in the National Football League during the 2000 NFL Draft , held April 15 and 16 , in New York City . Florida State had three players selected in the first round of the draft and seven players taken overall . Peter Warrick was the first player picked , selected with the fourth overall selection by the Cincinnati Bengals . Defensive tackle Corey Simon was selected two picks later with the sixth overall selection , and placekicker Sebastian Janikowski was taken 17th . Later rounds saw Ron Dugans ( 66th ) , <unk> Coles ( 78th ) , Jerry Johnson ( 101st ) , and Mario Edwards ( 180th ) taken in the draft from Florida State . 
 Virginia Tech had no players selected in the first round of the draft but saw five players taken from the second round onward . Defensive end John Engelberger was the first Hokie taken in the 2000 draft , and was picked with the 35th overall selection . He was followed by cornerback Ike Charlton , who was taken with the 52nd pick in the draft . Corey Moore ( 89th ) , Anthony Midget ( 134th ) , and Shyrone Stith ( 243rd ) also were taken . 
 Some players who participated in the 2000 Sugar Bowl elected to delay their entry into the NFL Draft , either because they hoped to finish their education or because they were not three years removed from their high school graduations and thus were not eligible to enter the draft . Examples of these players included Florida State quarterback Chris Weinke , who returned to Florida State to complete his senior year , and Virginia Tech quarterback Michael Vick , who was not eligible to enter the draft in 2000 , but who was taken with the first overall selection in the 2001 NFL Draft . 
 = = = Subsequent seasons = = = 
 Florida State entered the 2000 college football season with hopes of following up its victory in the 2000 Sugar Bowl with another national championship . The Seminoles ' regular @-@ season performance differed slightly from 1999 , as they lost a regular @-@ season game to Miami , yet still appeared in a third consecutive national championship game : the 2001 Orange Bowl . Unlike in 2000 , the Seminoles emerged on the losing side of a 13 – 2 score . Virginia Tech , like Florida State , had hoped to attend the national championship game again , but an injury to star quarterback Michael Vick caused the Hokies to lose a regular @-@ season game at third @-@ ranked Miami , eliminating them from national championship contention . 
 The following season , neither Florida State nor Virginia Tech competed for a national championship , but both teams played in the 2002 Gator Bowl , their first matchup in two years . Following the Gator Bowl , Florida State next met Virginia Tech in the 2005 ACC Championship Game after the Hokies left the Big East for the Atlantic Coast Conference . Florida State won that contest , 27 – 22 . Not until the 2007 college football season did Virginia Tech finally avenge its losses to the Seminoles with a 40 – 21 win en route to an Atlantic Coast Conference championship . It was the first game in fifteen consecutive matchups between the two teams that Virginia Tech had won . 
 = Preise , Jerusalem , den Herrn , BWV 119 = 
 Preise , Jerusalem , den Herrn ( Praise the Lord , Jerusalem ) , BWV 119 , is a sacred cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig for Ratswechsel , the inauguration of a new town council , and first performed it on 30 August 1723 . 
 Bach composed the cantata in his first year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , about three months after taking office at the end of May 1723 . A festive service at the Nikolaikirche was an annual event , celebrating the inauguration of a new town council , always held on the Monday after St. Bartholomew ( August 24 ) . The text by an anonymous poet includes psalm verses and an excerpt from Martin Luther 's German Te Deum . It is focused on acknowledgement of authority as a gift of God , thanks for past blessings , and prayer for future help . 
 The cantata is structured in nine movements , three of them choral ( 1 , 7 , 9 ) , the others alternating arias and recitatives . The orchestra is large and representative , with four trumpets , timpani , two recorders and three oboes , in addition to strings and basso continuo . Bach led the Thomanerchor in the first performance . 
 In 2015 the cantata was performed by the Thomanerchor at the place of its premiere on 12 June , opening the Bachfest and celebrating both the 1000th anniversary of the first recorded mention of Leipzig and the 850th anniversary of the Nikolaikirche . 
 = = History and words = = 
 As Thomaskantor , Bach served as music director of Leipzig and had to compose not only for music in the four major churches but also for public municipal functions . The Ratswechsel was celebrated with an annual church service at the Nikolaikirche on the Monday after St. Bartholomew , August 24 . It was not a democratic election , but a " ceremonial transfer of office " of council members who were appointed . The service was not part of the liturgical year with cantata texts related to prescribed biblical epistle and gospel readings . For the Ratswechsel service , Bach could count on the entire council ( his employer ) listening , and probably also civil servants and representatives of the Elector 's administration for the region . The musicologist Klaus Hofmann notes : " It was an opportunity for Bach to show how sacred music was flourishing under his direction and to present himself as a composer . " 
 The cantata was Bach 's first for the occasion in Leipzig . Early in his career he had written at least one cantata for the equivalent service at Mühlhausen . There are five surviving cantatas for the Ratswechsel at Leipzig , and librettos of three more , BWV Anh . I 3 , 4 and 193 . The other four extant cantatas are Ihr Tore zu Zion , BWV 193 , composed for the occasion in 1727 but partly lost , Wir danken dir , Gott , wir danken dir , BWV 29 , composed for the occasion in 1731 , Gott , man lobet dich in der Stille , BWV 120 , adapted from earlier cantatas for wedding and homage probably in 1742 , and Lobe den Herrn , meine Seele , BWV 69 , adapted from Lobe den Herrn , meine Seele , BWV <unk> , for the occasion in 1748 . 
 The text was written by an unknown librettist who included psalm verses ( 147 , 85 and 126 ) and lines from Martin Luther 's German Te Deum " Herr Gott , dich <unk> wir " . To suit the event for which it was written , these are all turned into hymns of thanking and praising God for Leipzig 's prosperity and asking him to protect the city in the future . 
 Bach led the Thomanerchor in the performance on 30 August 1723 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in nine movements with choral movements as a frame and in movement 7 , otherwise alternating recitatives and arias . He scored it for four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir , and an orchestra of four trumpets ( Tr ) , timpani ( Ti ) , two recorders ( Fl ) , three oboes ( Ob ) , two of them also playing oboes da caccia ( Oc ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo ( Bc ) . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 Even among other festive music written by Bach , this work 's scoring for four trumpets is unusual . It is characterised by a very solemn character and the attributes of courtly homage music , such as the opening chorus in the form of a French overture or fanfare @-@ like trumpet interjections in the bass recitative . Bach created a work that in musical terms corresponds less to sacred music and more to the type of secular music for a princely court , as had been required of him during his time in office in Köthen . Only in its final two movements does Bach again use simple forms to emphasize the work 's character of a church cantata , implying that earthly powers do not last , but God – the supreme ruler – is entitled to have the last word . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The cantata opens with a French overture , unusual in featuring the chorus in the faster middle section . At the time of Louis XIV an overture in this style was played when the king and his entourage entered a performance . Bach 's music expresses a similar respect for the authority of the town councils . The mostly homophonic slow opening is in the typical dotted rhythms , and shows a remarkable concerto of the trumpets versus the rest of the orchestra . The chorus appears only in the middle section , proclaiming verses from Psalm 147 , " Preise , Jerusalem , den Herrn " ( Praise the Lord , Jerusalem ) . It uses both fugal techniques and paired entries . The coda is a recapitulation of the first section . Analysis of corrections show that Bach probably used an instrumental piece composed earlier , and that the characteristic upward run on the first word " Preise " was added later . The text from psalm 147 @,@ 12 – 14a addresses Jerusalem , but the Leipzig congregation understood it as their city . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 A secco recitative introduces the topic , " <unk> Land , <unk> Stadt " ( Blessed land , fortunate city ) : a town is blessed if God reigns in it . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The oboes da caccia present a dotted @-@ rhythm ritornello to introduce the tenor aria . The vocal entry is before the ritornello cadence , " Wohl dir , du Volk der Linden " ( Good fortune , you people of the <unk> ) , a reference to Leipzig sometimes being called <unk> . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The bass recitative , " So herrlich <unk> du , liebe Stadt ! " ( So gloriously you stand , dear city ! ) , is introduced and concluded with a fanfare @-@ like trumpet and timpani line , further wind instruments , recorders and oboes da caccia add colour to the middle section , in an unusual movement for the Leipzig congregation . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The alto aria , " Die <unk> ist Gottes Gabe " ( Authority is God 's gift ) , is accompanied by two obbligato recorders in unison . It is the only minor @-@ mode movement of the cantata . The obbligato presents high repeated notes beginning midway through the ritornello theme , which recurs as episodes and at the conclusion of the movement . The movement is , in effect , a trio sonata . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 A soprano recitative , " Nun ! Wir <unk> es und <unk> dir " ( Now ! we acknowledge it and bring to You ) , expresses thanks for God 's gift and acknowledgement of the burden on the people serving as town council , those who did it the last year and those who succeed . 
 = = = 7 = = = 
 A choral movement confirms " Der Herr hat Guts an uns <unk> " ( The Lord has done good things for us ) . The movement is structured like a da capo aria , with a fugue in the opening and repeat , while the contrasting middle section is mostly homophonic . A a long ritornello theme features an " imperious " trumpet melody , which is played four times during the movement . The voices enter from the lowest to the highest , then additional instruments lead to a climax . In the middle section motifs from the ritornello are played " above and between " the voices . One fanfare motif appears also in Bach 's first Brandenburg Concerto and would later be used in the bass aria Großer Herr und starker König in the Christmas Oratorio . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann assumes , reflecting its secular character as a hunting signal and fanfare , that the movement is derived from an earlier homage cantata . 
 = = = 8 = = = 
 A very short alto recitative , " <unk> ! Da du uns , Herr , zu deinem Volk <unk> " ( Finally ! Since You have established us as Your people ) , is harmonically " adventurous " . 
 = = = 9 = = = 
 The cantata ends with the ninth stanza from Luther 's German Te Deum , " <unk> deinem Volk , Herr Jesu Christ " ( Help Your people , Lord Jesus Christ ) , a prayer for further help and preservation . It is a four @-@ part setting " with the subtlest touches of flamboyance " in a chorale . No performance material for the cantata has survived ; and the score , where the last two movements appear in free space within movement 7 , provides only the four @-@ part setting without mentioning which instruments would play with which voice . Hofmann imagines that there might have been additional parts for trumpets and timpani for an ending to match the opening of the cantata . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The sortable table are excerpt from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are grouped roughly : 
 Large choirs ( red background ) : Bach ( choir dedicated to Bach 's music , founded in the mid @-@ 20th century ) , Boys ( choir of all male voices ) 
 Medium @-@ size choirs 
 Large orchestras ( red background ) : Bach ( orchestra dedicated to Bach 's music , founded in the mid @-@ 20th century ) , Symphony 
 Orchestra on period instruments ( green background ) 
 = = 2015 = = 
 The cantata was performed in the opening concert of the Bachfest Leipzig on 12 June 2015 , celebrating 1000 years since the first recorded mention of Leipzig and the 850th anniversary of the Nikolaikirche . A line from the libretto was the festival 's motto for the occasion : " So herrlich <unk> du , liebe Stadt ! " ( So gloriously you stand , dear city ! ) . The cantata was performed at the Nikolaikirche by Ute <unk> , Britta Schwarz , Patrick <unk> , Jochen Kupfer , the Thomanerchor and the <unk> Halle , conducted by Gotthold Schwarz . 
 = John Struthers ( anatomist ) = 
 Sir John Struthers FRSE <unk> LLD ( ( 1823 @-@ 02 @-@ 21 ) 21 February 1823 – 24 February 1899 ( 1899 @-@ 02 @-@ 24 ) ) was the first Regius Professor of Anatomy at the University of Aberdeen . He was a dynamic teacher and administrator , transforming the status of the institutions in which he worked . He was equally passionate about anatomy , enthusiastically seeking out and dissecting the largest and finest specimens , including whales , and troubling his colleagues with his single @-@ minded quest for money and space for his collection . 
 Among scientists , he is perhaps best known for his work on the ligament which bears his name . His work on the rare and vestigial <unk> of Struthers came to the attention of Charles Darwin , who used it in his Descent of Man to help argue the case that man and other mammals shared a common ancestor . 
 Among the public , Struthers was famous for his dissection of the " Tay Whale " , a humpback whale that appeared in the Firth of Tay , was hunted and then dragged ashore to be exhibited across Britain . Struthers took every opportunity he could to dissect it and recover its bones . 
 In the medical profession , he was known for transforming the teaching of anatomy , for the papers and books that he wrote , as well as for his efficient work in his medical school , for which he was successively awarded medicine 's highest honours , including membership of the General Medical Council , fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , the presidency of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh , and finally a knighthood . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Struthers was the son of Dr Alexander Struthers ( 1767 – 1853 ) and his wife Mary Reid ( 1793 – 1859 ) . They lived in Brucefield , a large stone @-@ built 18th century house with spacious grounds , which was then just outside Dunfermline ; John was born in the house . Alexander was a wealthy mill owner and linen merchant . He bought Brucefield early in the 19th century , along with Brucefield Mill , a linen spinning mill built in 1792 . Linen was threshed at the nearby threshing mill , and bleached in the open air near the house . There were still linen bleachers living in Brucefield House in 1841 , but they had gone by 1851 , leaving the house as the seat of the Struthers family . Mary 's father , Deacon John Reid , was also a linen maker . Alexander and Mary were married in 1818 ; the marriage , though not warmly affectionate , lasted until Alexander 's death despite the large age difference . Both Alexander and Mary are buried at Dunfermline Abbey . 
 Struthers was one of six children , three boys and three girls . The boys were privately tutored in the classics , mathematics and modern languages at home in Brucefield House . They went out boating in summer , skating in winter on the nearby dam ; they rode ponies , went swimming in the nearby Firth of Forth , and went for long walks with wealthy friends . Both his older brother James and his younger brother Alexander studied medicine . James became a doctor at Leith ; Alexander died of cholera while serving as a doctor in the Crimean War . His sisters Janet and Christina provided a simple education at Brucefield for some poor friends , Daniel and James Thomson . Daniel ( 1833 – 1908 ) became a Dunfermline weaver as well as a historian and reformer . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 Struthers studied medicine at Edinburgh , winning prizes as an undergraduate . He completed his M.D. degree in 1845 , becoming a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh at the same time . In 1847 , the college licensed him and his brother James to teach anatomy . The courses that they taught at the medical school in Argyle Square , Edinburgh were recognized by the examining bodies of England , Scotland and Ireland . 
 He worked his way up at the Royal Infirmary from dresser ( surgical assistant ) , to surgical clerk , to house physician , house surgeon and finally full surgeon . His passion was for anatomy ; he told the story of how he had been so concentrated on an anatomy dissection one day in 1843 that he failed to look outside to observe the street procession known as the " Disruption " which launched the Free Church of Scotland . He became Lecturer of Anatomy at the University of Edinburgh . 
 In 1863 , Struthers became the first Regius Professor of Anatomy at the recently formed University of Aberdeen . This was a " Crown Chair " ( a professorship recognized by the government ) , a prestigious position . Struthers ' application for the chair was supported by over 250 letters , many from public figures including well @-@ known doctors such as Joseph Lister and James Paget , and politicians such as Charles Grey , 2nd Earl Grey , who became Home Secretary , and James <unk> , who became the Scottish Lord Advocate . The support of these men was actively solicited by Struthers ' well @-@ connected friends and relatives , including his cousin the Reverend John Struthers of Prestonpans , and his energetic wife Christina . With the success of their campaign , the family moved to Aberdeen . 
 Struthers held the professorship at Aberdeen for 26 years . In that time , he radically transformed anatomy teaching at the university , improved the Aberdeen medical school ; set up the museum of anatomy ; and helped to lead the reconstruction of the Aberdeen Infirmary . He vigorously collected specimens for his museum , " prepared or otherwise provided , mainly by the work of my own hands , and at my own expense " . The specimens were arranged to enable students to compare the anatomy of different animals . He intended the comparative anatomy exhibits to demonstrate evolution through the presence of homologous structures . For example , in mammals , the arm and hand of a human , the wing of a bird , the foreleg of a horse , and the flipper of a whale are all homologous forelimbs . He continually made demands of the University of Aberdeen 's Senate for additional room space and money for the museum , against the wishes of his colleagues in the faculty . Struthers could go to great lengths to obtain specimens he particularly wanted , and on at least one occasion this led to court action . He had long admired a crocodile skeleton at Aberdeen 's Medico @-@ Chirurgical Society . In 1866 he borrowed it , ostensibly to clean and remount it , but despite the society 's urgent requests to have it returned , it stayed in Struthers ' museum at Marischal College for ten years . Struthers still hoped to obtain the specimen , and when in 1885 he was made president of the Medico @-@ Chirurgical Society , he again tried to take the crocodile to his museum . The society then obtained an interdict ( a court order ) restraining him from removing the skeleton . 
 Struthers published about 70 papers on anatomy . He set up a popular series of lectures for the public , held on Saturday evenings . Many of the methods he used remain relevant today . He had a powerful effect on medical education in Britain , in 1890 establishing the format of three years of " pre @-@ clinical " academic teaching and examination in the sciences underlying medicine , including especially anatomy . His system lasted until the reform of medical training in 1993 and 2003 . His 21st century successors at the anatomy school in Aberdeen write that " He would undoubtedly be greatly dismayed at the drastic reduction in the teaching of basic medical sciences , and the subsequent perceived decline in the anatomical knowledge of medical students and practicing clinicians , " and they quote one of Struthers ' sayings to his students : 
 Unless you are well informed in the foundation sciences and principles , you may practise your profession , but you will never understand disease and its treatment ; your practice will be routine , the unintelligent application of the dogmas and directions of your textbook or teacher . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Struthers was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree by the University of Glasgow in 1885 for his work in medical education . In 1892 he was given honorary membership of the Royal Medical Society ; he also became president of the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh . He was appointed to the General Medical Council in 1883 and remained a member until 1891 . He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1894 . In 1895 he was made president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh ; he held the position for two years . In 1898 , he was knighted ( as Sir John Struthers ) by Queen Victoria for his service to medicine . 
 = = Scientific work = = 
 = = = Evolution and Struthers ' ligament = = = 
 Struthers was one of the first advocates of the theory of evolution , speaking publicly and corresponding with Charles Darwin about observations he made during his comparative anatomy studies . 
 Struthers was interested in abnormal variations in anatomy , such as additional toes , and he collected many specimens which he offered to show Darwin . Among other curiosities , Struthers described the " <unk> of Struthers " , a rare extra band of connective tissue present in 1 % of humans running from a bony projection on the humerus down to the elbow , and showed that its presence was inherited . 
 The significance of Struthers ' ligament , as Darwin and Struthers understood , is that the vestigial organ has no function in humans , but is inherited from a structure , the supra @-@ condyloid foramen , which certainly had a function in other mammals including marsupials and carnivores . In those other mammals , the supra @-@ condyloid foramen is an opening in the bone that important structures , the median nerve and the brachial artery , run through . Struthers observed that when his ligament was present in humans , the nerve and artery did run through it . Darwin took this to mean that humans and other mammals had a common ancestor , and used Struthers ' work as evidence in Chapter 1 of his Descent of Man ( 1871 ) : 
 In some of the lower Quadrumana , in the Lemuridae and Carnivora , as well as in many marsupials , there is a passage near the lower end of the humerus , called the supra @-@ condyloid foramen , through which the great nerve of the fore limb and often the great artery pass . Now in the humerus of man , there is generally a trace of this passage , which is sometimes fairly well developed , being formed by a depending hook @-@ like process of bone , completed by a band of ligament . Dr. Struthers , who has closely attended to the subject , has now shewn that this peculiarity is sometimes inherited , as it has occurred in a father , and in no less than four out of his seven children . When present , the great nerve invariably passes through it ; and this clearly indicates that it is the homologue and <unk> of the supra @-@ condyloid foramen of the lower animals . Prof. Turner estimates , as he informs me , that it occurs in about one per cent of recent skeletons . But if the occasional development of this structure in man is , as seems probable , due to reversion , it is a return to a very ancient state of things , because in the higher Quadrumana it is absent . 
 = = = Whale anatomy = = = 
 Aberdeen , a coastal city , gave Struthers the opportunity to observe the whales which were from time to time washed up on Scotland 's coast . In 1870 he observed , dissected and described a Blue Whale ( which he called a " Great Fin @-@ Whale " ) from Peterhead . He brought the entire skeleton of a Sei Whale back to the anatomy department at Aberdeen , where for a century it was suspended overhead in the hall . He vigorously collected examples of a wide range of species to form a museum of zoology , with the intention of illustrating Darwin 's theories . As an energetic and forceful personality with a strong enthusiasm for zoology , he alarmed his colleagues at the University of Aberdeen by constantly asking for money and space to acquire and house his collection . 
 = = = Dissecting the " Tay Whale " = = = 
 Struthers became known to the general public for his dissection of the " Tay Whale " — one of his largest specimens . 
 At the end of December 1883 , a humpback whale appeared in the Firth of Tay off Dundee , attracting much local interest . It was harpooned , but after an all @-@ night struggle escaped . A week later it was found dead , and was towed on to the beach at Stonehaven , near Aberdeen . Struthers quickly visited the carcass , measuring it as 40 feet long with a tail 11 feet 4 inches wide . Struthers was not able to start dissecting it at once , as a local entrepreneur , John Woods , bought the whale and took it to his yard in Dundee , where on the first Sunday , 12 @,@ 000 people paid to see it . 
 Struthers was not allowed to dissect the famous specimen until it was too badly decomposed for further public exhibition . He was well used to working on stinking carcasses : his dissecting room was reputed to stink " like the deck of a Greenland whaler " . The dissection was disturbed by John Woods , who admitted the public , for a fee , to watch Struthers and his assistants at work , with a military band playing in the background . Progress on the dissection was impeded by snow showers . Struthers was able to remove much of the skeleton before Woods had the flesh embalmed ; the carcass was then stuffed and sewn up to be taken on a profitable tour as far as Edinburgh and London . After months of waiting , on 7 August 1884 , Struthers was able to remove the skull and the rest of the skeleton . Over the next decade , Struthers wrote seven anatomy articles on the whale , with a complete monograph on it in 1889 . 
 = = Life and family = = 
 Struthers ' siblings included James Struthers MD ( 1821 @-@ 1891 ) , a doctor at Leith hospital for 42 years , and his youngest brother Alexander Struthers MB who died at Scutari in the Crimea . 
 Struthers married Christina Margaret Alexander ( born 15 January 1833 ) on 5 August 1857 . Christina was the sister of John Alexander , chief clerk to Bow Street Police Court . She too came from a Scottish medical family ; her parents were Dr James Alexander ( 1795 – 1863 ) and Margaret Finlay ( 1797 @-@ 1865 ) , both of old Dunfermline families ; James practised as a surgeon just across the English border in the small town of Wooler , Northumberland . On James ' death as a " country practitioner " , the city @-@ dweller Struthers wrote 
 The great majority of the profession are and must be country practitioners ; the hardest work of the profession is done by them ; in the winter nights , when the world is asleep , they have many a long and weary drive ; they are far from libraries , from hospitals and museums , and from societies ; and thus in their comparative isolation want that stimulus and guidance which tend to keep the city practitioner up to the mark . 
 Struthers was father @-@ in @-@ law of nitroglycerine chemist David Orme Masson , who married his daughter Mary . He was grandfather of another explosives chemist , Sir James Irvine Orme Masson , and father @-@ in @-@ law of educator Simon Somerville Laurie , who married his daughter Lucy . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On retiring from the University of Aberdeen , Struthers returned to Edinburgh . He was buried in the north @-@ east section of the central roundel of Warriston Cemetery , Edinburgh , in 1899 ; his wife Christina joined him there in 1907 . All three of their sons , Alexander , James and John also worked in the medical profession ; John followed his father by working at Leith Hospital , then at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and finally by also becoming president of the Royal College of Surgeons . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Struthers authored over 70 manuscripts and books , including the following . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Struthers , John ( 1854 ) . Anatomical and Physiological Observations . Edinburgh : Sutherland and Knox . 
 Struthers , John ( 1867 ) . Historical Sketch of the Edinburgh Anatomical School . Edinburgh : Maclachlan and Stewart . 
 Struthers , John ( 1889 ) . Memoir on the Anatomy of the Humpback Whale , Megaptera <unk> . Edinburgh : Maclachlan . 
 = = = Papers = = = 
 Struthers , John ( 1854 ) . " On some points in the abnormal anatomy of the arm " . Br . Foreign Medico @-@ Chir . Rev. 13 : 523 – 533 . 
 Struthers , John ( 1871 ) . " On some points in the anatomy of a Great Fin Whale ( Balaenoptera musculus ) " . Journal of Anatomical Physiology 6 : 107 – 125 . 
 Struthers , John ( 1881 ) . " On the bones , articulations and muscles of the rudimentary hind limbs of the Greenland Right Whale ( <unk> mysticetus ) " . Journal of Anatomical Physiology 15 : 141 – 321 . 
 Struthers , John ( October 1893 ) . " The New Five @-@ Year Course of Study : Remarks on the position of Anatomy among the Earlier Studies , and on the relative value of Practical Work and of Lectures in Modern Medical Education " . Edinburgh Medical Journal . 
 Struthers , John ( 1895 ) . " On the external characters and some parts of the anatomy of a Beluga ( <unk> leucas ) " . Journal of Anatomical Physiology 30 : 124 – 156 . 
 = Tom Harley = 
 Thomas ' Tom ' Harley ( born 18 July 1978 ) is a former Australian rules footballer for the Geelong Football Club in the Australian Football League ( AFL ) . A defender at 1 @.@ 93 metres ( 6 ft 4 in ) and 95 kilograms ( 209 lb ) , Harley was a two @-@ time premiership @-@ winning captain at the club . 
 After a successful junior career which culminated with selection in the under @-@ 18 All @-@ Australian team , Harley was drafted to the Port Adelaide Football Club as a zone selection . Although an inaugural member of the club , Harley struggled to force his way into the senior team and spent the majority of his early years playing for Norwood in the South Australian National Football League ( SANFL ) . After making just one appearance for Port Adelaide , Harley was traded to the Geelong Football Club in exchange for the 37th draft pick in the 1998 AFL Draft . 
 Harley quickly established himself within the Geelong defence and received a range of accolades and club honours , including multiple Best Clubman awards . Prior to the 2007 AFL season , Harley was appointed club captain and went on to enjoy great individual and team success . He led the club to its first premiership in 44 years during 2007 , and became a dual premiership captain after their victory in 2009 . In between , he achieved All @-@ Australian honours as vice @-@ captain of the team , and won the AFL Players Association ( AFLPA ) Best Captain Award . Harley also participated in the 2008 AFL Hall of Fame all @-@ star game , and was inducted into the Geelong Football Club Hall of Fame . 
 He is noted for being a leading ambassador to various community campaigns , including the anti @-@ violence program ' Just Think ' and Barwon Health . Since his retirement as a player , Harley has undertaken various roles in the sporting industry : he currently holds positions as General Manager - Football Sydney Swans , . 
 = = Early life = = 
 One of three children born to Rick and Trish ( née Rofe ) Harley in Adelaide , South Australia . Tom played most of his junior football for the Walkerville Junior Football Club and St Peter 's College from the under – 11s to under – 15s . 
 Despite being regularly overlooked for a place in the elite South Australian junior state squads , he continued to follow the rest of the squad to training sessions in order to learn alongside them . Harley 's persistent attendance at training was rewarded when he was called up to the under – 18s squad as a late injury replacement a week prior to the National AFL Championships . Playing at centre half @-@ back , Harley 's performance in defence earned him end @-@ of @-@ year All @-@ Australian honours and brought him to the attention of AFL scouts . 
 = = AFL career = = 
 = = = Port Adelaide experience ( 1998 ) = = = 
 Following their entry into the AFL in 1997 , Port Adelaide drafted Harley to the club as part of their zone selections , which entitled them to recruit uncontracted players from the South Australian National Football League ( SANFL ) prior to the 1996 National Draft . He struggled to break into the Port Adelaide senior team , and often found himself playing in the SANFL reserves for Norwood during the 1997 season , where he helped the team reach the SANFL reserves Grand Final , where they were defeated by the Port Magpies . Harley 's contributions in the reserves team throughout the year saw him promoted to the senior Norwood side , where he featured in two of their SANFL finals before missing selection for the senior SANFL Grand Final . 
 Harley continued to ply his trade in the SANFL reserves during the 1998 season , before being rewarded mid @-@ season with a senior team debut for Port Adelaide in round fourteen against Geelong . The team opted to use Harley sparingly off the bench , with Harley 's only meaningful contribution being a late goal scored with his only kick for the game . Returning to the Norwood reserves team , Harley helped the team reach their second successive Grand Final appearance against the Port Magpies and capture the reserves premiership . However , after struggling to break into the senior side , Harley was traded to Geelong during the off @-@ season for the 37th pick in the 1998 AFL Draft . 
 = = = Mixed success ( 1999 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Harley made his debut for Geelong in round fourteen of the 1999 AFL season against Adelaide , and kept his position in the senior team for the final nine games of the home @-@ and @-@ away campaign . The following season , Harley helped Geelong achieve a 12 @-@ 9 @-@ 1 record to qualify for the finals series . Harley made his finals debut in the First Elimination Final against Hawthorn , where he gathered 7 disposals and took 2 marks in the clubs ' nine @-@ point loss . 
 His consistency throughout the year , during which he played in all club fixture games for the first time in his career , was rewarded when he won the club 's Most Determined and Dedicated Player Award . Harley made his 50th senior appearance for the club the following season , and again featured in all 22 games over the next two seasons . Despite the club 's inability to qualify for the finals series , Harley 's consistency in the backline was recognised with successive top five placings in the club best and fairest award . During this period Harley was also awarded the Coach 's Award and Best Clubman Award respectively . 
 = = = Captaining the Cats ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = 
 At the beginning of 2007 , Harley was appointed as club captain of Geelong . Harley 's elevation to the captaincy was considered a surprise move to many outside the club . Despite the reaction , Harley was recommended by the club 's board of directors following a review of the football department the previous year . The club noted that Harley " was a player who would dig deep and stand up when it counts " , and was also chosen to help improve communication links between players , coaching staff and the board of directors . 
 Harley endured a difficult start to his first season as captain , as he ruptured a finger tendon during the club 's round one loss to the Western Bulldogs . After undergoing surgery on his finger , Harley made his return through the club 's reserves team in the VFL but failed to earn a recall to the senior team until round ten . After playing the majority of his career at Geelong as a centre half back , Harley struggled to find his niche in the defence following the emergence of the younger Matthew Egan in the key position . He soon adjusted himself as a floating defender capable of playing on small forwards , and retained his position in the side after achieving career @-@ best averages of 14 disposals and 5 marks a game . Harley helped the team compile an 18 @-@ 4 win @-@ loss record at the conclusion of the home and away season , earning them their eighth McClelland Trophy and securing first position on the ladder leading into the finals series . Harley led the defence to the number one defensive record in the league during the season , by letting only 1664 points be scored against them . After wins against North Melbourne and Collingwood in the Qualifying and Preliminary finals respectively , Geelong earned a spot in the Grand Final against Harley 's former team Port Adelaide . Collecting 13 disposals and 7 marks , Harley helped the club to an AFL @-@ record 119 point win and secure its first premiership in 44 years . Harley became the first Geelong captain of a premiership @-@ winning side since Fred Wooller in 1963 , and achieved the rare distinction of becoming a premiership @-@ winning captain in his first year at the helm . 
 Harley 's leadership qualities and influence on the club as captain was commended early on in the season after his handling of teammate Steve Johnson 's off @-@ field <unk> . Johnson was banished from the team during the pre @-@ season and demoted to the reserves for the first five games of the season . However , he successfully returned to the team and finished the season as a Norm Smith Medallist and All @-@ Australian . Harley 's leadership influence on the team was reflected in his finishing fourth in the AFLPA Best Captain award during his first year at the helm . He was also awarded life membership of the Geelong Football Club following his 150th team appearance in the round sixteen win against the Western Bulldogs , and named in the end @-@ of @-@ season South Australian State of Origin team . 
 Harley 's achievements at the club were recognised prior to the 2008 AFL season when he was inducted into the Geelong Football Club Hall of Fame . Following the success of 2007 , Harley and the club were expected to feature prominently in the 2008 finals series once more . Harley featured in all 22 home @-@ and @-@ away fixture games and 3 finals games . He set career @-@ highs of 14 marks ( round three ) and 14 handpasses ( Preliminary Final ) in the process , and helped the club achieve the number one defensive record during the season for the second consecutive year . During the season , he was also selected to the initial squad for the AFL Hall of Fame all @-@ star game , although he failed to make the final teams . Geelong compiled a 21 – 1 win @-@ loss record to once again capture the McClelland Trophy and qualify for the finals series in first position on the ladder . After successive wins against St Kilda and the Western Bulldogs , Harley led the team to their second straight Grand Final appearance . During the Grand Final , Harley suffered mild concussion following a collision prior to the half @-@ time break . As a result , he struggled to contribute for the rest of the game as Geelong lost to Hawthorn by 26 points . 
 Despite the club 's Grand Final defeat , Harley collected a range of individual accolades following his performances throughout the season . He earned his first All @-@ Australian honour and was named as vice @-@ captain of the team . Harley was also recognised by the AFLPA , as he was awarded the AFLPA Best Captain award in just his second season at the helm . After setting career @-@ highs of 209 <unk> and 378 disposals during the season , Harley was awarded a career @-@ high seven Brownlow Medal votes during the count and named once again in the South Australian State of Origin team . He was also awarded the Geelong Football Club Best Clubman award for a record third time , and named a co @-@ winner of the club ’ s Community Champion award alongside teammates James Kelly and David <unk> . 
 Harley was charged with helping the players regroup following the Grand Final loss the previous season , and admitted " losing the grand final was horrific " . Harley missed the first six rounds of the 2009 campaign with a knee injury , before returning to feature in fourteen games for the year . Despite Harley 's injury @-@ riddled campaign , Geelong finished the home @-@ and @-@ away campaign in second place on the ladder with an 18 – 4 win @-@ loss record . Following the failure of 2008 , Harley suggested that the club had learnt that it needed to " just be the best team in September " and that once qualified for the finals , focus had shifted towards rest and recovery . 
 After finals wins against the Western Bulldogs and Collingwood , Harley and Geelong progressed through to the Grand Final against St Kilda for a third successive season . During the final , Harley struggled to stay involved in the game and gathered only 5 disposals , 1 mark , and 3 tackles . However , Geelong prevailed by 12 points to win the 2009 AFL premiership and capture its second premiership cup within three seasons . 
 At the conclusion of the 2009 season , Harley announced his retirement from AFL football . Harley cited his inability to physically meet the demands of AFL football as his reason for departing the game . Harley retired as one of the most successful captains in Geelong 's history : during his three years as captain , Harley led the club to a club @-@ high two premierships — equalling the accomplishments of Fred Flanagan — and compiled a 49 @-@ 7 win @-@ loss record . His legacy at the club was pronounced by Thompson as being " one of the great captains in the history of the Geelong Football Club " . 
 Harley 's achievements during his playing career were recognised when he was nominated for a record four awards during the AFL Player 's Association Madden Medal night : the Madden Medal , the Football Achievement award , the Personal Development award , and the Community Spirit award . 
 = = After retiring as a player = = 
 In the weeks following his retirement , Harley was sounded out by the AFL 's newest team , Western Sydney , to join the club in an off @-@ field role . On 4 December 2009 , it was announced that Harley would join the club as a project consultant , serving on committee board and the football department in a part @-@ time role . 
 Harley later also joined the AIS @-@ AFL Academy as an assistant coach and mentor . Prior to the 2010 AFL season , it was further announced that Harley would join the Channel 7 network football commentary team , replacing Nathan Buckley in the leading special comments role . Harley admitted that his previous experience as a regular panellist on the football program One Week at a Time during his playing days had fuelled an interest in working within the media industry . He is currently the general manager of football at the Sydney Swans . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 During his playing career , Harley was considered as one of the league 's " most respected players " and the " general of the most miserly defence in the league " . Harley began his early career as a key position player at centre half back , where he used his physical size to great effect . However , during his later years he played as a floating defender capable of playing on small forwards . Despite his personal admission to not being " the greatest player " , Harley 's play @-@ reading ability saw him recognised as one of the league 's best at intercepting opposition passes inside his defensive 50m arc . 
 Harley 's leadership skills have been consistently praised during his time in the league . Despite his reputation for not being the team 's greatest player , he was widely regarded as a natural leader whose character " was the heartbeat of Geelong " . Teammate Gary Ablett complimented Harley as being " very approachable ... [ and ] the key to gelling the team together " . Many commentators have attributed his leadership influence as being a key factor in Geelong 's premiership success . Specifically , he was credited with helping transform the culture of the club , in setting standards for on and off @-@ field behaviour . Harley 's legacy as captain of the club was pronounced by Bill McMaster as being one of the great leaders of Geelong alongside Reg Hickey and Fred Flanagan . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Harley is the second of three children and has two brothers , elder brother Sam and younger brother Ben . He is married to Sydney @-@ based journalist Felicity Harley ( née Percival ) , whom he met while being interviewed for an article in Cosmopolitan . 
 After starting his Bachelor of Commerce degree at an Adelaide institution in 1996 , Harley transferred to Deakin University and graduated 11 years later in 2007 . Harley was one of 21 players from the Geelong Football Club who witnessed the 2002 Bali bombings first @-@ hand during an off @-@ season holiday to the popular tourist destination . Harley and his team mates were preparing to venture to the Sari night club just moments prior to the terrorist attack . 
 In 2008 , Harley was named an ambassador for an anti @-@ booze @-@ fuelled violence campaign run by the Geelong Advertiser newspaper , titled " Just Think " . As part of his ambassadorial role , Harley has appeared in numerous advertisements alongside fellow Geelong teammates and ambassadors James Kelly and David <unk> . He is an active health ambassador for Barwon Health . 
 In 2009 , Harley 's position as captain of the Geelong Football Club saw him participate in the inaugural Captains ' Forum . He was selected as one of 24 leaders in Australian sport to discuss and develop a national response at Parliament House , Canberra , for emerging challenges impacting sport and the broader community . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Honours and achievements = = 
 Team 
 AFL Premiership ( Geelong ) : 2007 ( C ) , 2009 ( C ) 
 McClelland Trophy ( Geelong ) : 2007 ( C ) , 2008 ( C ) 
 SANFL Reserves Premiership ( Norwood ) : 1998 
 Individual 
 All @-@ Australian : 2008 ( VC ) 
 AFLPA Best Captain Award : 2008 
 Captain of Geelong F.C. : 2007 – 2009 
 Geelong F.C. Best Clubman Award : 2002 , 2006 , 2008 
 Geelong F.C. Coach 's Award : 2001 
 Geelong F.C. Most Determined and Most Dedicated Player Award : 2000 
 Geelong F.C. Community Champion Award : 2008 
 South Australian State of Origin representative honours : 2007 , 2008 ( Captain ) 
 Legendary Performers Award : 2009 
 = Hobart coastal defences = 
 The Hobart coastal defences are a network of now defunct coastal batteries , some of which are inter @-@ linked with tunnels , that were designed and built by British colonial authorities in the nineteenth century to protect the city of Hobart , Tasmania , from attack by enemy warships . During the nineteenth century , the port of Hobart Town was a vital re @-@ supply stop for international shipping and trade , and therefore a major freight hub for the British Empire . As such , it was considered vital that the colony be protected . In all , between 1804 and 1942 there were 12 permanent defensive positions constructed in the Hobart region . 
 Prior to Australian Federation , the island of Tasmania was a colony of the British Empire , and as such was often at war with Britain 's enemies and European rivals , such as France and later Russia . The British had already established the colony of Sydney at Port Jackson in New South Wales in 1788 , but soon began to consider the island of Tasmania as the potential site of a useful second colony . It was an island , cut off from the mainland of Australia and isolated geographically , making it ideal for a penal colony , and was rich in timber , a resource useful to the Royal Navy . In 1803 , the British authorities decided to colonise Tasmania , and to establish a permanent settlement on the island that was at the time known as Van Diemen 's Land , primarily to prevent the French from doing so . During this period tensions between Great Britain and France remained high . The two nations had been fighting the French Revolutionary Wars with each other through much of the 1790s , and would soon be engaging each other again in the Napoleonic Wars . 
 The first British settlement in Van Diemen 's Land had begun on 8 September 1803 , at <unk> Cove on the Derwent River 's eastern shore . However , the arrival of Lieutenant @-@ Governor David Collins on 16 February 1804 , saw him make the decision to relocate the settlement to Sullivan 's Cove on the western shore of the Derwent River . Within days of the settlement 's establishment , Collins had decided the new colony would need protection should the French send warships up the river to threaten the fledgling colony . A crude earthwork redoubt was dug into an elevated position near the centre of Sullivan 's Cove , in the area that is now Franklin Square , and two ships cannons were placed inside . For the next seven years , this muddy emplacement would serve as the only defensive position of what was growing to become Hobart Town . 
 When Governor Lachlan Macquarie toured the Hobart Town settlement in 1811 , he was alarmed at the poor state of the defences and the general disorganisation of the colony . Along with planning for a new grid pattern of streets to be laid out , and new administrative and other buildings to be built , he commissioned the building of Anglesea Barracks , which opened in 1814 , and is now the oldest continually occupied barracks in Australia . Macquarie also suggested the construction of more permanent fortifications . Following his advice , a new location comprising an area of 8 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 m2 ) was selected at the eastern end of Battery Point on the southern side of Sullivan 's Cove , and construction began on what was to become the first of a series of new defensive installations . 
 = = Mulgrave Battery = = 
 By 1818 , the new battery had been completed on a location in Battery Point near the present <unk> Esplanade , and was named Mulgrave Battery in honour of Henry Phipps , 1st Earl of Mulgrave , who was at that time Master @-@ General of the Ordnance . The battery had six guns which projected forward through earthwork embrasures . At first , these were ships guns , but in 1824 they were replaced with 32 pounders . Now Hobart Town had two firing positions protecting either side of the entrance to Sullivans Cove . 
 Upon its completion , the Mulgrave Battery soon attracted heavy criticism from those who had to serve there . Members of the Royal Artillery felt it was inadequate , and one critic is even said to have described the battery as " a poor pitiful mud fort . " Engineers reported that the gun carriages were a danger to men firing the guns , and so new timber was sent from Macquarie Harbour in 1829 to make them safer ; however , records showed that only one gun had been upgraded by 1831 . The same year , the galleries were improved with large 15 metre long sections of timber , heavy bolts , braces and bars . 
 As the colony began to grow larger , more British units were sent to serve in the settlement of Hobart Town . Amongst one of these contingents was a commander of the Royal Engineers named Captain Roger Kelsall , who arrived in Hobart in 1835 to take over HM Ordnance Department . When he arrived , he assessed these two fortifications , and wrote in his report that he felt the colony was virtually undefended . He devised an ambitious plan to fortify the whole inner harbour of the Derwent River with a network of heavily armed and fortified batteries located at Macquarie Point , Battery Point and Bellerive Bluff on the eastern shore . He envisaged the forts all having an interlocking firing arc , which would cover the entire approach to Sullivan 's Cove , making it impossible for ships to enter the docks or attack the town unchallenged . 
 The scale of the plan was enormous for such a small colony , the population being approximately 20 @,@ 000 in the 1830s . This meant that the cost was too prohibitive , considering that at that period the British Empire enjoyed relative peace with the exception of border conflicts in India . Nevertheless , despite funding problems , work using convict labour began in 1840 . Mulgrave Battery was enhanced and expanded , and a new site was located slightly further up the hillside on Battery Point , behind the location of the Mulgrave Battery , where construction also commenced in 1840 . A semaphore station , built in 1829 , and signal mast were constructed above Mulgrave Battery , allowing communication with ships entering the mouth of the river , and through a relay system of masts , all the way to Port Arthur penitentiary on the Tasman Peninsula . 
 The modern Hobart suburb of Battery Point takes its name from the Mulgrave Battery . The original guardhouse , built in 1818 which had been located nearby is the oldest building in Battery Point , and one of the oldest buildings still standing in Tasmania . 
 = = Prince of Wales Battery and Albert Battery = = 
 The new battery , named the " Prince of Wales Battery " , was completed in 1842 . That year ten new 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) muzzle loading cannons were lifted into position , enhancing the firepower of the colony 's defences . Despite its significant firepower , the poor location and firing angles of the new fortress soon became obvious . The powder magazine was fitted out in 1845 . 
 The layout of the fortifications continued to have the Mulgrave and Prince of Wales batteries to the south of Sullivan 's Cove and the Queen 's Battery to the north , until the outbreak of the Crimean War with the Russian Empire . Fear of attack or even invasion by Russian warships of the Imperial Russian Navy , which were known to sail in the South Pacific , led to calls for review of Hobart Town 's defences . A commission was called and it found that further strengthening was needed . With the problems of the Prince of Wales Battery , it was decided a third battery , the Albert Battery ( originally called Prince Albert 's Battery after HRH Prince Albert , Queen Victoria 's Prince Consort ) , would be constructed even further up the hill , behind the Prince of Wales Battery . 
 By 1855 , the colony of Van Diemen 's Land was granted responsible self @-@ government by the Colonial Office , and renamed Tasmania . The Colonial Office began to pressure the newly formed local government to take more responsibility for the self @-@ defence of the colony . 
 As a result of these calls , the Tasmanian colonial government began to establish Volunteer Local Militia Forces . One such force , established in 1859 was the Hobart Town Artillery Company under the command of Captain A. F. Smith , formerly of the 99th . ( Wiltshire ) Regiment , who began to assume responsibility for the Hobart fortifications from the Royal Artillery who were increasingly being withdrawn , and had all departed well before the withdrawal of the last British forces from Tasmania in 1870 . Prior to this , in 1868 a Defence Proposals paper had been published which outlined the need for greater defensive fortifications . It also suggested the need for proposed batteries further to the south of Hobart Town on either side of the river . 
 Improvements to ship 's armaments meant that the existing fortifications , which provided covering fire to a range of approximately 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) , would allow enemy ships to ship outside the range of the defenders guns and still be able to bombard the town . This left the colony virtually defenceless . 
 Three Imperial Russian Navy warships , the Africa , <unk> , and Vestnik , arrived in January 1882 . Britain and its empire had fought against the Russians 26 years previously during the Crimean War and the colony was virtually defenceless . The Russians were on a goodwill mission , but had they had hostile intent , the colony would have easily fallen . As a result , the visit caused a great deal of debate about the state of the colony 's defences . 
 It had also highlighted the state of decay the existing fortresses had reached . Another Commission was carried out , and it was decided the Mulgrave , Prince of Wales and Albert Batteries were inadequate for the defence of the town . By 1878 , both had been condemned , and were dismantled by 1880 . In 1882 , the sites were handed over to Hobart City Council for use as public space , although the subterranean Prince of Wales magazine remains . Most of the stonework was removed and reused in the construction of the Alexandra Battery further to the south . 
 Following the closures , the entrance to the old magazine soon became a popular place for children to play , and at night , the underground magazine rooms often became a meeting place for men to drink and play cards , until they were closed and kept permanently locked by the council in 1934 . 
 To this day , the park in which the Mulgrave , Prince of Wales and Albert Batteries had been located remains a popular public park , and is named Princes Park in honour of the men who served in the batteries there , and as a reminder of the heritage of the site . The iron gate at the entrance of the underground magazine rooms can still be seen at the base of the park . 
 = = Queen 's Battery = = 
 As part of Major Roger <unk> 's recommendations , another site to the north @-@ eastern side of Hobart Town was to be used for an additional fortification . This site , located almost exactly underneath the present site of the Hobart Cenotaph war memorial upon Queens Domain was first constructed in 1838 and opened the same year as Queen 's Battery , named in honour of HRH Queen Victoria , who was on the throne at the time of the fort 's construction . It had been envisaged that this would be the grandest of the forts in Hobart , and would command the prominent point overlooking the entrance to Sullivans Cove ; however , the full plans were never developed . The battery was set back by delays and funding problems , and was not completed until 1864 . 
 With the imminent withdrawal of British forces due in 1870 , a major review of defences had been carried out in 1868 . It was decided the current system was inadequate to cope with advances in naval ordnance , and two new forts would be positioned at One Tree Point and Bellerive Bluff . The Queen 's Battery was to assume the apex position of a triangular coverage of the entrance to Sullivans Cove . 
 As the Royal Artillery were to withdraw within two years , a handbook containing range tables was created by Staff @-@ Sergeant R.H. Eccleston which suggested that to repel a vessel doing 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) up the river would take 226 men approximately 30 minutes to fire 365 rounds from the 20 guns that were available from the existing three forts . Despite this , it became an operational position , and for a time served as an effective defence . The Queen 's Battery remained in operation until the 1920s . The excavation of the site in 1992 revealed the hot shot oven which was uncovered and metal parts for rolling the shot which had been preserved . The oven and archaeological trenches were later filled in at the request of the Returned and Services League ( RSL ) . Hot shot was intended to be fired at wooden ships and to cause ignition of gunpowder . It was never fired in anger . 
 = = Alexandra Battery = = 
 Following the condemnation of the Mulgrave , Prince of Wales , and Albert batteries in 1878 , it was decided to re @-@ institute the plans for the alteration of the defensive strategy around the entrance to Sullivans Cove that were first drawn up in 1868 . 
 A triangle of fortresses with the Queen 's Battery at the Apex , and two new batteries , the Alexandra Battery , named for Princess Alexandra , the Princess of Wales , and the Kangaroo Battery on the eastern shore would be adequate for the task . Construction began on the new fortifications in 1880 , and at the same time , a new permanent field artillery unit , the Southern Tasmanian Volunteer Artillery equipped with two breech @-@ loading 12 @-@ pound howitzers and two 32 @-@ pound guns on field carriages , was raised . 
 Following the dismantling of the Battery Point batteries , much of the stonework was relocated to the Alexandra Battery . The Alexandra Battery site is now a public park with commanding views of the river , and much of the original construction is still accessible . 
 = = Kangaroo Battery = = 
 The presence of the Russian warships in the Derwent River in 1873 , and the condemning of the Battery Point batteries in 1878 had expedited the development of the Alexandra and Kangaroo Batteries . 
 The design of the fort was a pentagon shape that fitted conveniently into the point of the bluff above the cliff . The ditch , tunnels and underground chambers had to be cut out of solid stone and faced with masonry . Several loopholes and firing ports were fitted into the stone <unk> to allow rifle fire from every aspect of the fort . In case of an attempted infantry assault , caponiers faced both landward sides of the fort , with firing positions facing each direction . This meant that the only position to safely assault the fort with infantry was up the sheer cliffs of Kangaroo Bluff . Access to the caponiers was through iron hatchways that opened into open passageways three metres deep . These in turn led to tunnels accessing underground magazines , stores , a lamp room , well and the loading galleries . The loading galleries were ingenious and allowed the guns to be muzzle loaded with shells dragged along a conveyor belt directly to the muzzle of the gun , when it was in a downward tilted position . 
 Construction of the Kangaroo Battery was begun when excavations began to be dug in September 1880 , according to the plans of Colonel Peter Scratchley , a Royal Engineer who had been placed in charge of overseeing construction of defences for all of the Australian colonies . 
 Work was intermittent and beset by funding problems and delays , but in May 1883 , Patrick <unk> was placed in charge of the construction on behalf of the Public Works Department , and under the supervision of Staff Officer Boddam , work was completed the following year with the arrival of two massive 14 tonne eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) cannons from England . The construction had cost £ 8 @,@ 150 ( A $ 16 @,@ 300 ) at a time when labourers earned an average wage of about 4 shillings ( 50c ) per day . The guns fired shells weighing 81 @.@ 7 kg , and thanks to the barreled rifling , had excellent range and accuracy . In 1888 , two smaller QF 6 pounder Nordenfelt guns were added . Although the projectiles were only 2 @.@ 7 kg , they also had excellent accuracy and range . The same year , a Nordenfelt machine gun was mounted facing the entrance gate of the fort . 
 The first shots were fired on 12 February 1885 . Later that year , a dry mound , and deepened wet moat were added , as was further coarse @-@ work covered in broken bottle glass set in mortar . Fences were constructed around the moat in November 1885 when a local boy fell into the moat and drowned . 
 From 1887 , both the Alexandra and Kangaroo Batteries were being manned by detachments of the Southern Tasmanian Volunteer Artillery , as well as the Tasmanian Permanent Artillery . In 1901 Tasmania joined the new Federation of Australia , and all of the city 's fortifications passed into Commonwealth control . Kangaroo Fort remained operational until the 1920s , but never fired a shot in anger . In 1925 , all of the guns were buried as obsolete , and in 1930 , the Clarence City Council took over the site for use as a public park . In 1961 , the Scenery Preservation Board acquired the site , and in 1970 , the site was turned into a historical site , with the guns being dug up and put on display . The site is now operated by Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service and is a major tourist attraction . 
 = = Fort Direction and Pierson 's Point = = 
 With the outbreak of World War II , the Department of Defence acquired land near South Arm close to the mouth of the Derwent River on the eastern shore , from Courtland Calvert and his sister in September 1939 . At first , the land was used purely as a training ground , with mock battles that were disruptive to locals being fought day and night . But as war preparations evolved , the Commonwealth decided that the port of Hobart would require some degree of defence to protect the state 's vital zinc industry that was crucial to the war effort . Major Mark Pritchard was the first commanding officer of the new defences that became known as Fort Direction . By the end of 1939 , construction of two fortified six @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk VII gun emplacements , and a small four room weatherboard control building had been completed . Soon there was also a flagpole and set of naval signals . 
 Throughout the war , a 24 @-@ hour watch was maintained every day , and the site was usually manned by at least 15 Royal Australian Navy personnel . A record of every ship entering the Derwent River between 1940 and 1945 was kept . Between 1941 and 1944 , both guns were regularly used for training exercises . Although never used in hostile action against enemy vessels , the guns were fired in anger once . A liberty ship entering the mouth of the Derwent River failed to obey instructions issued from the Naval Command on the hill above the fort , and one shell was accurately fired across her bow , which immediately resulted in the liberty ship <unk> to . 
 On the opposite western shore of the Derwent River , another emplacement was constructed with one four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) gun . However , several huts to house men were constructed at that location as well as a complicated underground tunnel and command structure . Local residents recall barbed wire still surrounding the site well after the war and the site ’ s de @-@ commissioning . Nearby Goat Bluff was also the location of further underground tunnel systems . 
 The only enemy action to ever affect Hobart happened on 1 August 1942 , when a submarine @-@ launched Japanese spy plane flew from the submarine ’ s mooring in Great Oyster Bay south along the east coast of Tasmania , before flying northward along the Derwent River surveying Hobart and then returning to its mother submarine . Although both emplacements detected the flight , the plane was at too high an altitude to fire upon , and no aircraft were available to intercept it . After this event , two anti @-@ aircraft guns were positioned on nearby hills , but the Japanese never returned to Tasmania again during the war . 
 = Cornwallis in Ireland = 
 British General Charles Cornwallis , the 1st Marquess Cornwallis was appointed in June 1798 to serve as both Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Ireland , the highest civil and military posts in the Kingdom of Ireland . He held these offices until 1801 . 
 Cornwallis had specific instructions and authority to deal with the Irish Rebellion of 1798 , which had broken out in May 1798 . He took steps to ensure that justice was consistently applied to captured rebels , personally reviewing a significant number of court cases . He directed military operations when a French Revolutionary force landed at Killala Bay in August 1798 . 
 In the aftermath of the rebellion , the political climate with regard to Ireland became dominated by the idea that the union of the Irish and British kingdoms ( which were in personal union under the sovereignty of King George III ) was necessary to improve conditions in Ireland . Cornwallis favoured union , but believed that it would also require Catholic emancipation ( the granting of basic civil rights to the predominantly Roman Catholic Irish population ) to create a lasting peace . While Cornwallis was instrumental in achieving the passage of the Act of Union in 1800 by the Irish Parliament , he and Prime Minister William Pitt were unable to convince the king of the merits of Catholic emancipation . This difference of opinion led to the fall of Pitt 's government . Cornwallis also resigned , and was replaced in May 1801 by the Earl of Hardwicke . 
 = = Background = = 
 Charles Cornwallis , 1st Marquess Cornwallis , was a British general , civil administrator , and diplomat . His early career was primarily military in nature , including a series of well @-@ known campaigns during the War of American Independence from 1776 to 1781 that culminated in his surrender at Yorktown . This was followed in 1786 by a period of service as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief and Governor @-@ General of India . There he oversaw the consolidation of British power throughout most of southern India , primarily at the expense of the Kingdom of Mysore and its vassals , and introduced administrative reforms that had long @-@ term consequences . In 1794 he returned to England , which was then militarily engaged in the French Revolutionary Wars . After he was sent on an ultimately fruitless diplomatic mission to stop the fighting , he was appointed master of the ordnance , a post he held until 1798 . 
 The Kingdom of Ireland was at this time in personal union with the Kingdom of Great Britain , and therefore was under the rule of King George III , although it had separate political and administrative institutions . Members of the Parliament of Ireland were only elected by Protestants , as the Roman Catholic property owners had been disenfranchised in 1728 . The majority Catholics had , over the previous century , been progressively stripped of other rights as well . King George was represented in civil affairs by the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland , who ruled in consultation with a privy council , and in military affairs by a Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 The demands of the American War of Independence had forced King George to withdraw many troops from Ireland for service in North America . To bolster forces supportive of the king , Protestants raised militia companies called the Irish Volunteers to replace the departing regulars . Protestant leaders in the Irish Parliament , including Henry Flood and Henry Grattan , who had the support of the Volunteers , convinced the British Parliament to pass a series of acts known collectively as the Constitution of 1782 , giving the Irish Parliament significant political independence . 
 Unlike many English , Flood and Grattan were also proponents of Catholic emancipation , and under their leadership the Irish Parliament overturned a number of the restrictions on the rights of Catholics , although they continued to be unable to vote or hold elected offices . When the French Revolution broke out in the early 1790s , Catholics and middle @-@ class Protestants united to form the Society of United Irishmen . They successfully extracted additional rights , although there was some Protestant resistance to the idea of full Catholic suffrage due to their overwhelming numerical majority . The more radical elements favouring Irish independence found a leader in Theobald Wolfe Tone , who went to France for support from the revolutionaries there that led to an aborted attempt to invade Ireland in 1796 . The failed invasion led the government of the Earl of Camden to round up leaders of the United Irishmen and attempt to disarm the Catholic populace . Use of these tactics was made possible in part by the passage of an Insurrection Act , giving the administration broad police powers , and also by the suspension of habeas corpus in October 1796 . 
 By mid @-@ May 1798 the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Gerard Lake had organised British troops and the Irish Volunteers to put down elements of the growing rebellion . These actions , sometimes capricious and brutal , fanned the flames of rebellion . While Lake 's actions had been effective in Dublin , rebel leaders successfully orchestrated the simultaneous start of widespread hostilities on 23 May . News of the rebellion reached London a few days later , taking the British cabinet by surprise . Lord Camden had assured the Home Secretary , the Duke of Portland , that rebellion was unlikely in a letter written less than two weeks earlier . Camden , predicting a protracted and bloody struggle , sent his family to safety in England , undermining William Pitt 's confidence in him . 
 = = Appointment = = 
 Lord Camden had suggested Cornwallis for the position of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief as early as 1797 , since he was unhappy with Lake 's heavy @-@ handed leadership . Cornwallis refused this initial offer because the position was subservient to that of the Lord Lieutenant , which he felt would diminish its effectiveness . In March 1798 , Camden suggested to Pitt that he be replaced as Lord Lieutenant with Cornwallis , and then in May suggested that Cornwallis be offered both posts , an arrangement similar to the position he held in India . Cornwallis was aware of the discussions around these later proposals , and he agreed to the idea in discussions with Pitt in early June . On 13 June , King George 's Privy Council approved his appointment to both posts . On 21 June , Cornwallis arrived in Dublin to take command . While these discussions went on , General Lake directed the response to the rebellion . On the day Cornwallis landed , the back of the rebellion was broken with a British victory over a large rebel force at Vinegar Hill . 
 = = Rebellion = = 
 = = = Irish remnants = = = 
 As the British military and loyal militia mopped up the remnants of the rebellion in Wexford and other counties , the atrocities and sectarian violence left a mark on Cornwallis . He wrote that " the life of a Lord Lieutenant of Ireland comes up to my idea of a perfect misery ; but if I can achieve the great object of consolidating the British Empire , I shall be sufficiently repaid . " In early July he issued a proclamation offering amnesty to rebels who laid down their arms and took an oath to the crown , and he cracked down on the sometimes arbitrary courts martial held in the field by requiring the review of all sentences in Dublin . However , not all of Ireland received this treatment : areas that were still " disturbed " were exempted from the requirement , Lord Castlereagh , Cornwallis ' Chief Secretary , reported that " numbers were tried and executed " without the lord lieutenant 's review . One principal stronghold of the rebels was the Wicklow Mountains , through which the army began construction of a road facilitate its operations . The Wicklow Military Road survives today as the R115 road in Wexford and Dublin . 
 Cornwallis also negotiated with the parliament the passage of a bill offering amnesty to most of the rebels . This idea was vigorously opposed both in the Protestant @-@ controlled Irish Parliament and in London . By the time the bill passed and received the royal signature in October , it contained numerous exceptions , meaning that anyone with a role of significance in the rebellion was likely not eligible . The bill was also enacted too late to be of significant benefit anyway . He offered financial compensation for losses incurred by loyalists , the terms of which were significantly abused , as claims were often made well in excess of actual losses . This policy of lenience was furthermore disliked by politically influential Protestants , which complicated some of Cornwallis 's later activities . 
 To finish putting down the rebellion and create a semblance of peace , Cornwallis needed more troops . Pitt had promised him 5 @,@ 000 regulars and militia prior to his appointment . While regular troops were among the first to arrive , Ireland became a virtual garrison by September as militia companies flooded in . On 27 June , the Irish Parliament passed a bill Cornwallis introduced to regulate the use of English militia companies . 
 The rebel ringleaders were subjected to courts martial dominated by Protestants , something Cornwallis disliked but put up with . A few of the rebel leaders were tried for treason in July , and sentenced by Cornwallis to hang . This prompted a large number of prisoners , who had not yet been tried , to petition Cornwallis for banishment in exchange for their co @-@ operation . Cornwallis agreed in principle , to stem the flow of blood that was still ongoing in the countryside , and out of concern that the rebellion might be renewed if French assistance arrived . The banishments in many cases were not carried out until 1799 . In spite of some opposition , Cornwallis ultimately succeeded in having more than 400 rebels banished , primarily to Scotland . According to Lord Castlereagh , Cornwallis ' Chief Secretary , Cornwallis personally reviewed 400 court cases , sentencing 131 to death . 
 = = = French invasion = = = 
 French support for Irish independence waned after the death of Lazare Hoche , one of its main proponents , and the driving force behind the 1796 invasion attempt . Napoleon considered an invasion of Great Britain in late 1797 and early 1798 , but dropped the idea in February 1798 after seeing the poor condition of the navy . Napoleon instead chose to begin an expedition to Malta and Egypt in May , shortly before the Irish rebellion erupted . However , Wolfe Tone and other Irish dissidents in France managed to extract some assistance from the French Directory . 
 Cornwallis did not directly involve himself in military matters until the unexpected arrival on 22 August of French troops at Killala Bay in County Mayo , an area that had not seen much rebellious activity . A fleet of three ships had sailed from Rochefort in early August , carrying General Jean Humbert and over 1 @,@ 000 French troops , pursuant to a plan that also included 3 @,@ 000 troops to sail from Brest . When they landed , Humbert relatively quickly raised several hundred poorly disciplined recruits to join him , and began moving south . 
 News of Humbert 's landing reached Dublin two days later . Cornwallis , fearing their presence would encourage renewed uprisings , stepped in to direct military matters . He despatched General Lake to oversee the defences at Castlebar , where Humbert appeared to be heading , with orders to avoid a confrontation until he had sufficient strength . On the morning of 27 August , Lake 's force was routed in the " races of Castlebar " . Most of the fleeing defenders ended up at Tuam , some 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Castlebar , where Cornwallis went the next day with reinforcements . To bolster the forces , he reduced the garrisons at Dublin and Wexford significantly . Despite building a sizeable force ( estimated at about 10 @,@ 000 ) , Cornwallis was concerned about the quality of these forces , which included sizeable militia and yeomanry whose reliability in combat was uncertain . He also had to deal with their behaviour : actions of plunder and violence against locals in the early stages of the campaign prompted him to issue orders threatening immediate execution for soldiers caught stealing , and called on officers " to assist him in stopping the licentious behavior of the troops " . 
 General Humbert , who knew he would be significantly <unk> until the arrival of the Brest fleet unless he could reignite the rebellion and raise more men , then led Cornwallis and Lake on a chase . Seeking to gain support in Ulster , Humbert rapidly moved north . Cornwallis detached Lake to follow Humbert , while he monitored Humbert 's movements and kept positions between Humbert and Dublin . Humbert failed to gain significant local support , and was eventually trapped between the two forces at Ballinamuck . After a brief battle there on 8 September , Humbert surrendered . The fleet from Brest , carrying Wolfe Tone among others , sailed late , and attempted to escape British naval ships in an attempt to return to France ; most of the fleet was captured , and Wolfe Tone was brought to Dublin in chains . According to one account , Cornwallis ordered a number of Humbert 's Irish supporters to be killed by lottery . Pieces of paper , some marked " death " , were placed in a hat . Prisoners then drew from the hat , and were immediately led to the gallows if they drew one of the marked papers . 
 Cornwallis was criticised for the slow pace with which he went after Humbert , and the large number of troops used to capture the relatively modest French army . However , supporters pointed out that all of the French force was captured , and there was no subsequent uprising . General John Moore countered some of the criticisms , noting that Cornwallis " always suspected the Shannon and Dublin to be the objects [ of Humbert 's movements ] , and by guarding against them in time he prevented much mischief . He showed much prudence and judgment in the service . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 In the aftermath of the rebellion , Cornwallis came to believe that British policy toward Ireland was flawed , and that it was his job as Lord Lieutenant to promote measures that would benefit the entire population . This view brought him into conflict with both the Protestant elites in the Irish parliament , and the political establishment in London , even though he was in agreement with the latter that Ireland should be united with Great Britain . 
 In 1799 and 1800 , Ireland was suffering from food shortages that were exacerbated by crop failures in 1799 and a shortage of milling capacity . When Cornwallis offered a bounty to food importers , Portland , the Home Secretary , objected . Cornwallis did take other steps , including the banning of distillation of spirits ; he even considered arranging for imports of grain from America . 
 Attempting to act on a bequest by the recently deceased Bishop of Armagh for the establishment of a " university of Dissenters " there , Cornwallis proposed the establishment of a university for Presbyterians modelled on Trinity College , Dublin . Portland opposed the move , arguing in a manner the Wickwires describe as specious that the dissenters did not require a university , and that Ireland only needed the one university it already had . 
 = = Union = = 
 The Protestant elites in Ireland had previously petitioned for union with Great Britain early in the 18th century , principally to overcome London 's essentially colonial treatment of the country , which included trade restrictions detrimental to Irish merchants and businessmen . The subject arose several times in Irish and British political circles , and William Pitt had decided that it was time to give the matter serious consideration by the time Cornwallis went to Dublin . British politicians saw the immediate aftermath of the rebellion as a particularly opportune moment to press the matter . King George wrote that his officials should use " the present moment of terror " to convince Irish political interests previously opposed to support the idea . 
 The Protestant Ascendancy stood to lose a great deal in union , as seats in parliament , a significant source of power to a relatively small number of families , would necessarily be reduced as a consequence . To counter this assault on their power base , Cornwallis sought to use his power as lord lieutenant to grant government jobs ( patronage ) and peerages to essentially buy off enough votes in the Irish parliament so that it would vote itself out of existence . This task , which the Wickwires describe as " a program of wholesale bribery " , was one that Cornwallis found extremely unpleasant . 
 = = = Early setback = = = 
 Cornwallis believed that the terms of union should include Catholic emancipation . While some rights had been restored in the early 1790s , Catholics were still denied elective offices and other rights . Almost everyone in the establishments of Dublin and London , including the king and much of Pitt 's cabinet , opposed this , leading Cornwallis to write that " some mode must be adopted to soften the hatred of the Catholics to our government " . In a letter to the Home Secretary he wrote , " I trust that your grace and His Majesty 's other ministers will on no account consent to the insertion of any clause which shall unalterably bind the United Parliament to persevere in the exclusion of Catholics . " Protestants , including the Lord Chancellor , Lord Clare , who favoured union , opposed Catholic emancipation . " I trust , and I hope I am not deceived , that they are fairly inclined to give them up , and to bring [ union ] forward unencumbered with the doctrine of emancipation . " King George , after Cornwallis ' appointment , wrote to Pitt that " Cornwallis must clearly understand that no indulgence can be granted to the Catholics farther than has been " . Cornwallis ' efforts to include support for emancipation clearly had negative repercussions . One Protestant wrote , " his silly conduct , his total incapacity , and self conceit and <unk> have alone lost the question [ of union ] " , while another wrote to Castlereagh that Cornwallis had been rendered " not only an object of disgust , but of abhorrence . " 
 None of this prevented Cornwallis , with the assistance of Castlereagh , from forging ahead with the raising of support for union in November 1798 , after the rebellion had died down . Their politicking included firing government officials opposed to union and giving the jobs to supporters , and the offering of a small number of peerages . However , they could not overcome the rumours generated by early drafts of the details of union that appeared to conspire against the Protestant interests . In December 1798 , trade groups representing lawyers , merchants , and bankers all came out against the idea . The principal objection was that there would be fewer seats available for Irish representation in the united parliament , resulting in a loss of power for those whose seats would not be retained . Cornwallis saw the trouble ahead , warning Portland that it was unlikely to pass . 
 On 22 January 1799 , both the Irish and British parliaments met , and each heard a substantially similar address in favour of union delivered in London by the king , and in Dublin by the Lord Lieutenant . The Irish House of Commons , in a clear signal , agreed with the sentiments of the speech by only two votes . Castlereagh , who had been optimistic about the prospects of passage , informed Portland , " I should despair of the success of the measure at any future period , so weighty is the opposition ... , were I not convinced that their repugnance turns more upon points of personal interest , than a fixed aversion to the principle of union . " 
 = = = Building support = = = 
 In the aftermath of the speech 's poor reception , Pitt effectively promised Cornwallis carte blanche to build support for union . Portland wrote to Cornwallis , " I hope it is unnecessary to assure your excellency that whatever your decisions may be you may depend upon their receiving the unreserved sanction and support of His Majesty 's servants . " On the basis of these assurances , Cornwallis and Castlereagh developed a plan to <unk> or convince enough of the propertied interests that controlled the parliament to support the union . Cornwallis found this task , which occupied much of the next year , to be extremely distasteful : " My occupation is now of the most unpleasant nature , negotiating and jobbing with the most corrupt people under heaven . I despise and hate myself every hour for engaging in such dirty work , and am supported only by the reflection that without an Union the British Empire must be dissolved . " The task was made somewhat more pleasant by the arrival of his son for a short visit in July 1799 . 
 Some of Cornwallis ' opponents were particularly difficult to deal with . The Marquess of Downshire , who controlled eight seats in the Irish parliament , managed to convince his militia regiment to sign a petition in February 1800 opposing union ; Cornwallis used his military authority to suspend Downshire from his command . When the news reached London , Downshire was stripped of further privileges by King George , and formally stripped of his colonel 's commission . Others were more easily bought off with further promises of patronage and peerages . Cornwallis also worked to get support from Catholics , but was only able to make the vaguest promises concerning their rights due to the high @-@ level resistance to the idea . 
 Debate for union began in the Irish parliament on 15 January 1800 . Peers in the upper house , concerned that Irish peerages would be debased by the union , at first resisted ; Cornwallis promised them that the king would phase out Irish peerages , issuing more British peerages instead . On 28 March the parliament passed resolutions indicating support for union , so Castlereagh formally introduced the Act of Union on 21 May . The bill was passed in June , and Cornwallis gave it the royal assent on 1 August , with the union to take effect on 1 January 1801 . It included no provisions for Catholic rights . Clare , the Lord Chancellor , wrote , " I am now quite satisfied that [ Cornwallis ] has on the whole been the man of all others best selected for the crisis . " 
 Some political opponents declared that the union had been accomplished by corrupt on the part of government officials . Jonah Barrington alleged that Castlereagh corruptly spent £ 1 @.@ 5 million of treasury funds to achieve union , and Henry Grattan 's son wrote that " the union ... was an act of power and corruption . " This accusation was picked up by 19th @-@ century historians , and persisted into 20th century historiography . Historian Patrick Geoghegan observes that the methods the government employed were not unusual for the time , and Donal McCartney observes " it would be old @-@ fashioned , too nationalist , and much too simplistic to hold that the act of union was carried mainly because of the corrupt methods employed by the government . " 
 = = = Delivering on promises = = = 
 After dissolving the Irish parliament , Cornwallis embarked on a goodwill tour of the island , and was generally well @-@ received wherever he went ; " not an unpleasant circumstance to a man who has governed a country above two years by martial law . " Anticipating little trouble delivering on the many promises he had made , Cornwallis had forwarded to London a list of sixteen names to be granted peerages . The Home Secretary hedged , delayed , and refused many of them ; Cornwallis threatened to resign , since he had staked his reputation on the matter . 
 " When the promise was given I thought that I had made a good bargain for the public , and in the progress of the business I have seen no cause to alter my opinion ... I am bound in honor to stand by it ... There was no sacrifice that I should not have been happy to make for the service of my king and country , except that of honor . " 
 Castlereagh supported Cornwallis in his quest , and the pressure on the London cabinet succeeded . Portland informed Cornwallis that the cabinet would respond favourably , and it did . In the following months , many new peerages were issued , over and above those that Cornwallis requested . 
 Cabinet and royal support did not extend to Cornwallis 's persistent requests for Catholic rights ; he gave signs that he would eventually resign if action was not taken . Neither he nor Pitt , who had come to support him , was able to sway the king , who gave an anti @-@ Catholic speech in January 1801 . In response to this , Pitt requested the king 's permission to resign . At an impasse over the issue , King George accepted Pitt 's resignation on 5 February ; Cornwallis also resigned , agreeing to remain in office until a successor arrived to replace him . On 25 May 1801 , his successor , the Earl of Hardwicke , arrived in Dublin . Three days later , Cornwallis , delayed by bad weather , arrived at Holyhead , and returned to London . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Cornwallis ' work on union and his position on Catholic emancipation , while unsuccessful at the time , were politically influential . Although he was unable to move the king on the issue of emancipation , his views may have played a role in the change of position on the issue by Lord Clare and Edward Cooke , another early critic of emancipation , and rendered its passage , according to one commentator , " only a question of time " . Political movements toward emancipation continued , first under Henry Grattan , and then later under Daniel O 'Connell , whose campaigns for Catholic rights in the 1820s led to the 1829 Catholic Relief Act . 
 Cornwallis next was engaged by the king in diplomatic efforts in Europe . He led the British diplomatic team whose negotiations with Napoleon resulted in the 1802 Treaty of Amiens . He was then offered a second tour of duty in India . After a difficult sea voyage , he died in India not long after arriving there in 1805 . He is buried in Ghazipur , India . 
 = Max Payne ( character ) = 
 Max Payne is the main character and protagonist from the neo @-@ noir video game series of the same name . Max was introduced in the 2001 third @-@ person shooter Max Payne , which was written by Sam Lake and developed by Remedy Entertainment . The game 's publisher , 3D Realms , intended Max to serve as the " foundation of a new gaming franchise " . In the first game the character was portrayed by Lake , with Timothy Gibbs and James McCaffrey later taking over the role , and consistently voiced by McCaffrey . Mark Wahlberg portrayed Max in the film adaptation . The first game in the series presents the story as retold by Max from his point of view , while the sequel , Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne , alternates between his and that of the femme fatale character Mona Sax . 
 In the original Max Payne , Max is an NYPD police officer and an undercover special agent for the DEA . Max becomes a vigilante following the murder of his family and later the murder of his police partner , which he was framed for . Later , he returns to the service as a detective , before his life is soon shattered by death and betrayal . At the start of Max Payne 3 by Rockstar Games , he finds himself employed as a bodyguard for Rodrigo Branco , a wealthy man in Brazil . Max Payne has been very well received by media . 
 = = Character development = = 
 In the creation of Max Payne , the publisher 3D Realms " wanted to develop another strong character that would be the foundation for a new gaming franchise , much like we [ 3D Realms ] had done with Duke Nukem . " The titular character of Max Payne was originally named Max Heat , and 3D Realms spent over $ 20 @,@ 000 worldwide trademarking this name before someone at the company suggested the last name Payne , which was immediately adopted . He was modeled after Sam Lake ( Sami Järvi ) , who wrote the game 's story and script for the Finnish company Remedy Entertainment . Lake also dressed up and played this role for the graphic novel @-@ style cutscenes . For Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne , however , Lake declined the role . Due to having a much larger budget this time , the developers were able to hire professional actors , choosing Timothy Gibbs to be the new model for Max . 
 In both games , Max 's voice actor was James McCaffrey . McCaffrey recalled : " Originally , I ’ d worked on a show called Swift Justice , and there were some similarities between the two characters in terms of them both having experienced some family tragedy and were familiar with the concept of vengeance , but there weren ’ t any specific characters that Max is based on . " In an early announcement from Rockstar Games ( the franchise 's new developer and publisher ) Max 's voice actor was to be recast with an older actor . In the end , however , McCaffrey did return to the role of Max in Max Payne 3 , for which he also provided the motion capture material . McCaffrey said that performing motion capture helped match the dialogue to the scenes and compared it to " having to act in Avatar . " Payne 's look changed significantly for the third game , featuring an older , bald and bearded Max ; this move received an overwhelmingly negative reception . In response , Rockstar Games made changes to the game , as Max 's appearance shifts over the course of the game , including his ' classic ' appearance during flashbacks of his time in New Jersey . According to Rockstar 's Sam Houser , " This is Max as we 've never seen him before , a few years older , more world @-@ weary and cynical than ever . " McCaffrey compared Max in the third game to Charles Bronson 's character Paul Kersey in the film Death Wish . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 Max Payne has been put into a fatalist situation against his will , in the style of a classic element of many noir films , the fall guy . Max is an antihero , as he himself states : " I was not one of them , I was no hero . " The character is noted for his complex use of both metaphors and wordplay to describe the world around him within his inner monologues , which often contradict his external responses to characters he speaks with . He is an extreme introvert and his life is largely illustrated through dramatic and often morbidly cynical soliloquies describing his feelings about his actions and situation . It is also hinted through the games that Max has a questionable grip on reality . 
 At the beginning of the first game , Max is seen differently as a smiling , happily married extrovert with a bright personality . However , after his family was murdered , Max loses his meaning of life and blindly works toward his only remaining purpose : vengeance . However , he has not nullified his feelings , as he is taken with the femme fatale contract killer Mona Sax first they meet , and befriends Vladimir Lem . All the while , Max shows signs of survivor 's guilt and self @-@ destructive behaviour , considering his life to have ended " in a New York minute " . At the end of the second game , he finally seems to find peace within himself , saying : " I had a dream of my wife . She was dead . But it was alright . " However , this is not the case in Max Payne 3 as in the opening cinematic the drunk Max angrily throws a portrait of what is implied to be his family against his apartment wall ; he regrets this act and picks up the picture . 
 Rockstar vice @-@ president Dan Houser described Max Payne in the third game as " a drunk , somewhat morose , widowed ex @-@ cop , trying to find some kind of peace with himself . [ ... ] A man who has spent his life killing , even in the service of his idea of what is right or wrong , is going to be extremely damaged . [ ... ] He wants to be a thinker but he 's much better as a doer . When he thinks he gets wrapped up in himself or makes mistakes . When he acts , he is brilliant , almost super @-@ human . That is his character , and the dichotomy between the two is the reality of his life , and at the heart of the game . He cannot seem to move forward emotionally , but physically he is relentless . " Max is shown to be quite aware of his shortcomings and flaws , stating : " I 'm not slipping . I 'm slipped . I 'm a bad joke . " Max Payne 3 has him display not only extreme violence but also more restraint than in the previous games . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 In the original game , spanning the period of three years between 1998 and 2001 , Max Payne ( voiced by James McCaffrey ) is a former New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) homicide detective whose wife Michelle and six @-@ month @-@ old daughter Rose were brutally murdered in a home invasion connected with the investigation of a new street drug known as Valkyr . In response , Max joined the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) as a secret agent and went undercover in the Mafia . Eventually , framed for the murder of his NYPD and DEA partner Alex Balder , and with his identity exposed , Max becomes a fugitive wanted by the Mafia and the police alike while waging his personal war on the crime . Eventually , he discovers and seemingly destroys a powerful conspiracy behind all these events . 
 After solving the Valkyr case and avenging his family , Max is cleared by his contact in the powerful secret society known as the Inner Circle , and returns to the NYPD . In the first sequel , taking place in 2003 , Max begins investigating a series of murders by a shadowy group of professional killers called the Cleaners . Soon , Max reunites with the murder suspect Mona Sax to solve the mysteries of the Inner Circle ; the investigation leads to Mona 's death . 
 Following the events of the second game , Max is dismissed from the force , and is now addicted to alcohol and painkillers . After a violent mob confrontation , he eventually leaves New York City for the unfamiliar streets of São Paulo , Brazil . Max gets a job working in a security detail for Rodrigo Branco , a wealthy businessman along with Raul Passos who went through police training with Max . After Rodrigo 's wife is kidnapped , Max and Raul discover and then destroy a human organ harvesting ring involving local street gangs , right @-@ wing paramilitary mercenaries and a corrupt Brazilian special police force . 
 = = = In film = = = 
 In the film adaptation , loosely based on the plot of the first game in the series , Max Payne , played by Mark Wahlberg , is a NYPD cop seeking revenge against his family 's killers . When Mark Wahlberg first read Beau Thorne 's script he thought it was " awesome " but became wary after finding out it was based on a video game . Describing his role , Wahlberg said : " It 's probably one of the edgier roles I 've played but also the most layered . Here 's a very happy guy who worked a dismal job , had a beautiful family . But the beauty in his life was taken away . He just goes on a rampage . It 's all driven by emotion . " 3D Realms ' Scott Miller , however , said Max Payne was poorly portrayed in the film , falling short of the game 's standards . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 A three @-@ issue Max Payne 3 tie @-@ in digital comic , created and released in partnership between Rockstar Games and Marvel Comics explores Max 's early years and the events prior to the third game in the series . Max was born to Helen and Jack Payne . Max 's father was a PTSD suffering Vietnam veteran who cheated on and sometimes beat his wife . An important influence on the boy was his maternal grandfather ; a college professor who would tell him stories of ancient mythology . Helen died in 1976 , possibly due to her alcoholism ; Jack 's death followed three years later . As a young man , Max graduated from the New York City Police Academy as the top trainee in his class . Several years later , he has first met his future wife Michelle by saving her from two robbers . They married six months later and their daughter was born on February 4 , 1998 . 
 In 2012 , several sets of Max Payne 's Xbox Live Avatar clothes from the original game were released by Rockstar on the Xbox Live Marketplace . Max Payne 3 Special Edition was bundled with a 10 " tall collectible Max Payne statue made by <unk> . According to an Easter egg in Remedy Entertainment 's Alan Wake , Max died 13 years after the events of Max Payne 2 ( in 2016 ) . However , this is not canonical , as the rights to the series have moved to Rockstar Games . In Rockstar 's 2013 Grand Theft Auto V , the player character Michael can be customized to look like Max in Max Payne 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Max Payne was named the year 's best game character by Eurogamer in 2001 . In 2008 , PC Zone ranked him as PC gaming 's seventh @-@ best character , commenting : " He might be a film noir cliché , but Max Payne is a relatively unique specimen in games , with a superb script and suitably smooth voice acting to match . " Game Informer included him on their list of game characters that " shaped the 2000s , " as chosen by the staff and readers alike . In 2011 , readers of Guinness World Records voted Max as the 42nd @-@ top video game character of all time . In 2012 , GamesRadar ranked him as the 23rd " most memorable , influential , and badass " protagonist in video games due to his " series of extraordinary mobster @-@ murdering scenarios . " 
 Gulf News ranked him as second on their 2011 list of top video game characters , adding that " his no @-@ nonsense , take @-@ no @-@ prisoners attitude won him legions of fans . " That same year , Max was ranked sixth on the list of gaming 's top antiheroes by ScrewAttack , and 360 ranked his name as fifth on their list of the top " manliest " character names on Xbox 360 . IGN featured Max prominently in their 2012 article " A History of Badasses , " ranked him as the gaming 's " most notorious " antihero that same year , and called him " one of video games ' most troubled characters . " In 2013 , Complex ranked him as the 42nd " most badass " video game character of all time . He was also ranked as the eighth " most bad @-@ ass " video game character by The Ultimate Gamer that same year . 
 In addition , the sex scene between Max and Mona was ranked as the fifth sexiest moment in gaming by <unk> in 2007 , who called it " actually one of the most fitting [ sex scenes ] ever seen in a video game . " Their affair also ranked as sixth on the list of the most " disastrous game romances " by GamesRadar in 2011 . ScrewAttack , in 2012 , included both the new and the classic versions of the character in Max Payne 3 on their list of top ten " gamer costumes " for Halloween . That same year , GamesRadar included Max among the " 13 unluckiest bastards in gaming , " stating that " it ’ s hard to think of a protagonist who gets shit on more relentlessly than Max Payne " and noting him for having " the most comically overwrought internal monologues ever to appear in a game . " 
 In 2013 , Complex included Max Payne at the number @-@ two spot on their list of " old school " video game characters who were style icons , as " the gritty , hard @-@ boiled NYC cop look was a perfect fit . " The character 's initial design changes during the long development cycle of Max Payne 3 brought severe criticism from the fan community as well as the media ; UGO commented that " his suave , noir look got booted by trailer trash sensibilities " and blamed Obadiah Stane , Bam Bam Bigelow , John McClane and Kerry King for being " most responsible for Max 's new style . " Keith Stuart of The Guardian opined that , with the third game , Rockstar succeeded in turning " its ex @-@ cop anti @-@ hero into a credible character , " even as there is a " slight disconnect between the shambling Max of the cinematic sequences and the athletic psychopath we control in the interactive sections . " 
 = The Gift ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " The Gift " is the eleventh episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on February 4 , 2001 . The episode was written by Frank Spotnitz and directed by Kim Manners . " The Gift " has elements of both a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episode , and an entry in the series ' mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 and was viewed by 14 @.@ 6 million viewers . Overall , the episode received largely mixed reviews from television critics ; while many appreciated the return focus on Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) absence , others felt that the plot revelations were unnaturally forced into the show . 
 The season centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Mulder — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Doggett comes upon an old case about a professed " soul @-@ eater " that he hopes will ultimately prove the truth behind Mulder ’ s abduction . In a series of flashbacks , it is revealed that , after his exposure to an alien artifact , Mulder was slowly dying of a brain disease . In an attempt to heal himself , he tracked down the soul eater a year before the events of the episode , but felt pity for the creature . In the present , Doggett is shot and killed by the local sheriff , but the soul eater consumes his death and is finally allowed to die , resurrecting Doggett in the process . 
 " The Gift " featured the first substantial appearance of Duchovny since the season opener ; he had elected not to return to the show as a full @-@ time main character following the season seven finale . The episode was written by Spotnitz and was based on folklore surrounding the soul eater . Gillian Anderson , who did not appear in the episode , save for stock footage , later revealed that she was grateful for the time off because it allowed her to spend more time with her daughter . The episode has been analyzed for its themes of death and resurrection , its use of a medicine wheel as a motif , and it has been compared and contrasted with the fourth season episode " Leonard Betts " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is currently missing , having been abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem . " His partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) has been working with Agent John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) in order to locate him . Shortly after Mulder was abducted , Scully and Doggett learned that he had been suffering from a brain tumor and was nearing his demise . After a false lead in the Arizona desert early in the year , Doggett has been assigned to the X @-@ Files division , but he has continued his search for Mulder , despite a lack of definite leads . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 A man — whose face is hidden from the camera — drives up to and enters a house , which has an ominous symbol drawn in blood on the door . When he 's inside , a creature that looks somewhat human @-@ like approaches the woman but the mysterious man shoots the creature three times . As he returns to his car his identity is finally revealed : Agent Fox Mulder . 
 Agent Doggett investigates a possible lead into Mulder 's disappearance in Squamash , Pennsylvania . Apparently , in the spring of 2000 , Mulder visited the small town searching for something to cure his terminal brain disease that he received via exposure to an alien artifact . Doggett is informed by the local sheriff ( Michael McGrady ) that Mulder was there investigating a case involving Marie Hangemuhl ( Natalie Radford ) . Hangemuhl was told by her sister about a Native American legend of some sort of creature that lives in the woods . While interrogating the <unk> in the present , Doggett learns that Hangemuhl is suffering from terminal renal failure . As he is leaving , he also notices plastered @-@ over gunshot holes in their wall . Later , at Mulder 's apartment , Doggett finds a gun Mulder kept hidden under his sink . Meanwhile , in Squamash , a backhoe digs at a stone circle located in the town cemetery . Later that night , the citizens of Squamash show up at a cabin in the woods , demanding to a rustic woman ( Caroline <unk> ) living there that " it " be sent out . A creature attempts to escape , but it is captured . 
 Doggett and Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) return to Squamash , and the two ask the sheriff about the murder of an unidentified transient . Doggett believes that the transient was murdered by Mulder . Doggett and Skinner travel to the cemetery and discover that the grave dug up by the backhoe earlier is that of the transient . The two find the casket empty , but Doggett notices that the transient tunneled out of his own coffin . The sheriff arrives with the creature — revealed to be a soul eater , a creature that subsists off human disease — at the Hangemuhl home , where the symbol in blood is on the door again . The hideous creature opens its jaws wide and bites Hangemuhl . Doggett suggests to Skinner that Mulder shot someone to protect Hangemuhl from the man who was supposed to be in that grave . Meanwhile , deep underground , the creature vomits what appears to be the visceral remains of Marie into a person @-@ shaped mold in the soil . 
 Doggett goes off alone to see the woman who guarded the creature in the woods . The woman implies that Mulder , feeling sorry for the creature , was trying to euthanize the creature , not save Hangemuhl . Doggett hears a noise and finds a trap door leading into the tunnels . Underground , he finds Hangemuhl and takes her to the hospital . Skinner checks in with Doggett who reports that Hangemuhl 's kidneys have healed spontaneously . Doggett returns to the woman in the woods who watches over the creature ; after recoiling at its ugliness , the woman explains that it looks the way it does because it takes the sickness of others into itself , while healing them in the process . Doggett decides to take the creature away from the society , which only uses it . However , Doggett is shot and killed in a scuffle with the sheriff and is promptly buried . Later , Doggett awakens in the tunnels . In the dark corner of the cavern , the woman kneels beside the dead soul eater . She weeps over it , revealing that , by eating Doggett 's death , it has finally been allowed to die . 
 Back at FBI Headquarters , Doggett is struggling to write his report . When Skinner checks in on him , he encourages Doggett to not submit a report , as it would contradict Mulder 's earlier report and damage his , Scully 's , and Doggett 's reputation . Doggett protests that Scully had no knowledge of the events , but Skinner reminds him that it would take months to clear her name , and that it is enough that the two of them know the truth about what happened . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 " The Gift " featured the first substantial appearance from Duchovny as Mulder since the season openers " Within " and " Without " . After settling his contract dispute with Fox , Duchovny quit full @-@ time participation in the show after the seventh season . In order to explain Mulder 's absence , Duchovny 's character was abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem " . After several rounds of contractual discussions , Duchovny agreed to return for a total of 11 season eight episodes . Series creator Chris Carter later argued that Mulder 's absences from the series did not affect the characterization , noting that " there are characters who can be powerful as absent centers , as Mulder was through the eighth and ninth seasons . " 
