 The episode was written by executive producer Frank Spotnitz and was intended as a morality tale . Spotnitz made sure that the episode had an explicit purpose and reason , and he noted , " If you 're going to depart from literal reality as most of us know — if you 're going to go into supernatural — as a writer you have to ask yourself ' Why ? ... And if you don 't really have a point or reason , your story 's probably not going to be very good . " Despite largely being concerned with a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " , " The Gift " also fits in the series ' overarching mythology . The Complete X @-@ Files book , released in 2008 , considers the episode part of the overall myth arc , however , it was not included on the 2005 DVD release The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers . 
 The episode touches upon and explores Mulder 's brain disease , a plot device that was introduced in the season opener " Within " . This was largely a retcon placed in the series after the fact . The series rationalized this revelation with the fact that , due to Mulder 's exposure to the black oil in the fourth season episodes " Tunguska " and " Terma " and his forced brain operation by The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) in the seventh season episode " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " , his brain developed an incurable disease that was slowly killing him . In fact , Mulder 's " one @-@ week recovery " from his brain surgery was a point of criticism when " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " initially aired in 1999 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " The Gift " was directed by Kim Manners , and it marked his third directing credit for the season , after the opening two @-@ parter " Within " and " Without " . Although the episode was the eighth entry aired during the 2000 – 01 season , it was actually the eleventh filmed , as evidenced by its production number . Due to Duchovny 's limited availability , Mulder 's appearances were limited to flashbacks . This technique had previously been used during the filming of the episode " Per Manum " , which — although it was aired after " The Gift " — was filmed before this episode . 
 The majority of the episode — like the rest of seasons six , seven , eight and nine — was filmed in and around the Los Angeles , California area . The scenes taking place at the soul eater 's residence were filmed on Ventura Farms , a California horse establishment and filming location near the town of Thousand Oaks . The filming location had previously been used for the earlier eight season episode " Patience " , for scenes taking place at the undertaker 's residence . The scene featuring The Lone Gunmen talking to Doggett via webcams was actually filmed on the set of their spin @-@ off series , the eponymous The Lone Gunmen . Although the bulk of the episode was filmed by director Manners , the snippet of the Gunmen was directed by Bryan Spicer , who directed several of The Lone Gunmen episodes , as well as the Gunmen @-@ centric sixth season entry " Three of a Kind " . 
 The episode was written to not require Gillian Anderson at all . As a result , the finished episode only features stock footage of Scully from " Within " , and Anderson was not required to film any new scenes . Anderson later revealed that she was extremely grateful for this and other " Doggett @-@ centric " episodes , because they provided her time to spend time with her daughter , Piper Maru , who was attending school in Canada . Anderson insisted that the show both understand her situation and make accommodations : in an interview , she explained , " I was determined that they respect that I would work for three weeks and then have two or three weeks off to go and be with her . So they agreed to that , and that was important to me . I 'd never had that before on the show . " 
 " The Gift " was the first episode that make @-@ up artist Matthew W. Mungle 's company worked on for The X @-@ Files . The soul eater was a combination of actor Jordan Marder in make @-@ up , and a silicone dummy that featured an extendable mouth and movable teeth . 
 = = Themes = = 
 As The X @-@ Files entered into its eighth season , " human resurrection and salvation " as well as " disease , suffering , and healing " became an increasingly central focus of the show . " The Gift " , along with various other episodes during the eighth season of the show , would be the first to explore themes of death and resurrection . These sub @-@ themes emerged in the season premiere " Within " when Scully is shown Mulder 's tombstone . In " The Gift " , the theme is explored further ; not only is Doggett mortally wounded and then resurrected , the story behind Mulder 's inoperable brain tumor is also explored . In " Deadalive " , the theme reappears in full @-@ force : Billy Miles is found dead but resurrects , Mulder is buried for three months , and later , is brought back to life . This sub @-@ theme would continue well into the ninth season , in entries such as " Audrey Pauley " . 
 The episode makes heavy use of a medicine wheel . Doggett first discovers this symbol on the unknown grave that he digs up . The wheel is a Native American symbol common in folklore that is considered sacred ; although the size and shape varies , it usually consists of a central stone or cairn , concentric circles of stones , and at least two lines coming from the center of the middle stone . The stone usage has been " mired in controversy " , but most Native American scholars agree that it represents the " synthesis and wholeness , including concepts of renewal and rebirth " . In the episode , the symbol is similar to the " X " that is " identical to The X @-@ Files program symbol " . 
 Amy Donaldson , in her book We Want to Believe contrasted the soul eater from " The Gift " to Leonard Betts , a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " character from the fourth season episode of the same name . In the episode , Mulder and Scully investigate the supposed death and regeneration of an emergency medical technician ( EMT ) named Leonard Betts , a mutant who subsists on and can detect cancer in others , as well as regenerate severed body parts . Donaldson reasons that Betts ' condition , in which he is " riddled with cancer " but can " see the sickness within people " , is a metaphor for someone who " has let sin or evil become the regular course of life " . Although Betts can detect and consume the illness , his motives are derived from " his own self appetite " . Donaldson argues that the soul eater is the polar opposite of Betts because it takes an illness in order to help a person . This is in contrast to Betts , who takes an illness — and harms his victim in the process — in order to keep himself alive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Gift " first premiered on Fox in the United States on February 4 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 8 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 8 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 87 million households and 14 @.@ 6 million viewers overall . The episode ranked as the 35th most @-@ watched episode for the week ending February 4 . The episode subsequently debuted in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on May 19 , 2002 . Furthermore , because this was Duchovny 's first episode since the season opener , Fox heavily promoted the promo spots on television ; in the clip the announcer noted that " David Duchovny returns to The X @-@ Files " in the episode . In part , the episode was heavily promoted because it occurred during the February Sweeps , a time in which Nielsen processes approximately 2 million paper diaries from households across the country to collect viewing information . On November 4 , 2003 , the episode was released as part of the eighth season DVD box set . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely mixed . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " and called it " a great monster story , and my favorite of what I 've seen of [ season eight ] so far . " He argued that the episode was " so effective " because it " isn 't just the inversion of the monster / normal personal dichotomy ; the show has pulled that trick before , and while it tries to play coy about the true nature of the soul eater at first , it 's not hard to recognize who the real villain is . " Handlen also wrote that the episode both " forces the audience to identify more strongly with Doggett " and made good use of Anderson 's absence . Meghan Deans of Tor.com felt that , while " the tale of the soul eater may have been a little rushed and a little sloppy " , the episode itself " has a spark to it [ which is the ] spark of the absent , the drive of the missing . The feeling that we ’ re all here for a reason , and that the show wants to live . " 
 Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a " B + " and applauded the return of Duchovny , writing , " welcome back , [ ... ] you magnificent bastard . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations wrote a mixed review of the episode . On one hand , he praised the feel of the episode , writing , " in many ways , this was an episode that brought back the intensity , magic , and the power of The X @-@ Files that I have been missing throughout this most mundane of seasons . " In this manner , Kessenich felt that Doggett became " part of The X @-@ Files for the first time . " However , Kessenich also felt that the plot involving Mulder 's terminal brain disease was a mis @-@ step , noting that Mulder would have never kept something so serious and personal from Scully . He wrote , " a year ago , Mulder was not dying [ but ] what we once knew as truth has suddenly been replaced with a lie . " George Avalos and Michael Liedtke of the Contra Costa Times called the entry " one of the season 's more engaging episodes " and wrote positively of the " intriguing possibilities " that it set up for the final part of the season . They were also positive about the manner in which Doggett and Mulder were able to connect in " some mystical way " . However , Avalos and Liedtke were critical of the episode 's placement , noting that it would have worked better had it been the " fourth or fifth episode of the season " , as opposed to the eighth . Furthermore , they negatively wrote about the revelation that Mulder was suffering from a terminal brain disease , calling it a " monumental story " curve that did not bother " to connect all the dots behind " it . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five . Despite calling the episode " different " , the two wrote that the story involving Mulder was " not very satisfying " . In addition , the two called the finale " problematic " because it featured Skinner and Doggett suppressing the truth , a thematic choice that goes against the spirit of the series . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris criticized Doggett 's role , noting that " you would think after this even he would become a raging believer , but no , he 's not changed one bit . " Marisa Guthrie of the Boston Herald derided the fact that Duchovny was given such little amounts of screen time . Furthermore , she was critical that Doggett remained a skeptic at the end of the episode . 
 = Augustus = 
 Augustus ( Latin : <unk> Caesar <unk> <unk> Augustus ; 23 September 63 BC – 19 August 14 AD ) was the founder of the Roman Empire and its first Emperor , ruling from 27 BC until his death in AD 14 . 
 He was born Gaius Octavius into an old and wealthy equestrian branch of the plebeian <unk> family . His maternal great @-@ uncle Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC , and Octavius was named in Caesar 's will as his adopted son and heir , then known as Octavianus ( Anglicized as Octavian ) . He , Mark Antony , and Marcus Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate to defeat the assassins of Caesar . Following their victory at Philippi , the Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic among themselves and ruled as military dictators . The Triumvirate was eventually torn apart under the competing ambitions of its members . Lepidus was driven into exile and stripped of his position , and Antony committed suicide following his defeat at the Battle of Actium by Octavian in 31 BC . 
 After the demise of the Second Triumvirate , Augustus restored the outward facade of the free Republic , with governmental power vested in the Roman Senate , the executive magistrates , and the legislative assemblies . In reality , however , he retained his autocratic power over the Republic as a military dictator . By law , Augustus held a collection of powers granted to him for life by the Senate , including supreme military command , and those of tribune and censor . It took several years for Augustus to develop the framework within which a formally republican state could be led under his sole rule . He rejected monarchical titles , and instead called himself Princeps <unk> ( " First Citizen of the State " ) . The resulting constitutional framework became known as the Principate , the first phase of the Roman Empire . 
 The reign of Augustus initiated an era of relative peace known as the Pax Romana ( The Roman Peace ) . The Roman world was largely free from large @-@ scale conflict for more than two centuries , despite continuous wars of imperial expansion on the Empire 's frontiers and one year @-@ long civil war over the imperial succession . Augustus dramatically enlarged the Empire , annexing Egypt , Dalmatia , Pannonia , Noricum , and Raetia ; expanding possessions in Africa ; expanding into Germania ; and completing the conquest of Hispania . 
 Beyond the frontiers , he secured the Empire with a buffer region of client states and made peace with the Parthian Empire through diplomacy . He reformed the Roman system of taxation , developed networks of roads with an official courier system , established a standing army , established the Praetorian Guard , created official police and fire @-@ fighting services for Rome , and rebuilt much of the city during his reign . 
 Augustus died in AD 14 at the age of 75 . He may have died from natural causes , although there were unconfirmed rumors that his wife Livia poisoned him . He was succeeded as Emperor by his adopted son ( also stepson and former son @-@ in @-@ law ) Tiberius . 
 = = Name = = 
 Augustus ( / <unk> / ; Classical Latin : [ <unk> ] ) was known by many names throughout his life : 
 At birth , he was named Gaius Octavius after his biological father . Historians typically refer to him simply as Octavius ( or Octavian ) between his birth in 63 until his adoption by Julius Caesar in 44 BC ( after Julius Caesar 's death ) . 
 Upon his adoption , he took Caesar 's name and became Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus in accordance with Roman adoption naming standards . He quickly dropped " Octavianus " from his name , and his contemporaries typically referred to him as " Caesar " during this period ; historians , however , refer to him as Octavian between 44 BC and 27 BC . 
 In 42 BC , Octavian began the Temple of Divus Iulius or Temple of the Comet Star and added Divi Filius ( Son of the Divine ) to his name in order to strengthen his political ties to Caesar 's former soldiers by following the deification of Caesar , becoming Gaius Julius Caesar Divi Filius . 
 In 38 BC , Octavian replaced his praenomen " Gaius " and nomen " Julius " with Imperator , the title by which troops hailed their leader after military success , officially becoming Imperator Caesar Divi Filius . 
 In 27 BC , following his defeat of Mark Antony and Cleopatra , the Roman Senate voted new titles for him , officially becoming Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus . It is the events of 27 BC from which he obtained his traditional name of Augustus , which historians use in reference to him from 27 BC until his death in AD 14 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 While his paternal family was from the town of Velletri , approximately 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from Rome , Augustus was born in the city of Rome on 23 September 63 BC . He was born at Ox Head , a small property on the Palatine Hill , very close to the Roman Forum . He was given the name Gaius Octavius <unk> , his cognomen possibly commemorating his father 's victory at Thurii over a rebellious band of slaves . 
 Due to the crowded nature of Rome at the time , Octavius was taken to his father 's home village at Velletri to be raised . Octavius only mentions his father 's equestrian family briefly in his memoirs . His paternal great @-@ grandfather Gaius Octavius was a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War . His grandfather had served in several local political offices . His father , also named Gaius Octavius , had been governor of Macedonia . His mother , Atia , was the niece of Julius Caesar . 
 In 59 BC , when he was four years old , his father died . His mother married a former governor of Syria , Lucius Marcius Philippus . Philippus claimed descent from Alexander the Great , and was elected consul in 56 BC . Philippus never had much of an interest in young Octavius . Because of this , Octavius was raised by his grandmother ( and Julius Caesar 's sister ) , Julia . 
 Julia died in 52 or 51 BC , and Octavius delivered the funeral oration for his grandmother . From this point , his mother and stepfather took a more active role in raising him . He donned the toga virilis four years later , and was elected to the College of Pontiffs in 47 BC . The following year he was put in charge of the Greek games that were staged in honor of the Temple of Venus <unk> , built by Julius Caesar . According to Nicolaus of Damascus , Octavius wished to join Caesar 's staff for his campaign in Africa , but gave way when his mother protested . In 46 BC , she consented for him to join Caesar in Hispania , where he planned to fight the forces of Pompey , Caesar 's late enemy , but Octavius fell ill and was unable to travel . 
 When he had recovered , he sailed to the front , but was shipwrecked ; after coming ashore with a handful of companions , he crossed hostile territory to Caesar 's camp , which impressed his great @-@ uncle considerably . Velleius Paterculus reports that after that time , Caesar allowed the young man to share his carriage . When back in Rome , Caesar deposited a new will with the Vestal Virgins , naming Octavius as the prime beneficiary . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 = = = Heir to Caesar = = = 
 Octavius was studying and undergoing military training in Apollonia , Illyria , when Julius Caesar was killed on the Ides of March ( 15 March ) 44 BC . He rejected the advice of some army officers to take refuge with the troops in Macedonia and sailed to Italy to ascertain whether he had any potential political fortunes or security . Caesar had no living legitimate children under Roman law , and so had adopted Octavius , his grand @-@ nephew , making him his primary heir . Mark Antony later charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar through sexual favours , though Suetonius describes Antony 's accusation as political slander . After landing at <unk> near Brundisium , Octavius learned the contents of Caesar 's will , and only then did he decide to become Caesar 's political heir as well as heir to two @-@ thirds of his estate . 
 Upon his adoption , Octavius assumed his great @-@ uncle 's name Gaius Julius Caesar . Roman citizens adopted into a new family usually retained their old nomen in cognomen form ( e.g. , Octavianus for one who had been an Octavius , Aemilianus for one who had been an Aemilius , etc . ) . However , though some of his contemporaries did , there is no evidence that Octavius ever himself officially used the name Octavianus , as it would have made his modest origins too obvious . Historians usually refer to the new Caesar as Octavian during the time between his adoption and his assumption of the name Augustus in 27 BC in order to avoid confusing the dead dictator with his heir . 
 Octavian could not rely on his limited funds to make a successful entry into the upper echelons of the Roman political hierarchy . After a warm welcome by Caesar 's soldiers at Brundisium , Octavian demanded a portion of the funds that were allotted by Caesar for the intended war against Parthia in the Middle East . This amounted to 700 million sesterces stored at Brundisium , the staging ground in Italy for military operations in the east . 
 A later senatorial investigation into the disappearance of the public funds took no action against Octavian , since he subsequently used that money to raise troops against the Senate 's arch enemy Mark Antony . Octavian made another bold move in 44 BC when , without official permission , he appropriated the annual tribute that had been sent from Rome 's Near Eastern province to Italy . 
 Octavian began to bolster his personal forces with Caesar 's veteran legionaries and with troops designated for the Parthian war , gathering support by emphasizing his status as heir to Caesar . On his march to Rome through Italy , Octavian 's presence and newly acquired funds attracted many , winning over Caesar 's former veterans stationed in Campania . By June , he had gathered an army of 3 @,@ 000 loyal veterans , paying each a salary of 500 denarii . 
 = = = Growing tensions = = = 
 Arriving in Rome on 6 May 44 BC , Octavian found consul Mark Antony , Caesar 's former colleague , in an uneasy truce with the dictator 's assassins . They had been granted a general amnesty on 17 March , yet Antony succeeded in driving most of them out of Rome . This was due to his " inflammatory " eulogy given at Caesar 's funeral , mounting public opinion against the assassins . 
 Mark Antony was amassing political support , but Octavian still had opportunity to rival him as the leading member of the faction supporting Caesar . Mark Antony had lost the support of many Romans and supporters of Caesar when he initially opposed the motion to elevate Caesar to divine status . Octavian failed to persuade Antony to relinquish Caesar 's money to him . During the summer , he managed to win support from Caesarian sympathizers , however , who saw the younger heir as the lesser evil and hoped to manipulate him , or to bear with him during their efforts to get rid of Antony . 
 Octavian began to make common cause with the <unk> , the former enemies of Caesar . In September , the leading <unk> orator Marcus Tullius Cicero began to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the Republican order . With opinion in Rome turning against him and his year of consular power nearing its end , Antony attempted to pass laws that would lend him control over Cisalpine Gaul , which had been assigned as part of his province , from Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus , one of Caesar 's assassins . 
 Octavian meanwhile built up a private army in Italy by recruiting Caesarian veterans and , on 28 November , he won over two of Antony 's legions with the enticing offer of monetary gain . In the face of Octavian 's large and capable force , Antony saw the danger of staying in Rome and , to the relief of the Senate , he fled to Cisalpine Gaul , which was to be handed to him on 1 January . 
 = = = First conflict with Antony = = = 
 Decimus Brutus refused to give up Cisalpine Gaul , so Antony besieged him at Mutina . Antony rejected the resolutions passed by the Senate to stop the violence , as the Senate had no army of its own to challenge him . This provided an opportunity for Octavian , who already was known to have armed forces . Cicero also defended Octavian against Antony 's taunts about Octavian 's lack of noble lineage and aping of Julius Caesar 's name , stating " we have no more brilliant example of traditional piety among our youth . " 
 At the urging of Cicero , the Senate inducted Octavian as senator on 1 January 43 BC , yet he also was given the power to vote alongside the former consuls . In addition , Octavian was granted <unk> imperium ( commanding power ) which legalized his command of troops , sending him to relieve the siege along with Hirtius and Pansa ( the consuls for 43 BC ) . In April 43 BC , Antony 's forces were defeated at the battles of Forum Gallorum and Mutina , forcing Antony to retreat to Transalpine Gaul . Both consuls were killed , however , leaving Octavian in sole command of their armies . 
 The senate heaped many more rewards on Decimus Brutus than on Octavian for defeating Antony , then attempted to give command of the consular legions to Decimus Brutus — yet Octavian decided not to cooperate . Instead , Octavian stayed in the Po Valley and refused to aid any further offensive against Antony . In July , an embassy of centurions sent by Octavian entered Rome and demanded that he receive the consulship left vacant by Hirtius and Pansa . 
 Octavian also demanded that the decree should be rescinded which declared Antony a public enemy . When this was refused , he marched on the city with eight legions . He encountered no military opposition in Rome , and on 19 August 43 BC was elected consul with his relative Quintus <unk> as co @-@ consul . Meanwhile , Antony formed an alliance with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus , another leading Caesarian . 
 = = = Second Triumvirate = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In a meeting near Bologna in October 43 BC , Octavian , Antony , and Lepidus formed a junta called the Second Triumvirate . This explicit arrogation of special powers lasting five years was then supported by law passed by the plebs , unlike the unofficial First Triumvirate formed by Pompey , Julius Caesar , and Marcus Licinius Crassus . The triumvirs then set in motion proscriptions in which 300 senators and 2 @,@ 000 equites allegedly were branded as outlaws and deprived of their property and , for those who failed to escape , their lives . 
 The estimation that 300 senators were proscribed was presented by Appian , although his earlier contemporary Livy asserted that only 130 senators had been proscribed . This decree issued by the triumvirate was motivated in part by a need to raise money to pay the salaries of their troops for the upcoming conflict against Caesar 's assassins , Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus . Rewards for their arrest gave incentive for Romans to capture those proscribed , while the assets and properties of those arrested were seized by the triumvirs . 
 Contemporary Roman historians provide conflicting reports as to which triumvir was more responsible for the proscriptions and killing . However , the sources agree that enacting the proscriptions was a means by all three factions to eliminate political enemies . Marcus Velleius Paterculus asserted that Octavian tried to avoid proscribing officials whereas Lepidus and Antony were to blame for initiating them . Cassius Dio defended Octavian as trying to spare as many as possible , whereas Antony and Lepidus , being older and involved in politics longer , had many more enemies to deal with . 
 This claim was rejected by Appian , who maintained that Octavian shared an equal interest with Lepidus and Antony in eradicating his enemies . Suetonius presented the case that Octavian , although reluctant at first to proscribe officials , nonetheless pursued his enemies with more rigor than the other triumvirs . Plutarch described the proscriptions as a ruthless and cutthroat swapping of friends and family among Antony , Lepidus , and Octavian . For example , Octavian allowed the proscription of his ally Cicero , Antony the proscription of his maternal uncle Lucius Julius Caesar ( the consul of 64 BC ) , and Lepidus his brother Paullus . 
 = = = = Battle of Philippi and division of territory = = = = 
 On 1 January 42 BC , the Senate posthumously recognized Julius Caesar as a divinity of the Roman state , Divus Iulius . Octavian was able to further his cause by emphasizing the fact that he was Divi filius , " Son of God " . Antony and Octavian then sent 28 legions by sea to face the armies of Brutus and Cassius , who had built their base of power in Greece . After two battles at Philippi in Macedonia in October 42 , the Caesarian army was victorious and Brutus and Cassius committed suicide . Mark Antony later used the examples of these battles as a means to belittle Octavian , as both battles were decisively won with the use of Antony 's forces . In addition to claiming responsibility for both victories , Antony also branded Octavian as a coward for handing over his direct military control to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa instead . 
 After Philippi , a new territorial arrangement was made among the members of the Second Triumvirate . Gaul and the provinces of Hispania and Italia were placed in the hands of Octavian . Antony traveled east to Egypt where he allied himself with Queen Cleopatra VII , the former lover of Julius Caesar and mother of Caesar 's infant son <unk> . Lepidus was left with the province of Africa , stymied by Antony , who conceded Hispania to Octavian instead . 
 Octavian was left to decide where in Italy to settle the tens of thousands of veterans of the Macedonian campaign , whom the triumvirs had promised to discharge . The tens of thousands who had fought on the republican side with Brutus and Cassius could easily ally with a political opponent of Octavian if not appeased , and they also required land . There was no more government @-@ controlled land to allot as settlements for their soldiers , so Octavian had to choose one of two options : alienating many Roman citizens by confiscating their land , or alienating many Roman soldiers who could mount a considerable opposition against him in the Roman heartland . Octavian chose the former . There were as many as eighteen Roman towns affected by the new settlements , with entire populations driven out or at least given partial evictions . 
 = = = = Rebellion and marriage alliances = = = = 
 There was widespread dissatisfaction with Octavian over these settlements of his soldiers , and this encouraged many to rally at the side of Lucius Antonius , who was brother of Mark Antony and supported by a majority in the Senate . Meanwhile , Octavian asked for a divorce from <unk> <unk> , the daughter of Fulvia ( Mark Antony 's wife ) and her first husband Publius Clodius Pulcher . He returned <unk> to her mother , claiming that their marriage had never been consummated . Fulvia decided to take action . Together with Lucius Antonius , she raised an army in Italy to fight for Antony 's rights against Octavian . Lucius and Fulvia took a political and martial gamble in opposing Octavian , however , since the Roman army still depended on the triumvirs for their salaries . Lucius and his allies ended up in a defensive siege at <unk> ( modern Perugia ) , where Octavian forced them into surrender in early 40 BC . 
 Lucius and his army were spared , due to his kinship with Antony , the strongman of the East , while Fulvia was exiled to Sicyon . Octavian showed no mercy , however , for the mass of allies loyal to Lucius ; on 15 March , the anniversary of Julius Caesar 's assassination , he had 300 Roman senators and equestrians executed for allying with Lucius . <unk> also was pillaged and burned as a warning for others . This bloody event sullied Octavian 's reputation and was criticized by many , such as Augustan poet Sextus Propertius . 
 Sextus Pompeius was the son of First Triumvir Pompey and still a renegade general following Julius Caesar 's victory over his father . He was established in Sicily and Sardinia as part of an agreement reached with the Second Triumvirate in 39 BC . Both Antony and Octavian were vying for an alliance with Pompeius , who was a member of the republican party , ironically , not the Caesarian faction . Octavian succeeded in a temporary alliance in 40 BC when he married Scribonia , a daughter of Lucius Scribonius <unk> who was a follower of Sextus Pompeius as well as his father @-@ in @-@ law . Scribonia gave birth to Octavian 's only natural child , Julia , who was born the same day that he divorced her to marry Livia Drusilla , little more than a year after their marriage . 
 While in Egypt , Antony had been engaged in an affair with Cleopatra and had fathered three children with her . Aware of his deteriorating relationship with Octavian , Antony left Cleopatra ; he sailed to Italy in 40 BC with a large force to oppose Octavian , laying siege to Brundisium . This new conflict proved untenable for both Octavian and Antony , however . Their centurions , who had become important figures politically , refused to fight due to their Caesarian cause , while the legions under their command followed suit . Meanwhile , in Sicyon , Antony 's wife Fulvia died of a sudden illness while Antony was en route to meet her . Fulvia 's death and the mutiny of their centurions allowed the two remaining triumvirs to effect a reconciliation . 
 In the autumn of 40 , Octavian and Antony approved the Treaty of Brundisium , by which Lepidus would remain in Africa , Antony in the East , Octavian in the West . The Italian peninsula was left open to all for the recruitment of soldiers , but in reality , this provision was useless for Antony in the East . To further cement relations of alliance with Mark Antony , Octavian gave his sister , Octavia Minor , in marriage to Antony in late 40 BC . During their marriage , Octavia gave birth to two daughters ( known as Antonia Major and Antonia Minor ) . 
 = = = = War with Pompeius = = = = 
 Sextus Pompeius threatened Octavian in Italy by denying shipments of grain through the Mediterranean to the peninsula . Pompeius ' own son was put in charge as naval commander in the effort to cause widespread famine in Italy . Pompeius ' control over the sea prompted him to take on the name <unk> filius , " son of Neptune " . A temporary peace agreement was reached in 39 BC with the treaty of Misenum ; the blockade on Italy was lifted once Octavian granted Pompeius Sardinia , Corsica , Sicily , and the Peloponnese , and ensured him a future position as consul for 35 BC . 
 The territorial agreement between the triumvirate and Sextus Pompeius began to crumble once Octavian divorced Scribonia and married Livia on 17 January 38 BC . One of Pompeius ' naval commanders betrayed him and handed over Corsica and Sardinia to Octavian . Octavian lacked the resources to confront Pompeius alone , however , so an agreement was reached with the Second Triumvirate 's extension for another five @-@ year period beginning in 37 BC . 
 In supporting Octavian , Antony expected to gain support for his own campaign against Parthia , desiring to avenge Rome 's defeat at Carrhae in 53 BC . In an agreement reached at Tarentum , Antony provided 120 ships for Octavian to use against Pompeius , while Octavian was to send 20 @,@ 000 legionaries to Antony for use against Parthia . Octavian sent only a tenth of those promised , however , which Antony viewed as an intentional provocation . 
 Octavian and Lepidus launched a joint operation against Sextus in Sicily in 36 BC . Despite setbacks for Octavian , the naval fleet of Sextus Pompeius was almost entirely destroyed on 3 September by general Agrippa at the naval Battle of <unk> . Sextus fled to the east with his remaining forces , where he was captured and executed in Miletus by one of Antony 's generals the following year . As Lepidus and Octavian accepted the surrender of Pompeius ' troops , Lepidus attempted to claim Sicily for himself , ordering Octavian to leave . Lepidus ' troops deserted him , however , and defected to Octavian since they were weary of fighting and were enticed by Octavian 's promises of money . 
 Lepidus surrendered to Octavian and was permitted to retain the office of pontifex maximus ( head of the college of priests ) , but was ejected from the Triumvirate , his public career at an end , and effectively was exiled to a villa at Cape <unk> in Italy . The Roman dominions were now divided between Octavian in the West and Antony in the East . Octavian ensured Rome 's citizens of their rights to property in order to maintain peace and stability in his portion of the Empire . This time , he settled his discharged soldiers outside of Italy , while also returning 30 @,@ 000 slaves to their former Roman owners — slaves who had fled to join Pompeius ' army and navy . Octavian had the Senate grant him , his wife , and his sister tribunal immunity , or <unk> , in order to ensure his own safety and that of Livia and Octavia once he returned to Rome . 
 = = = = War with Antony = = = = 
 Meanwhile , Antony 's campaign turned disastrous against Parthia , tarnishing his image as a leader , and the mere 2 @,@ 000 legionaries sent by Octavian to Antony were hardly enough to replenish his forces . On the other hand , Cleopatra could restore his army to full strength ; he already was engaged in a romantic affair with her , so he decided to send Octavia back to Rome . Octavian used this to spread propaganda implying that Antony was becoming less than Roman because he rejected a legitimate Roman spouse for an " Oriental paramour " . In 36 BC , Octavian used a political ploy to make himself look less autocratic and Antony more the villain by proclaiming that the civil wars were coming to an end , and that he would step down as triumvir — if only Antony would do the same . Antony refused . 
 Roman troops captured the Kingdom of Armenia in 34 BC , and Antony made his son Alexander Helios the ruler of Armenia . He also awarded the title " Queen of Kings " to Cleopatra , acts that Octavian used to convince the Roman Senate that Antony had ambitions to diminish the preeminence of Rome . Octavian became consul once again on 1 January 33 BC , and he opened the following session in the Senate with a vehement attack on Antony 's grants of titles and territories to his relatives and to his queen . 
 The breach between Antony and Octavian prompted a large portion of the Senators , as well as both of that year 's consuls , to leave Rome and defect to Antony . However , Octavian received two key deserters from Antony in the autumn of 32 BC : <unk> Plancus and Marcus Titius . These defectors gave Octavian the information that he needed to confirm with the Senate all the accusations that he made against Antony . 
 Octavian forcibly entered the temple of the Vestal Virgins and seized Antony 's secret will , which he promptly publicized . The will would have given away Roman @-@ conquered territories as kingdoms for his sons to rule , and designated Alexandria as the site for a tomb for him and his queen . In late 32 BC , the Senate officially revoked Antony 's powers as consul and declared war on Cleopatra 's regime in Egypt . 
 In early 31 BC , Antony and Cleopatra were temporarily stationed in Greece when Octavian gained a preliminary victory : the navy successfully ferried troops across the Adriatic Sea under the command of Agrippa . Agrippa cut off Antony and Cleopatra 's main force from their supply routes at sea , while Octavian landed on the mainland opposite the island of Corcyra ( modern Corfu ) and marched south . Trapped on land and sea , deserters of Antony 's army fled to Octavian 's side daily while Octavian 's forces were comfortable enough to make preparations . 
 Antony 's fleet sailed through the bay of Actium on the western coast of Greece in a desperate attempt to break free of the naval blockade . It was there that Antony 's fleet faced the much larger fleet of smaller , more maneuverable ships under commanders Agrippa and Gaius <unk> in the battle of Actium on 2 September 31 BC . Antony and his remaining forces were spared only due to a last @-@ ditch effort by Cleopatra 's fleet that had been waiting nearby . 
 Octavian pursued them and defeated their forces in Alexandria on 1 August 30 BC — after which Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide . Antony fell on his own sword and was taken by his soldiers back to Alexandria where he died in Cleopatra 's arms . Cleopatra died soon after , reputedly by the venomous bite of an asp or by poison . Octavian had exploited his position as Caesar 's heir to further his own political career , and he was well aware of the dangers in allowing another person to do so the same . He , therefore , followed the advice of Arius Didymus that " two Caesars are one too many " , ordering <unk> to be killed ( Julius Caesar 's son by Cleopatra ) , while sparing Cleopatra 's children by Antony , with the exception of Antony 's older son . 
 Octavian had previously shown little mercy to surrendered enemies and acted in ways that had proven unpopular with the Roman people , yet he was given credit for pardoning many of his opponents after the Battle of Actium . 
 = = Change to Augustus = = 
 After Actium and the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra , Octavian was in a position to rule the entire Republic under an unofficial principate — but he had to achieve this through incremental power gains . He did so by courting the Senate and the people while upholding the republican traditions of Rome , appearing that he was not aspiring to dictatorship or monarchy . Marching into Rome , Octavian and Marcus Agrippa were elected as dual consuls by the Senate . 
 Years of civil war had left Rome in a state of near lawlessness , but the Republic was not prepared to accept the control of Octavian as a despot . At the same time , Octavian could not simply give up his authority without risking further civil wars among the Roman generals and , even if he desired no position of authority whatsoever , his position demanded that he look to the well @-@ being of the city of Rome and the Roman provinces . Octavian 's aims from this point forward were to return Rome to a state of stability , traditional legality , and civility by lifting the overt political pressure imposed on the courts of law and ensuring free elections — in name at least . 
 = = = First settlement = = = 
 In 27 BC , Octavian made a show of returning full power to the Roman Senate and relinquishing his control of the Roman provinces and their armies . Under his consulship , however , the Senate had little power in initiating legislation by introducing bills for senatorial debate . Octavian was no longer in direct control of the provinces and their armies , but he retained the loyalty of active duty soldiers and veterans alike . The careers of many clients and adherents depended on his patronage , as his financial power was unrivaled in the Roman Republic . Historian Werner Eck states : 
 The sum of his power derived first of all from various powers of office delegated to him by the Senate and people , secondly from his immense private fortune , and thirdly from numerous patron @-@ client relationships he established with individuals and groups throughout the Empire . All of them taken together formed the basis of his auctoritas , which he himself emphasized as the foundation of his political actions . 
 To a large extent , the public were aware of the vast financial resources that Augustus commanded . He failed to encourage enough senators to finance the building and maintenance of networks of roads in Italy in 20 BC , but he undertook direct responsibility for them . This was publicized on the Roman currency issued in 16 BC , after he donated vast amounts of money to the aerarium Saturni , the public treasury . 
 According to H. H. <unk> , however , Augustus 's power was based on the exercise of " a predominant military power and ... the ultimate sanction of his authority was force , however much the fact was disguised . " 
 The Senate proposed to Octavian , the victor of Rome 's civil wars , that he once again assume command of the provinces . The Senate 's proposal was a ratification of Octavian 's extra @-@ constitutional power . Through the Senate , Octavian was able to continue the appearance of a still @-@ functional constitution . Feigning reluctance , he accepted a ten @-@ year responsibility of overseeing provinces that were considered chaotic . 
 The provinces ceded to him for that ten @-@ year period comprised much of the conquered Roman world , including all of Hispania and Gaul , Syria , Cilicia , Cyprus , and Egypt . Moreover , command of these provinces provided Octavian with control over the majority of Rome 's legions . 
 While Octavian acted as consul in Rome , he dispatched senators to the provinces under his command as his representatives to manage provincial affairs and ensure that his orders were carried out . The provinces not under Octavian 's control were overseen by governors chosen by the Roman Senate . Octavian became the most powerful political figure in the city of Rome and in most of its provinces , but he did not have sole monopoly on political and martial power . 
 The Senate still controlled North Africa , an important regional producer of grain , as well as Illyria and Macedonia , two <unk> strategic regions with several legions . However , the Senate had control of only five or six legions distributed among three senatorial proconsuls , compared to the twenty legions under the control of Augustus , and their control of these regions did not amount to any political or military challenge to Octavian . 
 The Senate 's control over some of the Roman provinces helped maintain a republican façade for the autocratic Principate . Also , Octavian 's control of entire provinces followed Republican @-@ era precedents for the objective of securing peace and creating stability , in which such prominent Romans as Pompey had been granted similar military powers in times of crisis and instability . 
 On 16 January 27 BC the Senate gave Octavian the new titles of Augustus and Princeps . Augustus is from the Latin word <unk> ( meaning to increase ) and can be translated as " the illustrious one " . It was a title of religious authority rather than political authority . According to Roman religious beliefs , the title symbolized a stamp of authority over humanity — and in fact nature — that went beyond any constitutional definition of his status . After the harsh methods employed in consolidating his control , the change in name served to demarcate his benign reign as Augustus from his reign of terror as Octavian . 
 His new title of Augustus was also more favorable than Romulus , the previous one which he styled for himself in reference to the story of Romulus and Remus ( founders of Rome ) , which symbolized a second founding of Rome . The title of Romulus was associated too strongly with notions of monarchy and kingship , an image that Octavian tried to avoid . Princeps comes from the Latin phrase primum caput , " the first head " , originally meaning the oldest or most distinguished senator whose name would appear first on the senatorial roster . In the case of Augustus , however , it became an almost regnal title for a leader who was first in charge . Princeps had also been a title under the Republic for those who had served the state well ; for example , Pompey had held the title . 
 Augustus also styled himself as Imperator Caesar <unk> filius , " Commander Caesar son of the deified one " . With this title , he boasted his familial link to deified Julius Caesar , and the use of Imperator signified a permanent link to the Roman tradition of victory . The word Caesar was merely a cognomen for one branch of the Julian family , yet Augustus transformed Caesar into a new family line that began with him . 
 Augustus was granted the right to hang the corona <unk> above his door , the " civic crown " made from oak , and to have laurels drape his doorposts . This crown was usually held above the head of a Roman general during a triumph , with the individual holding the crown charged to continually repeat to the general " memento mori " , or " Remember that you are mortal " . Additionally , laurel wreaths were important in several state ceremonies , and crowns of laurel were rewarded to champions of athletic , racing , and dramatic contests . Thus , both the laurel and the oak were integral symbols of Roman religion and statecraft ; placing them on Augustus ' doorposts was tantamount to declaring his home the capital . 
 However , Augustus renounced flaunting insignia of power such as holding a scepter , wearing a diadem , or wearing the golden crown and purple toga of his predecessor Julius Caesar . If he refused to symbolize his power by donning and bearing these items on his person , the Senate nonetheless awarded him with a golden shield displayed in the meeting hall of the Curia , bearing the inscription virtus , pietas , clementia , <unk> — " valor , piety , clemency , and justice . " 
 = = = Second settlement = = = 
 By 23 BC , some of the un @-@ Republican implications were becoming apparent concerning the settlement of 27 BC . Augustus ' policy of holding of an annual consulate drew attention to his dominance over the Roman political system , at the same time cutting in half the opportunities for others to achieve what was still purported to be the head of the Roman state . Further , he was causing political problems by desiring to have his nephew Marcus Claudius Marcellus follow in his footsteps and eventually assume the Principate in his turn , alienating his three biggest supporters – Agrippa , Maecenas , and Livia . Feeling pressure from his own core group of adherents , Augustus turned to the Senate for help . 
 He appointed noted Republican Calpurnius Piso for co @-@ consul in 23 BC , after his choice Aulus Terentius Varro Murena was executed as part of the Marcus Primus Affair , in an attempt to bolster his support there , especially with the Republicans . ( Murena had fought against Julius Caesar and supported Cassius and Brutus . ) 
 In the late spring Augustus suffered a severe illness , and on his supposed deathbed made arrangements that would ensure the continuation of the Principate in some form , while at the same time put into doubt the senators ' suspicions of his anti @-@ republicanism . Augustus prepared to hand down his signet ring to his favored general Agrippa . However , Augustus handed over to his co @-@ consul Piso all of his official documents , an account of public finances , and authority over listed troops in the provinces while Augustus ' supposedly favored nephew Marcellus came away empty @-@ handed . This was a surprise to many who believed Augustus would have named an heir to his position as an unofficial emperor . 
 Augustus bestowed only properties and possessions to his designated heirs , as an obvious system of institutionalized imperial inheritance would have provoked resistance and hostility among the republican @-@ minded Romans fearful of monarchy . With regards to the Principate , it was obvious to Augustus that Marcellus was not ready to take on his position ; nonetheless , by giving his signet ring to Agrippa , it was Augustus ' intent to signal to the legions that Agrippa was to be his successor , and that no matter what the constitutional rules were , they would continue to obey Agrippa . 
 Soon after his bout of illness subsided , Augustus gave up his annual consulship . The only other times Augustus would serve as consul would be in the years 5 and 2 BC , both times to introduce his grandsons into public life . This was a clever ploy by Augustus ; his ceasing to perennially be one of two annual consuls allowed aspiring senators a better chance to fill that position , while at the same time Augustus could exercise wider patronage within the senatorial class . Although Augustus had resigned as consul , he desired to retain his consular imperium not just in his provinces but throughout the empire . This desire , along with the Marcus Primus Affair , led to a second compromise between him and the Senate known as the Second Settlement . 
 = = = Primary reasons for the Second settlement = = = 
 The primary reasons for the Second Settlement were as follows . First , after Augustus relinquished the annual consulship , he was no longer in an official position to rule the state , yet his dominant position remained unchanged over his Roman , ' imperial ' provinces where he was still a proconsul . When he annually held the office of consul , he had the power to intervene with the affairs of the other provincial proconsuls appointed by the Senate throughout the empire , when he deemed necessary . When he relinquished his annual consulship , he legally lost this power because his proconsular powers applied only to his imperial provinces . Augustus wanted to keep this power . 
 A second problem later arose showing the need for the Second Settlement in what became known as the " Marcus Primus Affair " . In late 24 or early 23 BC , charges were brought against Marcus Primus , the former proconsul ( governor ) of Macedonia , for waging a war without prior approval of the Senate on the <unk> kingdom of Thrace , whose king was a Roman ally . He was defended by Lucius <unk> Varro Murena , who told the trial that his client had received specific instructions from Augustus , ordering him to attack the client state . Later , Primus testified that the orders came from the recently deceased Marcellus . Such orders , had they been given , would have been considered a breach of the Senate 's prerogative under the Constitutional settlement of 27 BC and its aftermath — i.e. , before Augustus was granted imperium proconsulare maius — as Macedonia was a Senatorial province under the Senate 's jurisdiction , not an imperial province under the authority of Augustus . Such an action would have ripped away the veneer of Republican restoration as promoted by Augustus , and exposed his fraud of merely being the first citizen , a first among equals . Even worse , the involvement of Marcellus provided some measure of proof that Augustus 's policy was to have the youth take his place as Princeps , instituting a form of monarchy – accusations that had already played out . 
 The situation was so serious that Augustus himself appeared at the trial , even though he had not been called as a witness . Under oath , Augustus declared that he gave no such order . Murena disbelieved Augustus 's testimony and resented his attempt to subvert the trial by using his auctoritas . He rudely demanded to know why Augustus had turned up to a trial to which he had not been called ; Augustus replied that he came in the public interest . Although Primus was found guilty , some jurors voted to acquit , meaning that not everybody believed Augustus 's testimony , an insult to the ' August One ' . 
 The Second Constitutional Settlement was completed in part to allay confusion and formalize Augustus ' legal authority to intervene in Senatorial provinces . The Senate granted Augustus a form of general imperium proconsulare , or proconsular imperium ( power ) that applied throughout the empire , not solely to his provinces . Moreover , the Senate augmented Augustus ' proconsular imperium into imperium proconsulare maius , or proconsular imperium applicable throughout the empire that was more ( maius ) or greater than that held by the other proconsuls . This in effect gave Augustus constitutional power superior to all other proconsuls in the empire . Augustus stayed in Rome during the renewal process and provided veterans with lavish donations to gain their support , thereby ensuring that his status of proconsular imperium maius was renewed in 13 BC . 
 = = = Additional powers = = = 
 During the second settlement , Augustus was also granted the power of a tribune ( tribunicia potestas ) for life , though not the official title of tribune . For some years , Augustus had been awarded tribunicia <unk> , the immunity given to a Tribune of the Plebeians . Now he decided to assume the full powers of the magistracy , renewed annually , in perpetuity . Legally , it was closed to patricians , a status that Augustus had acquired some years earlier when adopted by Julius Caesar . This power allowed him to convene the Senate and people at will and lay business before them , to veto the actions of either the Assembly or the Senate , to preside over elections , and to speak first at any meeting . Also included in Augustus ' tribunician authority were powers usually reserved for the Roman censor ; these included the right to supervise public morals and scrutinize laws to ensure that they were in the public interest , as well as the ability to hold a census and determine the membership of the Senate . 
 With the powers of a censor , Augustus appealed to virtues of Roman patriotism by banning all attire but the classic toga while entering the Forum . There was no precedent within the Roman system for combining the powers of the tribune and the censor into a single position , nor was Augustus ever elected to the office of censor . Julius Caesar had been granted similar powers , wherein he was charged with supervising the morals of the state . However , this position did not extend to the censor 's ability to hold a census and determine the Senate 's roster . The office of the <unk> <unk> began to lose its prestige due to Augustus ' amassing of tribunal powers , so he revived its importance by making it a mandatory appointment for any plebeian desiring the praetorship . 
 Augustus was granted sole imperium within the city of Rome itself , in addition to being granted proconsular imperium maius and tribunician authority for life . Traditionally , proconsuls ( Roman province governors ) lost their proconsular " imperium " when they crossed the <unk> – the sacred boundary of Rome – and entered the city . In these situations , Augustus would have power as part of his tribunician authority but his constitutional imperium within the <unk> would be less than that of a serving consul . That would mean that , when he was in the city , he might not be the constitutional magistrate with the most authority . Thanks to his prestige or auctoritas , his wishes would usually be obeyed , but there might be some difficulty . To fill this power vacuum , the Senate voted that Augustus 's imperium proconsulare maius ( superior proconsular power ) should not lapse when he was inside the city walls . All armed forces in the city had formerly been under the control of the urban praetors and consuls , but this situation now placed them under the sole authority of Augustus . 
 In addition , the credit was given to Augustus for each subsequent Roman military victory after this time , because the majority of Rome 's armies were stationed in imperial provinces commanded by Augustus through the legatus who were deputies of the princeps in the provinces . Moreover , if a battle was fought in a Senatorial province , Augustus ' proconsular imperium maius allowed him to take command of ( or credit for ) any major military victory . This meant that Augustus was the only individual able to receive a triumph , a tradition that began with Romulus , Rome 's first King and first triumphant general . Lucius Cornelius Balbus was the last man outside Augustus ' family to receive this award in 19 BC . ( Balbus was the nephew of Julius Caesar 's great agent , who was governor of Africa and conqueror of the <unk> . ) Tiberius , Augustus ' eldest son by marriage to Livia , was the only other general to receive a triumph — for victories in Germania in 7 BC . 
 = = = Conspiracy = = = 
 Many of the political subtleties of the Second Settlement seem to have evaded the comprehension of the Plebeian class , who were Augustus ' greatest supporters and clientele . This caused them to insist upon Augustus ' participation in imperial affairs from time to time . Augustus failed to stand for election as consul in 22 BC , and fears arose once again that he was being forced from power by the aristocratic Senate . In 22 , 21 , and 19 BC , the people rioted in response , and only allowed a single consul to be elected for each of those years , ostensibly to leave the other position open for Augustus . Likewise , there was a food shortage in Rome in 22 BC which sparked panic , while many urban plebs called for Augustus to take on dictatorial powers to personally oversee the crisis . After a theatrical display of refusal before the Senate , Augustus finally accepted authority over Rome 's grain supply " by virtue of his proconsular imperium " , and ended the crisis almost immediately . It was not until AD 8 that a food crisis of this sort prompted Augustus to establish a praefectus annonae , a permanent prefect who was in charge of procuring food supplies for Rome . 
 Nevertheless , there were some who were concerned by the expansion of powers granted to Augustus by the Second Settlement , and this came to a head with the apparent conspiracy of <unk> Caepio . Some time prior to 1 September 22 BC , a certain <unk> provided Augustus with information about a conspiracy led by <unk> Caepio . Murena was named among the conspirators , the outspoken Consul who defended Primus in the Marcus Primus Affair . The conspirators were tried in absentia with Tiberius acting as prosecutor ; the jury found them guilty , but it was not a unanimous verdict . All the accused were sentenced to death for treason and executed as soon as they were captured — without ever giving testimony in their defence . Augustus ensured that the facade of Republican government continued with an effective cover @-@ up of the events . 
 In 19 BC , the Senate granted Augustus a form of ' general consular imperium ' , which was probably ' imperium <unk> maius ' , like the proconsular powers that he received in 23 BC . Like his tribune authority , the consular powers were another instance of gaining power from offices that he did not actually hold . In addition , Augustus was allowed to wear the consul 's insignia in public and before the Senate , as well as to sit in the symbolic chair between the two consuls and hold the fasces , an emblem of consular authority . This seems to have assuaged the populace ; regardless of whether or not Augustus was a consul , the importance was that he both appeared as one before the people and could exercise consular power if necessary . On 6 March 12 BC , after the death of Lepidus , he additionally took up the position of pontifex maximus , the high priest of the college of the Pontiffs , the most important position in Roman religion . On 5 February 2 BC , Augustus was also given the title pater patriae , or " father of the country " . 
 = = = Stability and staying power = = = 
 A final reason for the Second Settlement was to give the Principate constitutional stability and staying power in case something happened to Princeps Augustus . His illness of early 23 BC and the Caepio conspiracy showed that the regime 's existence hung by the thin thread of the life of one man , Augustus himself , who suffered from several severe and dangerous illnesses throughout his life . If he were to die from natural causes or fall victim to assassination , Rome could be subjected to another round of civil war . The memories of Pharsalus , the Ides of March , the proscriptions , Philippi , and Actium , barely twenty @-@ five years distant , were still vivid in the minds of many citizens . Proconsular imperium was conferred upon Agrippa for five years , similar to Augustus ' power , in order to accomplish this constitutional stability . The exact nature of the grant is uncertain but it probably covered Augustus ' imperial provinces , east and west , perhaps lacking authority over the provinces of the Senate . That came later , as did the jealously guarded tribunicia potestas . 
 Augustus ' powers were now complete . In fact , he dated his ' reign ' from the completion of the Second Settlement , July 1 , 23 BC . Almost as importantly , the Principate now had constitutional stability . Later Roman Emperors were generally limited to the powers and titles originally granted to Augustus , though often newly appointed Emperors would decline one or more of the honorifics given to Augustus in order to display humility . Just as often , as their reign progressed , Emperors would appropriate all of the titles , regardless of whether they had been granted them by the Senate . Later Emperors took to wearing the civic crown , consular insignia , and the purple robes of a Triumphant general ( toga picta ) , which became the imperial insignia well into the Byzantine era . 
 = = War and expansion = = 
 Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus chose Imperator ( " victorious commander " ) to be his first name , since he wanted to make an emphatically clear connection between himself and the notion of victory . By the year 13 , Augustus boasted 21 occasions where his troops proclaimed " imperator " as his title after a successful battle . Almost the entire fourth chapter in his publicly released memoirs of achievements known as the Res Gestae was devoted to his military victories and honors . 
 Augustus also promoted the ideal of a superior Roman civilization with a task of ruling the world ( to the extent to which the Romans knew it ) , a sentiment embodied in words that the contemporary poet Virgil attributes to a legendary ancestor of Augustus : tu <unk> imperio <unk> , Romane , memento — " Roman , remember by your strength to rule the Earth 's peoples ! " The impulse for expansionism apparently was prominent among all classes at Rome , and it is accorded divine sanction by Virgil 's Jupiter in Book 1 of the Aeneid , where Jupiter promises Rome imperium sine fine , " sovereignty without end " . 
 By the end of his reign , the armies of Augustus had conquered northern Hispania ( modern Spain and Portugal ) and the Alpine regions of Raetia and Noricum ( modern Switzerland , Bavaria , Austria , Slovenia ) , Illyricum and Pannonia ( modern Albania , Croatia , Hungary , Serbia , etc . ) , and had extended the borders of the Africa Province to the east and south . 
 Judea was added to the province of Syria when Augustus deposed Herod Archelaus , successor to client king Herod the Great ( 73 – 4 BC ) . Syria ( like Egypt after Antony ) was governed by a high prefect of the equestrian class rather than by a proconsul or legate of Augustus . 
 Again , no military effort was needed in 25 BC when Galatia ( modern Turkey ) was converted to a Roman province shortly after Amyntas of Galatia was killed by an avenging widow of a slain prince from <unk> . The rebellious tribes of Asturias and Cantabria in modern @-@ day Spain were finally quelled in 19 BC , and the territory fell under the provinces of Hispania and Lusitania . This region proved to be a major asset in funding Augustus ' future military campaigns , as it was rich in mineral deposits that could be fostered in Roman mining projects , especially the very rich gold deposits at Las <unk> . 
 Conquering the peoples of the Alps in 16 BC was another important victory for Rome , since it provided a large territorial buffer between the Roman citizens of Italy and Rome 's enemies in Germania to the north . Horace dedicated an ode to the victory , while the monument Trophy of Augustus near Monaco was built to honor the occasion . The capture of the Alpine region also served the next offensive in 12 BC , when Tiberius began the offensive against the Pannonian tribes of Illyricum , and his brother Nero Claudius Drusus moved against the Germanic tribes of the eastern Rhineland . Both campaigns were successful , as Drusus ' forces reached the Elbe River by 9 BC — though he died shortly after by falling off his horse . It was recorded that the pious Tiberius walked in front of his brother 's body all the way back to Rome . 
 To protect Rome 's eastern territories from the Parthian Empire , Augustus relied on the client states of the east to act as territorial buffers and areas that could raise their own troops for defense . To ensure security of the Empire 's eastern flank , Augustus stationed a Roman army in Syria , while his skilled stepson Tiberius negotiated with the Parthians as Rome 's diplomat to the East . Tiberius was responsible for restoring Tigranes V to the throne of the Kingdom of Armenia . 
 Yet arguably his greatest diplomatic achievement was negotiating with Phraates IV of Parthia ( 37 – 2 BC ) in 20 BC for the return of the battle standards lost by Crassus in the Battle of Carrhae , a symbolic victory and great boost of morale for Rome . Werner Eck claims that this was a great disappointment for Romans seeking to avenge Crassus ' defeat by military means . However , Maria Brosius explains that Augustus used the return of the standards as propaganda symbolizing the submission of Parthia to Rome . The event was celebrated in art such as the breastplate design on the statue Augustus of Prima Porta and in monuments such as the Temple of Mars Ultor ( ' Mars the Avenger ' ) built to house the standards . 
 Parthia had always posed a threat to Rome in the east , but the real battlefront was along the Rhine and Danube rivers . Before the final fight with Antony , Octavian 's campaigns against the tribes in Dalmatia were the first step in expanding Roman dominions to the Danube . Victory in battle was not always a permanent success , as newly conquered territories were constantly retaken by Rome 's enemies in Germania . 
 A prime example of Roman loss in battle was the Battle of Teutoburg Forest in AD 9 , where three entire legions led by Publius <unk> Varus were destroyed by Arminius , leader of the Cherusci , an apparent Roman ally . Augustus retaliated by dispatching Tiberius and Drusus to the Rhineland to pacify it , which had some success although the battle of AD 9 brought the end to Roman expansion into Germany . Roman general Germanicus took advantage of a Cherusci civil war between Arminius and <unk> ; they defeated Arminius , who fled that battle but was killed later in 21 due to treachery . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 The illness of Augustus in 23 BC brought the problem of succession to the forefront of political issues and the public . To ensure stability , he needed to designate an heir to his unique position in Roman society and government . This was to be achieved in small , undramatic , and incremental ways that did not stir senatorial fears of monarchy . If someone was to succeed Augustus ' unofficial position of power , he would have to earn it through his own publicly proven merits . 
 Some Augustan historians argue that indications pointed toward his sister 's son Marcellus , who had been quickly married to Augustus ' daughter Julia the Elder . Other historians dispute this due to Augustus ' will read aloud to the Senate while he was seriously ill in 23 BC , instead indicating a preference for Marcus Agrippa , who was Augustus ' second in charge and arguably the only one of his associates who could have controlled the legions and held the Empire together . 
 After the death of Marcellus in 23 BC , Augustus married his daughter to Agrippa . This union produced five children , three sons and two daughters : Gaius Caesar , Lucius Caesar , Vipsania Julia , Agrippina the Elder , and Postumus Agrippa , so named because he was born after Marcus Agrippa died . Shortly after the Second Settlement , Agrippa was granted a five @-@ year term of administering the eastern half of the Empire with the imperium of a proconsul and the same tribunicia potestas granted to Augustus ( although not trumping Augustus ' authority ) , his seat of governance stationed at Samos in the eastern Aegean . This granting of power showed Augustus ' favor for Agrippa , but it was also a measure to please members of his Caesarian party by allowing one of their members to share a considerable amount of power with him . 
 Augustus ' intent became apparent to make Gaius and Lucius Caesar his heirs when he adopted them as his own children . He took the consulship in 5 and 2 BC so that he could personally usher them into their political careers , and they were nominated for the consulships of AD 1 and 4 . Augustus also showed favor to his stepsons , Livia 's children from her first marriage Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus ( henceforth referred to as Drusus ) and Tiberius Claudius ( henceforth Tiberius ) , granting them military commands and public office , though seeming to favor Drusus . After Agrippa died in 12 BC , Tiberius was ordered to divorce his own wife Vipsania and marry Agrippa 's widow , Augustus ' daughter Julia — as soon as a period of mourning for Agrippa had ended . Drusus ' marriage to Antonia was considered an unbreakable affair , whereas Vipsania was " only " the daughter of the late Agrippa from his first marriage . 
 Tiberius shared in Augustus ' tribune powers as of 6 BC , but shortly thereafter went into retirement , reportedly wanting no further role in politics while he exiled himself to Rhodes . No specific reason is known for his departure , though it could have been a combination of reasons , including a failing marriage with Julia , as well as a sense of envy and exclusion over Augustus ' apparent favouring of his young grandchildren @-@ turned @-@ sons Gaius and Lucius . ( Gaius and Lucius joined the college of priests at an early age , were presented to spectators in a more favorable light , and were introduced to the army in Gaul . ) 
 After the early deaths of both Lucius and Gaius in AD 2 and 4 respectively , and the earlier death of his brother Drusus ( 9 BC ) , Tiberius was recalled to Rome in June AD 4 , where he was adopted by Augustus on the condition that he , in turn , adopt his nephew Germanicus . This continued the tradition of presenting at least two generations of heirs . In that year , Tiberius was also granted the powers of a tribune and proconsul , emissaries from foreign kings had to pay their respects to him , and by AD 13 was awarded with his second triumph and equal level of imperium with that of Augustus . 
 The only other possible claimant as heir was Postumus Agrippa , who had been exiled by Augustus in AD 7 , his banishment made permanent by senatorial decree , and Augustus officially disowned him . He certainly fell out of Augustus ' favor as an heir ; the historian Erich S. Gruen notes various contemporary sources that state Postumus Agrippa was a " vulgar young man , brutal and brutish , and of depraved character " . Postumus Agrippa was murdered at his place of exile either shortly before or after the death of Augustus . 
 On 19 August AD 14 , Augustus died while visiting Nola where his father had died . Both Tacitus and Cassius Dio wrote that Livia was rumored to have brought about Augustus ' death by poisoning fresh figs . This element features in many modern works of historical fiction pertaining to Augustus ' life , but some historians view it as likely to have been a salacious fabrication made by those who had favoured Postumus as heir , or other of Tiberius ' political enemies . Livia had long been the target of similar rumors of poisoning on the behalf of her son , most or all of which are unlikely to have been true . 
 Alternatively , it is possible that Livia did supply a poisoned fig ( she did cultivate a variety of fig named for her that Augustus is said to have enjoyed ) , but did so as a means of assisted suicide rather than murder . Augustus ' health had been in decline in the months immediately before his death , and he had made significant preparations for a smooth transition in power , having at last reluctantly settled on Tiberius as his choice of heir . It is likely that Augustus was not expected to return alive from Nola , but it seems that his health improved once there ; it has therefore been speculated that Augustus and Livia conspired to end his life at the anticipated time , having committed all political process to accepting Tiberius , in order to not endanger that transition . 
 Augustus ' famous last words were , " Have I played the part well ? Then applaud as I exit " — referring to the play @-@ acting and regal authority that he had put on as emperor . Publicly , though , his last words were , " Behold , I found Rome of clay , and leave her to you of marble . " An enormous funerary procession of mourners traveled with Augustus ' body from Nola to Rome , and on the day of his burial all public and private businesses closed for the day . Tiberius and his son Drusus delivered the eulogy while standing atop two rostra . Augustus ' body was coffin @-@ bound and cremated on a pyre close to his mausoleum . It was proclaimed that Augustus joined the company of the gods as a member of the Roman pantheon . The mausoleum was despoiled by the Goths in 410 during the Sack of Rome , and his ashes were scattered . 
 Historian D. C. A. Shotter states that Augustus ' policy of favoring the Julian family line over the Claudian might have afforded Tiberius sufficient cause to show open disdain for Augustus after the latter 's death ; instead , Tiberius was always quick to rebuke those who criticized Augustus . Shotter suggests that Augustus ' deification obliged Tiberius to suppress any open resentment that he might have harbored , coupled with Tiberius ' " extremely conservative " attitude towards religion . 
 Also , historian R. Shaw @-@ Smith points to letters of Augustus to Tiberius which display affection towards Tiberius and high regard for his military merits . Shotter states that Tiberius focused his anger and criticism on Gaius Asinius Gallus ( for marrying Vipsania after Augustus forced Tiberius to divorce her ) , as well as toward the two young Caesars , Gaius and Lucius — instead of Augustus , the real architect of his divorce and imperial demotion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Augustus ' reign laid the foundations of a regime that lasted , in one form or another , for nearly fifteen hundred years through the ultimate decline of the Western Roman Empire and until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453 . Both his adoptive surname , Caesar , and his title Augustus became the permanent titles of the rulers of the Roman Empire for fourteen centuries after his death , in use both at Old Rome and at New Rome . In many languages , Caesar became the word for Emperor , as in the German Kaiser and in the Bulgarian and subsequently Russian Tsar . The cult of Divus Augustus continued until the state religion of the Empire was changed to Christianity in 391 by Theodosius I. Consequently , there are many excellent statues and busts of the first emperor . He had composed an account of his achievements , the Res Gestae Divi Augusti , to be inscribed in bronze in front of his mausoleum . Copies of the text were inscribed throughout the Empire upon his death . The inscriptions in Latin featured translations in Greek beside it , and were inscribed on many public edifices , such as the temple in Ankara dubbed the Monumentum <unk> , called the " queen of inscriptions " by historian Theodor Mommsen . 
 There are a few known written works by Augustus that have survived such as his poems Sicily , <unk> , and Ajax , an autobiography of 13 books , a philosophical treatise , and his written rebuttal to Brutus ' Eulogy of Cato . Historians are able to analyze existing letters penned by Augustus to others for additional facts or clues about his personal life . 
 Many consider Augustus to be Rome 's greatest emperor ; his policies certainly extended the Empire 's life span and initiated the celebrated Pax Romana or Pax Augusta . The Roman Senate wished subsequent emperors to " be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan " . Augustus was intelligent , decisive , and a shrewd politician , but he was not perhaps as charismatic as Julius Caesar , and was influenced on occasion by his third wife , Livia ( sometimes for the worse ) . Nevertheless , his legacy proved more enduring . The city of Rome was utterly transformed under Augustus , with Rome 's first institutionalized police force , fire fighting force , and the establishment of the municipal prefect as a permanent office . The police force was divided into cohorts of 500 men each , while the units of firemen ranged from 500 to 1 @,@ 000 men each , with 7 units assigned to 14 divided city sectors . 
 A praefectus <unk> , or " Prefect of the Watch " was put in charge of the vigiles , Rome 's fire brigade and police . With Rome 's civil wars at an end , Augustus was also able to create a standing army for the Roman Empire , fixed at a size of 28 legions of about 170 @,@ 000 soldiers . This was supported by numerous auxiliary units of 500 soldiers each , often recruited from recently conquered areas . 
 With his finances securing the maintenance of roads throughout Italy , Augustus also installed an official courier system of relay stations overseen by a military officer known as the praefectus <unk> . Besides the advent of swifter communication among Italian polities , his extensive building of roads throughout Italy also allowed Rome 's armies to march swiftly and at an unprecedented pace across the country . In the year 6 Augustus established the aerarium militare , donating 170 million sesterces to the new military treasury that provided for both active and retired soldiers . 
 One of the most enduring institutions of Augustus was the establishment of the Praetorian Guard in 27 BC , originally a personal bodyguard unit on the battlefield that evolved into an imperial guard as well as an important political force in Rome . They had the power to intimidate the Senate , install new emperors , and depose ones they disliked ; the last emperor they served was Maxentius , as it was Constantine I who disbanded them in the early 4th century and destroyed their barracks , the Castra Praetoria . 
 Although the most powerful individual in the Roman Empire , Augustus wished to embody the spirit of Republican virtue and norms . He also wanted to relate to and connect with the concerns of the plebs and lay people . He achieved this through various means of generosity and a cutting back of lavish excess . In the year 29 BC , Augustus paid 400 sesterces each to 250 @,@ 000 citizens , 1 @,@ 000 sesterces each to 120 @,@ 000 veterans in the colonies , and spent 700 million sesterces in purchasing land for his soldiers to settle upon . He also restored 82 different temples to display his care for the Roman pantheon of deities . In 28 BC , he melted down 80 silver statues erected in his likeness and in honor of him , an attempt of his to appear frugal and modest . 
 The longevity of Augustus ' reign and its legacy to the Roman world should not be overlooked as a key factor in its success . As Tacitus wrote , the younger generations alive in AD 14 had never known any form of government other than the Principate . Had Augustus died earlier ( in 23 BC , for instance ) , matters might have turned out differently . The attrition of the civil wars on the old Republican oligarchy and the longevity of Augustus , therefore , must be seen as major contributing factors in the transformation of the Roman state into a de facto monarchy in these years . Augustus ' own experience , his patience , his tact , and his political acumen also played their parts . He directed the future of the Empire down many lasting paths , from the existence of a standing professional army stationed at or near the frontiers , to the dynastic principle so often employed in the imperial succession , to the embellishment of the capital at the emperor 's expense . Augustus ' ultimate legacy was the peace and prosperity the Empire enjoyed for the next two centuries under the system he initiated . His memory was enshrined in the political ethos of the Imperial age as a paradigm of the good emperor . Every Emperor of Rome adopted his name , Caesar Augustus , which gradually lost its character as a name and eventually became a title . The Augustan era poets Virgil and Horace praised Augustus as a defender of Rome , an upholder of moral justice , and an individual who bore the brunt of responsibility in maintaining the empire . 
 However , for his rule of Rome and establishing the principate , Augustus has also been subjected to criticism throughout the ages . The contemporary Roman jurist Marcus <unk> Labeo ( d . AD 10 / 11 ) , fond of the days of pre @-@ Augustan republican liberty in which he had been born , openly criticized the Augustan regime . In the beginning of his Annals , the Roman historian Tacitus ( c . 56 – <unk> ) wrote that Augustus had cunningly subverted Republican Rome into a position of slavery . He continued to say that , with Augustus ' death and swearing of loyalty to Tiberius , the people of Rome simply traded one slaveholder for another . Tacitus , however , records two contradictory but common views of Augustus : 
 Intelligent people praised or criticized him in varying ways . One opinion was as follows . Filial duty and a national emergency , in which there was no place for law @-@ abiding conduct , had driven him to civil war — and this can neither be initiated nor maintained by decent methods . He had made many concessions to Anthony and to Lepidus for the sake of vengeance on his father 's murderers . When Lepidus grew old and lazy , and Anthony 's self @-@ indulgence got the better of him , the only possible cure for the distracted country had been government by one man . However , Augustus had put the state in order not by making himself king or dictator , but by creating the Principate . The Empire 's frontiers were on the ocean , or distant rivers . Armies , provinces , fleets , the whole system was interrelated . Roman citizens were protected by the law . <unk> were decently treated . Rome itself had been lavishly beautified . Force had been sparingly used — merely to preserve peace for the majority . 
 According to the second opposing opinion : 
 filial duty and national crisis had been merely pretexts . In actual fact , the motive of Octavian , the future Augustus , was lust for power ... There had certainly been peace , but it was a blood @-@ stained peace of disasters and assassinations . 
 In a recent biography on Augustus , Anthony Everitt asserts that through the centuries , judgments on Augustus ' reign have oscillated between these two extremes but stresses that : 
 " Opposites do not have to be mutually exclusive , and we are not obliged to choose one or the other . The story of his career shows that Augustus was indeed ruthless , cruel , and ambitious for himself . This was only in part a personal trait , for upper @-@ class Romans were educated to compete with one another and to excel . However , he combined an overriding concern for his personal interests with a deep @-@ seated patriotism , based on a nostalgia of Rome 's antique virtues . In his capacity as princeps , selfishness and selflessness coexisted in his mind . While fighting for dominance , he paid little attention to legality or to the normal civilities of political life . He was devious , untrustworthy , and bloodthirsty . But once he had established his authority , he governed efficiently and justly , generally allowed freedom of speech , and promoted the rule of law . He was immensely hardworking and tried as hard as any democratic parliamentarian to treat his senatorial colleagues with respect and sensitivity . He suffered from no delusions of grandeur . " 
 Tacitus was of the belief that Nerva ( r . 96 – 98 ) successfully " mingled two formerly alien ideas , principate and liberty " . The 3rd @-@ century historian Cassius Dio acknowledged Augustus as a benign , moderate ruler , yet like most other historians after the death of Augustus , Dio viewed Augustus as an autocrat . The poet Marcus Annaeus <unk> ( AD 39 – 65 ) was of the opinion that Caesar 's victory over Pompey and the fall of Cato the Younger ( 95 BC – 46 BC ) marked the end of traditional liberty in Rome ; historian Chester G. Starr , Jr. writes of his avoidance of criticizing Augustus , " perhaps Augustus was too sacred a figure to accuse directly . " 
 The Anglo @-@ Irish writer Jonathan Swift ( 1667 – 1745 ) , in his Discourse on the Contests and <unk> in Athens and Rome , criticized Augustus for installing tyranny over Rome , and likened what he believed Great Britain 's virtuous constitutional monarchy to Rome 's moral Republic of the 2nd century BC . In his criticism of Augustus , the admiral and historian Thomas Gordon ( 1658 – 1741 ) compared Augustus to the puritanical tyrant Oliver Cromwell ( 1599 – 1658 ) . Thomas Gordon and the French political philosopher Montesquieu ( 1689 – 1755 ) both remarked that Augustus was a coward in battle . In his Memoirs of the Court of Augustus , the Scottish scholar Thomas Blackwell ( 1701 – 1757 ) deemed Augustus a Machiavellian ruler , " a bloodthirsty <unk> usurper " , " wicked and worthless " , " a mean spirit " , and a " tyrant " . 
 = = = Revenue reforms = = = 
 Augustus ' public revenue reforms had a great impact on the subsequent success of the Empire . Augustus brought a far greater portion of the Empire 's expanded land base under consistent , direct taxation from Rome , instead of exacting varying , intermittent , and somewhat arbitrary tributes from each local province as Augustus ' predecessors had done . This reform greatly increased Rome 's net revenue from its territorial acquisitions , stabilized its flow , and regularized the financial relationship between Rome and the provinces , rather than provoking fresh resentments with each new arbitrary exaction of tribute . 
 The measures of taxation in the reign of Augustus were determined by population census , with fixed quotas for each province . Citizens of Rome and Italy paid indirect taxes , while direct taxes were exacted from the provinces . Indirect taxes included a 4 % tax on the price of slaves , a 1 % tax on goods sold at auction , and a 5 % tax on the inheritance of estates valued at over 100 @,@ 000 sesterces by persons other than the next of kin . 
 An equally important reform was the abolition of private tax farming , which was replaced by salaried civil service tax collectors . Private contractors that raised taxes had been the norm in the Republican era , and some had grown powerful enough to influence the amount of votes for politicians in Rome . The tax farmers had gained great infamy for their depredations , as well as great private wealth , by winning the right to tax local areas . 
 Rome 's revenue was the amount of the successful bids , and the tax farmers ' profits consisted of any additional amounts they could forcibly wring from the populace with Rome 's blessing . Lack of effective supervision , combined with tax farmers ' desire to maximize their profits , had produced a system of arbitrary exactions that was often barbarously cruel to taxpayers , widely ( and accurately ) perceived as unfair , and very harmful to investment and the economy . 
 The use of Egypt 's immense land rents to finance the Empire 's operations resulted from Augustus ' conquest of Egypt and the shift to a Roman form of government . As it was effectively considered Augustus ' private property rather than a province of the Empire , it became part of each succeeding emperor 's <unk> . Instead of a legate or proconsul , Augustus installed a prefect from the equestrian class to administer Egypt and maintain its lucrative seaports ; this position became the highest political achievement for any equestrian besides becoming Prefect of the Praetorian Guard . The highly productive agricultural land of Egypt yielded enormous revenues that were available to Augustus and his successors to pay for public works and military expeditions , as well as bread and circuses for the population of Rome . 
 During his reign the circus games resulted in the murder of 3 @,@ 500 elephants . 
 = = = Month of August = = = 
 The month of August ( Latin : Augustus ) is named after Augustus ; until his time it was called Sextilis ( named so because it had been the sixth month of the original Roman calendar and the Latin word for six is sex ) . Commonly repeated lore has it that August has 31 days because Augustus wanted his month to match the length of Julius Caesar 's July , but this is an invention of the 13th century scholar Johannes de Sacrobosco . Sextilis in fact had 31 days before it was renamed , and it was not chosen for its length ( see Julian calendar ) . According to a senatus consultum quoted by Macrobius , Sextilis was renamed to honor Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power , culminating in the fall of Alexandria , fell in that month . 
 = = = Building projects = = = 
 On his deathbed , Augustus boasted " I found a Rome of bricks ; I leave to you one of marble . " Although there is some truth in the literal meaning of this , Cassius Dio asserts that it was a metaphor for the Empire 's strength . Marble could be found in buildings of Rome before Augustus , but it was not extensively used as a building material until the reign of Augustus . 
 Although this did not apply to the <unk> slums , which were still as rickety and fire @-@ prone as ever , he did leave a mark on the monumental topography of the centre and of the Campus Martius , with the Ara Pacis ( Altar of Peace ) and monumental sundial , whose central gnomon was an obelisk taken from Egypt . The relief sculptures decorating the Ara Pacis visually augmented the written record of Augustus ' triumphs in the Res Gestae . Its reliefs depicted the imperial pageants of the <unk> , the Vestals , and the citizenry of Rome . 
 He also built the Temple of Caesar , the Baths of Agrippa , and the Forum of Augustus with its Temple of Mars Ultor . Other projects were either encouraged by him , such as the Theatre of Balbus , and Agrippa 's construction of the Pantheon , or funded by him in the name of others , often relations ( e.g. Portico of Octavia , Theatre of Marcellus ) . Even his Mausoleum of Augustus was built before his death to house members of his family . 
 To celebrate his victory at the Battle of Actium , the Arch of Augustus was built in 29 BC near the entrance of the Temple of Castor and Pollux , and widened in 19 BC to include a triple @-@ arch design . There are also many buildings outside of the city of Rome that bear Augustus ' name and legacy , such as the Theatre of Mérida in modern Spain , the Maison Carrée built at Nîmes in today 's southern France , as well as the Trophy of Augustus at La <unk> , located near Monaco . 
 After the death of Agrippa in 12 BC , a solution had to be found in maintaining Rome 's water supply system . This came about because it was overseen by Agrippa when he served as aedile , and was even funded by him afterwards when he was a private citizen paying at his own expense . In that year , Augustus arranged a system where the Senate designated three of its members as prime commissioners in charge of the water supply and to ensure that Rome 's aqueducts did not fall into disrepair . 
 In the late Augustan era , the commission of five senators called the curatores <unk> <unk> <unk> ( translated as " Supervisors of Public Property " ) was put in charge of maintaining public buildings and temples of the state cult . Augustus created the senatorial group of the curatores <unk> ( translated as " Supervisors for Roads " ) for the upkeep of roads ; this senatorial commission worked with local officials and contractors to organize regular repairs . 
 The Corinthian order of architectural style originating from ancient Greece was the dominant architectural style in the age of Augustus and the imperial phase of Rome . Suetonius once commented that Rome was unworthy of its status as an imperial capital , yet Augustus and Agrippa set out to dismantle this sentiment by transforming the appearance of Rome upon the classical Greek model . 
 = = Physical appearance and official images = = 
 His biographer Suetonius , writing about a century after Augustus ' death , described his appearance as : " ... unusually handsome and exceedingly graceful at all periods of his life , though he cared nothing for personal adornment . He was so far from being particular about the dressing of his hair , that he would have several barbers working in a hurry at the same time , and as for his beard he now had it clipped and now shaved , while at the very same time he would either be reading or writing something ... He had clear , bright eyes ... His teeth were wide apart , small , and ill @-@ kept ; his hair was slightly curly and inclining to golden ; his eyebrows met . His ears were of moderate size , and his nose projected a little at the top and then bent ever so slightly inward . His complexion was between dark and fair . He was short of stature ( although Julius <unk> , his freedman and keeper of his records , says that he was five feet and nine inches , more or less 1 @.@ 75 meter , in height ) , but this was concealed by the fine proportion and symmetry of his figure , and was noticeable only by comparison with some taller person standing beside him . ... " 
 His official images were very tightly controlled and idealized , drawing from a tradition of Hellenistic royal portraiture rather than the tradition of realism in Roman portraiture . He first appeared on coins at the age of 19 , and from about 29 BC " the explosion in the number of Augustan portraits attests a concerted propaganda campaign aimed at dominating all aspects of civil , religious , economic and military life with Augustus ' person . " The early images did indeed depict a young man , but although there were gradual changes his images remained youthful until he died in his seventies , by which time they had " a distanced air of ageless majesty " . Among the best known of many surviving portraits are the Augustus of Prima Porta , the image on the Ara Pacis , and the Via <unk> Augustus , which shows him as a priest . Several cameo portraits include the Blacas Cameo and Gemma <unk> . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Descendants = = 
 Augustus ' only biological ( non @-@ adopted ) child was his daughter . 
 = State of the World ( song ) = 
 " State of the World " is a song recorded by American singer Janet Jackson for her fourth studio album , Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 ( 1989 ) . It was written and produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , with additional writing by Jackson . While recording the album , Jackson and the producers watched television , especially news channels , and created the song inspired by that . " State of the World " focuses lyrically on homeless people . It was released as the eighth and final single from the album on February 6 , 1991 , by A & M Records . 
 The song was not released commercially in the United States , making it ineligible to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 or the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , but it reached number five on Billboard 's Hot 100 Airplay chart . No music video was made to accompany the song . Jackson has only included " State of the World " on her Rhythm Nation World Tour in 1990 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the commercial and critical success of her 1986 album , Control , Jackson was motivated to continue songwriting and took a larger role in the creative production of her new album . Executives at A & M requested that she expand on the ideas presented on Control , suggesting a concept album entitled Scandal that would have been about the Jackson family . She wrote a song titled " You Need Me " which was directed at her father Joseph , but was unwilling to devote an entire album to the subject and substituted her own concept for theirs . She commented that " [ a ] lot of people wanted me to do another album like Control and that 's what I didn 't want to do . I wanted to do something that I really believed in and that I really felt strong about . " The concept of Rhythm Nation emerged as Jackson was a TV watcher , " We would watch BET , MTV ... then switched over to CNN , and there 'd always be something messed @-@ up happening . It was never good news , always bad news " , producer James " Jimmy Jam " Harris recalled . " State of the World " was one of these songs , influenced by TV and news . Jam recalled that with the song , they were trying to do something like Marvin Gaye 's song " What 's Going On " although we never could hope to achieve that , but still wanted to make people aware of what was happening in a way they could dance to it . Released on February 6 , 1991 , " State of the World " was the eighth and the final single of Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 . The record label reckoned that they would boost album sales with a radio @-@ only promotion . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " State of the World " focuses lyrically on homeless people . According to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , Jackson tries to stay optimistic with the world 's state : " Let 's weather the storm together " , and compared the song musically to the music by Prince . In the book Born in the U.S.A. : The Myth of America in Popular Music from Colonial Times to the Present by Timothy E. Scheurer , the author noted that she " attempts to deliver a message of hope " . According to him , the song is like a " medical diagnosis in which Jackson proposes education as the key to settling problems " . Pace magazine described the song as an " aggressive dance assault " . Eric Henderson from Slant Magazine noted that the producers " loosened their rigid backbeats in acquiescence with new jack 's standard three @-@ on @-@ one swing " as noted in the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times considered that " despite its platitudinous message , [ the song ] has stark edges and angles " . Sputnikmusic 's Zachary Powell commented that " ' State of the World ' keeps the upbeat motion that Rhythm Nation begins , but with more of a socially conscious twist . It shares with the preceding track a groovy beat and danceability , but takes it to another direction lyrically and shows the caring side of Janet Jackson " . Dennis Hunt of Los Angeles Times commented positively saying that the move to social commentary was a rocky decision . However , he felt that " State of the World " was not interesting enough musically to carry the messages . 
 On the book Michael Jackson A Life In Music : A Life in Music , by writer Geoff Brown focusing on Jackson 's brother Michael , he noted that like her brother , she can focus on problems as shown on the song , but she offers no solutions to them . The New Rolling Stone Album Guide commented that " heartfelt pleas for racial unity and cloudy musings on the ' State of the World ' don 't obscure the pulsating beat of other songs " from the album . Jonathan Van Meter from Spin was critical of the song , saying that " State of the World " , " Rhythm Nation " and " The Knowledge " formed " a Spike Lee @-@ esque trilogy made even less convincing by a tiresome house music back @-@ beat and that unfortunate , outdated beat on every fourth count " . AllMusic 's editor Alex Henderson called the song " disturbing " . 
 = = Chart performance and live performance = = 
 In the US the song was released as a radio @-@ only single , and was therefore ineligible to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . However , it peaked at number five on the US Billboard Hot 100 Airplay and number nine on the Hot Dance Club Songs charts . Author Fred Bronson noted it likely would have been the album 's eighth top ten hit if a commercial product had been distributed . In Australia , the song received a commercial release , and peaked at number 94 on the ARIA Singles Chart in July 1991 . 
 Jackson has only performed the song on her Rhythm Nation World Tour . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Australian CD single 
 " State of the World " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 49 
 " State of the World " ( State of the World Suite ) – 14 : 09 
 Japanese CD maxi single – The Remixes 
 " State of the World " ( United Nations 7 " ) – 4 : 20 
 " State of the World " ( State of the House 7 " ) – 4 : 32 
 " State of the World " ( Third World 7 " ) – 4 : 26 
 " State of the World " ( LP Version ) – 4 : 49 
 " State of the World " ( State of the House 12 " ) – 4 : 59 
 " State of the World " ( United Nations 12 " ) – 7 : 50 
 " State of the World " ( United Nations Dub ) – 6 : 15 
 " State of the World " ( United Nations Instrumental ) – 4 : 49 
 " State of the World " ( Third World Dub ) – 3 : 08 
 " State of the World " ( Third World Instrumental ) – 4 : 47 
 " State of the World " ( Make a Change Dub ) – 4 : 45 
 " State of the World " ( World Dance Mix ) – 4 : 52 
 " State of the World Suite " – 14 : 09 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Locations 
 Recorded at the Flyte Tyme Studios 
 ( Minneapolis , Minnesota ) 
 Mixed at the Flyte Tyme Studios 
 ( Edina , Minnesota ) 
 Personnel 
 Janet Jackson – lead vocals , background vocals , songwriter , co @-@ producer , keyboards , rhythm and vocal arranger 
 Jimmy Jam – producer , songwriter , keyboards and drum programming , percussion , rhythm and vocal arranger 
 Terry Lewis – producer , songwriter , percussion , background vocals , rhythm and vocal arranger 
 René Elizondo , Jr . – background vocals 
 Steve Hodge – background vocals , recording and mixing engineer 
 Brian Gardner – mastering 
 Credits adapted from Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 album booklet . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Personal relationships of Paul McCartney = 
 Paul McCartney had numerous relationships during his early life in Liverpool , and during his time with the Beatles . He was engaged to Dot Rhone , actress Jane Asher , and married three times : to Linda Eastman , Heather Mills and Nancy Shevell . 
 McCartney had a three year relationship with Dot Rhone in Liverpool , buying her a gold ring in Hamburg . In London , McCartney had a five year relationship with Asher , living in her parents ' house for three years . He wrote several songs at the Ashers ' house , including " Yesterday " . Asher inspired other songs , such as " And I Love Her " , " You Won 't See Me " and " I 'm Looking Through You " . On 25 December 1967 they announced their engagement , but separated in early 1968 . McCartney met American photographer Linda Eastman in a club in London while still with Asher . They met again at the launch party for the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper album . In May 1968 , McCartney met Eastman again in New York , and they were married on 12 March 1969 . They had three children together , and remained married until her death from breast cancer in 1998 . 
 McCartney appeared publicly beside Heather Mills at a party in January 2000 , to celebrate her 32nd birthday . On 11 June 2002 , they were married at Castle Leslie in Glaslough , Ireland . They had one child , Beatrice , in 2003 , but were living apart by May 2006 . In July 2006 , British newspapers announced that McCartney had petitioned for divorce . On 17 March 2008 , the financial terms of the divorce were finalised , which awarded Mills £ 24 @.@ 3 million ( $ 38 @.@ 5 million ) . In November 2007 McCartney started dating Nancy Shevell , who is a member of the board of the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority , as well as vice president of a family owned New England Motor Freight . It was announced on 6 May 2011 that the two had become engaged , and they married in London on 9 October 2011 . 
 = = Early relationships = = 
 One of McCartney 's first girlfriends , in 1959 , was called Layla ; a name he remembered as being unusual in Liverpool at the time . She was slightly older than McCartney and used to ask him to baby @-@ sit with her . Julie Arthur , another girlfriend , was Ted Ray 's niece . 
 McCartney 's first serious girlfriend in Liverpool was seventeen year old Dorothy " Dot " Rhone ( a bank clerk or a cashier at a chemist 's , according to varying accounts ) , whom he had met at The Casbah Club in 1959 . McCartney picked out the clothes he liked Rhone to wear and told her which make up to use , also paying for her to have her blonde hair done in the style of Brigitte Bardot , whom both he and John Lennon idolised . He disliked Rhone seeing her friends , and stopped her from smoking , even though he did so himself . When McCartney first went to Hamburg with The Beatles he wrote regular letters to Rhone , and she accompanied Lennon 's girlfriend , Cynthia Lennon to Hamburg when the group played there again in 1962 . According to Rhone , McCartney bought her a gold ring in Hamburg , a leather skirt , took her sightseeing , and was very attentive and caring . For the time Rhone was there , the couple lived in a bungalow by the Hamburg docks that belonged to Rosa , a former cleaner at the Indra club . McCartney admitted that he had other girlfriends in Hamburg when Rhone was in Liverpool , admitting that they were usually strippers , who knew a lot more about sex than Liverpool girls . 
 Rhone later rented a room in the same house as Cynthia Lennon was living , with McCartney contributing to the rent . Shortly after McCartney returned from Hamburg in May 1962 , Rhone told him that she was pregnant . They told McCartney 's father , Jim McCartney , whom they expected to be shocked at the news , but found him delighted at the prospect of becoming a grandfather . McCartney took out a marriage licence and set the wedding date for November , shortly before the baby was due . Rhone had a miscarriage in July 1962 , and after a few weeks , McCartney 's feelings towards Rhone " cooled off " , and he finished their relationship . 
 He then had a brief relationship with Thelma Pickles , who had previously dated Lennon . She later married Liverpool poet Roger McGough , but remembered McCartney as growing from a " plump young schoolboy into someone very much his own person " during their time together . McCartney also had a fiery " on @-@ off " relationship with Iris Caldwell , the younger sister of singer Rory Storm , who refused to bow to McCartney 's demands . After one argument , Caldwell poured a bowl of sugar over his head , but when McCartney turned up the next day , she had to phone her new boyfriend , George Harrison , to cancel their date . 
 Rhone later emigrated to Toronto , Canada , and McCartney met her again when the Beatles played there , and then again with Wings . Rhone later said that " Love of the Loved " and " P.S. I Love You " were written about her . Years later , Cynthia Lennon gave back to Rhone the gold ring that McCartney had bought her in Hamburg , having once tried it on while Rhone was washing dishes , and forgotten to take it off . Rhone is now a grandmother and lives in Mississauga , Ontario . 
 = = Asher , Eastman , Schwartz and McGivern = = 
 McCartney first met British actress Jane Asher on 18 April 1963 , when the Beatles performed at the Royal Albert Hall , in London , after a photographer asked them to pose with her . They were then interviewed by Asher for the BBC , with Asher being photographed screaming at them like a fan . McCartney soon met Asher 's family : Margaret , her mother was a music teacher , and Asher 's father Richard was a physician . Her brother , Peter , was a member of Peter and Gordon , and her younger sister , Clare , was also an actress . McCartney later gave " A World Without Love " to Peter and Gordon , as well as " Nobody I Know " . Both songs were hits for the duo . McCartney took up residence at the Ashers ' house at 57 Wimpole Street , London , and lived there for nearly three years . During his time there McCartney met writers such as Bertrand Russell , Harold Pinter , and Len Deighton . He wrote several songs at the Ashers ' , including " Yesterday " , and worked on songs with Lennon in the basement music room . Asher inspired many songs , such as " And I Love Her " , " You Won 't See Me " , and " I 'm Looking Through You " . 
 On 13 April 1965 , McCartney bought a £ 40 @,@ 000 three storey Regency house at 7 Cavendish Avenue , St. John 's Wood , London , and spent a further £ 20 @,@ 000 renovating it . He thanked the Ashers by paying for the decoration of the front of their house . On 15 May 1967 , McCartney met American photographer Linda Eastman at a Georgie Fame concert at The Bag O 'Nails in London . Eastman was in the UK on an assignment to take photographs of " swinging sixties " musicians in London . They met again four days later at the launch party for the Sgt. Pepper album at Beatles ' manager Brian Epstein 's house in Belgravia , but after her assignment was completed , she flew back to New York . On 25 December 1967 , McCartney and Asher announced their engagement , and she accompanied McCartney to India in February and March 1968 . 
 Dark haired model Maggie McGivern was dating a photographer when , in 1966 , she embarked on a secret relationship with McCartney . She had just taken on a steady job working for Marianne Faithful and John Dunbar as the nanny to their little boy Nicholas , and it was while taking care of Nicholas in Marianne ’ s third floor Chelsea flat that she first encountered Paul McCartney . He buzzed the intercom to ask if John ( Dunbar ) was around , and when Paul explained who he was , Maggie invited him straight up . “ Paul ran up the stairs and came in . Very casually I told him that John wasn ’ t really in and that sent us both into hysterics . We were laughing and chatting . I made a nice lunch for Marianne and a bunch of her friends but they never showed up . Paul and I sat together and ate it instead . I ’ ll never forget the meal – it was chicken casserole . It was such a funny introduction that it threw us both off guard . It could have been very embarrassing , but there was an immediate rapport and we just couldn ’ t stop talking . ” They began a secret three year affair which ended just before Paul married Linda . 
 Asher broke off the engagement in early 1968 , after coming back from an acting assignment in Bristol to find McCartney in bed with another woman , Francie Schwartz . McCartney and Asher later attempted to mend their relationship , but finally broke up in July 1968 . Asher has consistently refused to publicly discuss that part of her life . Schwartz , a twenty three year old New York scriptwriter , had travelled to London trying to interest Apple Corps in a film script . Schwartz was then asked by McCartney to move into his Cavendish Avenue house , and was given a job working for Derek Taylor at Apple , which was then based in Wigmore Street , London . She attended many sessions during the recording of the White Album , and was living with McCartney when Lennon and Yoko Ono were also invited to live there . Shortly after , Schwartz sold the story of her time at Cavendish Avenue to Rolling Stone magazine . 
 = = Marriage to Linda Eastman = = 
 In May 1968 , McCartney met Eastman again in New York , when Lennon and McCartney were there to announce the formation of Apple Corps . In September , McCartney phoned her and asked her to fly over to London . Six months later they were married at a small civil ceremony — when Eastman was four months pregnant with their child , Mary McCartney — at Marylebone Registry Office on 12 March 1969 . He later said that his wife was the woman who " gave me the strength and courage to work again " , after the break @-@ up of the Beatles . McCartney adopted her daughter from her first marriage , Heather , and had three children together : Mary , Stella , and James McCartney . McCartney taught Linda to play keyboards , and permanently included her in the line @-@ up of Wings . 
 Linda died of breast cancer at age 56 in Tucson , Arizona , on 17 April 1998 ; McCartney denied rumours that her death was an assisted suicide . Along with eight other British composers , he contributed to the choral album A Garland for Linda , and dedicated his classical album , Ecce Cor Meum , to his late wife . McCartney has said that he and Linda spent less than a week apart during their entire marriage , excluding McCartney 's incarceration in Tokyo on drug charges in January 1980 . 
 = = Marriage to Heather Mills = = 
 After having sparked the interest of the tabloids about his appearances with Mills at events , McCartney appeared publicly beside Mills at a party in January 2000 , to celebrate her 32nd birthday . On 11 June 2002 , McCartney married Mills , a former model , amputee , and campaigner against landmines , in an elaborate ceremony at Castle Leslie in Glaslough , County Monaghan , Ireland , where more than 300 guests were invited and the reception included a vegetarian banquet . On 28 October 2003 , Mills gave birth to a daughter , Beatrice Milly McCartney , although the date has also been stated as 30 October . The baby was reportedly named after Mills ' mother Beatrice , and McCartney 's Aunt Milly . 
 On 29 July 2006 , British newspapers announced that McCartney had petitioned for divorce , which sparked a media furore . On 17 March 2008 , the financial terms of the divorce were finalised , with a settlement awarding Mills £ 24 @.@ 3 million ( $ 38 @.@ 5 million ) . The settlement stated that McCartney pay their four @-@ year @-@ old daughter Beatrice 's nanny , school fees , and pay Beatrice £ 35 @,@ 000 ( $ 70 @,@ 000 ) a year until she is 17 , or ends her secondary education . After the divorce ruling , Justice Bennett said that throughout the case Mills was " inconsistent , inaccurate and less than candid " while McCartney was " honest . " On 12 May 2008 , Justice Hugh Bennett issued a decree nisi , which would become final after a period of six months apart . 
 = = Marriage to Nancy Shevell = = 
 McCartney started dating Shevell in November 2007 . She is a member of the board of the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority as well as vice president of a family @-@ owned transportation conglomerate that includes New England Motor Freight . It was announced on 6 May 2011 that the two had become engaged . On 9 October 2011 McCartney and Shevell were married at Old Marylebone Town Hall where his first wedding took place in 1969 . The couple attended Yom Kippur synagogue services prior to the wedding , out of respect for Shevell 's Jewish faith , but did not seek a religious blessing for their union . Upon their marriage , Shevell became Lady McCartney . McCartney wrote the song " My Valentine " , from his 2012 album Kisses on the Bottom , about Shevell . She is second cousin to broadcast journalist Barbara Walters . 
 = My Big Fat Greek Rush Week = 
 " My Big Fat Greek Rush Week " is the second episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the forty @-@ sixth episode overall . Written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by John T. Kretchmer , the episode premiered on The CW on October 10 , 2006 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica infiltrates the Theta Beta sorority as part of her investigation into Parker 's rape . Meanwhile , the Hearst sociology teacher , Dr. <unk> ( Dan Castellaneta ) , conducts an experiment similar to the Stanford prison experiment . 
 " My Big Fat Greek Rush Week " featured several notable guest stars , including appearances from Dan Castellaneta , Samm Levine , Rider Strong , and Rachelle Lefevre . In addition , David Tom returned as Chip Diller after previously appearing in the second season . The episode was watched by 2 @.@ 96 million people in its initial airing and received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A police officer interrogates Parker ( Julie Gonzalo ) about her rape , but she does not remember any of it . Veronica tells Sheriff Lamb ( Michael Muhney ) that she ran into the room and heard Parker having sex , and Parker berates her for not checking to see what was happening . Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) hikes through the desert after fleeing from Cormac Fitzpatrick ( Jason Beghe ) ; Cormac later realizes that Keith has disappeared and starts following him . Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) and Logan 's ( Jason Dohring ) sociology professor recruits volunteers for a Stanford prison experiment @-@ like study . Veronica interviews for a photography position at the college newspaper , but the editor tasks her with writing an exposé of the Theta Beta sorority , where Parker was during the night of her rape . Parker ’ s parents appear at Hearst and announce that they are going to remove her from the college in light of her assault . During her investigation , Veronica poses as a potential recruit , but she does not note any suspicious activity . In the sociology experiment , Logan is assigned to the role of a prisoner , while Wallace acts as a " guard " . While tracking Keith , Cormac gets stuck in a bear trap ; his brother Liam ( Rod Rowland ) appears and shoots him . Veronica is invited to attend a " private party " , which she believes will be the key to her exposé . At the party , Veronica encounters Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) and learns that Parker 's room was easily accessible . Veronica pretends to be drunk in order to ascertain whether or not the sorority members collaborate with the rapist , but they just drive her home . 
 The police search Kendall 's ( Charisma Carpenter ) apartment , but they only find a small amount of blood . In the fake prison during the experiment , the guards use sleep deprivation and verbal abuse to indicate the " prisoners " . Returning home , Keith cries and tells Veronica that he made a mistake . The guard puts one prisoner in solitary confinement . Veronica learns that a student , Moe Flater ( Andrew McClain ) , took Parker home the night of the rape . She confronts him , but upon further investigation , she accepts his alibi . Veronica learns that the main surveillance camera of the sorority was in the den mother 's room . The prisoners in the experiment successfully escape from prison . Veronica breaks into the room that is under surveillance and finds that they are growing marijuana . Veronica types up her exposé and hands it to the newspaper editor , but before it is published , one of the sorority members informs Veronica that they are growing the cannabis in order to aid the den mother 's cancer . Veronica cannot stop the publication of the article , but she warns the sorority about potential repercussions nonetheless . Mac ( Tina Majorino ) convinces Parker to stay at Hearst . 
 The prisoners believe they have won the study , but the guards have tricked them into winning , allowing them to escape . Keith tells the police the story of Kendall and Cormac 's deaths : Kendall gave Keith a valuable painting disguised as money in a case , and Cormac tried to kill Kendall and Keith to get the case 's contents . Cormac killed Liam out of anger that there was no money . The episode concludes with Logan streaking through sociology class , fulfilling a bet made earlier in the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Diane Ruggiero and directed by John T. Kretchmer , marking Ruggiero 's thirteenth writing credit and Kretchmer 's eleventh directing credit for the series . The episode features several notable guest appearances . Dan Castellaneta , best known as the voice of Homer Simpson on The Simpsons , appears as Dr. <unk> , a sociology professor . Rider Strong guest stars as a student who participates as a guard in the experiment . The episode features a guest appearance by Samm Levine , best known for his role on Freaks and Geeks . Levine had previously worked with series star Chris Lowell on Life as We Know It , a show that had been cancelled in 2005 . Rachelle Lefevre , known for her later roles as Victoria in The Twilight Saga and in Under the Dome , guest stars as Marjorie , one of the sorority girls who becomes friends with Veronica . 
 On the DVD Commentary , series creator Rob Thomas opined that the relationship between Veronica and Keith was the core of the series and listed the scene in which Keith stays up all night before scaring Veronica in the morning as one of his favorite examples of their chemistry in the season . Thomas highlighted the scene in which a girl shows Veronica around the sorority as indicative of Hansen 's comedic talents ; in addition , it marked the first appearance of David Tom in the season , a guest star in season two who was brought back for a recurring role in this season . The actress who played the girl showing Veronica around , Keri Lynn Pratt , previously appeared in the film Drive Me Crazy , which Thomas co @-@ wrote . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " My Big Fat Greek Rush Week " was watched by 2 @.@ 96 million viewers in its initial airing , marking a decrease from the season premiere and ranking 83rd out of 88 in the weekly rankings . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews . Eric Goldman , writing for IGN , gave the episode an 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 , indicating that it was great . He wrote that it felt " more like a normal episode of the series " compared to the premiere 's " introduction type " tone . He also praised the prison experiment subplot , writing that it " introduced a who 's who of recognizable guest stars , all of whom could clearly rerun on a show that loves to build a large cast of periphery characters . " Price Peterson , writing for TV.com , gave a positive review , writing " Anytime Veronica goes undercover as her polar opposite is just a good time , you know ? [ … ] And as much as the Stanford Experiment thing was low @-@ stakes and standalone , I enjoyed its unpredictable twists and reveals . Perfect early season plotline . " Alan Sepinwall wrote that the prison experiment plotline never getting " out of hand [ … ] made it feel like a wasted opportunity " while writing that " Enrico Colantoni really sold Keith 's despair at the resolution " of his plotline . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Rowan Kaiser gave a more mixed review , stating that the show and Veronica were both still discovering their place at the show 's new setting . " The show is still tense , still powerful , still amusing . But it doesn 't know how to apply those things in its new setting . " However , Kaiser concluded that " Veronica Mars is a mess right now . But it ’ s an extremely ambitious mess . I ’ d watch rather ' ambitious and difficult ' than ' boring , ' and ' My Big Fat Greek Rush Week ' was anything but boring . " Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B " . 
 = Looking Forward ( 1910 film ) = 
 Looking Forward is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . Adapted from James Oliver Curwood 's short story of the same name , the film follows a young chemist named Jack Goodwin . He discovers a chemical compound that puts a person into a state of sleep for a determined period of time and decides to test it upon himself . The first test is a success and Jack makes arrangements for his sleep of a hundred years , in a state similar to suspended animation . When he awakes in 2010 into a world ruled by women , he woos the female mayor . Jack joins a society to campaign for men 's rights . The society ends up before the female mayor who jails all of them , save for Jack who she proposes to . Jack accepts on the condition that men are given back their rights and she accepts . The cast and production credits of the film are not known , but Theodore Marston was not the director . The film was released on December 20 , 1910 . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film focuses on Jack Goodwin , a young chemistry student who has discovered a novel compound that allows a person to be put in a state of sleep for any length of time . The compound causes an effect similar to suspended animation , with no ill @-@ effects or bodily changes . Jack tests the compound on himself for a period of a week and desires to test it for a century . In preparation for this , he obtains a safety deposit vault and provides instructions to be presented before the mayor in a hundred years . Jack 's experiment works and he awakes in the year 2010 to a very different future . Transportation has been radically changed to pneumatic tubes allowing him to be transported to the mayor . The woman mayor takes an interest in him and invites her over to her home . In the intervening years , the world has become ruled by women and Jack is now out of place , but the two fall in love . Her father is an advocate for men 's rights and Jack joins their society . The group soon appears before the mayor and she sends all of them to jail through the pneumatic tube , except for Jack . She proposes to him , but Jack only consents if the rights of men would be granted . The mayor is true to her word and signs a decree to give the men their liberty . During the ceremony , she attempts to lead Jack to the altar , but Jack shows her that the man must lead . When the bridal veil is placed on Jack , he places it on his new wife . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane 
 William Russell 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenario is adapted from James Oliver Curwood 's short story of the same name . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Sometimes the directional credit is given to Theodore Marston . The apparent origin of this error is from the American Film @-@ Index 1908 – 1915 . Film historian Q. David Bowers consulted one of the co @-@ authors of the book , Gunnar Lundquist , and confirmed that the credit of Marston was in error . Theodore Marston worked with Pathé , Kinemacolor , Vitagraph and other companies , but there is no record of Marston working with Thanhouser . This error has persisted in several works including The Complete Index to Literary Sources in Film . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . 
 The cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 Musical accompaniment for the silent films were not provided by the studios , and the Thanhouser productions were no exception . The musical program for the screenings were decided and played by the individual accompanists . At times , musical accompaniments were shared in trade journals , but for Looking Forward a dispute serves to provide one musical credit provided by Mrs. Buttery of Pennsylvania . In responding to an editorial in The Moving Picture World , Mrs. Buttery stated that " John Took Me Home to See His Mother " was played during film at some unstated point . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel comedy , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on December 20 , 1910 . The New York Dramatic Mirror stated , " Here is a rather exaggerated farce with a good many laughs in it . It has for its basis recent cartoons , but has original treatment . The male members of the cast seemed to enjoy their roles , perhaps for the reason that it is a man 's picture ; the laugh seems on the ladies . " A more contemporary analysis of the film was covered in a paper by Eric <unk> , who credits this film as Thanhouser 's first film portraying suffragists . <unk> writes that the film presents the idea of a woman mayor , something which was not farfetched for women to find to be humorous . Despite Jack 's lack of power in the new era which he awakes to , he managed to win the heart of a powerful woman and easily restore the rights of men . Taken one way , the film seems to advance the idea that a women of power are controlled by their hearts . Dewing writes , " On the one hand it mocks many female suffrage " fighting tactics , " as suffragists , in an attempt to not appear too extremist and alienable , exploited conservative ideas of feminine virtue in order to assert their citizenship and reform desires . In the film , the man assumes effeminate passions to woo the Mayor . On the other hand , those sympathetic to the cause can see this as proof that these tactics can work in politics . The film also toys with the fears men harbored concerning the loss of power over females in public spaces , a threat to masculinity and manhood . " The film is also believed to have been the first adaptation of Curwood 's work . 
 = Francis Pegahmagabow = 
 Francis Pegahmagabow MM & Two bars ( March 9 , 1889 – August 5 , 1952 ) was the First Nations soldier most highly decorated for bravery in Canadian military history and the most effective sniper of World War I. Three times awarded the Military Medal and seriously wounded , he was an expert marksman and scout , credited with killing 378 Germans and capturing 300 more . Later in life , he served as chief and a councilor for the <unk> First Nation , and as an activist and leader in several First Nations organizations . He corresponded with and met other noted aboriginal figures including Fred Loft , Jules <unk> , Andrew Paull and John <unk> . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francis Pegahmagabow was born on March 9 , 1889 , on what is now the <unk> First Nation reserve in Nobel , Ontario . In Ojibwe his name was <unk> ( " the wind that blows off " ) . His father was a man of the First Nation and his mother of the First Nation , located further up Bay 's north shore . His father Michael had been raised by Noah <unk> after the deaths of his parents ; Michael died of an unspecified severe illness in April 1891 , and his mother Mary <unk> returned to her native <unk> Inlet First Nation after contracting the same illness . Francis was raised by <unk> and grew up in <unk> , where he learned traditional skills such as hunting , fishing , and practised a mix of Catholicism and <unk> spirituality . 
 In January 1912 Pegahmagabow received financial aid for room and board to complete his education with the help of the Parry Sound Crown attorney Walter Lockwood Haight . That summer he worked for the Department of Marine and Fisheries on the Great Lakes as a marine fire fighter . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Following the outbreak of World War I , Pegahmagabow volunteered for service with the Canadian Expeditionary Force in August 1914 , despite Canadian government discrimination that initially excluded minorities . He was posted to the 23rd Canadian Regiment ( Northern Pioneers ) . After joining the Canadian force he was based at CFB Valcartier . While there he decorated his army tent with traditional symbols including a deer , the symbol of his clan . In February 1915 he was deployed overseas with the 1st Canadian Infantry Battalion of the 1st Canadian Division — the first contingent of Canadian troops sent to flight in Europe . His companions there nicknamed him " Peggy " . 
 Shortly after his arrival on the continent , Pegahmagabow fought in the Second Battle of Ypres , where the Germans used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front , and it was during this battle that he began to establish a reputation as a sniper and scout . Following the battle he was promoted to lance corporal . His battalion took part in the Battle of the Somme in 1916 , during which he was wounded in the left leg . He recovered in time to return to the 1st Battalion as they moved to Belgium . He received the Military Medal for carrying messages along the lines during these two battles . Initially , his commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Frank Albert Creighton , had nominated him from the Distinguished Conduct Medal , citing his disregard for danger and " faithfulness to duty " , but it was downgraded . 
 On November 6 / 7 , 1917 , Pegahmagabow earned a Bar to his Military Medal for his actions in the Second Battle of Passchendaele . During the fighting there Pegahmagabow 's battalion was given the task of launching an attack at Passchendaele . By this time , he had been promoted to the rank of corporal and during the battle he was recorded playing an important role as a link between the units on the 1st Battalion 's flank . When the battalion 's reinforcements became lost , Pegahmagabow was instrumental in guiding them and ensuring that they reached their allocated spot in the line . 
 On August 30 , 1918 , during the Battle of the Scarpe , Pegahmagabow was involved in fighting off a German attack at Orix Trench near Upton Wood . His company was almost out of ammunition and in danger of being surrounded . Pegahmagabow braved heavy machine gun and rifle fire by going into no @-@ man 's land and brought back enough ammunition to enable his post to carry on and assist in repulsing heavy enemy counter @-@ attacks . For these efforts he received a second Bar to his Military Medal , becoming one of only 38 Canadians to receive this honour . 
 The war ended in November 1918 and in 1919 Pegahmagabow was invalided back to Canada . He had served for almost the whole war , and had built a reputation as a skilled marksman . Using the much @-@ maligned Ross rifle , he was credited with killing 378 Germans and capturing 300 more . By the time of his discharge he had attained the rank of sergeant @-@ major and had been awarded the 1914 – 15 Star , the British War Medal , and the Victory Medal . 
 = = Political life = = 
 Upon his return to Canada he continued to serve in the Algonquin Regiment militia as a non @-@ permanent active member . Following in his father 's and grandfather 's footsteps , he was elected chief of the Parry Island Band from February 1921 . Once in office he caused a schism in the band after he wrote a letter calling for certain individuals and those of mixed race to be expelled from the reserve . He was re @-@ elected in 1924 and served until he was deposed via an internal power struggle in April 1925 . Before the motion could go through , Pegahmagabow resigned . A decade later , he was appointed councillor from 1933 to 1936 . In 1933 the Department of Indian Affairs ( DIA ) changed its policies and forbade First Nation chiefs from corresponding with the DIA . They directed that all correspondence , as of the spring of 1933 , go through the Indian Agent . This gave huge power to the Agent , something that grated on Pegahmagabow , who did not get along with his Indian Agent , John Daly . First Nation members who served in the army during World War I were particularly active as political activists . They had travelled the world , earned the respect of the comrades in the trenches , and refused to be sidelined by the newly empowered Indian Agent . Historian Paul Williams termed these advocates " returned soldier chiefs " , and singled out a few , including Pegahmagabow , as being especially active . This caused intense disagreements with Daly and eventually led to Pegahmagabow being deposed as chief . Daly and other agents who came in contact with Pegahmagabow were incredibly frustrated by his attempts , in his words , to free his people from " white slavery " . The Indian agents labelled him a " mental case " and strove to sideline him and his supporters . 
 In addition to the power struggle between the Indian council and the DIA with which Pegahmagabow took issue , he was a constant agitator over the islands in Georgian Bay of the Huron . The Regional First Nation governments claimed the islands as their own and Pegahmagabow and other chiefs tried in vain to get recognition of their status . 
 During World War II Pegahmagabow worked as a guard at a munitions plant near Nobel , Ontario , and was a Sergeant @-@ major in the local militia . In 1943 , he became the Supreme Chief of the Native Independent Government , an early First Nations organization . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 A married father of six children , Pegahmagabow died on the Parry Island reserve in 1952 at the age of 61 . He is a member of the Indian Hall of Fame at the Woodland Centre in Brantford , Ontario , and his memory is also commemorated on a plaque honouring him and his regiment on the Rotary and Algonquin Regiment Fitness Trail in Parry Sound . Honoured by the Canadian Forces by naming the 3rd Canadian Ranger Patrol Group HQ Building at CFB Borden after him . 
 Canadian journalist Adrian Hayes wrote a biography of Pegahmagabow titled Pegahmagabow : Legendary Warrior , Forgotten Hero , published in 2003 , and another titled Pegahmagabow : Life @-@ Long Warrior , published in 2009 . Canadian novelist Joseph Boyden 's 2005 novel Three Day Road was inspired in part by Pegahmagabow . The novel 's protagonist is a fictional character who , like Pegahmagabow , serves as a military sniper during World War I , although Pegahmagabow also appears as a minor character . 
 A life @-@ sized bronze statue of Pegahmagabow was erected in his honour on National Aboriginal Day , June 21 , 2016 , in Parry Sound , near Georgian Bay . The figure has an eagle on one arm , a Ross rifle slung from its shoulder , and a caribou at its feet , representing the Caribou Clan that Pegahmagabow belonged to . The Eagle was his spirit animal . The artist Tyler <unk> spent eight months sculpting the statue , which spent a further year in casting . <unk> chose to erect it in Parry Sound rather than <unk> to reach a larger public and educate them on the contributions of First Nations people to Canada . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 He was first awarded the Military Medal while fighting at the second battle of Ypres , Festubert and Givenchy , for courage above fire in getting important messages through to the rear . 
 Earned his first bar to the Military Medal at the bloody Battle of Passchendaele . 
 His second bar to the Military Medal came at the battle of The Scarpe , in 1918 . Only 37 other Canadian men received the honour of two bars . 
 The 1914 – 15 Star 
 The British War Medal 
 The Victory Medal 
 In 2003 the Pegahmagabow family donated his medals and chief head dress to the Canadian War Museum where they can be seen as of 2010 as part of the World War I display . While researching his 2005 novel Three Day Road , Boyden was asked about why he thought that Pegahmagabow had not received a higher award like the Distinguished Conduct Medal or the Victoria Cross . Boyden speculated it was due to Pegahmagabow being a First Nations soldier , and that there may have been jealousy on the part of some officers who he felt might have been suspicious of the number of Germans Pegahmagabow claimed to have shot because he did not use an observer while sniping . 
 = RMS Magdalena ( 1948 ) = 
 Magdalena was a 17 @,@ 547 GRT passenger and refrigerated cargo ocean liner that Harland and Wolff built in Belfast in 1948 for Royal Mail Lines ( RML ) . Launched on 11 May 1948 , she was the third @-@ largest ship being built in a UK shipyard at that time . 
 Built as a replacement for a ship lost during the Second World War , she was to serve on route between England and the east coast of South America . She was wrecked on her maiden voyage in 1949 , the third ship built by Harland and Wolff to suffer this fate . The insurance payout of £ 2 @,@ 295 @,@ 000 was the largest made at the time for a marine casualty in the United Kingdom . Due to changing trading conditions RML decided not to replace her . 
 = = Description = = 
 Magdalena was 570 feet 1 inch ( 173 @.@ 76 m ) long overall ( 540 feet 0 inches ( 164 @.@ 59 m ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 73 feet 3 inches ( 22 @.@ 33 m ) , and a draught of 28 feet 9 inches ( 8 @.@ 76 m ) ( SLL ) . She was propelled by two Parsons steam turbines , double reduction geared , driving twin screws . Developing 12 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 8 @,@ 900 kW ) , they could propel the ship at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ) . 
 Magdalena had five holds for the carriage of refrigerated cargo , three forward and two aft , for a total of 460 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 13 @,@ 000 m3 ) . Internally she was divided into nine watertight compartments . She was of part @-@ riveted and part @-@ welded construction , with a double bottom . She was certificated to carry 251 crew and 529 passengers . She was assessed at 17 @,@ 547 GRT , 9 @,@ 885 NRT , 9 @,@ 725 DWT . 
 = = History = = 
 RML ordered Magdalena in 1946 . Her keel had been laid by 8 October when Harland and Wolff applied for a passenger certificate for the ship . In 1947 it was reported that delivery would be delayed until the end of 1948 and that the cost of building her would be considerably higher than the estimated cost when the order was placed . She was built to replace Highland Patriot , which had been sunk in 1940 . Magdalena was the first passenger ship built by Harland and Wolff in Belfast after the end of the war and the third @-@ largest being built in the United Kingdom at that time . 
 The ship was the third in the Royal Mail Lines fleet to carry the name Magdalena , she was built to serve on the Tilbury – Cherbourg – Vigo – Lisbon – Las Palmas – Pernambuco – Bahia – Rio de Janeiro – Santos – Montevideo – Buenos Aires route . She was launched on 11 May 1948 . Her passenger certificate was issued on 18 February 1949 . Her port of registry was London . The Official Number <unk> and Code Letters <unk> were allocated . 
 Magdalena left London on her maiden voyage on 9 March 1949 , bound for Buenos Aires , Argentina . Her captain was on his final voyage before retirement . She called at Las Palmas in the Canary Islands on 15 March , and Rio de Janeiro , Brazil on 24 March . She reached Buenos Aires , where a cargo of 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 048 t ) of meat was loaded , and called at Santos where a cargo of oranges was loaded . Carrying 237 crew and 347 passengers , she left Santos on 24 April , passing south of the Isle of <unk> and the Isle of San Sebastian . Magdalena 's course was more northerly than that intended , and adjustments were made twice on the orders of her captain . She passed Boi Point , San Sebastian at 19 : 56 and her course was altered to pass about 0 @.@ 5 nmi ( 0 @.@ 93 km ) north of the Palmas Island Lighthouse , at the entrance to Rio de Janeiro Harbour . The captain retired to bed at about 22 : 45 , leaving written orders to be called when the ship was at a bearing of 315 ° off the <unk> Lighthouse . As Magdalena was not due at Rio de Janeiro until the morning , her speed was reduced to 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ) . At 02 : 30 on 25 April , she was some 2 to 2 @.@ 5 nmi ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 6 km ) north of her intended position and another adjustment was made to her heading . By 03 : 30 , she was on course and the bearing of 315 ° to the <unk> Lighthouse was obtained at 03 : 49 , at which point the captain was called . Having checked that all was well , he left orders to be called at 04 : 30 . 
 At 04 : 00 , the watch changed ; the incoming watch were informed that the ship 's course would mean that it would pass close to the <unk> Rocks . Shortly before 04 : 30 , a fix was obtained which showed that Magdalena was again 1 ⁄ 2 nautical mile ( 930 m ) north of her intended position . The captain was called as ordered and informed that arrival off Palmas Island would be at about 05 : 07 . The first officer then took another fix as he was unsure of the accuracy of the first fix . He had just returned to the bridge when something was seen in the water ahead of them , which the Third Officer took to be a ship without lights . The order " port , 3 degrees " was given , followed by " hard @-@ a @-@ starboard " immediately before Magdalena struck the <unk> Rocks , located between the <unk> Islands and the Palmas Islands . The time of the grounding was 04 : 40 . 
 An SOS was broadcast , which was answered by the Brazilian Navy , which sent three submarine chasers and three destroyers to the scene . The passengers were ordered to take to the lifeboats . Tenders and tugs also assisted in the rescue of all passengers from Magdalena without loss of life . The sea conditions at the time were smooth . At 19 : 00 , the steam turbines had to be shut down , and power was then provided by her auxiliary diesel engines . At about 20 : 00 , the submarine chaser <unk> arrived and started to rescue the passengers . Other ships which assisted in the rescue were the tugs Comandante Triunfo , Dorat , <unk> and <unk> , and also the cargo ship <unk> . 
 Magdalena was refloated at 23 : 34 . Her No.3 compartment was flooded and she was down by the bows . Tugs were sent to tow her the 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) into Rio de Janeiro . The tow started at 07 : 00 on 26 April , making slow progress , with the ship being towed stern first and making just 3 knots ( 5 @.@ 6 km / h ) . Her bows were drawing 45 feet ( 14 m ) of water . She was abeam of Sugarloaf Mountain when she began to split in two forward of her aft superstructure . This happened as the ship was passing over a sandbank at the harbour mouth , which lay at a depth of about 45 feet ( 14 m ) . The anchors were then dropped . The remaining passengers and crew abandoned ship , with the last three leaving just before Magdalena broke up . 
 The bow section remained at anchor in the Guanabara Bay , The bow section slowly sank , being noticeably deeper in the water by 29 April . It finally sank on 30 April , with its foremast clear of the water marking its position ( 22 ° 57 ′ 05 ″ S 43 ° 7 ′ 30 ″ W ) . Much of her cargo of oranges washed up on Copacabana Beach . Salvage of the bow section was officially abandoned on 7 June . The wreck now lies in 36 to 44 feet ( 11 to 13 m ) of water . 
 The stern section drifted aground at the opposite side to the bay to where the bow section remained . The passengers ' baggage was salvaged , as well as mail being carried . Of her cargo , 450 long tons ( 457 t ) of frozen meat was salvaged , with hopes that a further 300 long tons ( 305 t ) would also be salvageable , as well as 2 @,@ 000 of the 12 @,@ 000 cases of oranges . They were shipped to the United Kingdom aboard Highland Brigade . Salvage operations were abandoned on 25 May , and it was decided to sell her remains for scrap . 
 Magdalena 's stern section was towed to <unk> Bay , and was sold for £ 50 @,@ 000 . Her steam turbines were used for many years to generate electricity for Manaus . The ship 's bell and some other small parts , including some portholes are preserved at the <unk> Yacht Club , Niterói . The wreck of the bow section was a hazard to shipping until at least the 1970s , but has since been mostly demolished . It is difficult to dive due to strong currents in the area , poor visibility and anchoring in the busy shipping lane being banned . 
 On 4 May , Magdalena was declared to be a total loss , making her the third ship built by Harland and Wolff to be lost on her maiden voyage . [ Note 1 ] Her insurers paid out £ 2 @,@ 295 @,@ 000 to Royal Mail Lines by cheque on 16 May . At the time , this was the biggest payout for a marine casualty in the United Kingdom . It was decided that a replacement ship would not be built . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 A preliminary enquiry into Magdalena 's was held at Rio de Janeiro by the British Consul @-@ General , who sent a report to the Minister of Transport , who ordered that a Court of Formal Investigation be held . The enquiry was held at the Royal Courts of Justice , London on 26 – 28 September 1949 with J. V. <unk> KC in charge , assisted by Captains Grimston and Williamson , and a Mr. Gray . Evidence was heard that the ship was seaworthy , and that the provision of rescue equipment on board either met or exceeded the required standard . The course selected was deemed to be correct , but the navigation of the ship was defective , with insufficient attention being paid to compass errors . Her captain had his master 's certificate suspended for two years . Her first officer had his certificate suspended for a year , being allowed to hold a second mate 's certificate during this time . These suspensions were effective from the date of the report 's release on 3 October 1949 . 
 = = Reunion = = 
 In April 1996 a reunion was held at Belfast of people who had either helped to build or worked on board Magdalena . It was organised by the Lagan Legacy heritage organisation . Four of the seven people contacted attended the reunion , with one coming from Australia . 
 = Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri = 
 Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri ( c . 1955 – 2008 ) was a Pintupi @-@ Luritja @-@ speaking Indigenous artist from Australia 's Western Desert region , and sister of artist Molly Jugadai Napaltjarri . Daisy Jugadai lived and painted at Haasts Bluff , Northern Territory . There she played a significant role in the establishment of Ikuntji Women 's Centre , where many artists of the region have worked . 
 Influenced by the Hermannsburg School , Jugadai 's paintings reflect her <unk> , the complex spiritual knowledge and relationships between her and her landscape . The paintings also reflect fine observation of the structures of the vegetation and environment . Jugadai 's works were selected for exhibition at the National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Awards five times between 1993 and 2001 , and she was a section winner in 2000 . Her paintings are held in major collections including the National Gallery of Victoria , National Gallery of Australia and the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory . 
 = = Life = = 
 Daisy Jugadai was born circa 1955 at Haasts Bluff , Northern Territory , daughter of artists <unk> Nangala and Timmy Jugadai Tjungurrayi . The ambiguity around the year of birth is in part because Indigenous people operate using a different conception of time from non @-@ Indigenous Australians , often estimating dates through comparisons with the occurrence of other events . 
 The people of Papunya and Haasts Bluff , such as Daisy , speak a variety of the Pintupi language referred to as Pintupi @-@ Luritja , a Western Desert dialect . Napaltjarri ( in Western Desert dialects ) or Napaljarri ( in Warlpiri ) is a skin name , one of sixteen used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people . These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners and may be associated with particular totems . Although they may be used as terms of address , they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans . Thus " Daisy Jugadai " is the element of the artist 's name that is specifically hers . 
 Jugadai 's childhood was spent at both Haasts Bluff and a nearby camp , Five Mile , while she was schooled at Papunya . She married Kelly <unk> , and they had a daughter , Agnes . They lived on an outstation , <unk> , but Daisy moved back to Haasts Bluff when Kelly died . It was not until the 1990s that she was remarried , to an Elcho Islander , after which she travelled regularly between Arnhem Land and Haasts Bluff . Jugadai died in 2008 , her funeral held at Haasts Bluff , where she was born . Daisy Jugadai had an older sister , artist Molly Jugadai Napaltjarri , and another sister , Ester , who predeceased her . 
 = = Art = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The contemporary Indigenous Australian art movement began in the western desert in 1971 , when Indigenous men at Papunya took up painting , led by elders such as <unk> Tjampitjinpa , and assisted by teacher Geoffrey Bardon . This initiative , which used acrylic paints to create designs representing body painting and ground sculptures , rapidly spread across Indigenous communities of central Australia , particularly following the commencement of a government @-@ sanctioned art program in central Australia in 1983 . By the 1980s and 1990s , such work was being exhibited internationally . The first artists , including all of the founders of the Papunya Tula artists ' company , had been men , and there was resistance amongst the Pintupi men of central Australia to women painting . However , many women in the communities wished to participate , and in the 1990s many began to create paintings . In the western desert communities such as Kintore , Yuendumu , Balgo , and on the outstations , people were beginning to create art works expressly for exhibition and sale . 
 Daisy Jugadai came from a family of painters , including her uncle Uta Uta <unk> and her mother . She learned to draw during her schooling at Papunya and Haasts Bluff , but her first experience as a painter came working on backgrounds for the pictures created by her father . From the Pintupi / Luritja language group , Daisy Jugadai was one of a range of artists who came to painting through the Ikuntji Women 's Centre in the early 1990s . She is credited with a significant role in the centre 's establishment . She began with screen printing and linocut printmaking , but quickly shifted to acrylic painting , producing many of her best works during the mid @-@ 1990s . Western Desert artists such as Daisy Jugadai will frequently paint particular ' dreamings ' or Tjukurrpa for which they have personal responsibility or rights . A complex concept , Tjukurrpa refers to the spiritual knowledge of the landscape and custodianship of it ; it also refers to laws , rules or stories that people must maintain and re @-@ produce in their communities . Daisy Jugadai portrayed in her art both those for which she had personal responsibility , and those of her late husband and late father . These included honey ant , spinifex and emu dreamings ; geographical locations that were the settings for these paintings included <unk> waterhole and <unk> , and other locations around <unk> , where her family had lived for many years . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Throughout the 1990s , Daisy Jugadai was a regular exhibitor at the Araluen Art Centre in Alice Springs , and well as other major exhibitions such as the Australian Heritage Art Awards in Canberra in 1994 . Recognition came in 1993 , in two forms : an award of a Northern Territory Women 's Fellowship ; and the purchase by the Araluen Arts Centre of a work exhibited in its annual art award . Within her community she was an administrator as well as an artist . A member of the Ikuntji Women 's Centre and a representative on Ikuntji Community Council , Daisy was one of those who successfully lobbied to have artist Marina Strocchi appointed as an art centre coordinator in the early 1990s . The respect between the two women was mutual : Daisy was one of a group of artists whose work was selected for an exhibition that toured regional Australian public galleries in 1999 – 2000 , Ikuntji <unk> – touring , which was curated by Marina Strocchi , the art centre coordinator who had first helped develop the Ikuntji centre in Haasts Bluff some years earlier . 
 Works by Daisy Jugadai are held by the National Gallery of Victoria , National Gallery of Australia and the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory . They are also held in major private collections , such as Nangara ( also known as the Ebes Collection ) , as well as by Edith Cowan University . First exhibiting in the National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Awards in 1993 , she was a finalist on several occasions including 1995 , 1998 and 2001 , and a section winner in 2000 . Her 1994 entry in the award , Karu <unk> <unk> ( Creek after rain ) , belongs to the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory . Her work is also featured alongside other Indigenous artists such as Gloria Petyarre in the Melbourne international airport terminal , completed in 1996 . <unk> , near Five Mile , a 1998 painting , has appeared as cover art on an issue of the Medical Journal of Australia . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Alone amongst the Ikuntji artists , Daisy Jugadai worked at an easel . She cited the Hermannsburg School , a group of Indigenous artists including Albert <unk> who began painting at Hermannsburg Mission in the 1930s , as an influence on her work . Memory and Five Mile Creek ( 1995 ) represents the country of her childhood . It shows the hills of the region in elevation rather than in plan , and represents the range of vegetation typical of that country . Curator Marina Strocchi notes how Daisy Jugadai 's painting reflects close observation of the complex structures of the vegetation and environment , its features " obsessively detailed " , with the artist " devotedly [ including ] all the bush tucker of that area " , as well as choosing " a time of year in which to depict her country " . Vegetation would be carefully painted with a trimmed brush , while even finer detail , such as pollen , would be rendered using a matchstick . Clouds were always the final features to be included . Despite this devotion to detail , Daisy preferred to paint large canvasses . Memory and Five Mile Creek was included in the National Gallery of Victoria 's 2004 – 05 exhibition " Aboriginal Art Post 1984 " and reviewer Miriam <unk> , while noting its " naive charm " , also drew attention to the work 's title and the implication that , like other more explicitly political painters of her era , " she too is talking of violent dispossession " . 
 Artist Mandy Martin , who participated in a 2005 collaboration with several painters from the Haasts Bluff region , thought that Daisy 's rendering of bush tucker was achieved with a " stylised but dazzling personal language " . Writer and critic Morag Fraser described Daisy 's work as " extraordinary " , observing that in Daisy 's paintings " nature is so wholly internalised , and its rendering so uninhibited . " A distinguished artist in her community , her death coincided with a vigorous renewal of artistic expression amongst her successors . 
 = Murder of <unk> Harvey = 
 <unk> " Steve " Harvey was a Jamaican activist who campaigned for the rights of those living with HIV / AIDS in Jamaican society . In November 2005 he was abducted from his home and murdered in a robbery that some commentators believed was also a homophobic hate crime . Openly gay , Harvey had worked for Jamaica AIDS Support for Life ( JASL ) since 1997 , becoming the group 's coordinator for Kingston . In this position , he focused on distributing information and services surrounding HIV / AIDS to the most marginalised sectors of Jamaican society , among them prisoners , sex workers , and lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) people . In 2005 , he was selected as the Latin America and Caribbean Council of AIDS Service Organizations ' project coordinator for Jamaica . 
 In November 2005 , three men carrying guns broke into his home , removing any valuables . They asked if he was gay , and when he refused to respond they kidnapped him , later shooting him dead and dumping the body elsewhere . The police subsequently arrested four individuals and charged them with murder in the furtherance of a robbery . The accused remained in police custody for almost ten years before the case came to court . At that point , the police dropped their murder charges against two of the accused . The other two , Dwayne Owen and Andrew West , went on trial and were found unanimously guilty of murder by a jury . Although prosecutors had requested capital punishment in the case , the judge sentenced them to life in prison with a minimum of thirty years before becoming eligible for parole . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Harvey 's biography = = = 
 In 1997 , Harvey became involved with Jamaica AIDS Support for Life ( JASL ) , an organisation that was a partner of Christian Aid . He became the group 's Kingston co @-@ ordinator , and in this position primarily worked to ensure that the marginalised groups within the country – including prisoners , sex workers , and lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) people – had access to information about the HIV / AIDS virus . He was selected as Jamaica 's representative at the Latin America and Caribbean Council of AIDS Service Organizations . He was also a registered delegate to the conference of the People 's National Party . In the week preceding his death , Harvey led JASL 's annual candle @-@ lit vigil in memory of those who had died as a result of AIDS . 
 = = = Anti @-@ LGBT sentiment in Jamaica = = = 
 In 2006 , Time magazine asked whether Jamaica was " the most homophobic place on Earth " , and answered that it " may be the worst offender " . The country 's laws criminalising same @-@ sex activity between males were introduced in 1864 , during the British colonial administration . According to the Sexual Offences Act of 2009 , any man convicted under these laws must register as a sex offender . These laws have been cited as contributing to wider homophobic attitudes among the Jamaican populace , including the view that gay people are criminals regardless of whether or not they have committed any crime . Anti @-@ LGBT perspectives have been furthered by the island 's conservative Christian churches . Many reggae and dancehall songs , among them Buju Banton 's " Boom Bye Bye " , call for the killing of gays . Writing for the International Business Times in the summer of 2013 , the journalist Palash Gosh noted that while Jamaica was " awash in crime and violence , gays and lesbians are particularly prominent targets of wanton brutality . " In the summer of 2013 , Human Rights Watch carried out five weeks of fieldwork among Jamaica 's LGBT community , reporting that over half of those interviewed had experienced violence as a result of their sexual orientation or gender identity , sometimes on more than one occasion . 
 = = Murder = = 
 On the night of Wednesday 30 November 2005 , three armed men broke into Harvey 's home , confronting him and his two roommates and demanding money . The intruders said " We hear that you are gay " and while the two room mates denied this , Harvey – who was openly gay – remained silent . The two room mates were bound and gagged while Harvey was forced to carry valuables to the criminal 's car . At gunpoint , they forced him into the car and abducted him . 
 Two hours later , Harvey 's corpse was found at Pinewood Terrace , a rural area far from his home ; his body had gunshot wounds in the head and back . Harvey 's clothes , suitcases , jewellery , cellphones , and watches were recovered by police . Reporter Gary Younge expressed the view that the killing " appears to have been a homophobic attack " , while an editorial in The New York Times noted that " the Harvey killing has the earmarks of a hate crime " . 
 = = = Arrest and trial = = = 
 Following investigations , in 2005 police arrested four individuals – Dwayne Owen , Andrew West , Ryan Wilson , and <unk> Gibson – charging them all with committing murder in the furtherance of a robbery . The accused were from an area known as Vietnam in Grant 's Pen . Defence lawyers repeatedly complained that the prosecution had been late in handing over relevant documents to them . 
 The case was brought before the Home Circuit Court on April 24 , 2014 , however it could not proceed because important documents had not been served on the defence . The witnesses for the case , who included ten police officers and two civilians , were bound over . Senior <unk> Judge Gloria Smith stated that no further adjournments of the case would be permitted , ordering the Director of Public Prosecutions to make full disclosure to the defence , and insisting that the trial must start on May 19 . In her words , " This case has been going on for far too long and has reached the point where something must happen . " However , on that date the trial was postponed again due to the unavailability of a courtroom , being rescheduled for June 1 . At that date it was again postponed , this time due to a shortage of available jurors , with the new date being set for July 7 . 
 In early July 2014 , the prosecution announced that they were dropping all charges against Wilson , who was declared free to go after over eight years in prison . They had determined that at the time of the murder he had been in custody at the Constant Spring Police Station . The prosecution also stated that it was dropping the murder charges against Gibson , who would instead be charged with misprision of felony . After a three week trial , in late July a twelve @-@ person jury unanimously found both Owen and West guilty of murder . The state prosecutors , Kathy Pryce and Karen Seymour Johnson , requested that Owen and West face the death penalty . However , in November Justice Lloyd Hibbert sentenced them to life in prison , stipulating that they must serve a minimum of thirty years before becoming eligible for parole . He stated that in sentencing the pair he took into account the fact that they had already spent a decade in custody . In December , both Owen and West launched appeals against their conviction . 
 Independently of the Harvey case , West was also charged with being involved in the murder of Jamie Lue , a financial analyst at Alliance Capital Limited , who had been abducted , robbed and killed in December 2005 . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 In December 2005 , the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS ( UNAIDS ) issued a statement expressing the view that " Harvey 's death is a profound shock and loss not only to the AIDS movement in Jamaica and the Caribbean , but to the whole world " , furthermore calling on the Jamaican government to ensure that Harvey 's killers be found and convicted . Rebecca Schleifer , a researcher with Human Rights Watch 's HIV / AIDS and Human Rights Program , stated that Harvey was " a person of extraordinary bravery and integrity , who worked tirelessly to ensure that some of Jamaica 's most marginalized people had the tools and information to protect themselves from HIV / AIDS " . 
 According to Peter Tatchell of the British LGBT rights organisation OutRage ! , " It is thanks to the efforts of Steve and his colleagues that many Jamaican men and women - both gay and straight - have not contracted HIV . They have helped save hundreds of lives . " The Guyanese Society Against Sexual Orientation Discrimination issued a press release condemning Harvey 's killing and calling for the perpetrators to be convicted . 
 = Spinner shark = 
 The spinner shark ( Carcharhinus brevipinna ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , named for the spinning leaps it makes as a part of its feeding strategy . This species occurs in tropical and warm temperate waters worldwide , except for in the eastern Pacific Ocean . It is found from coastal to offshore habitats to a depth of 100 m ( 330 ft ) , though it prefers shallow water . The spinner shark resembles a larger version of the blacktip shark ( C. limbatus ) , with a slender body , long snout , and black @-@ marked fins . This species can be distinguished from the blacktip shark by the first dorsal fin , which has a different shape and is placed further back , and by the black tip on the anal fin ( in adults only ) . It attains a maximum length of 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . 
 Spinner sharks are swift and gregarious predators that feed on a wide variety of small bony fishes and cephalopods . When feeding on schools of forage fish , they will speed vertically through the school while spinning on their axis , erupting from the water at the end . Like other members of its family , the spinner shark is viviparous , with females bearing litters of three to 20 young every other year . The newborns are born in shallow nursery areas near the coast , and are relatively fast @-@ growing . This species is not usually dangerous to humans , but may become belligerent when excited by food . Spinner sharks are valued by commercial fisheries across their range for their meat , fins , liver oil , and skin . They are also esteemed as strong fighters by recreational fishers . The IUCN has assessed this species as Near Threatened worldwide and Vulnerable off the southeastern United States . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The spinner shark was originally described as Carcharias ( <unk> ) brevipinna by Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle in their 1839 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen , based on the mounted skin of a 79 @-@ cm @-@ long specimen collected off Java . This species was subsequently moved to the genera <unk> , Squalus , and <unk> before being placed within the genus Carcharhinus . The tooth shape and coloration of this species varies significantly with age and between geographical regions , which caused much taxonomic confusion . Other common names include <unk> shark , great blacktip shark , <unk> shark , large blacktip shark , long @-@ nose grey shark , longnose grey whaler , and <unk> shark . 
 Based on similarities in morphology , tooth shape , and behavior , the closest relatives of the spinner shark were originally believed to be the blacktip shark and the graceful shark ( C. amblyrhynchoides ) . However , this interpretation was not supported by Gavin Naylor 's 1992 allozyme analysis , which suggested that these similarities are the product of convergent evolution and that the closest relative of the spinner shark is the copper shark ( C. brachyurus ) . In a 2007 ribosomal DNA study , the spinner shark was found to be the most genetically divergent of all the requiem shark species examined save for the tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) , being less related to other Carcharhinus species than the lemon shark ( Negaprion brevirostris ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Some uncertainty exists in the distribution data for the spinner shark due to confusion with the blacktip shark . In the western Atlantic Ocean , it occurs from North Carolina to the northern Gulf of Mexico , including the Bahamas and Cuba , and from southern Brazil to Argentina . In the eastern Atlantic , it occurs from off North Africa to Namibia . In the Indian Ocean , it is found from South Africa and Madagascar , to the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden , to India and nearby islands , to Java and Sumatra . In the Pacific Ocean , it occurs off Japan , Vietnam , Australia , and possibly the Philippines . <unk> evidence suggests that Indian Ocean spinner sharks have passed through the Suez Canal into the Mediterranean Sea , becoming Lessepsian migrants . 
 The spinner shark has been reported from ocean surface to a depth of 100 m ( 330 ft ) , though it prefers water less than 30 m ( 98 ft ) deep , and occupies all levels of the water column . This species may be found from coastal waters to well offshore , over continental and insular shelves . Juveniles have been known to enter bays , but avoid brackish conditions . The northwest Atlantic subpopulation is known to be migratory ; in spring and summer , they are found in warm inshore waters , and in winter they move south into deeper water . 
 = = Description = = 
 The average spinner shark is 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long and weighs 56 kg ( 123 lb ) ; this species attains a maximum known length and weight of 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) and 90 kg ( 200 lb ) . Indo @-@ Pacific sharks are generally larger than those from the northwest Atlantic . This species has a slim , streamlined body with a distinctive , long , pointed snout . The eyes are small and circular . There are prominent forward @-@ pointing furrows at the corners of the mouth . The tooth rows number 15 – 18 in each half of the upper jaw and 14 – 17 in each half of the lower jaw , with two and one tiny symphysial ( central ) teeth , respectively . The teeth have long , narrow central cusps and are finely serrated in the upper jaw and smooth in the lower jaw . The five pairs of gill slits are long . 
 The first dorsal fin is relatively small and usually originates behind the free rear tip of the pectoral fins . No ridge exists between the first and second dorsal fins . The pectoral fins are moderately short , narrow , and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) . The body is densely covered with diamond @-@ shaped dermal denticles with seven ( rarely five ) shallow horizontal ridges . The coloration is gray above , sometimes with a bronze sheen , and white below , with a faint white band on the sides . Young individuals have unmarked fins ; the tips of the second dorsal fin , pectoral fins , anal fin , and lower caudal fin lobe ( and sometimes the other fins , as well ) are black in larger individuals . The spinner shark differs from the blacktip shark in that its first dorsal fin is slightly more triangular in shape and is placed further back on the body . Adults can also be distinguished by the black tip on the anal fin . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The spinner shark is a fast , active swimmer that sometimes forms large schools , segregated by age and sex . Young individuals prefer cooler water temperatures than adults . Off South Africa , females are found close to shore year @-@ round while males only appear during the summer . Smaller spinner sharks may be preyed upon by larger sharks . Known parasites of the spinner shark include the copepods Kroyeria <unk> , Nemesis <unk> , and N. atlantica , which infest the shark 's gills , Alebion <unk> , which infests the skin , Nesippus orientalis , which infests the mouth and gill arches , and Perissopus dentatus , which infests the nares and the rear margins of the fins . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Spinner sharks feed primarily on small bony fish , including <unk> , sardines , herring , anchovies , sea catfish , lizardfish , mullets , bluefish , tunas , <unk> , croakers , jacks , mojarras , and tongue @-@ soles . They have also been known to eat stingrays , cuttlefish , squid , and octopus . Groups of spinner sharks are often found pursuing schools of prey at high speed . Individual prey are seized and swallowed whole , as this shark lacks cutting dentition . This species employs an unusual tactic when feeding on schools of small fish ; the shark charges vertically through the school , spinning on its axis with its mouth open and snapping all around it . The shark 's momentum at the end of these spiraling runs often carries it into the air , giving it its common name . The blacktip shark also performs this behavior , though not as often . Off Madagascar , spinner sharks follow migrating schools of mackerel , tunas , and jacks . Like blacktip sharks , they congregate around shrimp trawlers to feed on the discarded bycatch , and may be incited into feeding frenzies . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other requiem sharks , the spinner shark is viviparous . Adult females have a single functional ovary and two functional uteri ; each uterus is divided into compartments , one for each embryo . The embryos are initially sustained by a yolk sac . When the embryo grows to around 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) long , the supply of yolk has been exhausted and the empty yolk sac develops into a placental connection through which the mother provides nutrients for the remainder of gestation . This species has the smallest ova relative to the fully developed embryo of any viviparous shark known . Females give birth to three to 20 ( usually seven to 11 ) pups every other year , after a gestation period of 11 – 15 months . Mating occurs from early spring to summer , and parturition in August off North Africa , from April to May off South Africa , and from March to April in the northwestern Atlantic . Young are birthed in coastal nursery areas such as bays , beaches , and high @-@ salinity estuaries in water deeper than 5 m ( 16 ft ) . 
 The length at birth is 66 – 77 cm ( 26 – 30 in ) in the northwestern Atlantic , 61 – 69 cm ( 24 – 27 in ) off Tunisia , and 60 cm ( 24 in ) off South Africa . Spinner sharks are relatively fast @-@ growing sharks : 30 cm ( 12 in ) per year for newborns , 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) per year for one @-@ year @-@ olds , 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) per year for adolescents , and 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) per year for adults . In the northwestern Atlantic , males mature at 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long and females at 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 6 m ( 4 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 2 ft ) long , corresponding to ages of 4 – 5 years and 7 – 8 years , respectively . Off South Africa , males mature at 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and females at 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) . Spinner sharks generally do not reproduce until they are 12 – 14 years old . The maximum lifespan has been estimated at 15 – 20 years or more . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Ordinarily , spinner sharks do not pose a substantial danger to humans ; they do not perceive large mammals as prey , as their small , narrow teeth are adapted for grasping rather than cutting . However , they can become excited by the presence of food , so caution is warranted if this species is encountered while <unk> . As of 2008 , the International Shark Attack File listed 16 unprovoked attacks and one provoked attack attributable to the spinner shark , none of them fatal . 
 The meat of the spinner shark is of high quality and sold fresh or dried and salted . In addition , the fins are used for shark fin soup in East Asia , the liver oil is processed for vitamins , and the skin is made into leather products . Spinner sharks are an important catch of the US commercial shark fisheries operating in the northwestern Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico . The meat is marketed under the name " blacktip shark " in the United States , due to that species being considered superior in quality by consumers . It is likely also caught by other fisheries across its range , going unreported owing to confusion with the blacktip shark . The spinner shark is also highly regarded by recreational fishers , being described as a " spectacular fighter " that often leaps out of the water . 
 The IUCN has assessed the spinner shark as Near Threatened worldwide and Vulnerable in the northwest Atlantic ; its frequent use of coastal habitats render it vulnerable to human exploitation and habitat degradation . The Northwest Atlantic fishery for this species is managed under the US National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) 1999 Fishery Management Plan ( FMP ) for Atlantic Tunas , Swordfish and Sharks . For the purposes of commercial quotas and recreational bag limits , the spinner shark is categorized as a " large coastal shark " . 
 = Sagtikos State Parkway = 
 The Sagtikos State Parkway , also known as the Sagtikos or Sagtikos Parkway , known colloquially as " the Sag " is a 5 @.@ 14 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 27 km ) north – south limited @-@ access parkway in Suffolk County on Long Island , New York , in the United States . It begins at an interchange with the Southern and Heckscher state parkways in the hamlet of West Islip and goes north to a large cloverleaf interchange with the Northern State Parkway in the town of Smithtown , where the Sagtikos ends and the road becomes the Sunken Meadow State Parkway . The parkway comprises the southern half of New York State Route <unk> ( NY <unk> ) , an unsigned reference route , with the Sunken Meadow State Parkway forming the northern portion . Commercial vehicles are prohibited from using the Sagtikos State Parkway , a restriction that applies to most parkways in the state . 
 The parkway was proposed to help bridge a gap in the eastern part of the Long Island Parkway system . Construction began in 1949 with the opening of an interchange between Bay Shore Road and the Southern State Parkway . Work on the parkway itself began the following year , with plans calling for connections to three spurs : the Captree State Parkway ( now Robert Moses Causeway ) , the Sunken Meadow Spur ( Sunken Meadow State Parkway ) , and the Heckscher Spur ( Heckscher State Parkway ) . The parkway was completed in 1952 , closing the highway loop on Long Island . In 2001 , a study by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) called for the Sagtikos State Parkway to be widened to include new bus and carpool lanes from end to end . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Sagtikos State Parkway begins at an interchange with the Southern and Heckscher state parkways in the hamlet of West Islip , just north of the Robert Moses Causeway 's junction with the Southern State Parkway . Heading southbound , this junction is signed as exit S4 . The parkway proceeds northward through the town of Islip as a four @-@ lane divided highway , passing through residential parts of the adjacent hamlet of Brentwood to reach exit S3 , a partial cloverleaf interchange with Pine Aire Drive . Just north of the junction , the highway passes over the Main Line of the Long Island Rail Road . Continuing northward through Islip , the Sagtikos Parkway leaves Brentwood ahead of exit S2 , a connection to County Route 13 ( CR 13 , named Crooked Hill Road ) . The southbound exit serves CR 13 by way of access roads through the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center while the northbound direction uses part of G Road to reach CR 13 and Suffolk County Community College 's Grant Campus . 
 Past the exit , the Sagtikos State Parkway crosses under CR 13 and immediately enters exit S1 , a large modified cloverleaf interchange with the Long Island Expressway ( Interstate 495 or I @-@ 495 ) . The junction brings the parkway into the town of Smithtown , where it bends northwestward and parallels CR 67 ( Vanderbilt Motor Parkway ) for a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) through the town 's Commack section . CR 67 eventually turns westward to pass under the Sagtikos Parkway , at which point the parkway curves back to the north and enters exit <unk> , a cloverleaf interchange serving as the Northern State Parkway 's exit 44 . The Sagtikos State Parkway name ends here while the highway continues northward toward Long Island 's North Shore as the Sunken Meadow State Parkway . 
 According to annual average daily traffic counts compiled in 2011 by NYSDOT , the most @-@ traveled stretch of the Sagtikos State Parkway was the portion between the Southern State Parkway and the Long Island Expressway . The part between the Southern State and Pine Aire Drive handled an average of 87 @,@ 250 vehicles per day ; slightly lower numbers were recorded along the segment between Pine Aire Drive and the Long Island Expressway , with roughly 85 @,@ 300 vehicles using the section on a daily basis . The portion between the Long Island Expressway and the Northern State Parkway carries an average of 67 @,@ 600 vehicles per day . All three segments saw a rise in traffic over the course of the previous decade , with the Pine Aire Drive – Long Island Expressway segment gaining 14 @,@ 000 vehicles per day during that time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and opening = = = 
 The Sagtikos State Parkway was first proposed in the 1920s as a connector between the Northern and Southern state parkways . In order to construct the freeway , the heirs of the late David Gardiner , who owned the historic Sagtikos Manor in West Bay Shore , donated 197 acres ( 80 ha ) of land to the Long Island State Park Commission ( LISPC ) . This donation was considered unusual by the commission as it would break up the family 's estate , which had been constructed in 1692 and served George Washington in 1780 . In addition to this donation , James Fisher , a nearby resident , gave the commission 23 @.@ 5 acres ( 9 @.@ 5 ha ) of land north of the Gardiner property and another 0 @.@ 3 acres ( 0 @.@ 12 ha ) north of the Fisher property to ensure that LISPC had the necessary right @-@ of @-@ way for the new parkway . 
 The right @-@ of @-@ way on which the parkway was built had originally been part of a private road leading to Sagtikos Manor . The parkway was designed to have connections with the Sunken Meadow Spur ( the future Sunken Meadow State Parkway ) and the Captree State Parkway ( now known as the Robert Moses Causeway ) proposed by New York City highway engineer Robert Moses . On November 13 , 1949 , a new interchange between the Southern State Parkway and Bay Shore Road was opened to traffic . This interchange would eventually serve as the Southern State Parkway 's junction with the Sagtikos , Heckscher and Captree state parkways . Proposals conceived at this time called for grading on the new Sagtikos State Parkway to begin in early 1950 . 
 In March 1950 , $ 3 million ( 1950 USD ) was earmarked out of a $ 104 @.@ 5 million budget for the start of construction on the parkway . The contract for paving 4 @.@ 76 miles ( 7 @.@ 66 km ) of the Sagtikos Parkway was awarded by the New York State Department of Public Works on June 7 , 1951 , to Hudson Contracting Corporation of Kew Gardens , who entered a bid of $ 1 @,@ 407 @,@ 037 ( 1951 USD ) for the project . The remainder of the parkway was paved as part of a contract valued around $ 418 @,@ 000 ( 1951 USD ) and let by the state on July 11 . A 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) stretch of the Northern State Parkway was also built as part of the project . On September 29 , 1952 , an extension of the Northern State Parkway , Southern State Parkway , and the entire length of the Sagtikos State Parkway were opened without celebration . Robert Moses commented that the completed parkway reflected LISPC 's objective to construct well @-@ designed recreational facilities . 
 = = = Roadway improvements = = = 
 From 1997 – 2001 , engineers from NYSDOT worked on a $ 6 @.@ 5 million ( 2001 USD ) study aimed to improve Long Island 's transportation system by 2020 . The resulting plan included proposals to widen 130 miles ( 210 km ) of roads , including the entirety of the Sagtikos State Parkway from the Southern to Northern state parkways . These proposals would give the Sagtikos a restricted @-@ access lane for buses and carpooling drivers , which would be part of a 60 @-@ mile ( 97 km ) system of similar lanes across Long Island . 
 In 2002 , the Wolkoffs , a family of real estate developers , bought land used by the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center for $ 20 million ( 2002 USD ) with the intent of replacing the property with a new smart growth community named Heartland Town Square . The community , situated near the junction of the Sagtikos Parkway and the Long Island Expressway , would have 9 @,@ 000 housing units and various commercial and recreational buildings . As part of the redevelopment of the property , a study was done on the existing facilities and the surrounding area , which noted several deficiencies in the area 's transportation system , including several related to the Sagtikos . The study determined that the deficiencies would be " exacerbated " if no changes were made . 
 In response , the study suggested that a third lane be constructed along the Sagtikos from the Southern State Parkway to the Long Island Expressway . The bridges over the Sagtikos at Campus Road and Crooked Hill Road ( CR 13 ) would have to be reconstructed to make room for the added lane , and the interchange with Pine Aire Drive ( exit S3 ) would be completely rebuilt . A new interchange would also be constructed on the parkway between Pine Aire Drive and Campus Road , creating a junction with CR 100 . The project would cost $ 4 billion ( 2011 USD ) and be built in phases for 15 – 20 years . 
 As of 2012 , progress on the project has been stalled by disagreements between the Wolkoffs and the town of Islip over the amount the Wolkoffs will spend for the transportation piece of the project , and between the family and labor unions over wages and health care . The town of Islip has stated that the Wolkoffs agreed to spend $ 75 million ( 2011 USD ) for the infrastructure improvements ; however , the family stated in a September 2011 letter that they would only commit to $ 27 million ( 2011 USD ) and that they never agreed to the original figure . Gerald <unk> thought that the discrepancy stemmed from his belief that transportation should be funded by the government , not from private sources , as his project would generate tax revenue for the government . Despite the issues surrounding the project , the Heartland project received $ 2 @.@ 5 million from the State of New York for roadway improvements in December 2011 . The funding was part of a $ 101 million ( 2011 USD ) package given to Long Island for various economic improvements . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Suffolk County . 
 = Lanthanum = 
 Lanthanum is a soft , ductile , silvery @-@ white metallic chemical element with symbol La and atomic number 57 . It tarnishes rapidly when exposed to air and is soft enough to be cut with a knife . It gave its name to the lanthanide series , a group of 15 similar elements between lanthanum and lutetium in the periodic table . It is also sometimes considered the first element of the 6th @-@ period transition metals , and is traditionally counted among the rare earth elements . As such , it almost always assumes the oxidation state + 3 . Lanthanum has no biological role and is not very toxic . 
 Lanthanum usually occurs together with cerium and the other rare earth elements . Lanthanum was first found by the Swedish chemist Carl Gustav Mosander in 1839 as an impurity in cerium nitrate – hence the name lanthanum , from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " to lie hidden " . Although it is classified as a rare earth element , lanthanum is the 28th most abundant element in the Earth 's crust , being just under three times as abundant as lead . In minerals such as monazite and bastnäsite , lanthanum makes up about a quarter of the lanthanide content . It is extracted from these minerals using a process of such complexity that pure lanthanum metal was not isolated until 1923 . 
 Lanthanum compounds have numerous applications as catalysts , additives in glass , carbon lighting for studio lighting and projection , ignition elements in lighters and torches , electron cathodes , scintillators , GTAW electrodes , and others . Lanthanum carbonate has been approved as a medicine for treating renal failure . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Lanthanum is the first element and prototype of the lanthanide series . In the periodic table , it appears to the right of the alkaline earth metal barium and to the left of the lanthanide cerium . Lanthanum is often considered to be a group 3 element , along with its lighter congeners scandium and yttrium and its heavier congener , the radioactive actinium , although this classification is sometimes disputed . Similarly to scandium , yttrium , and actinium , the 57 electrons of a lanthanum atom are arranged in the configuration [ Xe ] 5d16s2 , with three valence electrons outside the noble gas core . In chemical reactions , lanthanum almost always gives up these three valence electrons from the 5d and 6s subshells to form the + 3 oxidation state , achieving the stable configuration of the preceding noble gas xenon . Some lanthanum ( II ) compounds are also known , but they are much less stable . 
 Among the lanthanides , lanthanum is exceptional as it does not have any 4f electrons ; indeed , the sudden contraction and lowering of energy of the 4f orbital that is important for the chemistry of the lanthanides only begins to happen at cerium . Thus it is only very weakly paramagnetic , unlike the strongly paramagnetic later lanthanides ( with the exceptions of the last two , ytterbium and lutetium , where the 4f shell is completely full ) . Furthermore , since the melting points of the trivalent lanthanides are related to the extent of hybridisation of the 6s , 5d , and 4f electrons , lanthanum has the second @-@ lowest ( after cerium ) melting point among all the lanthanides : 920 ° C. The lanthanides become harder as the series is traversed : as expected , lanthanum is a soft metal . Lanthanum has a relatively high resistivity of 615 <unk> at room temperature ; in comparison , the value for the good conductor aluminium is only 26 @.@ 50 <unk> . Lanthanum is the least volatile of the lanthanides . Like most of the lanthanides , lanthanum has a hexagonal crystal structure at room temperature . At 310 ° C , lanthanum changes to a face @-@ centered cubic structure , and at 865 ° C , it changes to a body @-@ centered cubic structure . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 As expected from periodic trends , lanthanum has the largest atomic radius of the lanthanides and the stable group 3 elements . Hence , it is the most reactive among them , tarnishing slowly in air and burning readily to form lanthanum ( III ) oxide , La2O3 , which is almost as basic as calcium oxide . A centimeter @-@ sized sample of lanthanum will corrode completely in a year as its oxide spalls off like iron rust , instead of forming a protective oxide coating like aluminium and its lighter congeners scandium and yttrium . Lanthanum reacts with the halogens at room temperature to form the trihalides , and upon warming will form binary compounds with the nonmetals nitrogen , carbon , sulfur , phosphorus , boron , selenium , silicon and arsenic . Lanthanum reacts slowly with water to form lanthanum ( III ) hydroxide , La ( OH ) 3 . In dilute sulfuric acid , lanthanum readily forms the <unk> tripositive ion [ La ( H2O ) 9 ] 3 + : this is colorless in aqueous solution since La3 + has no f electrons . Lanthanum is the strongest and hardest base among the lanthanides . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring lanthanum is made up of two isotopes , the stable 139La and the primordial long @-@ lived radioisotope 138La . 139La is by far the most abundant , making up 99 @.@ 910 % of natural lanthanum : it is produced in the s @-@ process ( slow neutron capture , which occurs in low- to medium @-@ mass stars ) and the r @-@ process ( rapid neutron capture , which occurs in core @-@ collapse supernovae ) . The very rare isotope 138La is one of the few primordial odd @-@ odd nuclei , with a long half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 05 × 1011 years : it is one of the proton @-@ rich p @-@ nuclei which cannot be produced in the s- or r @-@ processes . 138La , along with the even rarer 180mTa , is produced in the ν @-@ process , where neutrinos interact with stable nuclei . All other lanthanum isotopes are synthetic : with the exception of <unk> with a half @-@ life of about 60 @,@ 000 years , all of them have half @-@ lives less than a day , and most have half @-@ lives less than a minute . The isotopes 139La and <unk> occur as fission products of uranium . 
 = = = Position in the periodic table = = = 
 Traditionally , from the 1940s , lanthanum has been placed under scandium and yttrium in group 3 of the periodic table , as its differentiating electron from the previous element goes into a d @-@ orbital . This results in a consistent set of electron configurations in group 3 ( Sc : [ Ar ] <unk> ; Y : [ Kr ] <unk> ; La : [ Xe ] 5d16s2 ) . However , this position has sometimes been disputed , on the grounds that yttrium and to a lesser extent scandium are closer in their chemical properties to lutetium than lanthanum . Indeed , early techniques on separating the rare earths relied on the distinction between the early lanthanides in the cerium group ( whose sodium double sulfates dissolve in water with difficulty ) and the late ones ( as well as yttrium ) in the yttrium group ( whose sodium double sulfates are very water @-@ soluble ) , prompting some researchers in the 1920s and 1930s to place lutetium under yttrium instead . Since the differentiating electron between ytterbium and lutetium also goes into a d @-@ orbital , both lutetium and lanthanum appear by this argument as equally valid candidates for being the third member of group 3 . 
 Many of the discrepancies between lanthanum and the lighter group 3 elements can simply be explained by its larger size , as expected from periodic trends , as it precedes the lanthanide contraction that makes the early period 6 transition metals so similar to their period 5 homologs . This phenomenon , based on the poor shielding of nuclear charge by the 4f electrons that are added across the lanthanide series , results in a decrease of ionic and atomic radii across the lanthanide series , resulting in the early period 6 transition metals ( just after the lanthanides ) until about rhenium to be very similar to their period 5 homologs . This same effect makes yttrium more similar to lutetium ( [ Xe ] 4f145d16s2 ) than lanthanum , although scandium still shows many differences from lutetium because it is even smaller . Unlike all the other lanthanides , no lanthanum ions have any electrons in f @-@ orbitals ( La + : [ Xe ] <unk> ; <unk> + : [ Xe ] <unk> ; La3 + : [ Xe ] ) , and in lanthanum metal the f @-@ orbitals are core @-@ like and localized . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Lanthanum oxide is a white solid that can be prepared by direct reaction of its constituent elements . Due to the large size of the La3 + ion , La2O3 adopts a hexagonal 7 @-@ coordinate structure that changes to the 6 @-@ coordinate structure of scandium oxide ( Sc2O3 ) and yttrium oxide ( <unk> ) at high temperature . When it reacts with water , lanthanum hydroxide is formed : a lot of heat is evolved in the reaction and a hissing sound is heard . Lanthanum hydroxide will react with <unk> carbon dioxide to form the basic carbonate . 
 Lanthanum fluoride is insoluble in water and can be used as a qualitative test for the presence of La3 + . The heavier halides are all very soluble deliquescent compounds . The anhydrous halides are produced by direct reaction of their elements , as heating the hydrates causes hydrolysis : for example , heating hydrated LaCl3 produces <unk> . 
 Lanthanum reacts <unk> with hydrogen to produce the dihydride LaH2 , a black , pyrophoric , brittle , conducting compound with the calcium fluoride structure . This is a non @-@ stoichiometric compound , and further absorption of hydrogen is possible , with a concomitant loss of electrical conductivity , until the more salt @-@ like <unk> is reached . Like <unk> and <unk> , LaH2 is probably an electride compound . 
 Due to the large ionic radius and great electropositivity of La3 + , there is not much covalent contribution to its bonding and hence it has a limited coordination chemistry , like yttrium and the other lanthanides . Lanthanum oxalate does not dissolve very much in alkali @-@ metal oxalate solutions , and [ La ( acac ) 3 ( H2O ) 2 ] decomposes around 500 ° C. Oxygen is the most common donor atom in lanthanum complexes , which are mostly ionic and often have high coordination numbers over 6 : 8 is the most characteristic , forming square antiprismatic and <unk> structures . These high @-@ coordinate species , reaching up to coordination number 12 with the use of chelating ligands such as in <unk> ( SO4 ) 3 · <unk> , often have a low degree of symmetry because of <unk> factors . 
 Lanthanum chemistry tends not to involve π bonding due to the electron configuration of the element : thus its organometallic chemistry is quite limited . The best @-@ characterised <unk> compounds are the cyclopentadienyl complex La ( C5H5 ) 3 , which is produced by reacting anhydrous LaCl3 with NaC5H5 in tetrahydrofuran , and its methyl @-@ substituted derivatives . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1751 , the Swedish mineralogist Axel Fredrik Cronstedt discovered a heavy mineral from the mine at <unk> , later named cerite . Thirty years later , the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Vilhelm <unk> , from the family owning the mine , sent a sample of it to Carl Scheele , who did not find any new elements within . In 1803 , after <unk> had become an ironmaster , he returned to the mineral with Jöns Jacob Berzelius and isolated a new oxide which they named ceria after the dwarf planet Ceres , which had been discovered two years earlier . <unk> was simultaneously independently isolated in Germany by Martin Heinrich Klaproth . Between 1839 and 1843 , ceria was shown to be a mixture of oxides by the Swedish surgeon and chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander , who lived in the same house as Berzelius : he separated out two other oxides which he named <unk> and <unk> . He partially decomposed a sample of cerium nitrate by roasting it in air and then treating the resulting oxide with dilute nitric acid . Since lanthanum 's properties differed only slightly from those of cerium , and occurred along with it in its salts , he named it from the Ancient Greek <unk> [ <unk> ] ( lit. to lie hidden ) . Relatively pure lanthanum metal was first isolated in 1923 . 
 = = Occurrence and production = = 
 Lanthanum is the third @-@ most abundant of all the lanthanides , making up 39 mg / kg of the Earth 's crust , behind neodymium at 41 @.@ 5 mg / kg and cerium at 66 @.@ 5 mg / kg . It is almost three times as abundant as lead in the Earth 's crust . Despite being among the so @-@ called " rare earth metals " , lanthanum is thus not actually rare at all , but it is historically so named because it is indeed rarer than " common earths " such as lime and magnesia , and historically only a few deposits were known . Lanthanum is taken into consideration as a rare earth metal because the process to mine it is difficult , time @-@ consuming and expensive . 
 The La3 + ion is similarly @-@ sized to the early lanthanides of the cerium group ( those up to samarium and europium ) that immediately follow in the periodic table , and hence it tends to occur along with them in phosphate , silicate and carbonate minerals , such as monazite ( <unk> ) and bastnäsite ( <unk> ) , where M refers to all the rare earth metals except scandium and the radioactive promethium ( mostly Ce , La , and Y ) . <unk> is usually lacking in thorium and the heavy lanthanides , and the purification of the light lanthanides from it is less involved . The ore , after being crushed and ground , is first treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid , evolving carbon dioxide , hydrogen fluoride , and silicon tetrafluoride : the product is then dried and leached with water , leaving the early lanthanide ions , including lanthanum , in solution . 
 The procedure for monazite , which usually contains all the rare earths as well as thorium , is more involved . Monazite , because of its magnetic properties , can be separated by repeated electromagnetic separation . After separation , it is treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid to produce water @-@ soluble sulfates of rare earths . The acidic <unk> are partially neutralized with sodium hydroxide to pH 3 @-@ 4 . Thorium precipitates out of solution as hydroxide and is removed . After that , the solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths to their insoluble oxalates . The oxalates are converted to oxides by annealing . The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components , cerium , whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3 . Lanthanum is separated as a double salt with ammonium nitrate by crystallization . This salt is relatively less soluble than other rare earth double salts and therefore stays in the residue . Care must be taken when handling some of the residues as they contain 228Ra , the daughter of 232Th , which is a strong gamma emitter . Lanthanum is relatively easy to extract as it has only one neighbouring lanthanide , cerium , which can be removed by making use of its ability to be oxidised to the + 4 state ; thereafter , lanthanum may be separated out by the historical method of fractional crystallization of La ( NO3 ) 3 · <unk> · 4H2O , or by ion @-@ exchange techniques when higher purity is desired . 
 Lanthanum metal is obtained from its oxide by heating it with ammonium chloride or fluoride and hydrofluoric acid at 300 @-@ 400 ° C to produce the chloride or fluoride : 
 La2O3 + 6 <unk> → 2 LaCl3 + 6 NH3 + 3 H2O 
 This is followed by reduction with alkali or alkaline earth metals in vacuum or argon atmosphere : 
 LaCl3 + 3 Li → La + 3 LiCl 
 Also , pure lanthanum can be produced by electrolysis of molten mixture of anhydrous LaCl3 and NaCl or KCl at elevated temperatures . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The first historical application of lanthanum was in gas lantern mantles . Carl Auer von Welsbach used a mixture of 60 % magnesium oxide , 20 % lanthanum oxide , and 20 % yttrium oxide , which he called <unk> and patented in 1885 . The original mantles gave a green @-@ tinted light and were not very successful , and his first company , which established a factory in <unk> in 1887 , failed in 1889 . 
 Modern uses of lanthanum include : 
 One material used for anodic material of nickel @-@ metal hydride batteries is La ( Ni 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 0 @.@ 7 ) . Due to high cost to extract the other lanthanides , a mischmetal with more than 50 % of lanthanum is used instead of pure lanthanum . The compound is an intermetallic component of the AB 
 5 type . 
 As most hybrid cars use nickel @-@ metal hydride batteries , massive quantities of lanthanum are required for the production of hybrid automobiles . A typical hybrid automobile battery for a Toyota Prius requires 10 to 15 kilograms ( 22 to 33 lb ) of lanthanum . As engineers push the technology to increase fuel efficiency , twice that amount of lanthanum could be required per vehicle . 
 Hydrogen sponge alloys can contain lanthanum . These alloys are capable of storing up to 400 times their own volume of hydrogen gas in a reversible adsorption process . Heat energy is released every time they do so ; therefore these alloys have possibilities in energy conservation systems . 
 <unk> , a pyrophoric alloy used in lighter flints , contains 25 % to 45 % lanthanum . 
 Lanthanum oxide and the boride are used in electronic vacuum tubes as hot cathode materials with strong emissivity of electrons . Crystals of <unk> 
 6 are used in high @-@ brightness , extended @-@ life , thermionic electron emission sources for electron microscopes and Hall @-@ effect thrusters . 
 Lanthanum trifluoride ( <unk> 
 3 ) is an essential component of a heavy fluoride glass named <unk> . This glass has superior transmittance in the infrared range and is therefore used for fiber @-@ optical communication systems . 
 Cerium @-@ doped lanthanum bromide and lanthanum chloride are the recent inorganic scintillators , which have a combination of high light yield , best energy resolution , and fast response . Their high yield converts into superior energy resolution ; moreover , the light output is very stable and quite high over a very wide range of temperatures , making it particularly attractive for high @-@ temperature applications . These scintillators are already widely used commercially in detectors of neutrons or gamma rays . 
 Carbon arc lamps use a mixture of rare earth elements to improve the light quality . This application , especially by the motion picture industry for studio lighting and projection , consumed about 25 % of the rare @-@ earth compounds produced until the phase out of carbon arc lamps . 
 Lanthanum ( III ) oxide ( La 
 2O 
 3 ) improves the alkali resistance of glass and is used in making special optical glasses , such as infrared @-@ absorbing glass , as well as camera and telescope lenses , because of the high refractive index and low dispersion of rare @-@ earth glasses . Lanthanum oxide is also used as a grain @-@ growth additive during the liquid @-@ phase sintering of silicon nitride and zirconium diboride . 
 Small amounts of lanthanum added to steel improves its malleability , resistance to impact , and ductility , whereas addition of lanthanum to molybdenum decreases its hardness and sensitivity to temperature variations . 
 Small amounts of lanthanum are present in many pool products to remove the phosphates that feed algae . 
 Lanthanum oxide additive to tungsten is used in gas tungsten arc welding electrodes , as a substitute for radioactive thorium . 
 Various compounds of lanthanum and other rare @-@ earth elements ( oxides , chlorides , etc . ) are components of various catalysis , such as petroleum cracking catalysts . 
 Lanthanum @-@ barium radiometric dating is used to estimate age of rocks and ores , though the technique has limited popularity . 
 Lanthanum carbonate was approved as a medication ( <unk> , Shire Pharmaceuticals ) to absorb excess phosphate in cases of end @-@ stage renal failure . 
 Lanthanum fluoride is used in phosphor lamp coatings . Mixed with europium fluoride , it is also applied in the crystal membrane of fluoride ion @-@ selective electrodes . 
 Like horseradish peroxidase , lanthanum is used as an electron @-@ dense tracer in molecular biology . 
 Lanthanum @-@ modified bentonite ( or <unk> ) is used to remove phosphates from water in lake treatments . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Lanthanum has no known biological role . The element is very poorly absorbed after oral administration and when injected its elimination is very slow . Lanthanum carbonate ( <unk> ) was approved as a phosphate binder to absorb excess phosphate in cases of end stage renal disease . 
 While lanthanum has pharmacological effects on several receptors and ion channels , its specificity for the GABA receptor is unique among trivalent cations . Lanthanum acts at the same modulatory site on the GABA receptor as zinc , a known negative allosteric modulator . The lanthanum cation La3 + is a positive allosteric modulator at native and recombinant GABA receptors , increasing open channel time and decreasing desensitization in a subunit configuration dependent manner . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Lanthanum has a low to moderate level of toxicity and should be handled with care . The injection of lanthanum solutions produces hyperglycemia , low blood pressure , degeneration of the spleen and hepatic alterations . The application in carbon arc light led to the exposure of people to rare earth element oxides and fluorides , which sometimes led to pneumoconiosis . As the La3 + ion is similar in size to the Ca2 + ion , it is sometimes used as an easily traced substitute for the latter in medical studies . Lanthanum , like the other lanthanides , is known to affect human metabolism , lowering cholesterol levels , blood pressure , appetite , and risk of blood coagulation . When injected into the brain , it acts as a painkiller , similarly to morphine and other opiates , though the mechanism behind this is still unknown . The first four lanthanides , lanthanum , cerium , praseodymium , and neodymium , act as essential cofactors for the methanol dehydrogenase of the <unk> bacterium <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = Justice ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Justice " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . The episode first aired in broadcast syndication on November 9 , 1987 . Directed by James L. Conway , writer John D. F. Black originally pitched the story , but after Worley Thorne and Gene Roddenberry modified it , Thorne wrote the script . Because of the changes to the story , Black chose to receive his credit under the pseudonym Ralph Wills . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet crew of the Federation starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) is sentenced to death after inadvertently breaking the law on an alien planet . Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) must deal with the powerful and mysterious protector of the planet while deliberating whether to violate the Prime Directive to save Wesley 's life . 
 This was the first episode of The Next Generation to feature multiple shots filmed on location , with scenes filmed in Van Nuys , Los Angeles , and the Huntington Library in Pasadena , California . " Justice " was the second most viewed episode of the first season , with 12 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode received a mostly negative response , with critics pointing to issues with the quality of the acting and the predictability of the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The USS Enterprise arrives for shore leave at the newly discovered planet of <unk> III . A small advance party from the ship are sent down to meet with the Edo , the native people of the planet . Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) sends Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) as part of the away team to evaluate the planet on behalf of the young people on board the Enterprise . Upon their arrival , they are greeted by Rivan ( Brenda Bakke ) and <unk> ( Jay Louden ) in a very comfortable way , triggering Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) to determine it a " nice planet " , while Wesley leaves the adults to play with the native children . On the Enterprise , Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) reports something unusual orbiting the planet , but nothing appears on the viewscreen . He sends out a communications signal which reveals another vessel in orbit . A small ball of light enters the bridge and communicates with Picard through Data in a booming voice warning him not to interfere with the Edo , calling them " his children " . The intruder then incapacitates Data . 
 On <unk> III , the Edo explain to Lt. Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) and Worf that capital punishment is used to enforce their laws . The away team rush to warn Wesley , only to discover he has accidentally broken a greenhouse whilst playing catch with the Edo children . An Edo attempts to give Wesley a lethal injection for this infraction of the law , but Yar and Worf draw their phasers . On the ship , the sphere leaves Data 's body and departs . Picard , upon hearing of the situation with Wesley , transports to the surface . He meets with representatives of the Edo in a council chamber and explains that Earth no longer practices capital punishment . Some Edo interpret this stance as an attempt by the Federation to push their superiority and suggest that Picard should mount a rescue effort for the boy . He says he cannot , quoting the Prime Directive . 
 Picard asks about the mysterious vessel in orbit and discovers that the Edo worship it as a god . He returns to his ship with Rivan and Counsellor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) . Rivan sees the strange ship from orbit and confirms it is the Edo 's god . She is transported back to the surface when the ship threatens the Enterprise for taking her away from the planet . Data reveals that , while he was in communication with the entity , it will protect the Edo as if they were its children . After considering their options , Picard returns to the planet 's surface and announces that he is willing to risk the wrath of the entity . He orders the transportation of Wesley to the Enterprise , but the entity does not allow the transporters to operate . Picard pleads with the Edo god that laws must allow for exceptions to ensure justice , and after this statement the transporters go back online and allows the away team to return . Upon leaving the planet , Picard communicates with the entity to inform it that they are leaving and will remove recently placed colonists at a nearby star system under the entity 's jurisdiction . With that , the entity disappears and the Enterprise departs . 
 = = Production = = 
 John D. F. Black 's original pitch featured a story about capital punishment . His idea was based on a film treatment detailing the colony planet of <unk> where capital punishment is handed down as a sentence for any offense except against those who are immune from the law . In the treatment , a security officer is killed by a local law enforcement officer , who is then killed himself by his partner for unjustly killing the Enterprise crewman . The planet would have had a rebel faction who wanted to overthrow the laws , which Picard refused to back initially whilst citing the Prime Directive . A second draft featured a rebel leader executed for treason . Black explained the premise of a society that developed laws to prevent terrorism and anarchy : " Let 's say that what we do is kill everybody who is a terrorist or suspected of being a terrorist . Now the people who have killed everybody , what do they do ? " 
 The idea was re @-@ written by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry and writer Worley Thorne . It was Roddenberry and Thorne who created the godlike entity and sexed up the Edo . James L. Conway directed the episode , having just finished the MacGyver episode , " Jack in the Box " . Josh Clark , who plays a Conn officer in " Justice " , later appears as Lt. Joe Carey in all seven seasons of Star Trek : Voyager . 
 " Justice " is the first episode of Star Trek : The Next Generation filmed mostly on location , and the first of any scenes on location other than those set in the holodeck in " Encounter at Farpoint " . Scenes shot at the Tillman Water Reclamation Plant in Van Nuys , Los Angeles , were located under the flight path for the Van Nuys Airport . The noise from overhead planes was so loud , the actors were required to re @-@ record their lines in the studio . Filming for the scene where Wesley crashes into the greenhouse occurred on the grounds of the Huntington Library in Pasadena , California . 
 = = Reception and home media = = 
 " Justice " first aired in broadcast syndication on November 8 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 12 @.@ 7 million , placing it in third place in the timeslot . It ranked the second highest viewed episode of the first season , after the premiere " Encounter at Farpoint " , which was seen by 15 @.@ 7 million viewers . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . <unk> Wil Wheaton watched " Justice " for AOL TV in December 2006 . He observed problems with his acting and the plot development , particularly where Picard transports the Edo woman to the Enterprise . Wheaton felt Picard 's actions were a clear breach of the Prime Directive which was otherwise at the heart of the episode . On the other hand , he thought the episode showed a proper dynamic between Picard and the bridge crew , and he believed it tackled a real ethics problem in a manner more frequently seen in the 2004 Battlestar Galactica television series . Wheaton gave the episode of " Justice " a grade of B + . 
 Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in May 2011 . He said the episode " collapses under the weight of its own ridiculousness " , and he criticized the Edo as caricatures . DeCandido thought that the plot involving Wesley was predictable , but that the scripting for Picard helped to cement him as a " great character " . He gave the episode a score of two out of ten . 
 James Hunt reviewed the episode for Den of Geek in November 2012 . He liked the central idea , but said it was typical of the poor quality of the early episodes of the series . Hunt also thought multiple plot details were not addressed , such as the origin of the alien entity and the reason for the Edo 's fear of it . Jamahl Epsicokhan for his website Jammer 's Reviews , said that the episode featured " yet another Trek @-@ cliched Infinitely Superior Life Form " , and featured a debate which was " more obtuse than enlightening " . He gave it a score of one out of four . 
 " Justice " was first released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on July 1 , 1992 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . The most recent release was as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = The Blues Brothers ( film ) = 
 The Blues Brothers is a 1980 American musical crime comedy film directed by John Landis . It stars John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd as " Joliet " Jake and Elwood Blues , characters developed from " The Blues Brothers " musical sketch on the NBC variety series Saturday Night Live . The film 's screenplay was written by Aykroyd and Landis . It features musical numbers by rhythm and blues ( R & B ) , soul , and blues singers James Brown , Cab Calloway , Aretha Franklin , Ray Charles , and John Lee Hooker . The film is set in and around Chicago , Illinois , where it was filmed . It features non @-@ musical supporting performances by John Candy , Carrie Fisher , Charles Napier , and Henry Gibson . 
 The story is a tale of redemption for paroled convict Jake and his brother Elwood , who set out on " a mission from God " to save from foreclosure the Catholic orphanage in which they were raised . To do so , they must reunite their R & B band and organize a performance to earn $ 5 @,@ 000 needed to pay the orphanage 's property tax bill . Along the way , they are targeted by a destructive " mystery woman " , Neo @-@ Nazis , and a country and western band — all while being relentlessly pursued by the police . 
 Universal Studios , which had won the bidding war for the film , was hoping to take advantage of Belushi 's popularity in the wake of Saturday Night Live , Animal House , and the Blues Brothers ' musical success ; it soon found itself unable to control production costs . The start of filming was delayed when Aykroyd , new to film screenwriting , took six months to deliver a long and unconventional script that Landis had to rewrite before production , which began without a final budget . On location in Chicago , Belushi 's partying and drug use caused lengthy and costly delays that , along with the destructive car chases depicted onscreen , made the final film one of the most expensive comedies ever produced . 
 Concerns that the film would fail limited its initial bookings to less than half those a film of its magnitude normally received . Released in the United States on June 20 , 1980 , it received generally positive reviews . It earned just under $ 5 million in its opening weekend and went on to gross over $ 115 million in theaters worldwide before its release on home video . It has become a cult classic , spawning the sequel , Blues Brothers 2000 , 18 years later , which was a critical and commercial failure . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jake Blues is released from prison after serving three years for armed robbery , and is picked up by his brother Elwood in the new Bluesmobile , a battered former Mount Prospect police car , replacing their old Cadillac . Jake approves it after Elwood demonstrates its capabilities by jumping an open drawbridge . The brothers visit the Roman Catholic orphanage where they were raised , and learn from Sister Mary " The Penguin " Stigmata that it will be closed unless $ 5 @,@ 000 in property taxes is collected . During a sermon by the Reverend <unk> James at the Triple Rock Baptist church , Jake has an epiphany : They can re @-@ form the Blues Brothers Band , which broke up while Jake was in prison , and raise the money to pay the tax bill . 
 That night , Elwood is pulled over for running a red light , and the state troopers attempt to arrest him for driving with a suspended license due to 116 parking tickets and 56 moving violations . After a high @-@ speed chase through the Dixie Square Mall , the brothers escape . The next morning , as the police arrive at the flophouse where Elwood lives , a mysterious woman detonates a bomb that demolishes the building , but miraculously leaves Jake and Elwood unharmed , and saves them from being arrested . 
 Jake and Elwood begin tracking down members of the band . Trombonist Tom " Bones " Malone , drummer Willie " Too Big " Hall , rhythm guitarist Steve " The Colonel " Cropper , bassist Donald " Duck " Dunn , and keyboardist Murphy " Murph " Dunne are now performing as a lounge band , " Murph and the <unk> " , at a deserted Holiday Inn , and quickly agree to rejoin . Trumpeter Alan " Mr. Fabulous " Rubin , now the maître d ' at an expensive restaurant , turns them down , but the brothers refuse to leave the restaurant until he relents . On their way to meet the final two band members , saxophonist Louis " Blue Lou " Marini and guitarist Matt " Guitar " Murphy , the brothers find the road blocked by a Nazi Party demonstration on a bridge ; Elwood runs them off the bridge into Lake Michigan . Marini and Murphy , who now run a soul food restaurant , ignore the advice of Murphy 's wife ( Aretha Franklin ) and rejoin the band . The reunited group obtain instruments and equipment from Ray 's Music Exchange , and Ray ( Ray Charles ) , as usual , takes an IOU . 
 As Jake attempts to book a gig , the mystery woman blows up the phone booth he is using ; once again , he is miraculously unhurt . The band stumbles into a gig at Bob 's Country Bunker , a local honky @-@ tonk . They win over the rowdy crowd , but run up a bar tab higher than their pay , and infuriate the country band that was actually booked for the gig , the Good Ol ' Boys . 
 Realizing that they need one big show to raise the necessary $ 5 @,@ 000 , the brothers persuade their old agent to book the Palace Hotel Ballroom , north of Chicago . They mount a loudspeaker atop the Bluesmobile and drive all over greater Chicago promoting the concert — and alerting the police , the Nazis , and the Good Ol ' Boys of their whereabouts . The ballroom is packed with blues fans , police officers , and the Good Ol ' Boys . Jake and Elwood perform two songs , then sneak offstage , as the tax deadline is rapidly approaching . A record company executive offers them a $ 10 @,@ 000 cash advance on a recording contract — more than enough to pay off the orphanage 's taxes and Ray 's IOU — and then shows the brothers how to slip out of the building unnoticed . As they make their escape via a service tunnel , they are confronted by the mystery woman : Jake 's jilted ex @-@ fiancée ( Carrie Fisher ) . After her volley of M16 rifle bullets leaves them miraculously unharmed , Jake offers a series of ridiculous excuses that she miraculously believes , allowing the brothers to escape to the Bluesmobile . 
 Jake and Elwood race back toward Chicago , pursued at high speeds by dozens of police cars and the Good Ol ' Boys . They elude them all with a series of improbable maneuvers , including a miraculous , gravity @-@ defying escape from the Illinois Nazis . At the Richard J. Daley Center , they rush inside the adjacent Chicago City Hall building with hundreds of law officers of every conceivable type in hot pursuit . At the office of the Cook County Assessor , the brothers pay the tax bill . As their receipt is stamped " paid " , they are arrested by the mob of law officers . In prison , the band plays " Jailhouse Rock " for the inmates . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The characters , Jake and Elwood Blues , were created by Belushi and Aykroyd in performances on Saturday Night Live . The name " The Blues Brothers " was the idea of Howard Shore . The fictional back story and character sketches of blood brothers Jake and Elwood were developed by Aykroyd in collaboration with Ron Gwynne , who is credited as a story consultant for the film . As related in the liner notes of the band 's debut album , Briefcase Full of Blues , the brothers grew up in an orphanage , learned the blues from a janitor named Curtis , and sealed their brotherhood by cutting their middle fingers with a steel string said to have come from the guitar of Elmore James . 
 Belushi had become a star in 1978 as a result of both the Blues Brothers ' musical success and his role in National Lampoon 's Animal House . At one point , he managed the triple feat of being the star of the week 's top @-@ grossing film , top @-@ rated television show , and singing on the number @-@ one album within a year . When Aykroyd and Belushi decided they could make a Blues Brothers film , the bidding war was intense . Universal Studios narrowly beat Paramount Pictures for the project . John Landis , who had directed Belushi in Animal House , was aboard as director . 
 However , the project had neither a budget nor a script . On the former issue , Universal head Lew Wasserman thought the film could be made for $ 12 million ; the filmmakers wanted $ 20 million . It would be impossible to settle on a specific amount without a screenplay to review , and after Mitch Glazer declined to help him , Aykroyd wrote one on his own . 
 Aykroyd had never written a screenplay before , he admitted in the 1998 documentary , Stories Behind the Making of The Blues Brothers , or even read one , and he was unable to find a writing partner . Consequently , he put together a very descriptive volume that explained the characters ' origins and how the band members were recruited . His final draft was 324 pages , which was three times longer than a standard screenplay , written not in a standard screenplay format , but more like free verse . To soften the impact , Aykroyd made a joke of the thick script and had it bound with the cover of the Los Angeles Yellow Pages directory for when he turned it in to producer Robert K. Weiss . Landis was given the task of editing the script into a usable screenplay , which took him about two weeks . 
 The premise of the underlying plot was somewhat unrealistic . It would be unlikely that a church @-@ owned orphanage would have to pay a property tax bill since , in Illinois - as in much of the rest of the world - property owned by religious groups and other not @-@ for @-@ profit organizations is tax @-@ exempt . However , while the script was being written , a legislative proposal to tax such property was under consideration . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began in July 1979 , with the film 's budget still not settled . For the first month , things ran smoothly on and off the set . When Weiss saw the supposedly final $ 17 @.@ 5 million budget , he reportedly joked , " I think we 've spent that much already . " 
 In the next month , the production began falling behind schedule . Much of the delay was due to Belushi 's partying and carousing . When not on the set , he went out to his familiar Chicago haunts such as Wrigley Field . People often recognized him and slipped him cocaine , a drug he was already using heavily on his own , hoping to use it with him . " Every blue @-@ collar Joe wants his John Belushi story , " said Smokey Wendell , who was eventually hired to keep it away from the star . As a result of his late nights and drug and alcohol use , Belushi would often miss unit calls ( the beginning of a production day ) or go to his trailer after them and sleep , wasting hours of production time . One night , Aykroyd found him crashing on the sofa of a nearby house , where Belushi had already helped himself to food in the refrigerator . 
 Cocaine was already so prevalent on the set ( like many other film productions of that era ) that Aykroyd , who used far less than his partner , claims a section of the budget was actually set aside for purchases of the drug during night shooting . The stars had a private bar , the Blues Club , built on the set , for themselves , crew , and friends . Carrie Fisher , Aykroyd 's girlfriend at the time , says most of the bar 's staff doubled as dealers , procuring any drug patrons desired . 
 The original budget was quickly surpassed , and back in Los Angeles , Wasserman grew increasingly frustrated . He was regularly confronting Ned Tanen , the executive in charge of production for Universal , in person over the costs . Sean Daniel , another studio executive , was not reassured when he came to Chicago and saw the production had set up a special facility for the 70 cars used in the chase sequences . Filming there , which was supposed to have concluded in the middle of September , continued into late October . 
 On the set , Belushi 's drug use worsened . Fisher , who herself later struggled with cocaine addiction , says Landis told her to keep Belushi away from the drug . Wendell was hired to clear any from the places Belushi visited off @-@ camera . Nevertheless , at one point , Landis found Belushi with what he described as a " mountain " of cocaine on a table in his trailer , which led to a tearful confrontation in which Belushi admitted his addiction and feared it could eventually kill him . 
 After Aykroyd and Belushi 's wife Judy had a talk with him about his antics , the production returned to Los Angeles . Filming there again ran smoothly , until it came time to shoot the final sequence at the Hollywood Palladium . Just beforehand , Belushi fell off a borrowed skateboard and seriously injured his knee , making it unlikely he could go through with the scene , which required him to sing , dance , and do cartwheels . Wasserman persuaded the city 's top orthopedic surgeon to postpone his weekend plans long enough to stop by and sufficiently anesthetize Belushi 's knee , and the scene was filmed as intended . 
 = = = = Locations = = = = 
 Much of the film was shot on location in and around Chicago between July and October 1979 , including <unk> , Illinois , where the car crashes into the side of Route 12 . Made with the cooperation of Mayor Jane M. Byrne , it is credited for putting Chicago on the map as a venue for filmmaking . Nearly 200 movies have been filmed in Chicago . " Chicago is one of the stars of the movie . We wrote it as a tribute , " Dan Aykroyd told the Chicago Sun @-@ Times in an article written to mark the film 's 25th @-@ anniversary DVD release . 
 The first traffic stop was in Park Ridge , Illinois . The shopping mall car chase was filmed in the real , albeit abandoned , Dixie Square Mall , in Harvey , Illinois . The bridge jump was filmed on an actual drawbridge , the 95th Street bridge over the Calumet River , on the southeast side of Chicago . The main entrance to Wrigley Field ( and its sign reading " Save lives . Drive safely , prevent fires . " ) makes a brief appearance when the " Illinois Nazis " visit it after Elwood falsely registers the ballpark 's location , 1060 West Addison , as his home address on his driver 's license . ( Elwood 's Illinois driver 's license number is an almost @-@ valid encoded number , with Dan Aykroyd 's own birth date embedded . ) Jake 's final confrontation with his girlfriend was filmed in a replica of a section of the abandoned Chicago freight tunnel system . The other chase scenes included lower Wacker Drive , Lake Street , and Richard J. Daley Center . 
 Jake and Elwood push their fuel @-@ less Blues Mobile off the highway and into a service station named Lloyd 's Tire Clinic . This was located right off IL 38 ( Roosevelt Road ) and IL 59 , four miles west of Belushi 's former high school , Wheaton Central . The station was detonated late one night while filming , but this scene was deleted . While Lloyd 's is long gone , the adjacent West @-@ Wind Motel ( slightly to the east ) at Gary 's Mill Road , where Twiggy 's character waited for a no @-@ show Elwood , survives to this date . 
 In the final car chase scene , the production actually dropped a Ford Pinto , representing the one driven by the " Illinois Nazis " , from a helicopter at an altitude of about 1 @,@ 200 feet — and had to gain a Special Airworthiness Certificate from the Federal Aviation Administration to do it . The FAA was concerned that the car could prove too aerodynamic in a high @-@ altitude drop , and pose a threat to nearby buildings . The shot leading up to the car drop , where the " Illinois Nazis " drive off a freeway ramp , was shot in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , near the Hoan Bridge on Interstate 794 . The Lake Freeway ( North ) was a planned but not completed six @-@ lane freeway , and I @-@ 794 contained an unfinished ramp off which the Nazis drove . Several Milwaukee skyscrapers are visible in the background as the Bluesmobile flips over , notably the U.S. Bank Center . 
 The " Palace Hotel Ballroom " , where the band performs its climactic concert , was at the time of filming a country club , but later became the South Shore Cultural Center , named after the Chicago neighborhood where it is located . The interior concert scenes were filmed in the Hollywood Palladium . 
 The filming in downtown Chicago was conducted on Sundays during the summer of 1979 , and much of the downtown was cordoned off from the public . Costs for filming the largest scene in the city 's history totaled $ 3 @.@ 5 million . Permission was given after Belushi and Aykroyd offered to donate $ 50 @,@ 000 to charity after filming . Although the Bluesmobile was allowed to be driven through the Daley Center lobby , special breakaway panes were temporarily substituted for the normal glass in the building . The speeding car caused $ 7 @,@ 650 in damages to 35 granite paver stones and a bronze air grill in the building . Interior shots of the elevator , staircase , and assessor 's office were all recreated in a film set for filming . 
 As revealed in the DVD commentary , both Brown and Lee Hooker sang their songs live on set because they couldn 't accurately lip @-@ sync to pre @-@ recorded audio tracks . Charles and Franklin sang to playback , despite the latter 's similar difficulties with lip @-@ sync . 
 = = = Bluesmobile = = = 
 The film used thirteen different cars bought at auction from the California Highway Patrol to depict the Bluesmobile , a retired 1974 Mount Prospect , Illinois Dodge Monaco patrol car . The vehicles were outfitted by the studio to do particular driving chores ; some were customized for speed and others for jumps , depending on the scene . For the large car chases , filmmakers purchased 60 police cars at $ 400 each , and most were destroyed at the completion of the filming . More than 40 stunt drivers were hired , and the crew kept a 24 @-@ hour body shop to repair cars . 
 For the scene when the Blues Brothers finally arrive at the Richard J. Daley Center , a mechanic took several months to rig the car to fall apart . At the time of the film 's release , it held the world record for the most cars destroyed in one film until it was surpassed by its own sequel . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Soul and R & B stars James Brown , Cab Calloway , Ray Charles , and Aretha Franklin were cast in speaking parts to support musical numbers built around them . This caused friction between Landis and Universal later in the production , as its costs far exceeded the original budget . Since none of them except Charles had had any hits in recent years , the studio wanted the director to replace them with , or add , performances by younger acts such as Rose Royce , whose " Car Wash " had made them disco stars after its use in the 1976 film of that name . 
 Other notable musicians in the cast include Big Walter Horton , Pinetop Perkins , and John Lee Hooker ( who performed " Boom Boom " during the Maxwell Street scene ) . The members of The Blues Brothers band are notable for their musical accomplishments , as well . Steve Cropper and Donald Dunn are architects of the Stax Records sound ( Cropper 's guitar can be heard at the start of the Sam & Dave song " Soul Man " ) and were half of Booker T. & the M.G. ' s . Horn players Lou Marini , Tom Malone , and Alan Rubin had all played in Blood , Sweat & Tears and the Saturday Night Live band . Drummer Willie Hall had played in The Bar @-@ Kays and backed Isaac Hayes . Matt Murphy is a veteran blues guitarist . As the band developed at Saturday Night Live , pianist Paul Shaffer was part of the act and was cast in the film . However , due to contractual obligations with SNL , he was unable to participate , so actor @-@ musician Murphy Dunne ( whose father , George Dunne , was the Cook County Board President ) was hired to take his role . 
 Fisher , Freeman , Gibson , and Candy were cast in non @-@ musical supporting roles . The film is also notable for the number of cameo appearances by established celebrities and entertainment @-@ industry figures , including Steve Lawrence as a booking agent , Twiggy as a " chic lady " in a Jaguar convertible whom Elwood propositions at a gas station , Steven Spielberg as the Cook County Assessor 's clerk , John Landis as a state trooper in the mall chase , Paul Reubens ( before Pee @-@ wee Herman ) as a waiter in the Chez Paul restaurant scene , Joe Walsh in a cameo as the first prisoner to jump up on a table in the final scene , and Chaka Khan is the soloist in James Brown 's choir . Muppet performer Frank Oz plays a corrections officer , and in the scene where the brothers crash into Toys R Us , a Grover and Kermit the Frog toy can be spotted . Right before the brothers crash into the Toys R Us , a customer ( played by stunt coordinator Gary McLarty ) asks the cashier if they have a Miss Piggy doll , a Muppet character that is voiced by Oz . The character portrayed by Cab Calloway is named Curtis as an homage to Curtis Salgado , a Portland , Oregon , blues musician who inspired Belushi while he was in Oregon filming Animal House . 
 Over 500 extras were used for the next @-@ to @-@ last scene , the blockade of the building at Daley Center , including 200 National Guardsmen , 100 state and city police officers , with 15 horses for the mounted police ( and 3 each Sherman tanks , helicopters , and fire engines ) . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Landis ' difficulties continued even after principal photography was completed . The first cut of the film lasted two and a half hours , with an intermission . After one early screening , Wasserman demanded it be shortened , and 20 minutes were cut . The film 's final budget was $ 27 @.@ 5 million ( $ 79 million in modern dollars ) , $ 10 million over its original budget . 
 Prospects for a successful release did not look good . Aykroyd and Belushi had left SNL at the end of the previous season , reducing their bankability . Belushi 's fame had taken a further hit after the commercial and critical failure of 1941 at the end of the year . One day after the editing was done , Wasserman invited Landis up to his office to speak with Ted Mann , head of the Mann Theatres chain , which dominated film exhibition in the Western United States . He told Landis that he would not book the film at any theaters in predominately white neighborhoods , such as Westwood . Not only did Mann not want black patrons going there to see the film , he surmised that white viewers were unlikely to see a film featuring older black musical stars . Ultimately The Blues Brothers got less than half the bookings nationwide for its initial release than a typical big @-@ budget studio film of the era , which did not bode well for its success at the box office . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Blues Brothers opened on June 20 , 1980 , with a release in 594 theaters . It took in $ 4 @,@ 858 @,@ 152 , ranking second for that week ( after The Empire Strikes Back ) and 10th for the entire year . Over the years , it has retained a following through television and home video . The film in total grossed $ 57 @,@ 229 @,@ 890 domestically and $ 58 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in foreign box offices for a total of $ 115 @,@ 229 @,@ 890 . By genre , it is the ninth @-@ highest grossing musical and the tenth @-@ highest earner among comedy road movies . It ranks second , between Wayne 's World and Wayne 's World 2 ( which , coincidentally , also take place in the greater Chicago metropolitan area , in the outlying suburb of Aurora , Illinois ) , among films adapted from Saturday Night Live sketches . Director John Landis claimed The Blues Brothers was also the first American film to gross more money overseas than it did in the United States . 
 The popularity of the film boosted the Ray @-@ Ban Wayfarer , which was yet experiencing some renewed popularity thanks to the rise of the " New Music " movement . From a few thousands sold through the mid @-@ 1970s , sales rose to 18 @,@ 000 during 1981 partly because of the film , bringing the model out from the verge of withdrawal . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Blues Brothers received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an 85 % " Certified Fresh " rating , based on 53 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Too over the top for its own good , but ultimately rescued by the cast 's charm , director John Landis ' grace , and several soul @-@ stirring musical numbers " . It won the Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing and Sound Effects , is 14th on Total Film magazine 's " List of the 50 Greatest Comedy Films of All Time " and is number 69 on Bravo 's " 100 Funniest Movies " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , praising it for its energetic musical numbers and said the car chases were " incredible " if so over @-@ the @-@ top that they finally became numbing . Ebert further noted " Belushi and Aykroyd come over as hard @-@ boiled city guys , total cynics with a world @-@ view of sublime simplicity , and that all fits perfectly with the movie 's other parts . There 's even room , in the midst of the carnage and mayhem , for a surprising amount of grace , humor , and whimsy . In his review for The Washington Post , Gary Arnold criticized Landis for engorging " the frail plot of The Blues Brothers with car chases and crack @-@ ups , filmed with such avid , humorless starkness on the streets of Chicago that comic sensations are virtually obliterated " . Time magazine 's Richard Corliss wrote , " The Blues Brothers is a demolition symphony that works with the cold efficiency of a Moog synthesizer gone sadistic " . 
 Janet Maslin of The New York Times criticized the film for <unk> viewers on more details about Jake and Elwood 's affinity for African @-@ American culture . She also took director Landis to task for " distracting editing " , mentioning the Soul Food diner scene in which saxophonist Lou Marini 's head is out of shot as he dances on the counter . In the documentary , Stories Behind the Making of The Blues Brothers , Landis acknowledges the criticism , and Marini recalls the dismay he felt at seeing the completed film . 
 Kim Newman , writing for Empire in 2013 , considered The Blues Brothers to be " an amalgam of urban sleaze , automobile crunch and <unk> rhythm and blues " with " better music than any film had had for many years . " He noted that Belushi and <unk> pack in their heroes : " Aretha storming through ' Think ' , Cab Calloway cruising through ' Minnie the Moocher ' , John Lee Hooker <unk> through ' Boom Boom ' and Ray Charles on electric piano , not to mention the hottest band . " He observed that " the picture had revived the careers of virtually all the musicians that appeared in it " and concluded " it still sounds great and looks as good as ever through Ray Bans " . 
 On the 30th anniversary , L 'Osservatore Romano , the daily newspaper of Vatican City State , wrote that the film is filled with positive symbolism and moral references that can be related to Catholicism . They went further , stating , The Blues Brothers " is a memorable film , and , judging by the facts , a Catholic one . " 
 = = = Cult @-@ film status = = = 
 The Blues Brothers has become a staple of late @-@ night cinema , even slowly morphing into an audience @-@ participation show in its regular screenings at the Valhalla Cinema , in Melbourne , Australia . John Landis acknowledged the support of the cinema and the fans by a phone call he made to the cinema at the 10th @-@ anniversary screening , and later invited regular attendees to make cameo appearances in Blues Brothers 2000 . The fans act as the members of the crowd during the performance of " Ghost Riders in the Sky " . 
 In August 2005 , a 25th @-@ anniversary celebration for The Blues Brothers was held at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles . Attendees included Landis , former Universal Studios executive Thom Mount , film editor George Folsey , Jr . , and cast members James Brown , Henry Gibson , Charles Napier , Steve Cropper , and Stephen Bishop . It featured a press conference , a panel discussion where Dan Aykroyd joined by satellite , and a screening of the original theatrical version of the film . The panel discussion was broadcast direct to many other cinemas around the country . 
 The popularity of the film has also spread overseas . The film was an inspiration for Japanese companies Studio Hibari and Aniplex , which led to the creation of the manga and anime franchise <unk> Daikon Brothers , which contain heavy references to the film . 
 = = = American Film Institute = = = 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 Think - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " We 're on a mission from God . " - Nominated 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 When the film was first screened for a preview audience , a producer demanded that director Landis cut 25 minutes from the film . After trimming 15 minutes , it was released in theaters at 132 minutes . It was first released on VHS and Betamax from MCA Videocassette Inc. in 1983 . A Laserdisc from MCA Videodisc was released the same year . It was re @-@ released on VHS , Laserdisc , and Betamax in 1985 from MCA Home Video , and again in 1990 from MCA / Universal Home Video . It was also released in a 2 @-@ Pack VHS box set with along with Animal House . The film 's original length was restored to 148 minutes for the " Collector 's Edition " DVD and a Special Edition VHS and <unk> release in 1998 . The DVD and Laserdisc versions included a 56 minute documentary called " The Stories Behind The Making Of The Blues Brothers " . Produced and directed by JM Kenny ( who also produced the Animal House Collector 's Edition DVD the same year ) , it included interviews with Landis , Aykroyd , members of The Blues Brothers Band , producer Robert K. Weiss , editor George Folsey Jr . , and others involved with the film . It also included production photographs , the theatrical trailer , production notes , and cast and filmmaker bios . The 25th @-@ anniversary DVD release in 2005 included both the theatrical cut and the extended version . 
 The film was released on Blu @-@ ray on July 26 , 2011 , with the same basic contents as the 25th @-@ anniversary DVD . In a March 2011 interview with Ain 't it Cool News , Landis also mentioned he had approved the Blu @-@ ray 's remastered transfer . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The Blues Brothers : Original Soundtrack Recording ( later re @-@ released as The Blues Brothers : Music from the Soundtrack ) was released on June 20 , 1980 as the second album by the Blues Brothers Band , which also toured that year to promote the film . " Gimme Some Lovin ' " was a Top 20 Billboard hit , peaking at number 18 . The album was a followup to their debut , the live album , Briefcase Full of Blues . Later that year they released a second live album , Made in America , which featured the Top 40 track , " Who 's Making Love " . 
 The songs on the soundtrack album are a noticeably different audio mix than in the film , with a prominent baritone saxophone in the horn line ( also heard in the film during " Shake a Tail Feather " , though no baritone sax is present ) , and female backing vocals on " Everybody Needs Somebody to Love " , though the band had no other backup singers , besides Jake & / or Elwood , in the film . A number of regular Blues Brothers ' members , including saxophonist Tom Scott and drummer Steve Jordan , perform on the soundtrack album , but are not in the film . 
 According to Landis in the 1998 documentary The Stories Behind the Making of ' The Blues Brothers ' , filmed musical performances by Franklin and Brown took more effort , as neither artist was accustomed to lip @-@ synching their performances on film . Franklin required several takes , and Brown simply rerecorded his performance live . Cab Calloway initially wanted to do a disco variation on his signature tune , " Minnie the Moocher " , having done the song in several styles in the past , but Landis insisted that the song be done faithful to the original big @-@ band version . 
 " She Caught the Katy " ( Taj Mahal , Yank <unk> ) – The Blues Brothers with lead vocals by Jake Blues - 4 : 10 
 " Peter Gunn Theme " ( Henry Mancini ) – The Blues Brothers Band - 3 : 46 
 " Gimme Some Lovin ' " ( Steve Winwood , Muff Winwood , Spencer Davis ) – The Blues Brothers with lead vocals by Jake Blues - 3 : 06 
 " Shake a Tail Feather " ( Otha Hayes , Andre Williams , <unk> Rice ) – Ray Charles with the Blues Brothers ( Jake and Elwood , backing vocals ) - 2 : 48 
 " Everybody Needs Somebody to Love " ( Jerry Wexler , Bert Berns , Solomon Burke ) – The Blues Brothers ( Jake Blues , lead vocals ; Elwood Blues , harmonica and vocals ) - 3 : 21 
 " The Old Landmark " ( Adeline M. Brunner ) – James Brown and the Rev. James Cleveland Choir ( additional choir vocals by Chaka Khan credited in the film ) - 2 : 56 
 " Think " ( Teddy White , Aretha Franklin ) – Aretha Franklin and the Blues Brothers with backing vocals by Brenda Corbett , Margaret Branch , Carolyn Franklin , Jake , and Elwood - 3 : 13 
 " Theme from Rawhide " ( Dimitri Tiomkin , Ned Washington ) – Elwood , Jake , and the Blues Brothers Band - 2 : 37 
 " Minnie the Moocher " ( Cab Calloway , Irving Mills ) – Cab Calloway with the Blues Brothers Band - 3 : 23 
 " Sweet Home Chicago " ( Robert Johnson ) – The Blues Brothers with lead vocals by Jake Blues ( dedicated to the musician Magic Sam ) - 7 : 48 
 " Jailhouse Rock " ( Jerry Leiber , Mike Stoller ) – Jake Blues and the Blues Brothers ( Over the closing credits in the film , verses are sung by James Brown , Cab Calloway , Ray Charles , Aretha Franklin and " crew " ) - 3 : 19 
 Other songs in the film 
 The film 's score includes " God Music " ( instrumental with choir vocalese ) composed by Elmer Bernstein , who previously had worked with John Landis on National Lampoon 's Animal House . Other songs in the film include : 
 " Somebody Loan Me a Dime " - composed and performed by Fenton Robinson ( music playing on the radio while Jake is being escorted from his prison cell . ) 
 " Shake Your Moneymaker " – composed and performed by Elmore James ( music playing in Curtis ' basement when Jake and Elwood go to visit the orphanage ) 
 " <unk> Me " / " Hold On ! I 'm Comin ' " – composed by Sam Cooke / Isaac Hayes and David Porter ; performed by Sam & Dave ( both tracks paying on the Bluesmobile 's 8 @-@ track player . The former when Jake and Elwood get pulled over by the police ; latter when they are then chased after resisting arrest ) 
 " I Can 't Turn You Loose " – composed by Otis Redding ; instrumental performed by the Blues Brothers band ( their theme song ; plays during the smashing of the Mall and again when they are introduced at the Palace Hotel Ballroom , incorporating " Time Is Tight " by Booker T. and The M.G. ' s ) 
 " Let the Good Times Roll " – composed and performed by Louis Jordan ( plays on the record player in Elwood 's corner of the flophouse ) 
 " <unk> e core " – performed by Ezio Pinza ( plays when Jake and Elwood investigate Tom Malone and Lou Marini 's old home ) 
 " Quando , quando , quando " – performed by Murph and the Magic Tones 
 " Just the Way You Are " – composed by Billy Joel ; ( plays during the ' Magic Tones ' scene , as a reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape instrumental when the band takes their set break to discuss rejoining Jake & Elwood ) 
 " Die <unk> " - composed by Joseph Lanner ( 1801 – 1843 ) , performed by an uncredited group ( background music in the Chez Paul restaurant scene ) 
 " Boom Boom " – composed by John Lee Hooker ; performed by John Lee Hooker ( as " Street Slim " ) , vocals and guitar ; Big Walter Horton ( as " Tampa Pete " ) , harmonica ; Pinetop Perkins ( as " Luther Jackson " ) electric piano ; Willie " Big Eyes " Smith , drums ; Luther Johnson ( Guitar Junior ) , guitar ; Calvin " Fuzz " Jones , bass ( plays in the Maxwell Street scene , short version in the theatrical cut , full @-@ length in the extended cut ) 
 " Mama <unk> " / " Boogie Chillen ' " – composed and performed by John Lee Hooker ( plays in the film twice ; first when Jake tries to phone Maury <unk> , again when the band go to Bob 's Country Bunker ) 
 " Your Cheatin ' Heart " – composed by Hank Williams ; performed by Kitty Wells ( heard when Jake and Elwood first enter Bob 's Country Bunker ) 
 " Stand by Your Man " – composed by Tammy Wynette and Billy Sherrill ; performed by the Blues Brothers 
 Sink The Bismarck - cut from the film 
 " I 'm Walkin ' " – performed by Fats Domino ( plays during the scenes where Jake , Elwood and the orphans promote the concert ) 
 " Ride of the Valkyries " – composed by Richard Wagner ; performed by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra ( plays when Jake and Elwood are pursued by the Nazis ; ends abruptly when the Head Nazi 's car falls through the middle of the road ) 
 " The Girl from Ipanema " – composed by Antônio Carlos Jobim ; performed by an uncredited group ( background music while the brothers are in the elevator to the assessor 's office ) 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The 1998 sequel , Blues Brothers 2000 , had similar traits to the original , including large car @-@ chase scenes and musical numbers . Landis returned to direct the film and Aykroyd reprised his role , joining John Goodman , Joe Morton , and 10 @-@ year @-@ old J. Evan Bonifant as the new Blues Brothers . Franklin and Brown were among the celebrities returning from the first film . There were also musical performances by Sam Moore , Wilson Pickett , Paul Shaffer , B.B. King , and Eric Clapton , among others . Dozens of artists were packed into an all @-@ star band called The Louisiana Gator Boys . Even with many returning cast members , the film was considered a box @-@ office failure , only generating a little over $ 14 million in sales , and critics ' reactions were very poor . 
 = Alternative rock = 
 Alternative rock ( also called alternative music , alt @-@ rock or simply alternative ) is a genre of rock music that emerged from the independent music underground of the 1980s and became widely popular in the 1990s and 2000s . In this instance , the word " alternative " refers to the genre 's distinction from mainstream rock music . The term 's original meaning was broader , referring to a generation of musicians unified by their collective debt to either the musical style or simply the independent , D.I.Y. ethos of punk rock , which in the late 1970s laid the groundwork for alternative music . At times , " alternative " has been used as a catch @-@ all description for music from underground rock artists that receives mainstream recognition , or for any music , whether rock or not , that is seen to be descended from punk rock ( including some examples of punk itself , as well as new wave , and post @-@ punk ) . 
 Alternative rock is a broad umbrella term consisting of music that differs greatly in terms of its sound , its social context , and its regional roots . By the end of the 1980s magazines and zines , college radio airplay , and word of mouth had increased the prominence and highlighted the diversity of alternative rock , helping to define a number of distinct styles ( and music scenes ) such as gothic rock , jangle pop , noise pop , indie rock , indie pop , grunge , industrial rock , alternative hip hop , and rap rock . Most of these subgenres had achieved minor mainstream notice and a few bands representing them , such as Hüsker Dü and R.E.M. , had even signed to major labels . But most alternative bands ' commercial success was limited in comparison to other genres of rock and pop music at the time , and most acts remained signed to independent labels and received relatively little attention from mainstream radio , television , or newspapers . With the breakthrough of Nirvana and the popularity of the grunge and Britpop movements in the 1990s , alternative rock entered the musical mainstream and many alternative bands became successful . 
 By the end of the decade , alternative rock 's mainstream prominence declined due to a number of events that caused grunge and Britpop to fade and led to the hiatus of the Lollapalooza festival . Nevertheless , post @-@ grunge remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century , with the commercial success of Creed and Matchbox Twenty ; Radiohead 's critical acclaim , and the success of some post @-@ Britpop groups like Coldplay . Emo attracted attention in the larger alternative rock world , and the term was applied to a variety of artists , including multi @-@ platinum acts . During the late 1990s and early 2000s , several alternative rock bands emerged , including The White Stripes , The Strokes , Arcade Fire , Franz Ferdinand , and Interpol , that drew from post @-@ punk and new wave . Post @-@ punk revival artists such as Modest Mouse and The Killers had commercial success in the early and mid 2000s . 
 = = Origin of term = = 
 Before the term alternative rock came into common usage around 1990 , the sort of music to which it refers was known by a variety of terms . In 1979 , Terry Tolkin used the term Alternative Music to describe the groups he was writing about . In 1979 Dallas radio station <unk> had a late night new wave show entitled " Rock and Roll Alternative " . " College rock " was used in the United States to describe the music during the 1980s due to its links to the college radio circuit and the tastes of college students . In the United Kingdom , dozens of small do it yourself record labels emerged as a result of the punk subculture . According to the founder of one of these labels , Cherry Red , NME and Sounds magazines published charts based on small record stores called " Alternative Charts " . The first national chart based on distribution called the Indie Chart was published in January 1980 ; it immediately succeeded in its aim to help these labels . At the time , the term indie was used literally to describe independently distributed records . By 1985 , indie had come to mean a particular genre , or group of subgenres , rather than simply distribution status . 
 The use of the term alternative to describe rock music originated around the mid @-@ 1980s ; at the time , the common music industry terms for cutting @-@ edge music were new music and post modern , respectively indicating freshness and a tendency to re contextualize sounds of the past . Individuals who worked as DJs and promoters during the 1980s claim the term originates from American FM radio of the 1970s , which served as a progressive alternative to top 40 radio formats by featuring longer songs and giving DJs more freedom in song selection . According to one former DJ and promoter , " Somehow this term ' alternative ' got rediscovered and <unk> by college radio people during the 80s who applied it to new post @-@ punk , indie , or underground @-@ whatever music " . At first the term referred to intentionally non – mainstream rock acts that were not influenced by " heavy metal ballads , rarefied new wave " and " high @-@ energy dance anthems " . Usage of the term would broaden to include new wave , pop , punk rock , post @-@ punk , and occasionally " college " / " indie " rock , all found on the American " commercial alternative " radio stations of the time such as Los Angeles ' KROQ @-@ FM . The use of alternative gained further exposure due to the success of Lollapalooza , for which festival founder and Jane 's Addiction frontman Perry Farrell coined the term Alternative Nation . In the late 1990s , the definition again became more specific . In 1997 , Neil Strauss of The New York Times defined alternative rock as " hard @-@ edged rock distinguished by brittle , ' 70s @-@ inspired guitar riffing and singers agonizing over their problems until they take on epic proportions " . 
 Defining music as alternative is often difficult because of two conflicting applications of the word . Alternative can describe music that challenges the status quo and that is " fiercely iconoclastic , <unk> , and <unk> " , but the term is also used in the music industry to denote " the choices available to consumers via record stores , radio , cable television , and the Internet . " However alternative music has paradoxically become just as commercial and marketable as the mainstream rock , with record companies using the term " alternative " to market music to an audience that mainstream rock does not reach . Using a broad definition of the genre , Dave Thompson in his book Alternative Rock cites the formation of the Sex Pistols as well as the release of the albums Horses by Patti Smith and Metal Machine Music by Lou Reed as three key events that gave birth to alternative rock . Until recent years ( early 2000s ) when indie rock became the most common term in the US to describe modern pop and rock , the terms " indie rock " and " alternative rock " were often used interchangeably ; whilst there are aspects which both genres have in common , indie rock was regarded as a British @-@ based term , unlike the more American alternative rock . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The name " alternative rock " essentially serves as an umbrella term for underground music that has emerged in the wake of punk rock since the mid @-@ 1980s . Throughout much of its history , alternative rock has been largely defined by its rejection of the commercialism of mainstream culture , although this could be contested ever since some of the major alternative artists have achieved mainstream success or co @-@ opted with the major labels from the 1990s onwards ( especially since the new millennium and beyond ) . Alternative bands during the 1980s generally played in small clubs , recorded for indie labels , and spread their popularity through word of mouth . As such , there is no set musical style for alternative rock as a whole , although The New York Times in 1989 asserted that the genre is " guitar music first of all , with guitars that blast out power chords , pick out chiming riffs , buzz with fuzztone and squeal in feedback . " Sounds range from the gloomy soundscapes of gothic rock to the jangling guitars of indie pop to the dirty guitars of grunge to the 1960s / 1970s revivalism of Britpop . More often than in other rock @-@ styles since the mainstreaming of rock music during the 1970s , alternative rock lyrics tend to address topics of social concern , such as drug use , depression , suicide , and environmentalism . This approach to lyrics developed as a reflection of the social and economic strains in the United States and United Kingdom of the 1980s and early 1990s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The 1980s = = = 
 By 1984 , a majority of groups signed to independent record labels mined from a variety of rock and particularly 1960s rock influences . This represented a sharp break from the futuristic , hyper @-@ rational post @-@ punk years . 
 Throughout the 1980s , alternative rock remained mainly an underground phenomenon . While on occasion a song would become a commercial hit or albums would receive critical praise in mainstream publications like Rolling Stone , alternative rock in the 1980s was primarily featured on independent record labels , fanzines , and college radio stations . Alternative bands built underground followings by touring constantly and by regularly releasing low @-@ budget albums . In the case of the United States , new bands would form in the wake of previous bands , which created an extensive underground circuit in America , filled with different scenes in various parts of the country . Although American alternative artists of the 1980s never generated spectacular album sales , they exerted a considerable influence on later alternative musicians and laid the groundwork for their success . By 1989 the genre had become popular enough that a package tour featuring New Order , Public Image Limited and The Sugarcubes toured the United States arena circuit . 
 In contrast , British alternative rock was distinguished from that of the United States early on by a more pop @-@ oriented focus ( marked by an equal emphasis on albums and singles , as well as greater openness to incorporating elements of dance and club culture ) and a lyrical emphasis on specifically British concerns . As a result , few British alternative bands have achieved commercial success in the US . Since the 1980s alternative rock has been played extensively on the radio in the UK , particularly by disc jockeys such as John Peel ( who championed alternative music on BBC Radio 1 ) , Richard Skinner , and Annie Nightingale . Artists that had cult followings in the United States received greater exposure through British national radio and the weekly music press , and many alternative bands had chart success there . 
 = = = = American underground in the 1980s = = = = 
 Early American alternative bands such as Dream Syndicate , R.E.M. , The Feelies and Violent Femmes combined punk influences with folk music and mainstream music influences . R.E.M. was the most immediately successful ; its debut album , Murmur ( 1983 ) , entered the Top 40 and spawned a number of jangle pop followers . One of the many jangle pop scenes of the early 1980s , Los Angeles ' Paisley Underground revived the sounds of the 1960s , incorporating psychedelia , rich vocal harmonies and the guitar interplay of folk rock as well as punk and underground influences such as The Velvet Underground . 
 American indie record labels SST Records , Twin / Tone Records , Touch and Go Records , and Dischord Records presided over the shift from the hardcore punk that then dominated the American underground scene to the more diverse styles of alternative rock that were emerging . Minneapolis bands Hüsker Dü and The Replacements were indicative of this shift . Both started out as punk rock bands , but soon diversified their sounds and became more melodic . Michael Azerrad asserted that Hüsker Dü was the key link between hardcore punk and the more melodic , diverse music of college rock that emerged . Azerrad wrote , " Hüsker Dü played a huge role in convincing the underground that melody and punk rock weren 't antithetical . " The band also set an example by being the first group from the American indie scene to sign to a major record label , which helped establish college rock as " a viable commercial enterprise . " By focusing on heartfelt songwriting and wordplay instead of political concerns , The Replacements upended a number of underground scene conventions ; Azerrad noted that " along with R.E.M. [ The Replacements ] were one of the few underground bands that mainstream people liked . " 
 By the late 1980s , the American alternative scene was dominated by styles ranging from quirky alternative pop ( They Might Be Giants and Camper Van Beethoven ) , to noise rock ( Sonic Youth , Big Black , The Jesus Lizard ) and industrial rock ( Ministry , Nine Inch Nails ) . These sounds were in turn followed by the advent of Boston 's Pixies and Los Angeles ' Jane 's Addiction . Around the same time , the grunge subgenre emerged in Seattle , Washington , initially referred to as " The Seattle Sound " until its rise to popularity in the early 1990s . Grunge featured a sludgy , murky guitar sound that synthesized heavy metal and punk rock . Promoted largely by Seattle indie label Sub Pop , grunge bands were noted for their thrift store fashion which favored flannel shirts and combat boots suited to the local weather . Early grunge bands Soundgarden and Mudhoney found critical acclaim in the U.S. and UK , respectively . 
 By the end of the decade , a number of alternative bands began to sign to major labels . While early major label signings Hüsker Dü and The Replacements had little success , acts who signed with majors in their wake such as R.E.M. and Jane 's Addiction achieved gold and platinum records , setting the stage for alternative 's later breakthrough . Some bands such as Pixies had massive success overseas while they were ignored domestically . 
 In the middle of the decade Hüsker Dü 's album Zen Arcade influenced other hardcore acts by tackling personal issues . Out of Washington , D.C. ' s hardcore scene what was called " emocore " or " emo " emerged and was noted for its lyrics which delved into emotional very personal subject matter ( vocalists sometimes cried ) and added free association poetry and a confessional tone . Rites of Spring has been described as the first " emo " band . Former Minor Threat singer Ian MacKaye founded Dischord Records which became the center for the city 's emo scene . 
 = = = = British genres and trends of the 1980s = = = = 
 Gothic rock developed out of late @-@ 1970s British post @-@ punk . With a reputation as the " darkest and gloomiest form of underground rock " , gothic rock utilizes a synthesizer @-@ and @-@ guitar based sound drawn from post @-@ punk to construct " foreboding , sorrowful , often epic soundscapes " , and the genre 's lyrics often address literary romanticism , morbidity , religious symbolism , and supernatural mysticism . This genre among bands that took inspiration from late @-@ 1970s British post @-@ punk groups , Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees . Bauhaus ' debut single " Bela Lugosi 's Dead " , released in 1979 , is considered to be the proper beginning of the gothic rock genre . The Cure 's " oppressively dispirited " albums Seventeen Seconds ( 1980 ) , Faith ( 1981 ) , Pornography ( 1982 ) and their opus Disintegration ( 1989 ) cemented that group 's stature in that style and laid the foundation for its large cult following . 
 The key British alternative rock band to emerge during the 1980s was Manchester 's The Smiths . Music journalist Simon Reynolds singled out The Smiths and their American contemporaries R.E.M. as " the two most important alt @-@ rock bands of the day " , commenting that they " were eighties bands only in the sense of being against the eighties " . Reynolds noted that The Smiths ' " whole stance was predicated on their British audience being a lost generation , exiles in their own land " . The Smiths ' embrace of the guitar in an era of synthesizer @-@ dominated music is viewed as signaling the end of the new wave era and the advent of alternative rock in the United Kingdom . Despite the band 's limited chart success and short career , The Smiths exerted an influence over the British indie scene through the end of the decade , as various bands drew from singer Morrissey 's English @-@ centered lyrical topics and guitarist Johnny Marr 's jangly guitar @-@ playing style . The <unk> cassette , a 1986 NME premium featuring Primal Scream , The Wedding Present and others , was a major influence on the development of indie pop and the British indie scene as a whole . 
 Other forms of alternative rock developed in the UK during the 1980s . The Jesus and Mary Chain 's sound combined the Velvet Underground 's " melancholy noise " with Beach Boys pop melodies and Phil Spector 's " Wall of Sound " production , while New Order emerged from the demise of post @-@ punk band Joy Division and experimented with techno and house music . The Mary Chain , along with Dinosaur Jr . , <unk> and the dream pop of Cocteau Twins , were the formative influences for the shoegazing movement of the late 1980s . Named for the band members ' tendency to stare at their feet and guitar effects pedals onstage rather than interact with the audience , shoegazing acts like My Bloody Valentine and Slowdive created an overwhelmingly loud " wash of sound " that obscured vocals and melodies with long , droning riffs , distortion , and feedback . <unk> bands dominated the British music press at the end of the decade along with the Madchester scene . Performing for the most part in The Haçienda , a nightclub in Manchester owned by New Order and Factory Records , Madchester bands such as Happy Mondays and The Stone Roses mixed acid house dance rhythms with melodic guitar pop . 
 = = = Popularization in the 1990s = = = 
 By the start of the 1990s , the music industry was enticed by alternative rock 's commercial possibilities and major labels actively courted bands including Jane 's Addiction , Red Hot Chili Peppers , Dinosaur Jr . , Firehose , and Nirvana . In particular , R.E.M. ' s success had become a blueprint for many alternative bands in the late 1980s and 1990s to follow ; the group had outlasted many of its contemporaries and by the 1990s had become one of the most popular bands in the world . 
 The breakthrough success of the band Nirvana led to the widespread popularization of alternative rock in the 1990s . The release of the band 's single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " from its second album Nevermind ( 1991 ) " marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon " . Due to constant airplay of the song 's music video on MTV , Nevermind was selling 400 @,@ 000 copies a week by Christmas 1991 . The success of Nevermind surprised the music industry . Nevermind not only popularized grunge , but also established " the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general . " Michael Azerrad asserted that Nevermind symbolized " a sea @-@ change in rock music " in which the hair metal that had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music that was authentic and culturally relevant . 
 Nirvana 's surprise success with Nevermind heralded a " new openness to alternative rock " among commercial radio stations , opening doors for heavier alternative bands in particular . In the wake of Nevermind , alternative rock " found itself dragged @-@ kicking and screaming ... into the mainstream " and record companies , confused by the genre 's success yet eager to capitalize on it , scrambled to sign bands . The New York Times declared in 1993 , " Alternative rock doesn 't seem so alternative anymore . Every major label has a handful of guitar @-@ driven bands in shapeless shirts and threadbare jeans , bands with bad posture and good riffs who cultivate the oblique and the evasive , who conceal catchy tunes with noise and hide craftsmanship behind nonchalance . " However , many alternative rock artists rejected success , for it conflicted with the rebellious , D.I.Y. ethic the genre had espoused before mainstream exposure and their ideas of artistic authenticity . 
 = = = = Grunge explosion = = = = 
 Other grunge bands subsequently replicated Nirvana 's success . Pearl Jam had released its debut album Ten a month before Nevermind in 1991 , but album sales only picked up a year later . By the second half of 1992 Ten became a breakthrough success , being certified gold and reaching number two on the Billboard 200 album chart . Soundgarden 's album Badmotorfinger , Alice in Chains ' Dirt and Stone Temple Pilots ' Core along with the Temple of the Dog album collaboration featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden , were also among the 100 top @-@ selling albums of 1992 . The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted Rolling Stone to nickname Seattle " the new Liverpool . " Major record labels signed most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle , while a second influx of bands moved to the city in hopes of success . 
 At the same time , critics asserted that advertising was co @-@ opting elements of grunge and turning it into a fad . Entertainment Weekly commented in a 1993 article , " There hasn 't been this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies in the ' 60s . " The New York Times compared the " <unk> of America " to the mass @-@ marketing of punk rock , disco , and hip hop in previous years . As a result of the genre 's popularity , a backlash against grunge developed in Seattle . Nirvana 's follow @-@ up album In Utero ( 1993 ) was an intentionally abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a " wild aggressive sound , a true alternative record . " Nevertheless , upon its release in September 1993 In Utero topped the Billboard charts . Pearl Jam also continued to perform well commercially with its second album , Vs . ( 1993 ) , which topped the Billboard charts by selling a record 950 @,@ 378 copies in its first week of release . 
 = = = = Britpop = = = = 
 With the decline of the Madchester scene and the <unk> of shoegazing , the tide of grunge from America dominated the British alternative scene and music press in the early 1990s . As a reaction , a flurry of British bands emerged that wished to " get rid of grunge " and " declare war on America " , taking the public and native music press by storm . Dubbed " Britpop " by the media , this movement represented by Pulp , Oasis , Suede , and Blur was the British equivalent of the grunge explosion , in that the artists propelled alternative rock to the top of the charts in their home country . Britpop bands were influenced by and displayed reverence for British guitar music of the past , particularly movements and genres such as the British Invasion , glam rock , and punk rock . In 1995 the Britpop phenomenon culminated in a rivalry between its two chief groups , Oasis and Blur , symbolized by their release of competing singles on the same day . Blur won " The Battle of Britpop " , but Oasis soon eclipsed the other band in popularity with its second album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? ( 1995 ) , which went on to become the third best @-@ selling album in the UK 's history . 
 = = = = Other trends = = = = 
 Long synonymous with alternative rock as a whole in the US , indie rock became a distinct form following the popular breakthrough of Nirvana . Indie rock was formulated as a rejection of both alternative rock 's absorption into the mainstream by artists who could not or refused to cross over , and a wariness of its " macho " aesthetic . While indie rock artists share the punk rock distrust of commercialism , the genre does not entirely define itself against that , as " the general assumption is that it 's virtually impossible to make indie rock 's varying musical approaches compatible with mainstream tastes in the first place " . 
 Labels such as Matador Records , Merge Records , and Dischord , and indie rockers like Pavement , Superchunk , Fugazi , and Sleater @-@ Kinney dominated the American indie scene for most of the 1990s . One of the main indie rock movements of the 1990s was lo @-@ fi . The movement , which focused on the recording and distribution of music on low @-@ quality cassette tapes , initially emerged in the 1980s . By 1992 , Pavement , Guided by Voices and Sebadoh became popular lo @-@ fi cult acts in the United States , while subsequently artists like Beck and Liz Phair brought the aesthetic to mainstream audiences . The period also saw alternative confessional female singer @-@ songwriters . Besides the aforementioned Liz Phair , Lynda Thomas , PJ Harvey and the massively successful Alanis Morissette fit into this sub group . 
 In 1993 , Smashing Pumpkins album Siamese Dream was a major commercial success . The strong influence of heavy metal and progressive rock on the album helped to legitimize alternative rock to mainstream radio programmers and close the gap between alternative rock and the type of rock played on American 1970s Album Oriented Rock radio . 
 During the latter half of the 1990s , grunge was supplanted by post @-@ grunge . Many post @-@ grunge bands lacked the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what grunge had become , namely " a wildly popular form of inward @-@ looking , serious @-@ minded hard rock . " ; many post @-@ grunge bands emulated the sound and style of grunge , " but not necessarily the individual <unk> of its original artists . " Post @-@ grunge was a more commercially viable genre that tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with polished , radio @-@ ready production . Originally , post @-@ grunge was a label used almost pejoratively on bands that emerged when grunge was mainstream and emulated the grunge sound . The label suggested that bands labelled as post @-@ grunge were simply musically derivative , or a cynical response to an " authentic " rock movement . Bush , Candlebox and Collective Soul were labelled almost pejoratively as post @-@ grunge which , according to Tim Grierson of About.com , is " suggesting that rather than being a musical movement in their own right , they were just a calculated , cynical response to a legitimate stylistic shift in rock music . " Post @-@ grunge morphed during the late 1990s as post @-@ grunge bands such as Creed and Nickelback emerged . 
 Post @-@ rock was established by Talk Talk 's Laughing Stock and Slint 's Spiderland albums , both released in 1991 . Post @-@ rock draws influence from a number of genres , including Krautrock , progressive rock , and jazz . The genre subverts or rejects rock conventions , and often incorporates electronic music . While the name of the genre was coined by music journalist Simon Reynolds in 1994 , the style of the genre was solidified by the release of Millions Now Living Will Never Die ( 1996 ) by the Chicago group Tortoise . Post @-@ rock became the dominant form of experimental rock music in the 1990s and bands from the genre signed to such labels as Thrill Jockey , Kranky , Drag City , and Too Pure . A related genre , math rock , peaked in the mid @-@ 1990s . In comparison to post @-@ rock , math rock is more " <unk> " and relies on complex time signatures and intertwining phrases . While by the end of the decade a backlash had emerged against post @-@ rock due to its " dispassionate intellectuality " and its perceived increasing predictability , a new wave of post @-@ rock bands such as Godspeed You ! Black Emperor and Sigur Rós emerged who further expanded the genre . 
 After almost a decade in the underground , ska punk , a mixture of earlier British ska and punk acts , became popular in the United States . Rancid was the first of the " Third Wave Ska Revival " acts to break . In 1996 , the Mighty Mighty Bosstones , No Doubt , Sublime , Goldfinger , Reel Big Fish , Less Than Jake and Save Ferris charted or received radio exposure . 
 = = = = Decline of popularity = = = = 
 By the end of the decade , alternative rock 's mainstream prominence declined due to a number of events , notably the death of Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain in 1994 and Pearl Jam 's lawsuit against concert venue promoter Ticketmaster , which in effect barred the group from playing many major venues around the United States . In addition to the decline of grunge bands , Britpop faded as Oasis 's third album , Be Here Now ( 1997 ) , received lackluster reviews and Blur began to incorporate influences from American alternative rock . A signifier of alternative rock 's declining popularity was the hiatus of the Lollapalooza festival after an unsuccessful attempt to find a headliner in 1998 . In light of the festival 's troubles that year , Spin said , " Lollapalooza is as comatose as alternative rock right now " . 
 Despite alternative rock 's declining popularity , some artists retained mainstream relevance . Post @-@ grunge remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century , when bands like Creed and Matchbox Twenty became among the most popular rock bands in the United States . At the same time Britpop began to decline , Radiohead achieved critical acclaim with its third album OK Computer ( 1997 ) , and its follow @-@ ups Kid A ( 2000 ) and Amnesiac ( 2001 ) , which were in marked contrast with the traditionalism of Britpop . Radiohead , along with post @-@ Britpop groups like Travis and Coldplay , were major forces in British rock in subsequent years . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s Sunny Day Real Estate defined the " emo " genre for many . Weezer 's album Pinkerton ( 1996 ) was also influential . By 2000 and on into the new decade emo was one of the most popular rock music genres . Popular acts included platinum selling success of Bleed American by Jimmy Eat World ( 2001 ) and Dashboard Confessional 's The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most ( 2003 ) . The new emo had a much more mainstream sound than in the 1990s and a far greater appeal amongst adolescents than its earlier incarnations . At the same time , use of the term " emo " expanded beyond the musical genre , becoming associated with fashion , a hairstyle and any music that expressed emotion . The term " emo " has been applied by critics and journalists to a variety of artists , including multi @-@ platinum acts such as Fall Out Boy and My Chemical Romance and disparate groups such as Paramore and Panic ! at the Disco , even when they reject the label . 
 = = = 2000s revival = = = 
 During the late 1990s and early 2000s , several alternative rock bands emerged , including The Strokes , Franz Ferdinand , Interpol and The Rapture that drew primary inspiration from post @-@ punk and new wave , establishing the post @-@ punk revival movement . Preceded by the success of bands such as The Strokes and The White Stripes earlier in the decade , an influx of new alternative rock bands , including several post @-@ punk revival artists and others such as Modest Mouse , The Killers , and Yeah Yeah Yeahs , found commercial success in the early and mid 2000s . Owing to the success of these bands , Entertainment Weekly declared in 2004 , " After almost a decade of domination by rap @-@ rock and nu @-@ metal bands , mainstream alt @-@ rock is finally good again . " Worldwide arena tours for alternative rock acts were culled to a few well @-@ established players such as U2 , Muse , Foo Fighters and Coldplay , with American band Thirty Seconds to Mars experiencing a notable rise in popularity during the latter half of the 2000s . American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers entered a new @-@ found popularity in 1999 after the release of their album Californication ( 1999 ) , with continued success throughout the 2000s . 
 Most references to modern alternative rock music in the United States are to the indie rock genre , a term that previously had limited usage on alternative rock channels and media . While there have been conflicting opinions on the relevance of alternative rock to mainstream audiences beyond 2010 , Dave Grohl commented on an article from the December 29 , 2013 issue of the New York Daily News stating that rock is dead : " speak for yourself ... Rock seems pretty alive to me . " 
 = Symeon the New Theologian = 
 Symeon the New Theologian ( sometimes spelled " Simeon " ) ( Greek : <unk> ὁ <unk> <unk> ; 949 – 1022 AD ) was a Byzantine Christian monk and poet who was the last of three saints canonized by the Eastern Orthodox church and given the title of " Theologian " ( along with John the Apostle and Gregory of Nazianzus ) . " Theologian " was not applied to Symeon in the modern academic sense of theological study , but to recognize someone who spoke from personal experience of the vision of God . One of his principal teachings was that humans could and should experience theoria ( literally " contemplation , " or direct experience of God ) . 
 Symeon was born into the Byzantine nobility and given a traditional education . At age fourteen he met Symeon the Studite , a renowned monk of the Monastery of Stoudios in Constantinople , who convinced him to give his own life to prayer and asceticism under the elder Symeon 's guidance . By the time he was thirty , Symeon the New Theologian became the abbot of the Monastery of St. Mammas , a position he held for twenty @-@ five years . He attracted many monks and clergy with his reputation for sanctity , though his teachings brought him into conflict with church authorities , who would eventually send him into exile . His most well known disciple was Nicetas <unk> who wrote the Life of Symeon . 
 Symeon is recognized as the first Byzantine mystic to freely share his own mystical experiences . Some of his writings are included in the Philokalia , a collection of texts by early Christian mystics on contemplative prayer and hesychast teachings . Symeon wrote and spoke frequently about the importance of experiencing directly the grace of God , often talking about his own experiences of God as divine light . Another common subject in his writings was the need of putting oneself under the guidance of a spiritual father . The authority for many of his teachings derived from the traditions of the Desert Fathers , early Christian monks and ascetics . Symeon 's writings include Hymns of Divine Love , Ethical Discourses , and The Catechetical Discourses . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 The details of Symeon 's life come from his own writings and from the Life of Symeon , written by his disciple Nicetas . He was born at <unk> in Galatia to Basil and Theophano <unk> , members of the Byzantine nobility who supported the Macedonian dynasty . His given name at birth is unclear — it was traditional at that time , when becoming a monk , to take on a new name with the same initial as one 's birth name . Symeon may have ignored that tradition in order to take the same name as his spiritual father , Symeon the Studite . In his writings , he sometimes described the experiences of " George , " which might have been his birth name . Symeon received a basic Greek school education until the age of eleven , when an uncle recognized that he had potential for higher learning . The uncle helped Symeon to complete his secondary education at the court of the emperor Basil II and his brother Constantine VIII . 
 At age fourteen he met Symeon the Studite ( also called Symeon the Pious ) , a holy monk of the Monastery of Stoudios in Constantinople . That meeting convinced the younger Symeon to forgo higher education and take on Symeon the Studite as his spiritual father . At that time he began studying the life of prayer and asceticism under his guidance , with the desire to immediately enter the monastery . Symeon the Studite asked the young Symeon to wait before becoming a monk , so he spent the years until age twenty @-@ seven serving in the household of a patrician , though according to some sources he served the emperor instead . 
 Living a worldly life during the day , he reportedly spent his evenings in vigils and prayer , putting into practice the writings of two authors — Marcus Eremita and <unk> of <unk> — that were given to him by his spiritual father . It was during this time that Symeon had his first experience of God as divine light , as he described later in one of his Discourses ( Disc . 22 @.@ 2 – 4 ) . He attributed the experience to the prayers of Symeon the Studite . In spite of the experience , the young Symeon confessed that he still fell into worldly ways of living . Direct personal experience of God was to become one of Symeon 's central teachings in his writings , and to the monks who followed him . 
 = = = Abbot of St. Mammas monastery = = = 
 At age twenty @-@ seven , he entered the Monastery of Stoudios , giving his life over completely to discipleship to his teacher Symeon the Studite . The elder Symeon was not an ordained priest , but a simple monk who was considered holy by many people . The younger Symeon was extremely zealous in his practices and in following his teacher — to such an extent that the abbot of the monastery insisted that Symeon leave after only a few months . 
 Following the elder Symeon 's advice , he left for the nearby Monastery of St. Mammas in Constantinople , which was described as run down , both physically and spiritually . During his time at St. Mammas he continued to follow Symeon the Studite 's guidance . Within three years after moving to St. Mammas , Symeon was tonsured as a monk , ordained as a priest , and elected as the abbot of the monastery . He spent the next twenty @-@ five years as abbot of St. Mammas , attracting many monks and clergy with his reputation for learning and sanctity . 
 Not all of the monks were attracted by Symeon 's zealous approach . Symeon attempted to reform the Byzantine monasteries , where monks had become subservient to the emperor and had acquired large holdings of property , libraries , and art . His writings and teachings were aimed at returning the monasteries to their traditional role in the early church , urging the monks to take up a life of simplicity , asceticism , purity of heart , and constant prayer . The strict monastic discipline for which Symeon aimed upset several monks in the monastery . Symeon also took a more emotional approach to worship , suggesting that a monk shouldn 't take the sacrament without tears . The introduction of vegetarian meals , along with other unique practices to instill discipline and humility , also caused some displeasure among the monks . 
 Fifteen years after becoming abbot , one morning after the Divine Liturgy a group of approximately thirty monks rose against Symeon , who drove them away . Breaking the locks on the monastery gate on their way out , the monks took their appeal to the Patriarch <unk> , who sided with Symeon and sent the monks into exile . Symeon pleaded on their behalf , doing everything he could to have the monks return to the monastery , including seeking out some of the monks to apologize to them . During his time as abbot , Symeon wrote Hymns of Divine Love ( completed during his exile ) , the Discourses , and many letters and polemical works which have been lost . He also wrote articles relating to his disputes with the church theologians — these survived as his theological and ethical treatises . In 1005 Symeon resigned as abbot of St. Mammas , appointing one of his disciples in his stead , and taking up a more solitary life at the monastery . 
 = = = Opposition from the church = = = 
 Symeon endured severe opposition from church authorities , particularly from the chief theologian of the emperor 's court , Archbishop Stephen , who at one time was the Metropolitan of Nicomedia . Stephen was a former politician and diplomat with a reputation for a thorough theoretical understanding of theology , but one which was removed from actual experience of the spiritual life . Symeon , in contrast , held the view that one must have actual experience of the Holy Spirit in order to speak about God , at the same time recognizing the authority of scripture and of the earlier church fathers . Their differing views on the source of authority to speak on spiritual matters was the cause of several years of intense conflict , ending with Symeon 's eventual exile . 
 Stephen found fault with Symeon especially for his charismatic approach , and his support of individual direct experience of God 's grace . Symeon believed that direct experience gave monks the authority to preach and give absolution of sins , without the need for formal ordination — as practiced by his own teacher , Symeon the Studite . Church authorities also taught from a speculative and philosophical perspective , while Symeon taught from his own direct mystical experience . Symeon 's teachings , especially those regarding the direct experience of God 's grace , brought accusations of heresy from Stephen . Symeon responded to Stephen 's charges by declaring that the real heresy was to teach that it is impossible to have direct experience of God ( Disc . 29 @.@ 4 ) . 
 Stephen also found fault with Symeon for revering his spiritual father , Symeon the Studite . At that time , formal recognition of saints was seldom practiced and not obligatory , so revered monks were informally recognized and honored by monasteries and by their disciples . Every year the younger Symeon arranged a celebration honoring his teacher , which included an icon of Symeon the Studite and a service to him . Stephen rebuked Symeon for honoring his teacher as a saint , because in his opinion the Studite was not worth of any honor . The conflict between the two lasted for six years . 
 Stephen was finally able to bring Symeon before the Synod on charges of honoring as a saint someone who Stephen believed was far from saintly . At first , Patriarch Sergius II of Constantinople supported Symeon , going so far as to send candles and perfume in support of the veneration of Symeon the Studite at St. Mammas . Stephen attacked the Studite as unholy and sinful , and was eventually able to convince others that Symeon 's homage was improper by convincing them that the Studite held some unorthodox beliefs . As a compromise , Stephen suggested that the annual festival honoring the elder Symeon be held as a private observance within the monastery . Symeon the New Theologian refused to compromise , declaring that it was his duty to honor the church fathers and the saints , and in January 1009 was condemned to go into exile . Stephen also convinced the Patriarch to order all icons of Symeon the Studite removed from St. Mammas , with many of them destroyed or covered over with soot . 
 Symeon , for his part , never backed down from the church authorities . In one of his hymns , he had Christ speaking the following rebuke to the bishops : 
 They ( the bishops ) <unk> handle My Body 
 and seek avidly to dominate the masses ... 
 They are seen to appear as brilliant and pure , 
 but their souls are worse than mud and dirt , 
 worse even than any kind of deadly poison , 
 these evil and perverse men ! ( Hymn 58 ) 
 = = = Exile and death = = = 
