 In 1009 Symeon was sent into exile near <unk> , a small village near Chrysopolis on the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus . According to one account , he was left by church authorities alone and without food , in the middle of winter . There he found a deserted and ruined chapel that had been dedicated to Saint Macrina . It happened to be on land owned by one of Symeon 's spiritual children , Christopher <unk> , who donated the land and proceeds to start a monastery . 
 By this time , Symeon had many disciples — some of them , including the patrician <unk> , appealed to Sergius II , the Patriarch of Constantinople , to lift the order of exile . Out of fear that the dispute would reach the emperor , Sergius II lifted the exile order completely , and then offered to re @-@ establish Symeon at the monastery of St. Mammas and consecrate him as archbishop of an important see in Constantinople . The only qualification was that Symeon must show some restraint in his celebration of Symeon the Studite 's festival day . Symeon refused to compromise — the Patriarch , out of respect for Symeon , gave him his blessing to " live together with your disciples and act according to your good pleasure . " 
 Symeon remained at the Saint Macrina monastery , where many close disciples , both monks and secular people , gathered around him . At Saint Macrina he was free of monks who were averse to his discipline and zeal , and free from direct conflict with church authorities . He continued to honor Symeon the Studite — most of the clergy from Constantinople , along with many monks and laymen , joined him during those celebrations . He also wrote during that time and made himself accessible to all who wanted to see him . Symeon spent the last thirteen years of his life in exile , dying from dysentery on March 12 , 1022 . According to his biographer and disciple , Nicetas , Symeon foretold his own death many years previously , and on his last day called together all the monks to sing the funeral hymns . 
 Symeon is now recognized as a saint by the Orthodox Church . The title of " Theologian " was not given to him in the modern academic sense of someone who is learned in theology , but to recognize someone who speaks from personal experience of the vision of God . Until Symeon 's time , that title was reserved mainly for John the Apostle , author of one of the four gospels , and Gregory of Nazianzus , writer of contemplative poetry . His opponents derisively called him the " new " theologian because of his creative approach — his supporters , and later the Church at large , embraced the name in the most positive sense . 
 = = Writings = = 
 After Symeon 's death his writings were kept alive by small groups of followers , eventually becoming one of the central teachings of the hesychast movement . Many copies of his works were made in the following centuries , particularly around the 14th century , and among the Eastern Orthodox monasteries on Mt . Athos . His recognition has always been greater outside the official church , its calendar and liturgy . Historians credit this to his zealous personality , his criticism of the church hierarchy , his emphasis on direct experience of God , and some of his unorthodox teachings — including his belief that an unordained monk who had the direct experience of God was empowered to absolve others of their sins . 
 Symeon wrote in a similar style and taught the traditional views of several early Christian fathers and <unk> , including St. Augustine , Gregory of Nyssa , Gregory of Nazianzus , and Mark the Hermit . Where Symeon differed from his predecessors was in his transparent and open sharing of his most interior experiences . Symeon was the first Byzantine mystic to freely share those experiences , which were given in the context of his teaching that the direct experience of God was something to which all Christians could aspire . 
 One catechesis of Symeon 's , On Faith , along with a composite work titled One Hundred and Fifty @-@ Three Practical and Theological Texts , are included in the Philokalia , a collection of texts by early Christian mystics . Another text in the Philokalia , titled The Three Methods of Prayer is also attributed to Symeon — it describes a method of practicing the Jesus Prayer that includes direction on correct posture and breathing while reciting the prayer . It is extremely unlikely that he wrote that text — some scholars attribute it to <unk> the Monk , while others believe it was written by disciples of Symeon . 
 = = = Discourses = = = 
 The Discourses are the central work of Symeon 's life , and were written during his time as abbot at St. Mammas ( 980 – 998 ) . They consist of thirty @-@ four discourses , along with two pieces on thanksgiving , that were given as talks to his monks and others interested in the spiritual life — often at St. Mammas during Matins services — and then compiled and likely edited by Symeon himself . They were widely read in Constantinople even before Symeon 's exile . Their style maintains the personality of Symeon as expressed in his live talks : simplicity , sincerity , humility , speaking from the heart , and " full of fire and persuasion . " There is no obvious sequence or order to the Discourses — the topics are apparently a collection of talks given during different liturgical seasons or at feast days of saints . 
 There are two main themes running through the different discourses . One is the traditional theme of the early <unk> and mystical theologians of the Christian East , especially the practices of faith ( praxis ) and asceticism ( <unk> ) that they frequently taught as the way to reach direct experience of God ( theoria ) . Specific practices discussed by Symeon include : repentance , detachment , renunciation , mercy , sorrow for sins , faith , and contemplation . 
 Symeon 's other main emphasis is the power of the Holy Spirit to transform , and the profound mystical union with God that is the end result of a holy life . Symeon referred to this as the Baptism of the Holy Spirit , compared to the more ritualistic Baptism of water . Symeon believed that Christianity had descended into formulae and church ritual , which for many people replaced the earlier emphasis on actual and direct experience of God . The Discourses express Symeon 's strong conviction that the life of a Christian must be much more than mere observance of rules , and must include personal experience of the presence of the living Christ . Symeon describes his own conversion and mystical experience of the divine light . 
 = = = Hymns of Divine Love = = = 
 In Hymns of Divine Love ( also called Hymns of Divine Eros ) most of which were completed during his time in exile , Symeon describes his vision of God as uncreated divine light . That experience of divine luminosity is associated by Symeon with the Holy Trinity , with God , and sometimes with Christ . The Hymns are similar in theme to the Discourses , but are written with poetic meter and rhyme . He began writing them at the same time as the Discourses but only finished editing them during the last thirteen years of his life at the monastery of St. Macrina . There are 58 hymns totaling approximately 11 @,@ 000 verses . 
 The Hymns cover various themes , similar to the Discourses : repentance , death , the practice of virtue , charity , detachment , and more . Especially notable are the Hymns that recount Symeon 's mystical experiences and his love for Christ , which have been described as " ecstatic writing and ... mystical content that becomes very personal , both to Symeon and to the reader . " 
 An excerpt from Hymn 25 includes the following description of Symeon 's mystical union with God as light : 
 — But , Oh , what intoxication of light , Oh , what movements of fire ! 
 Oh , what <unk> of the flame in me , miserable one that I am , 
 coming from You and Your glory ! 
 The glory I know it and I say it is your Holy Spirit , 
 who has the same nature with You , and the same honor , O word ; 
 He is of the same race , the same glory , 
 of the same essence , He alone with your Father , 
 and with you , O Christ , O God of the universe ! 
 I fall down in adoration before You . 
 I thank You that You have made me worthy to know , however little it may be , 
 the power of Your divinity . 
 = = = Theological and ethical treatises = = = 
 Symeon 's theological and ethical treatises were original written works , as compared to many of his other writings that were taken from his talks . They cover his positions on various controversial issues of theology . Many of them were directed at Stephen , his main antagonist in the church , along with other church officials whom Symeon saw as taking an overly theoretical approach to Christianity . In these pieces Symeon defended the traditions of the early Byzantine mystical theologians from the teachings of the church officials of his own time . Central to this defense was Symeon 's view that the revelation of scripture could only be understood through the experience of divine grace given to the pure of heart during contemplation . 
 The treatises cover a wide range of topics , including Symeon 's defense against Stephen regarding his own views on the unity of the Holy Trinity . He also presents his doctrine on mysticism , the necessity of faith , the possibility of direct experience of God , the Baptism of the Holy Spirit , and more . The last four treatises were written during his exile , and discuss living a holy life while on earth , salvation through faith and good works , and the need for solitude if one wants to become a channel of divine grace to others . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 The church authorities regularly challenged Symeon , even though his teachings were rooted in the Gospels . He was also faithful to the early Greek Fathers and the two main traditions of Byzantine spirituality : the Alexandrian School , which took a more intellectual approach , and the " school of the heart " , represented by Mark the Hermit , Pseudo @-@ <unk> , John <unk> , and other early ascetic monks . He combined these different traditions with his own inner experience in a synthesis that was new in Byzantine mysticism . 
 Symeon often taught that all followers of Christ could have the direct experience of God , or theoria , just as the early church fathers experienced and taught . In that context he frequently described his own experiences of God as divine light . He preached to his monks that the way to God 's grace was through a life of simplicity , asceticism , sanctity , and contemplation , which was also the doctrine of the hermits and monks known as the Desert Fathers . In addition , Symeon placed great emphasis on putting oneself under the complete guidance of a spiritual father . 
 = = = Direct experience = = = 
 A central theme throughout Symeon 's teachings and writings is that all Christians should aspire to have actual direct experience of God in deep contemplation , or theoria . Regarding his own mystical experiences , he presented them not as unique to himself , but as the norm for all Christians . He taught that the experience came after purification through prayer , repentance , and asceticism . He especially called on his monks to take on the traditional charismatic and prophetic role in the Church . 
 In one of his Discourses he defended the frequent sharing of his own inner experiences , writing that it was not presumptuous , but was done to encourage others in their inner life : 
 We have written them because we are mindful of God 's gifts , which He has bestowed on our unworthy self from the beginning of life until the present moment ... and in gratitude we show to all of you the talent He has entrusted to us . How can we be silent before such an abundance of blessings , or out of ingratitude bury the talent that has been given to us ( Mt . 25 : 18 ) , like ungrateful and evil servants ? ... By our oral teaching we encourage you too to strive that you may have part in His gifts and enjoy them , the gifts of which we , though unworthy , have been partakers through His unutterable goodness . ( Discourse XXXIV ) 
 = = = Divine light = = = 
 Symeon repeatedly describes the experience of divine light in his writings , as both an inward and outward mystical experience . These experiences began in his youth , and continued all during his life . They came to him during inward prayer and contemplation , and were associated with a feeling of indescribable joy , as well as the intellectual understanding that the light was a vision of God . In his writings , he spoke directly to God about the experience variously as " the pure Light of your face " and " You deigned to reveal Your face to me like a formless sun . " He also described the light as the grace of God , and taught that its experience was associated with a mind that was completely still and had transcended itself . At times he described the light speaking to him with kindness , and explaining who it was . 
 In Discourse XXVIII Symeon wrote about the light and its power to transform : 
 It shines on us without evening , without change , without alteration , without form . It speaks , works , lives , gives life , and changes into light those whom it illuminates . We bear witness that " God is light , " and those to whom it has been granted to see Him have all beheld Him as light . Those who have seen Him have received Him as light , because the light of His glory goes before Him , and it is impossible for Him to appear without light . Those who have not seen His light have not seen Him , for He is the light , and those who have not received the light have not yet received grace . Those who have received grace have received the light of God and have received God , even as Christ Himself , who is the Light , has said , " I will live in them and move among them . " ( 2 Cor . 6 : 16 ) 
 = = = Guidance of a spiritual father = = = 
 Symeon taught that putting oneself under the guidance of a spiritual father was essential for those who were serious about living the spiritual life . That relationship was a historical tradition especially prominent among the Desert Fathers , who defined the qualifications for acting in the role of a spiritual father : personal experience ; an interior life ; purity of heart ; the vision of God ; insight ; inspiration ; discernment . Official ordination as a priest was not a requirement — Symeon 's own spiritual father was a simple unordained monk who had many spiritual children . Symeon also taught that such teachers were empowered by their holiness to preach and to absolve others of their sins , a view that brought him into disagreement with church leaders of his time . 
 In Hymns of Divine Love Symeon wrote that : 
 Listen only to the advice of your spiritual father , 
 answer him with humility 
 and , as to God , tell him your thoughts , 
 even to a simple meditation , without hiding anything , 
 do nothing without his advice . 
 = = = Absolution of sins = = = 
 Symeon 's teachings on the hearing of confession and the absolution of sins brought him into regular conflict with church authorities , particularly Archbishop Stephen . According to Symeon , only one who had the grace and direct experience of God was empowered by God to preach and absolve the sins of others . Stephen held the view that only ordained priests had that authority . Symeon 's views were colored by his own spiritual father , Symeon the Studite , who was a simple monk , unordained , and yet who preached and gave absolution . In one of his Ethical Discourses Symeon went further and wrote that one should not give absolution without having first received the experience of God 's grace : 
 Be careful , I beg you , never to assume the debts of others when you are a debtor yourself ; do not dare give absolution without having received in your heart the One who takes away the sin of the world . " ( <unk> . 6 ' ) 
 = History of the Galveston Bay Area = 
 For a period of over 7000 years , humans have inhabited the Galveston Bay Area in what is now the United States . Through their history the communities in the region have been influenced by the once competing sister cities of Houston and Galveston , but still have their own distinct history . Though never truly a single , unified community , the histories of the Bay Area communities have had many common threads . 
 Prior to European settlement the area around Galveston Bay was settled by the Karankawa and Atakapan tribes , who lived throughout the Gulf coast region . Spanish and French explorers traveled the area for many years gradually establishing trade with the local natives . In the early 19th century the pirate Jean Lafitte created a small , short @-@ lived empire around the bay ruled from his base on Galveston Island before his being ousted by the United States Navy . 
 Following Mexico 's independence from Spain , the new nation established long @-@ term settlements , including Anahuac and San Jacinto , around the bay . Early rebellions by the settlers against Mexican rule occurred in the region and it was later the site of the victory of the Texas army over the Mexican army during the Texas Revolution . Following Texas ' independence from Mexico and its annexation by the United States , economic growth was centered initially on agriculture and cattle ranching . Commerce grew between Galveston , Harrisburg and Houston in the later 19th century , and created additional economic opportunities as railroads were built through the Bay Area to connect these and other commercial centers . 
 In the early 20th century the region gave birth to some of the state 's earliest oil fields and refineries as the Texas Oil Boom took hold . Refining and manufacturing grew rapidly in the area , particularly around Baytown , Pasadena , and Texas City . The opening of the Port of Texas City , and later Barbours Cut and Bayport , gradually established the region as an important shipping center . As wealth increased in southeast Texas , resorts and other tourist draws developed in the Bay Area . During the 1960s the area became home of the Johnson Space Center , headquarters for the nation 's manned space program , which helped diversify the regional economy and began the development of an aerospace industry , and later other high @-@ tech industries . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The present geography of the Gulf Coast was formed during an ice age approximately 30 @,@ 000 years ago when dramatic lowering of the sea level occurred . As the ice later melted , it formed a flow through the Trinity and San Jacinto rivers and carved wide valleys in the soft sediments , resulting in the creation of the modern system of bays and lakes approximately 4500 years ago . 
 Humans first entered the region as early as 10 @,@ 000 years ago following migrations into the Americas from Asia during the ice age . Research has indicated that the first settlements around Galveston Bay may have been constructed around 5500 BCE . The first ceramics appeared around 100 CE , and arrow points around 650 CE . When Europeans first entered the region there were still significant numbers of Native Americans living there . Along the southern coast around the Colorado River and Matagorda Bay and up toward Galveston Bay lived the <unk> tribe , a branch of the Karankawa people . The northeast was inhabited by the Akokisa , or Han , tribe as part of the Atakapan people 's homelands . The Karankawa were migratory hunter @-@ gatherers . Their diet included deer , bison , peccary , and bears , in addition to fish , oysters , nuts , and berries as they were available . They used portable huts for shelter . Dugout canoes were used to travel the many internal waterways and the coast , an advantage that initially gave them tactical superiority over the Europeans . The Akokisa in the area were similarly hunter @-@ gatherers , and utilized canoes for transport . They became well @-@ known among the Europeans for their hide @-@ tanning abilities , especially for bear hide . During the 18th century the Akokisa population in the area was estimated at about 3500 . 
 Though earlier surveys of the coastline had been made , the first known Europeans to land in the vicinity were under the command of Spanish explorer Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca when he and his crew were shipwrecked in 1528 , though it is unclear precisely where they landed . Though subsequent explorers described cannibalism among the local tribes , Cabeza de Vaca made no mention of the practice . He and the other survivors left the area as soon as they were able traveling to safety into Mexico . 
 The Rivas @-@ Iriarte expedition , one of several Spanish maritime expeditions charting the Gulf Coast , performed a detailed scientific exploration of the Galveston Bay in 1687 , probably the first such exploration . A 1785 expedition by José Antonio de Evia charting the Gulf Coast gave the bay and the island the name <unk> , or <unk> , for the Spanish Viceroy Bernardo de Gálvez . 
 During the early 18th Century , French traders first began trade with the Akokisa and the nearby Bidai tribes for furs . In 1754 several traders including Joseph <unk> established a trading post on the Trinity River a just north of the bay , near modern <unk> . Spanish authorities quickly seized the post and transformed it into the San Augustín de Ahumada fort . They named the site El <unk> and established a Catholic mission . The Spanish were not successful in maintaining trade with the natives and the post was abandoned within a few years . Encroachment by Spanish as well as U.S. settlers continued such that by the end of the century native populations had declined dramatically due to disease and territorial pressures from the Europeans . 
 In 1816 Galveston Island was claimed by the pirate Louis @-@ Michel Aury as a base of operations to support Mexico 's rebellion against Spain . Aury was succeeded as leader by Jean Lafitte , the famed Louisiana pirate and American hero of the War of 1812 . Lafitte , at the time serving as a privateer for the Spanish Empire , transformed Galveston Island and the bay into a pirate kingdom he called Campeche . He established bases for smuggling and ship repair on the Trinity River near the bay and at Eagle Point ( modern San Leon ) . His gang also created a hide @-@ out on the shores of Clear Lake . As late as 1965 , treasure from this era was discovered at Kemah . In response to the piracy , the United States Navy ousted Lafitte from the island in 1821 and the colony was abandoned . Some settlers in the region remained such as Anson Taylor who had supplied produce and game from the Clear Lake area for Campeche . 
 = = Mexican dominion and the Republic of Texas = = 
 In the early 19th century following the Louisiana Purchase , Texas , particularly southeastern Texas , had become an increasing point of contention between Spain and the United States . Various failed attempts , such as the Long Expedition , were made by groups from the U.S. to take control of parts of Texas , resulting in some temporary settlements near the bay including Perry 's Point near modern Anahuac . Spanish authorities began efforts to colonize Texas to help protect its claim to the territory . Hoping to spur settlement , the Spanish government granted land to pioneers from the United States , including Moses Austin . 
 Soon afterward , though , Mexico declared its independence from Spain and moved to establish its own control over Texas . Because of fears of the indigenous tribes , officials found it difficult to find settlers in Mexico willing to move into the territory 's coastal areas , and therefore continued to allow settlers from the United States into the area with the promise of allegiance to Mexico . Austin 's son , Stephen F. Austin , established a colony which extended from east central Texas to Galveston Bay and the Gulf Coast . Some of Austin 's original Old 300 settlers , including John Dickson , William Scott , and John <unk> , established homesteads and commercial enterprises around the bay . The Port of Galveston and a permanent settlement were established on the island in 1825 to spur trade . Communities including Lynchburg , San Jacinto , and Campbell 's Bayou ( founded by one of Lafitte 's former officers ) were gradually established around the bay . In addition to the Anglo @-@ American and Mexican settlers in the area , a Cajun settlement was established along Armand Bayou . The Mexican Colonization Law of 1824 , however , forbade the creation of settlements near the coast with the intention of protecting the native tribes in the area . The law was not enforced and settlers continued to encroach upon tribal lands . Native tribes remained in the area years afterward but were gradually driven out as European settlers moved into the region . The Akokisa were driven inland where they merged with the Bidai . The <unk> were driven southward where they eventually established their current homelands in northeastern Mexico . 
 The Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company was formed in New York in 1830 to promote additional settlement around Galveston Bay and other parts of southeast Texas . The company gradually brought in many colonists from the United States and Europe , although conflict with Mexican officials over colonization laws initially made these efforts difficult . In 1830 , Mexican authorities created a customs and garrison post near the bay commanded by Juan Davis Bradburn . The post , which later became the modern city of Anahuac , was the first major outpost on the mainland shores and temporarily replaced Galveston as a port of entry . New Washington ( modern Morgan 's Point ) and <unk> ( within modern Texas City ) were also founded by settlers from the company . Conflicts between Bradburn and the settlers in the region over land rights , slavery laws , and customs duties led to the Anahuac Disturbances , a prelude to the larger Texas rebellion . As a result , Mexican authorities were driven out of eastern Texas and the settlers began to discuss independence . 
 Following a coup in the Mexican government , Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna became president and revoked many freedoms previously enjoyed by the Texans further deteriorating the government 's relations with the region 's settlers . Texas declared its independence and revolted in 1835 . Following a number of battles with the Mexican army , the Texas army , under the leadership of General Sam Houston , finally defeated Santa Anna in the Battle of San Jacinto , near modern Pasadena . 
 The new Republic of Texas grew rapidly . The shores of the bay were initially home to farms and ranches . Longhorn cattle , which had roamed wild throughout Texas , became free resources for producing hides and beef shipped throughout North America . The famed Allen Ranch was established near Harrisburg in what is now southeast Houston and Pasadena , in addition to the Bay Lake Ranch and other ranches established around the bay . The range land of these ranches came to encompass most of the terrain around the bay south of the San Jacinto River . Cedar Bayou ( part of modern Baytown ) , Shoal Point ( part of modern Texas City ) , and other small communities began to develop during this period . Eagle Point ( part of modern San Leon ) became an important shipping and trading post for slaves . 
 Inland from the bay , the towns of Harrisburg and Houston were both founded on the Buffalo Bayou by entrepreneurs from New York and competed as commercial centers , but neither was as significant as Galveston . Throughout the 19th century these three cities developed increasing influence on the Bay Area communities , particularly as railroads were built through the region . 
 Multiple hurricanes struck the region during this time and after . Though none during the 19th century were catastrophic , they nevertheless caused substantial damage and caused some loss of life . 
 = = Annexation by the United States = = 
 Texas succeeded in its bid to join the United States in 1845 , one of the key causes of the subsequent Mexican @-@ American War . Texas ' annexation brought more people to Texas . Ranching interests expanded around the bay , along with the growth of the farming and lumber enterprises in the region . The construction of the Galveston , Houston and Henderson ( GH & H ) Railroad , begun in 1857 , further spurred more growth in the region . 
 During the American Civil War , in which Texas seceded from the United States , the area served a limited role in the conflict though no major battles were fought on the mainland shoreline . New fortifications , like Fort Chambers near Anahuac , were constructed to ward off a mainland invasion by Union forces and to protect supply routes to and from Galveston . The GH & H Railroad was used in the recapture of Galveston by Confederate forces in 1863 . Makeshift hospitals , such as the Nolan home in Dickinson , were established in the bayside communities . 
 In the aftermath of the war the Texan economy declined for a period . Nevertheless , ranching interests became major economic drivers spawning many other economic enterprises like hide processing plants and shipping companies . Some former slaves were able to take advantage of ranching 's economic influence as some successful African American communities were established , including the " Settlement " in what is now League City . The success of the various enterprises in the area and the growth of Galveston as one of the prime commercial centers in the South and Southwest helped promote the construction of the Gulf , Colorado and Santa Fe Railway , and the La Porte , Houston and Northern Railroad over the course of the 19th century . These railroads built lines near the southwest shore of the bay and led to the creation of La Porte , Clear Creek ( modern League City ) , Webster , Edward 's Point / North Galveston ( modern San Leon ) , and others ( eventually including Texas City ) . Toward the end of the century , as ranching 's profitability declined , many communities turned increasingly to agriculture . The farming community of Pasadena was established during this time . By the end of the 19th century , the land south of Buffalo Bayou came to be known as the " Texas Fruit Belt " for the oranges , pears , grapes , and other fruits and vegetables grown in the area . The Sylvan Beach park was created at La Porte as a beachfront summer getaway from Houston . With amenities including bathhouses , boating piers , and a <unk> hotel with a dance pavilion , Sylvan Beach quickly became the most popular tourist destination in the Houston area . 
 In 1900 a massive hurricane devastated the city of Galveston and heavily damaged communities around the bay . According to some estimates the death toll on the coast outside of Galveston may have been over one thousand . Bridges between Galveston and the mainland were destroyed . Communities along the shoreline declined for some time as economic growth moved inland and Houston became the dominant economic center in Southeast Texas . The region received a population boost from some Galveston refugees who relocated to the mainland following the catastrophe . 
 = = The wars and the oil boom = = 
 The sparsely populated communities around the bay transformed during the 20th century . Following the devastating 1900 hurricane , donations by the newly created Red Cross , including millions of strawberry plants to Gulf Coast farmers , helped revive area communities . This and the subsequent establishment of a major strawberry farm in the area by Texaco founder Joseph S. Cullinan made Pasadena an important fruit producer for many years afterward . The newly established community of Texas City opened its port and railroad junctions shipping cotton and grain . In fact , because the port had opened just before the 1900 hurricane , it was able to handle Galveston 's diverted shipping traffic until the island 's damaged port was repaired . Following another hurricane in 1915 , the Texas City Dike was built to protect the Texas City ship channel from sediment movement in future storms , thus helping to build confidence in the safety of the port . One of the most immediate effects of the dike , however , was to increase the salt levels in West Bay , between Galveston and the southwest coastline . 
 Major tracts of the Allen Ranch were liquidated opening up new development around Pasadena and other bayside communities . Commercial fishing for oysters and shrimp grew as a significant area industry . The lumber industry also continued to grow . A sugar refinery opened in Texas city , a paper mill in Pasadena , and other factories in the early 20th century . 
 Following the petroleum discovery at Spindletop ( roughly 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Galveston Bay ) in 1901 Texas entered an era of economic development known as the Texas Oil Boom . Petroleum exploration at Galveston Bay began shortly afterward with the discovery of the Goose Creek Oil Field in 1903 . The first well at Goose Creek was built in 1907 with significant production beginning in 1908 ( in 1924 it was the state 's third largest field ) . In 1915 the first offshore oil drilling site in the state was opened at Goose Creek . Gradually other oil fields were discovered around the bay as well , including the Anahuac oil field in 1935 . The first refinery by the bay was built in 1908 at Texas City , followed by refineries in Baytown and Pasadena . The main refinery in Baytown , built by Humble Oil ( now ExxonMobil ) , became the largest in the state . 
 The wealth brought on by the boom transformed the region . The population increased rapidly due to significant immigration from within the United States , from Mexico , and overseas . Mexicans , fleeing the Mexican Revolution in 1910 , added significantly to the population of what is now Baytown ; Sicilian immigrants added greatly to the community of Dickinson ; and Japanese rice farmers settled in Webster , Pasadena , and League City ( in fact the rice industry on the U.S. Gulf Coast was born in Webster ; see <unk> <unk> ) . Major manufacturing centers developed throughout the Bay Area with Houston acting as the corporate and financial center for the boom . Wealthy Houstonians created waterfront retreats in Morgan 's Point and a boardwalk amusement park at Sylvan Beach , La Porte ( together known at the time as the Texas " Gold Coast " ) , as well as summer homes at Seabrook and other communities . The onset of Prohibition made Galveston Bay an important entry point for smuggling illegal liquor , which supplied most of Texas and much of the Midwest . Boats arrived at locations ranging from Galveston to Seabrook . The Maceo crime syndicate , which operated in Galveston at that time , created casino districts in Kemah and Dickinson and other areas of Galveston County . Houstonians often humorously referred to the county line as the " Maceo @-@ Dickinson line " ( a pun referring to the Mason @-@ Dixon line ) . Much of the area around Clear Lake was developed as recreational properties for the wealthy , including a large ranch estate owned by Houston businessman James West . Though the Great Depression closed many businesses in the area petroleum @-@ related growth helped offset the effects . 
 During the World Wars , factories around the bay were pressed into service mass @-@ producing a variety of products including aviation fuel , synthetic rubber , and ships . The first tin smelter outside of Europe was opened in Texas City becoming one of the world 's main suppliers . The population in the Bay Area grew faster than even Houston as processing plants and factories were built and expanded . Ellington Air Force Base was built to the southeast of Houston ( adjacent to modern Clear Lake City ) and became a major air field and flight training center during the wars . 
 Industrialization and urbanization during the earlier 20th century led to the pollution of the bay . By the 1970s the bay was described by some sources as " the most polluted body of water in the U.S. " The ship channel and Clear Lake were rated by some sources as having even worse water quality . Drilling for oil and underground water , as well as large wakes from increasing shipping in the bay , led to land subsidence and erosion along the shoreline , especially in the Baytown @-@ Pasadena area . Today approximately 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) of the historic San Jacinto battleground are submerged , most of Sylvan Beach is gone , and the once prominent <unk> neighborhood of Baytown has had to be abandoned . 
 In 1947 , an explosion on a ship at the Port of Texas City caused fires and destruction throughout the city 's industrial complex and other ships creating one of nation 's worst industrial accidents . The tragedy caused more than five hundred deaths , more than four thousand injuries , and more than $ 50 million in damage ( $ 530 million in today 's dollars ) . Though the city 's growth and prosperity were interrupted , the city and the business leaders were able to rebuild . 
 = = Modern times = = 
 The war effort had brought about significant diversification in the area 's industrial base . This diversity facilitated the area 's transition to a peacetime economy though the petroleum industry again became a major focus . In 1952 the Gulf Freeway , then part of U.S. Route 75 , was completed providing a fast automobile link between Houston and Galveston . The new freeway , considered an engineering marvel at the time , greatly encouraged new development in the western region of the bay . 
 Hurricane Carla , Texas ' largest storm on record , struck the coast in 1961 causing substantial flooding and damage in Texas City and other communities . Loss of life was minimal thanks to evacuation efforts . Expansion of the flood control dike and construction on the Texas City seawall occurred a result . The project was completed in 1985 . 
 NASA 's Johnson Space Center ( JSC ) was established in the area in 1963 . That and the explosive growth of neighboring Houston in the mid @-@ 20th century , especially the 1970s and 1980s , caused the remainder of the communities on the southwestern shore to <unk> . The Clear Lake City community was created by the Friendswood Development Company , a venture of Humble Oil and Dell E. Webb Corporation , to support residential growth near the new NASA facility . The communities around Clear Lake rapidly reoriented toward aerospace related industries , and the region 's economy diversified further . Urban development spread solidly between Houston and the Bay Area communities . Houston formally annexed most of Clear Lake City in 1977 with Pasadena annexing most of the rest . Most of the other communities around the bay , however , had already incorporated , or incorporated soon afterward , and thus were independent of the metropolis . 
 The economic boom of the 1970s and early 1980s that took place in Texas ( because of the escalation in oil prices ) benefited the Bay Area communities significantly . Industrial operations were expanded including the opening of the U.S. Steel plant in Baytown in 1970 , and the Barbours Cut shipping terminal at Morgan 's Point in 1977 . The Port of Texas City became the third leading port in Texas by tonnage and ninth in the nation . The Barbours Cut terminal , operated by the Port of Houston , became the seventh leading port in the nation . Not all of this development was without controversy , however . In building Barbours Cut , the Port of Houston used its power of eminent domain to evict residents from nearly one third of the homes in Morgan 's Point . Still , when the Texas economy declined in the later 1980s , the economic diversity of the area and substantial annual federal investments related to JSC helped the region fare better than most of Greater Houston . 
 Conservation efforts in the mid to late 20th century by area industries and municipalities helped to dramatically improve water quality in the bay . The Nature Conservancy and Houston 's Outdoor Nature Club ( ONC ) helped encourage nature preservation efforts including creating the Anahuac National Wildlife Refuge , the Armand Bayou Nature Center , and the Texas City Prairie Preserve . Tourism in the area grew , especially around Clear Lake , led in large part by the Space Center . Some former resort communities of the early 20th century like Kemah and Seabrook re @-@ emerged . The lake itself today holds one of the largest concentrations of marinas in the world . 
 During the later 20th century and afterward , many of the communities and businesses in the area began cooperative efforts , including the Clear Lake Area Chamber of Commerce , the Bay Area Houston Economic Partnership , and the Bay Area Houston Transportation Partnership , to create a distinct economic and civic identity for the region and to plan regional development . Though most of the communities in the region have been incorporated into municipalities , a few unincorporated communities remain under the extra @-@ territorial jurisdiction of neighboring towns . These include San Leon , Bacliff , and Smith Point . The communities of San Leon and Bacliff , despite their seaside location , their proximity to the relatively prosperous Clear Lake Area , and the development of summer resort communities there in the early 20th century , have suffered economic decline since the mid @-@ 20th century and are among the least affluent parts of the Bay Area today . 
 In 2008 Hurricane Ike struck the coast causing substantial damage both environmentally and economically . As of 2009 the ecology of the region is still in recovery with damage caused by both natural pollution ( sea salt ) and man @-@ made pollution ( chemicals washed into the freshwater and the bay ) still showing dramatic effects on both the marine and land @-@ dwelling wildlife . Commercial fishing and oyster farming are expected to take decades to fully recover . Most major industry was able to return to normal operations but some tourist areas have taken longer to recover . 
 Discussions of a proposal to build an Ike Dike that would protect the Bay Area , particularly the nationally critical Houston Ship Channel , were begun in 2009 . As of 2010 the project is still in the conceptual stage . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 9 = 
 State Highway 9 , abbreviated as SH @-@ 9 , OK @-@ 9 , or simply Highway 9 , is a major east – west highway in the U.S. state of Oklahoma . Spanning across the central part of the state , SH @-@ 9 begins at the Texas state line near Madge , Oklahoma , and ends at the Arkansas state line near Fort Smith , Arkansas . State Highway 9 is a major highway around the Norman area . At 348 @.@ 1 miles ( 560 @.@ 2 km ) , SH @-@ 9 is Oklahoma 's second @-@ longest state highway ( second to State Highway 3 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = West of Interstate 35 = = = 
 From the western terminus at State Highway 203 along the Texas border , the highway travels due east for five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) and intersects with SH @-@ 30 between Madge and Vinson . SH @-@ 9 continues east for 23 miles ( 37 km ) without intersecting another highway until meeting US @-@ 283 and SH @-@ 34 two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Mangum . The highway overlaps the other two routes for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , going north , before splitting off and heading east again through Granite and Lone Wolf . East of Lone Wolf , the highway forms a concurrency with SH @-@ 44 . Near Hobart , SH @-@ 9 overlaps US @-@ 183 for 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) ( again going northward ) before splitting off again . 
 Continuing east , SH @-@ 9 passes through <unk> , Mountain View , and Carnegie . Around Fort Cobb , Oklahoma , the highway begins nine miles ( 14 km ) of travel to the south . There , the route links up with the concurrent U.S. Highways 62 and 281 . While US @-@ 281 will split off in Anadarko , SH @-@ 9 and US @-@ 62 remain concurrent until Newcastle . In Chickasha , US @-@ 277 joins to form another three @-@ route concurrency with US @-@ 62 and SH @-@ 9 . On the eastern edge of Chickasha , US @-@ 62 / 277 / SH @-@ 9 have an interchange with I @-@ 44 , or more commonly known as the H.E. Bailey Turnpike . 
 Traveling northeast from Chickasha , US @-@ 62 / 277 / SH @-@ 9 are routed to the town of Blanchard . Four miles later , SH @-@ 9 splits away from the two U.S. routes at a diamond interchange that also serves as the eastern terminus of the H.E. Bailey Turnpike Spur . SH @-@ 9 remains without any concurrent routes until Goldsby . The section of road east of US @-@ 62 / 277 , recently upgraded to a four @-@ lane divided highway , provides a link from the H.E. Bailey Turnpike Spur to Interstate 35 . At the interstate , SH @-@ 9 merges onto I @-@ 35 northbound to cross the Canadian River into Norman . 
 = = = East of Interstate 35 = = = 
 Through Norman , Highway 9 serves as a major artery providing access to the University of Oklahoma campus ( in particular , the Lloyd Noble Center ) . Around the area , the route is a four @-@ lane divided expressway ( with surface crossings and stoplights ) . However , after a full interchange with US @-@ 77 , the road becomes a two lane highway again . 
 SH @-@ 9 continues eastward , passing Lake Thunderbird State Park , before reaching the towns of Tecumseh and Seminole . The road intersects the Indian Nation Turnpike near Hanna , and US @-@ 69 near Eufaula . SH @-@ 9 provides access to the south side of Lake Eufaula before reaching Stigler . 
 SH @-@ 9 overlaps US @-@ 59 for 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , after which the road becomes concurrent with US @-@ 271 . Both remain concurrent , until the highway ends at the Arkansas border . After passing the Arkansas state line , State Highway 9 becomes I @-@ 540 , and US @-@ 271 continues over the state line concurrent with the Interstate . 
 = = History = = 
 Officially designated on 1924 @-@ 08 @-@ 24 , the original route encompassed all of current SH @-@ 9 west of Blanchard . East of Blanchard , SH @-@ 9 followed a more northerly route . Bypassing Norman , SH @-@ 9 ran north to Oklahoma City before going east through Harrah , Meeker , Prague , Henryetta , and <unk> . The highway ended at the original State Highway 3 in Spiro . Upon the creation of the United States Numbered Routes system in 1926 , the section between Oklahoma City and Warner was overlaid with U.S. Highway 266 . Four years later in 1930 , SH @-@ 9 was truncated to Chickasha . By this time , much of the route had become part of U.S. Highway 62 . 
 On 1935 @-@ 08 @-@ 27 , the route was extended eastward , taking over the original SH @-@ 37 . SH @-@ 9 's eastern terminus became SH @-@ 48 near Seminole . On 1937 @-@ 08 @-@ 25 , the route was brought further east to end at US @-@ 69 in Eufaula . Part of the newly commissioned section was rescinded on 1937 @-@ 10 @-@ 19 , when a small segment just east of SH @-@ 48 and the entire Hughes County portion were dropped from the highway . These sections were re @-@ added on 1938 @-@ 09 @-@ 27 . 
 State Highway 9 was extended eastward twice in the route 's history . The first extension occurred on 1941 @-@ 02 @-@ 26 , and extended SH @-@ 9 to SH @-@ 2 at Whitefield . The final extension brought SH @-@ 9 to the Arkansas state line on 1941 @-@ 11 @-@ 12 . The only major realignment in SH @-@ 9 's history since 1941 was the Norman expressway bypass , which was designated as SH @-@ 9 on 1971 @-@ 11 @-@ 08 . 
 After the I @-@ 40 bridge disaster , parts of State Highway 9 in eastern Oklahoma served as an emergency detour for eastbound I @-@ 40 traffic . All eastbound traffic was routed along the section of SH @-@ 9 between SH @-@ 2 in Whitefield and US @-@ 59 . In addition , the section of SH @-@ 9 between US @-@ 59 and the Arkansas state line were used for eastbound traffic for commercial trucks . 
 = = Future = = 
 Discussions are under way to widen SH @-@ 9 to four lanes east of US @-@ 77 in Norman . The City of Norman and ODOT have conflict in their proposals for the design of the widened highway . ODOT has proposed a 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) paved median , with 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) shoulders to accommodate bicyclists . Norman 's proposal includes a grass median and a separate bike path along the north side of the right @-@ of @-@ way , running from 24th Avenue S.E. to Lake Thunderbird . ODOT criticized the city 's plan as too expensive . The city is now proposing a compromise , with a narrower raised concrete median and separate bike path . 
 = = Spurs = = 
 State Highway 9 creates three spur highways throughout the state . Additionally , it has two business routes , serving towns the main route bypasses . These routes are : 
 Business SH @-@ 9 , a three @-@ mile ( 5 km ) loop through Hobart . 
 Another instance of Business SH @-@ 9 that loops through <unk> . ( This is not shown on the state highway map . ) 
 SH @-@ 9A is a designation for three distinct highways : 
 A highway that intersects SH @-@ 9 in <unk> and links the parent highway to I @-@ 40 and SH @-@ 39 in <unk> . The spur also passes through the town of Maud . 
 A connector highway from US @-@ 69 to SH @-@ 9 south of Eufaula . 
 A spur route to SH @-@ 112 in <unk> . This section is a former alignment of U.S. Highway 271 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Gowanus Canal = 
 The Gowanus Canal is a canal in the New York City borough of Brooklyn , on the westernmost portion of Long Island . Connected to Gowanus Bay in Upper New York Bay , the canal borders the neighborhoods of Red Hook , Carroll Gardens , and Gowanus , all within South Brooklyn , to the west ; Park Slope to the east ; Boerum Hill and Cobble Hill to the north ; and Sunset Park to the south . It is 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) long . There are seven bridges over the canal , carrying Union Street , Carroll Street ( a landmark ) , Third Street , Ninth Street , Hamilton Avenue , the Gowanus Expressway , and the IND Culver Line of the New York City Subway . 
 Once a busy cargo transportation hub , the canal is now recognized as one of the most polluted bodies of water in the United States , and is labeled as a Superfund site . The canal 's history has paralleled the decline of domestic shipping via water . The canal is still used for waterborne transportation of goods , notably fuel oil , scrap metal and aggregates . Tugs and barges still navigate the canal daily . A legacy of serious environmental problems has beset the area from the time the canal arose from the local tidal wetlands and fresh water streams . In recent years , there has been a call once again for environmental cleanup . In addition , development pressures have brought speculation that the wetlands of the Gowanus should serve waterfront economic development needs which may not be compatible with environmental restoration . 
 = = Historical use = = 
 = = = Mill creek = = = 
 The Gowanus neighborhood originally surrounded Gowanus Creek , which consisted of a tidal inlet of navigable creeks in original saltwater marshland and meadows teeming with fish and other wildlife . Henry Hudson and Giovanni da Verrazzano both navigated the inlet in their explorations of New York Harbor . The first land patents within <unk> ( Brooklyn ) , including the land of the Gowanus , were issued by the Dutch Government from 1630 to 1664 . In 1639 , the leaders of New Netherland made one of the earliest recorded real estate deals in New York City history with the purchase of the area around the Gowanus Bay for construction of a tobacco plantation . The early settlers of the area named the waterway " <unk> Creek " after <unk> , sachem of the local Lenape tribe called the <unk> , who lived and farmed on the shorelines . 
 Adam Brouwer , who had been a soldier in the service of the Dutch West India Company , built and operated the first gristmill patented in New York at Gowanus ( on land patented July 8 , 1645 , to Jan <unk> Bout ) . The tide @-@ water gristmill on the Gowanus was the first in the town of <unk> and was the first mill ever operated in New Netherland ( located north of Union Street , west of Nevins Street , and next to Bond Street ) . A second mill ( Denton 's Mill , also called Yellow mill ) was built on Denton 's mill pond , after being granted permission to dredge from the creek to the mill pond once located between Fifth Ave and the present day canal at Carroll and Third Street . On May 26 , 1664 , several <unk> residents , headed by Brouwer , petitioned director general Peter Stuyvesant and his Council for permission to dredge a canal at their own expense through the land of Frederick <unk> in order to supply water to run the mill . The petition was presented to the council on May 29 , 1664 , and the motion was granted . Another mill , Cole 's Mill , was located just about at present day 9th Street , between Smith Street and the Canal . Cole 's Mill Pond , located north of 9th street , occupied the present location of Public Place . Slave labor was used to excavate the marshland . 
 In 1700 , a settler , Nicholas Vechte , built a farmhouse of brick and stone now known as the Old Stone House , which later played a critical role in the 1776 Battle of Long Island , when American troops fought off the Redcoats long enough to allow George Washington to retreat . This house sat at the south eastern edge of the Denton 's Mill pond . Brower 's Mill ( also known as <unk> Mill , located at the present day intersection of Union and Nevins streets ) can be seen in drawings depicting the " Battle of Brooklyn " . 
 Throughout this period , a few Dutch farmers settled along the marshland and engaged in clamming of large oysters that became a notable first export to Europe . The six @-@ foot ( 2 m ) tides of the bay forced salt water up into the creek 's meandering course , creating a brackish mix of water that was ideal for the bivalves , which often grew much larger than today but gradually shrank through a form of negative artificial selection . By the middle of the 19th century , the City of Brooklyn was the third most populous , and fastest growing , city in America and had incorporated the creek and farmland into a greater urban fabric with linear villages flourishing along the shore . 
 = = = Economic hub = = = 
 The mills on the Gowanus were also home to public landing sites , connecting the water route to the old Gowanus road . As the local population grew and 19th @-@ century industrial revolution reached Brooklyn , the need for larger navigational and docking facilities grew . Colonel Daniel Richards , a successful local merchant , advocated the building of a canal to benefit existing inland industries and drain the surrounding marshes for land reclamation that would raise property values . In 1849 , the New York Legislature authorized the construction of the Gowanus Canal by deepening Gowanus Creek , to transform it into a mile @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ long commercial waterway connected to Upper New York Bay . The full dredging of Gowanus Creek could not begin until a further act of the legislature in 1867 . After exploring numerous alternative ( and some more environmentally sound ) designs , the final was chosen for its low price tag . United States Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) Major David Bates Douglass was hired to design the canal , which was essentially complete by 1869 . The cost of the construction came from assessments on the local residents of Brooklyn and State money . 
 Despite its relatively short length , the Gowanus Canal was a hub for Brooklyn 's maritime and commercial shipping activity . Factories , warehouses , tanneries , coal stores , and manufactured gas refineries sprang up as a result of its construction . Much of the brownstone quarried in New Jersey and the upper Hudson was placed on barges with lumber and brick and shipped through the canal to build the neighborhoods of Carroll Gardens , Cobble Hill , and Park Slope . In addition , the industrial sector around the canal grew substantially over time to include : stone and coal yards ; flour mills ; cement works , and manufactured gas plants ; tanneries , factories for paint , ink , and soap ; machine shops ; chemical plants ; and sulfur producers , all of which emitted substantial water and airborne pollutants . The canal was the first site where chemical fertilizers were manufactured . 
 With as many as 700 new buildings a year constructed , the South Brooklyn region grew at a remarkable rate . Thriving industry brought many new people to the area but important questions about wastewater sanitation had not been properly addressed to handle such growth . All the sewage from the new buildings drained downhill , into the Gowanus . The building of new sewer connections only compounded the problem by discharging raw sewage from neighborhoods even farther away into the Canal . By the turn of the century , the combination of industrial pollutants and runoff from storm water , fortified with the products of the new sewage system , rendered the waterway a repository of rank odors , euphemistically called by wise @-@ cracking locals " Lavender Lake " . After World War I , with six million annual tons of cargo produced and trafficked though the waterway , the Gowanus Canal became the nation 's busiest commercial canal , and arguably the most polluted . The heavy sewage flow into the canal required regular dredging to keep the waters navigable . 
 With much fanfare , the US Army Corps of Engineers completed its last dredging of the canal in 1955 and soon afterward abandoned its regular dredging schedule , deeming it to be no longer cost @-@ effective . Brooklyn 's fuel trade was already converting from coal and artificial gas to petroleum , which was served by the wider and deeper Newtown Creek , and natural gas , which arrived by pipeline . With the early 1960s growth of containerization , New York 's loss of industrial waterfront jobs during this period was evident on the canal and , with the failure of the city sewage and pump station infrastructure along the canal , Gowanus was used as a derelict dumping place . Remaining barge traffic mostly carries fuel oil , sand , gravel and scrap metal is exported ; the canal still serves as a port moving goods in and out of Brooklyn . At this point , the issue of revitalizing of the Gowanus area was raised . In 1975 the City of New York established a Gowanus Industrial Renewal Plan for the area , which remained in effect until the year 2011 . Since 1975 , the surrounding community has been calling for the city , state , and federal governments to bring the full power of the Clean Water Act to bear on the environmental conditions left behind in this once thriving urban / industrial waterway . 
 = = = Degeneration = = = 
 At the time the canal was built , several designs were proposed for it , some with lock systems that would have allowed daily flushing of the whole waterway . But these designs were considered too expensive , and as a result the Gowanus Canal was constructed with significant design flaws , but within budget . There was no through @-@ flow of water and the canal was open at only one end , in the hope that the tides would be enough to flush the waterway . But with the canal 's wooden and concrete embankments , the strong tides of fresh diurnal doses of oxygenated water from New York Harbor were barred from flowing into the 1 @.@ 8 mile ( 3 km ) channel . Water quality studies have found the concentration of oxygen in the canal to be just 1 @.@ 5 parts per million , well below the minimum 4 parts per million needed to sustain life . With the high level of development in the Gowanus watershed area , excessive nitrates and pathogens are constantly flowing into the canal , further depleting the oxygen and creating breeding grounds for the pathogens responsible for the canal 's odor . 
 The opaqueness of the Gowanus water obstructs sunlight to one third of the six feet needed for aquatic plant growth . Rising gas bubbles betray the decomposition of sewage sludge that on a warm , sultry day produces the canal 's notable ripe stench . The murky depths of the canal conceal the remnants of its industrial past : cement , oil , mercury , lead , multiple volatile organic compounds , PCBs , coal tar , and other contaminants . A 2007 Science Line report found gonorrhea and unidentified organisms in the canal . In 1951 , with the opening of the elevated Gowanus Expressway over the waterway , easy access for trucks and cars catalyzed industry slightly , but with 150 @,@ 000 vehicles passing overhead each day , the expressway also deposits tons of toxic emissions into the air and water beneath . 
 There is an urban legend that the canal served as a dumping ground for the Mafia . In Jonathan Lethem 's Motherless Brooklyn , a character refers to it as " the only body of water in the world that is 90 percent guns . " In Lavender Lake , a 1998 documentary film about the Gowanus Canal by Alison <unk> , two cops discuss the recent discovery by fishermen of a suitcase full of human body parts that was taken from the waterway . In Joseph O 'Neill 's novel Netherland , the remains of one of the protagonists are found in the Gowanus Canal . 
 = = = Flushing the canal = = = 
 The first step to ameliorate pollution in the canal was the construction in the 1890s of the Bond Street sewer pipeline that carried sewage out into the harbor , but this proved inadequate . In the first attempt to improve flow at the northern , closed end of the canal , the " Big Sewer " was constructed from Marcy Avenue in Prospect Heights , down Green Ave to 4th Avenue and into the canal at Butler Street . This sewer design was featured in Scientific American for its innovative construction method and size . The area this sewer ran through was known as " The Flooded District , " and it was believed that this new sewer would serve two purposes : to drain the flooded district , and to use the flow of that excessive water to move the water of the upper Gowanus Canal . Headlines in the Brooklyn Daily Eagle newspaper declared it an engineering blunder shortly after its construction . The Big Sewer still exists under the streets of Brooklyn today . 
 The existing method to control the pollution of the isolated Gowanus Canal was the installation of the Flushing Tunnel on June 21 , 1911 , which for a time supplied clean water to the upper reaches of the canal through the brick @-@ lined 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) tunnel via Butler Street to Buttermilk Channel between Brooklyn and Governors Island . Unfortunately , this too failed . Aside from numerous operational glitches , a long series of problems and mistakes occurred throughout the 1960s , culminating when a city worker dropped a manhole cover that severely damaged a pump system already suffering from the effect of the corrosive salt water . The Clean Water Act had not yet been passed , and the city , stretched for funds at the time , did nothing to address the issue . As a result of the unrepaired damage to the Flushing Tunnel , and the long stretch of economic recession , the waters of the canal lay stagnant and under @-@ used for years . 
 According to the New York City Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) , plans to reactivate the Flushing Tunnel pump were proposed in 1982 . But , due to bureaucratic delays , the DEP did not take up the project until 1994 . The tunnel was finally reactivated in 1999 . The new design employed a 600 horsepower ( 450 kW ) motor , that pumped an average rate of 200 million gallons a day ( 9 m ³ / s ) of aerated water from Buttermilk Channel of the East River into the head end of the canal . Although water was circulating through the tunnel , it can only be pumped 11 hours a day , due to tidal forces . Water quality has now improved , or at least the quality of water samples taken while the Flushing Pump is operating . Another attempt to control pollution , the construction of the $ 230 million Red Hook Water Pollution Control Plant in 1987 , had similar unsatisfactory results . The Red Hook Treatment plant collected waste from the existing Bond Street sewer that had been dumping into the harbor , but did not take up any additional waste that still spills into the canal from the sewer system 's 14 combined sewer overflow ( CSO ) points . The city has yet to modify the sewer system to reduce sewage overflows into the Gowanus . 
 = = Environmental cleanup and redevelopment = = 
 = = = Redevelopment plans = = = 
 In 1999 , Assemblywoman Joan Millman allocated $ 100 @,@ 000 to the Gowanus Canal Community Development Corporation ( <unk> ) to produce and distribute a bulkhead study and public access document . The following year , <unk> received $ 270 @,@ 000 from the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation to construct three street @-@ end public open spaces along the Gowanus Canal through the city 's Green Street program . An additional $ 270 @,@ 000 was funded by Governor George E. Pataki to create a revitalization plan in 2001 and then allocated $ 100 @,@ 000 in capital funds in 2002 to implement a pilot project on the shoreline . In 2003 , Congresswoman Nydia Velázquez allocated an additional $ 225 @,@ 000 to create a comprehensive community development plan . Today this organization relies on community volunteers to maintain and clean these Green Street Projects . The community lacks a community centered redevelopment plan . 
 In 2002 , the United States Army Corps of Engineers entered into a cost @-@ sharing agreement with the DEP to collaborate on a $ 5 million Ecosystem Restoration Feasibility Study of the Gowanus Canal area to be completed in 2005 , studying possible alternatives for ecosystem restoration such as dredging , and wetland and habitat restoration . Discussions turned to breaking down the hard edges of the canal in order to restore some of the natural processes to improve the overall environment of the Gowanus wetlands area . The DEP also initiated the Gowanus Canal Use and Standards Attainment project , to meet the City 's obligations under the Clean Water Act . As of the summer 2009 , the joint NYC / Army Corps Feasibility study has not been completed . 
 In early 2006 , the problem of wastewater management arose during a controversy over a planned Brooklyn Nets Arena in nearby central Brooklyn . The project at that point , now called Pacific Park , was to include a basketball arena and 17 skyscrapers , with the resulting sewage would flow into antiquated combined sewers that can overflow when it rains . The Gowanus Canal has 14 combined sewer overflow points , so the fear is that the additional wastewater from the arena would lead to more frequent overflows in the canal . 
 As the industrial Brooklyn cityscape evolves , new development plans have been debated for the Gowanus Canal and the land abutting it . The adjacent neighborhood to the east ( 4th Avenue ) was rezoned for high density residential use with a strong commercial component . With brownfield redevelopment incentives offered by the State of New York , developers look to this land as another place to build , with substantial help of public money . 
 In February 2009 , the city of New York granted a zoning change to the developer , Toll Brothers Inc . , allowing for a 480 @-@ unit , twelve @-@ story , super @-@ block residential project , the first permitted along the waterway . Toll Brothers abandoned this project in 2010 when the Gowanus Canal was declared a Superfund cleanup site by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . 
 = = = = Different uses = = = = 
 Paving the way for recreational use of the canal has been the Gowanus <unk> Canoe Club ( founded in 1999 ) , and The Urban Divers Estuary Conservancy ( founded in 1998 ) , two organizations that are dedicated to providing waterfront access and education related to the estuary and bordering shoreline of the canal . During the 2003 season , over 1 @,@ 000 individuals , including more than 200 youths , participated in <unk> Canoe Club programs , logging over 2 @,@ 000 trips on the Gowanus Canal . The NY Harbor report for that same year showed the Gowanus to have the highest level of pathogens in the entire harbor . 
 A 9 @.@ 4 acres ( 4 ha ) U.S. Postal Service site on the east side of the Ninth Street canal crossing became available for commercial development . Development groups have not taken their eye off a whole range of possible projects for the site . It has been proposed as the Brooklyn Commons , an entertainment and retail complex featuring a multiplex cinema , a bowling alley , shops and restaurants . After controversy , a lawsuit , and a rival proposal for an IKEA store , a large Lowe 's store was built and opened on April 30 , 2004 , with an adjacent public promenade overlooking the canal . The IKEA company , previously rejected from the Ninth Street location for traffic congestion , opened on the south end of Red Hook on the harbor waterway . That project was objected to by community organizations in the Red Hook and Gowanus neighborhoods . 
 Another site at Smith and 4th street was taken by the city in 1975 and designated a Public Place , for use as " public recreation space " . Despite this legal standing of the Public Place , developers have continually proposed using this site for other possibilities . National Grid is accountable for a cleanup of the pollution left behind on the site after years of coal gas manufacture . Upon completion of this cleanup , the site was to be turned over to the parks department . 
 = = = = Activism = = = = 
 In November 2006 , <unk> , a festival dedicated to " local action as global wisdom " , celebrated the Gowanus Canal through environmental conferences , collaborative art , educational programs and interactive walks around the area . The canal has been the home to various arts organizations . Issue Project Room once organized art events , and the Yard , an outdoor concert space , opened in the summer of 2007 near the Carroll Street bridge . 
 = = = Cleanup efforts = = = 
 In April 2009 , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) proposed that the canal be listed as a Superfund cleanup site . This action was supported by the state Department of Environmental Conservation , which had requested help from the EPA to address the canal 's environmental problems . In May 2009 , the city stepped forward to oppose the Superfund listing and offered , for the first time , to produce a Gowanus cleanup plan that would match the work of a Superfund cleanup , but with a promise to accomplish it faster . The city stated that it could now achieve a faster cleanup than EPA because the city would fund the cleanup through taxpayer dollars from the state and city levels , while the EPA would seek its funding from the polluters . In 2009 , the nonprofit Gowanus Canal Conservancy was founded , which partners with the EPA , the city Department of Environmental Protection ( <unk> ) , groups like Riverkeeper and universities such as Cornell and Rutgers . Among other things , it hosts monthly composting events . On March 4 , 2010 , the EPA announced that it had placed the Gowanus Canal on its Superfund National Priorities List . 
 By 2013 , the <unk> was planning to reduce the sewage content of the canal by repairing a tunnel that flushes fresh water into the Gowanus . The repair will not completely eliminate the sewage problem . The EPA has suggested seven plans for the clean up . The Village Voice reported two scenarios as most viable , estimated at taking ten years to complete and costing around $ 350 – $ 450 million . The first step in the plans is dredging , scheduled to begin 2016 . The second is to lay down one of two different proposed " caps " . One cap over the still @-@ polluted canal bed would be made of concrete . The second would have first a layer of clay to absorb pollutants , a layer of sand to act as a buffer , and then a layer of rocks to anchor that floor . Some express concern that the clean @-@ up poses a health risk . 
 On September 27 , 2013 , the EPA approved a clean @-@ up plan for the Gowanus Canal . The plan is to cost $ 506 million and should be completed by 2022 . The plan divides the canal into three segments : The upper segment runs from the top of the canal to 3rd Street , the middle segment runs from 3rd Street to just south of the Hamilton Avenue Bridge and the lower segment runs from the Hamilton Avenue Bridge to the mouth of the canal . The plan entails removing contaminated sediment from the bottom of canal by dredging , capping the dredged areas and implementing controls on combined sewer overflows to prevent future contamination . It also involves excavating and restoring approximately 475 feet of the former 1st Street Basin and 25 feet of the former 5th Street Basin . 
 The layer of toxic sediment in the canal averages 10 feet thick , and at some spots reaches 20 feet . EPA will remove approximately 307 @,@ 000 cubic yards of highly contaminated sediment from the upper and middle segments and 281 @,@ 000 cubic yards of contaminated sediment from the lower segment . The dredged sediment will be treated at an off @-@ site facility . 
 Following dredging , in areas of the canal where contamination has permeated the underlying sediment , EPA will cap with multiple layers of clean material . The multi @-@ layer cap consists of an “ active ” layer made of a specific type of clay that will remove contamination that could well up from below , an “ isolation ” layer of sand and gravel that will ensure that the contaminants are not exposed , and an “ armor ” layer of heavier gravel and stone to prevent erosion of the underlying layers from boat traffic and canal currents . Finally , sufficient clean sand will be placed on top of the “ armor ” layer to fill in the voids between the stones and to establish sufficient depth in order to restore the canal bottom as a habitat . In the middle and upper segment of the canal where the native sediment is contaminated with liquid coal tar , the EPA will stabilize that sediment by mixing it with concrete or similar materials . The stabilized areas will then be covered with the multiple layer cap as described above . 
 As the Superfund model requires the EPA to seek restitution from the Potentially Responsible Parties ( PRPs ) , the estimated cost of the cleanup plan is to be spread among more than three dozen entities , mostly companies and a few government entities like the City of New York and the United States Navy , for ship work that polluted the canal . Many of the original businesses that once operated alongside the canal have since merged , changed names or moved away , including Brooklyn Union Gas , which eventually became a part of National Grid , Continental Oil and Standard Oil . When companies have been sold or merged , the successor company as well as the current property owner assume the liability . Companies that produced or transported the hazardous substances are also considered responsible . The EPA Superfund Gowanus report has identified the major PRPs as National Grid and New York City . 
 = = = = Wildlife = = = = 
 On January 26 , 2013 , a dolphin entered the canal at low tide , was unable to get out , and died . The necropsy on dolphin showed it was middle @-@ aged and sickly before becoming trapped . It had kidney stones , gastric ulcers and parasites . 
 By 2014 , it has been reported that herons , egrets , bats , Canada geese , small fish and crabs have started to live around the waterway . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 2014 , So What ? Press published an issue of its comic series Tales of the Night Watchman , entitled " It Came from the Gowanus Canal " , about a toxic sludge monster who lives in the canal and takes revenge on a gangster who once dumped bodies there . It was written by Dave Kelly and illustrated by Molly Ostertag . The publisher also produced a fake movie poster in conjunction with the Gowanus Souvenir Shop based on the issue in 2015 . 
 = 1906 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1906 Atlantic hurricane season was the eleventh @-@ deadliest Atlantic hurricane season in recorded history , with 381 deaths . The season was fairly active , with eleven storms , of which six became hurricanes and three became major hurricanes . The first storm of the season , a tropical storm in the northern Caribbean Sea , formed on June 8 ; although it struck the United States , no major impacts were recorded . July saw a period of inactivity , with no known storms . However , in August , the streak of inactivity ended with two storms , including a powerful hurricane . September brought three storms , including a deadly hurricane , with catastrophic impacts in Pensacola and Mobile . October included three storms , with a powerful hurricane that killed over 200 people . The final storm of the season impacted Cuba in early November and dissipated on November 9 . 
 = = Methodology = = 
 Prior to the advent of modern tropical cyclone tracking technology , notably satellite imagery , many hurricanes that did not affect land directly went unnoticed , and storms that did affect land were not recognized until their onslaught . As a result , information on older hurricane seasons was often incomplete . Modern @-@ day efforts have been made and are still ongoing to reconstruct the tracks of known hurricanes and to identify initially undetected storms . In many cases , the only evidence that a hurricane existed was reports from ships in its path , and judging by the direction of winds experienced by ships , and their location in relation to the storm , it is possible to roughly pinpoint the storm 's center of circulation for a given point in time . This is the manner in which all of the eleven known storms in the 1906 season were identified by hurricane expert José Fernández @-@ Partagás 's reanalysis of hurricane seasons between 1851 and 1910 . Partagás also extended the known tracks of three other hurricanes previously identified by scholars . The information Partagás and his colleague uncovered was largely adopted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's Atlantic hurricane reanalysis in their updates to the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) , with some slight adjustments . HURDAT is the official source for such hurricane data as track and intensity , although due to a sparsity of available records at the time the storms existed , listings on some storms are incomplete . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first storm of the season formed on June 8 , south of western Cuba , attaining its peak winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) by June 9 . On June 10 , a weather station in Havana reported a minimum air pressure of 1002 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 59 inHg ) ; however , the minimum pressure of the system itself is unknown . On June 12 , the system caused the sinking of a schooner ; however , all on board the schooner were rescued . The system continued traveling north @-@ northwestward , making landfall near Panama City on June 13 , quickly weakening to a tropical depression as it moved inland . The system became extratropical by June 14 , dissipating shortly thereafter ; no deaths and injuries are known to have been caused by the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 This first hurricane of the season 's effects were first noted in Santa Clara , Cuba , where rainy and windy conditions were observed on the afternoon of June 14 . Several vessels sank during the hurricane during the early morning hours of June 15 . The system was thought to have entered the Florida Straits during the evening . The system began to travel towards the west @-@ northwest , steadily strengthening into a hurricane by the afternoon . On June 17 , a minimum pressure of 979 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) was recorded , as the hurricane passed over southern Florida . 
 The hurricane slowly intensified as it traveled offshore , continuing to strengthen throughout the day on June 17 , eventually reaching Category 2 status by June 18 . As the storm headed northeastward , the hurricane began to weaken , becoming a tropical storm by June 21 . The system turned toward the east @-@ southeast on June 21 , later recurving towards the east @-@ northeast on June 22 . It weakened to a tropical depression by June 23 , transitioning into an extratropical cyclone later that day . Impacts caused by the hurricane were minimal — a boat was partially dismantled at Key West , and a wharf at Coconut Grove was also damaged . In addition , the schooner <unk> <unk> sank , although her crew was later rescued . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 This tropical storm was previously unidentified until modern research by José Fernández @-@ Partagás revealed the storm in 1997 . The tropical storm is believed to have originated as a tropical depression in the North Atlantic on August 22 . By August 23 , the depression had intensified into a tropical storm , with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . The system further intensified into a powerful tropical storm on August 24 , with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , the storm began to weaken , and it transitioned into an extratropical storm on August 25 , with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The fourth storm of the season was believed to have originated as a tropical storm off the coast of Africa on August 25 . The storm slowly intensified , eventually reaching hurricane status on August 28 . As the storm headed west @-@ northwestward on August 31 , it passed by the Lesser Antilles as a Category 2 hurricane . The storm became a Category 3 hurricane on September 2 as it passed north of the Dominican Republic . The storm further intensified into a Category 4 hurricane on September 5 , located east of the Bahamas . Throughout the day on September 6 , the hurricane began to curve northward . During the evening , it weakened to Category 3 status and began to travel northeastward on September 7 . 
 The hurricane maintained its intensity and passed northwest of Bermuda on September 9 , where winds reached 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and air pressures fell to 988 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) . The storm continued to weaken , eventually becoming a Category 2 hurricane on September 11 ; at this time , the <unk> Luise measured an air pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 06 inHg ) . The system became extratropical later during the day , and lost its identity on September 12 in the North Atlantic near the British Isles . As a result of warnings in advance , little damage was caused by the hurricane . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 The fifth storm of the season formed on September 3 in the western Atlantic . It drifted west @-@ northwestward , slowly gaining intensity , and turned northwest on September 8 . However , the tropical storm then changed course and began to head west @-@ northwest on September 11 as it slowly intensified . By September 12 , the tropical storm had intensified to a minimal hurricane , and began to turn towards the north @-@ northwest on September 13 . It attained its peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) on September 14 . As it maintained its intensity on September 15 , the hurricane began to turn westward while it continued to approach the coast of South Carolina on September 17 . The hurricane made landfall near Myrtle Beach later on September 17 , and quickly weakened to a tropical storm as it moved inland . The storm dissipated as a tropical depression on September 18 over Tennessee . 
 The hurricane caused moderate impacts — two hundred people were stranded at Wrightsville Beach , North Carolina . At Charleston , South Carolina , winds of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) were recorded , in addition to a barometric pressure of 997 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 44 inHg ) . Many small buildings were damaged in Charleston ; damage in the city totaled to $ 1 @,@ 000 , while at the town of Georgetown , damage was estimated to be around $ 15 @,@ 000 . The Laura encountered the hurricane , and three of the crew of four were killed . A schooner called the <unk> and its crew were also impacted by the hurricane ; the crew on board survived without food for two days . Overall damage to shipping and crops in the Carolinas was moderate ; seven people were killed , and at least $ 2 @,@ 016 @,@ 000 ( 1906 USD ) in damage was recorded . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 The sixth hurricane of the season originated as a tropical depression on September 19 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea . The following day , the depression intensified into a tropical storm . It continued to intensify steadily , eventually reaching hurricane status on September 24 as it exited the Yucatán Channel . The hurricane continued to intensify as it moved north @-@ northwest and attained Category 2 intensity in the Gulf of Mexico . During the afternoon , the storm intensified further into a major hurricane . At this time , the hurricane was 300 miles ( 480 km ) west @-@ northwest of Cuba . The hurricane maintained intensity and continued to drift north @-@ northwest , and weakened to a Category 2 hurricane as it made landfall near Pascagoula , Mississippi , on September 27 . The hurricane weakened as it moved inland , quickly weakening to a tropical storm by September 28 . The storm became extratropical on September 29 . 
 The hurricane caused severe damage along the Gulf Coast . Many marine vessels were blown ashore or sunken in Pensacola , and railroads in the city were severely damaged . Numerous wharfs were damaged or destroyed , and many roofs were torn off buildings . Three forts in the vicinity of Pensacola suffered damage . Electricity in the city was shut off . A total of 35 people were killed in Pensacola . Mobile and surrounding areas suffered similar damage , including destroyed timber , smashed windows , and sunken watercraft . In Mississippi , over 300 @,@ 000 cotton bales were ruined during the hurricane , amounting to $ 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in damage . Damage in New Orleans was minimal ; however , Lake Pontchartrain overflowed , flooding the city . The hurricane killed a total of 134 people . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 This tropical storm was previously unidentified and was not considered a tropical storm until research by José Fernández @-@ Partagás in 1997 . The storm is believed to have originated west of the Canary Islands in the northeastern Atlantic on September 22 . The tropical storm moved west @-@ southwestward for several days , maintaining its peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ; however , the storm began to curve early on September 26 and traveled directly westward before curving northward during the afternoon . The tropical storm continued to change course , turning west @-@ northwestward by September 28 . The transitioned to an extratropical system on October 1 , and reached England on October 3 . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight = = = 
 This hurricane originated on October 4 near Barbados as a " cyclonic perturbation " ; however , no closed circulation was evidently associated with the system . Barometric pressures began sinking in Panama as the system drifted westward , and it was considered a tropical storm by October 8 . As the storm headed west , it rapidly strengthened ; the storm became a hurricane on October 9 and intensified into a major hurricane on October 10 . As it began to curve northwestward , the hurricane made landfall in Nicaragua , and weakened to a tropical storm on October 11 . It began to drift north @-@ northwestward later that day , intensifying into a minimal hurricane as it drifted into the Gulf of Honduras . 
 However , the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm again on October 14 as it moved overland , and began to curve north @-@ northwest , restrengthening to a major hurricane by October 17 while it was west @-@ southwest of Cuba . The hurricane made landfall over Cuba on the evening of October 17 . The hurricane passed over southern Florida near Pigeon Key and Downtown Miami on October 18 . The hurricane continued traveling north @-@ northwest ; however , it was forced to re @-@ curve south @-@ southwest , as a result of a high @-@ pressure area . The hurricane weakened to a tropical storm overland , eventually becoming a tropical depression . The system meandered into the Gulf of Mexico , making a final landfall in Central America on October 23 . 
 The hurricane wreaked havoc throughout its path — crops in Central America suffered severe damage , and rainfall destroyed many roads and bridges in Nicaragua . In Cuba , at least 29 people were killed , and tobacco crops in the country were ruined . The most severe damage was caused in Florida — the state suffered more than $ 420 @,@ 000 in damage and more than two hundred people were killed . Of the people killed in Florida , 135 were workers on the Florida East Coast Railway , and more than 70 people were drowned near Elliott Key after two steamers sank . Throughout its path , damage caused by the hurricane totaled to at least $ 4 @,@ 135 @,@ 000 and at least 240 deaths were recorded . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 A tropical storm was believed to have formed from a low @-@ pressure area , possibly on the tail end of a cold front on October 14 . The storm moved westward ; however , it began to curve west @-@ southwestward on October 15 , as it reached its peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The storm continued to trek towards the west @-@ southwest on October 16 , later making landfall in eastern Florida on October 17 as a tropical depression . No damage is known to have been caused by the tropical storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ten = = = 
 The tenth storm of the season formed on October 15 as a tropical storm east of the Bahamas and north of Hispaniola . The tropical storm moved northwest , but changed direction and began to curve northeastward on October 17 . As the storm moved eastward , it slowly strengthened ; the storm attained its peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on October 18 . The tropical storm headed directly eastward on October 19 , and dissipated in the open Atlantic on October 20 . 
 = = = Hurricane Eleven = = = 
 The final storm of the season started as a tropical depression on November 5 , located in the Caribbean , south of Cuba . It strengthened into a tropical storm later during the day as it curved northward , and the storm turned towards the northeast on November 6 . As it approached Cuba , the storm briefly attained hurricane status ; however , as the hurricane made landfall over Cuba , it weakened to a tropical storm . The storm drifted over the Bahamas as a minimal tropical storm on November 8 while it traced east @-@ northeast . It continued to weaken , and transitioned into an extratropical storm on November 10 . No damage is known to have been caused by the hurricane . Its path , its intensity , and the time of the year in which it formed are very similar to those of Hurricane Katrina of 1981 . 
 = X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor = 
 The X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , formerly known as the Clinton Pile and X @-@ 10 Pile , was the world 's second artificial nuclear reactor ( after Enrico Fermi 's Chicago Pile @-@ 1 ) and was the first reactor designed and built for continuous operation . It was built during World War II as part of the Manhattan Project . 
 While Chicago Pile @-@ 1 demonstrated the feasibility of nuclear reactors , the Manhattan Project 's goal of producing enough plutonium for atomic bombs required reactors a thousand times as powerful , along with facilities to chemically separate the plutonium bred in the reactors from uranium and fission products . An intermediate step was considered prudent . The next step for the plutonium project , codenamed X @-@ 10 , was the construction of a semiworks where techniques and procedures could be developed and training conducted . The centerpiece of this was the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor . It was air @-@ cooled , used nuclear graphite as a neutron moderator , and pure natural uranium in metal form for fuel . 
 DuPont commenced construction of the plutonium semiworks at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge on February 2 , 1943 . The reactor went critical on November 4 , 1943 , and produced its first plutonium in early 1944 . It supplied the Los Alamos Laboratory with its first significant amounts of plutonium , and its first reactor @-@ bred product . Studies of these samples heavily influenced bomb design . The reactor and chemical separation plant provided invaluable experience for engineers , technicians , reactor operators , and safety officials who then moved on to the Hanford site . It operated as a plutonium production plant until January 1945 , when it was turned over to research activities , and the production of radioactive isotopes for scientific , medical , industrial and agricultural uses . It was shut down in 1963 , and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1966 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , followed by its theoretical explanation ( and naming ) by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch , opened up the possibility of a controlled nuclear chain reaction with uranium . At Columbia University , Enrico Fermi and Leo Szilard began exploring how this might be done . Szilard drafted a confidential letter to the President of the United States , Franklin D. Roosevelt , explaining the possibility of atomic bombs , and warning of the danger of a German nuclear weapon project . He convinced his old friend and collaborator Albert Einstein to co @-@ sign it , lending his fame to the proposal . This resulted in support by the U.S. government for research into nuclear fission , which became the Manhattan Project . 
 In April 1941 , the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) asked Arthur Compton , a Nobel @-@ Prize @-@ winning physics professor at the University of Chicago , to report on the uranium program . His report , submitted in May 1941 , foresaw the prospects of developing radiological weapons , nuclear propulsion for ships , and nuclear weapons using uranium @-@ 235 or the recently discovered plutonium . In October he wrote another report on the practicality of an atomic bomb . Niels Bohr and John Wheeler had theorized that heavy isotopes with odd atomic numbers were fissile . If so , then plutonium @-@ 239 was likely to be . 
 Emilio Segrè and Glenn Seaborg at the University of California produced 28 μg of plutonium in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron there in May 1941 , and found that it had 1 @.@ 7 times the thermal neutron capture cross section of uranium @-@ 235 . At the time only such minute quantities of plutonium @-@ 239 had been produced , in cyclotrons , and it was not possible to produce a sufficiently large quantity that way . Compton discussed with Eugene Wigner from Princeton University how plutonium might be produced in a nuclear reactor , and with Robert Serber how the plutonium produced in a reactor might be separated from uranium . 
 The final draft of Compton 's November 1941 report made no mention of using plutonium , but after discussing the latest research with Ernest Lawrence , Compton became convinced that a plutonium bomb was also feasible . In December , Compton was placed in charge of the plutonium project , which was codenamed X @-@ 10 . Its objectives were to produce reactors to convert uranium to plutonium , to find ways to chemically separate the plutonium from the uranium , and to design and build an atomic bomb . It fell to Compton to decide which of the different types of reactor designs the scientists should pursue , even though a successful reactor had not yet been built . He felt that having teams at Columbia , Princeton , the University of Chicago and the University of California was creating too much duplication and not enough collaboration , and he concentrated the work at the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago . 
 = = Site selection = = 
 By June 1942 , the Manhattan Project had reached the stage where the construction of production facilities could be contemplated . On June 25 , 1942 , the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) S @-@ 1 Executive Committee deliberated on where they should be located . Moving directly to a megawatt production plant looked like a big step , given that many industrial processes do not easily scale from the laboratory to production size . An intermediate step of building a pilot plant was considered prudent . For the pilot plutonium separation plant , a site was wanted close to the Metallurgical Laboratory , where the research was being carried out , but for reasons of safety and security , it was not desirable to locate the facilities in a densely populated area like Chicago . 
 Compton selected a site in the Argonne Forest , part of the Forest Preserve District of Cook County , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) southwest of Chicago . The full @-@ scale production facilities would be co @-@ located with other Manhattan Project facilities at a still more remote location in Tennessee . Some 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) of land was leased from Cook County for the pilot facilities , while an 83 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 34 @,@ 000 ha ) site for the production facilities was selected at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . By the S @-@ 1 Executive Committee meeting on September 13 and 14 , it had become apparent that the pilot facilities would be too extensive for the Argonne site . Instead , a research reactor would be built at Argonne , while the plutonium pilot facilities ( a semiworks ) would be built in Tennessee . 
 In December , it was decided that the plutonium production facilities would not be built at Oak Ridge after all , but at the even more remote Hanford Site in Washington state . Compton and the staff at the Metallurgical Laboratory then reopened the question of building the plutonium semiworks at Argonne . But the engineers and management of DuPont , particularly Roger Williams , the head of its <unk> Division , which was responsible for the company 's role in the Manhattan Project , disagreed . They felt that there would be insufficient space at Argonne , and that there were disadvantages in having a site that was so accessible , especially to the research staff from the Metallurgical Laboratory , whom they feared would attempt to interfere unduly . A better location , they felt , would be with the production facilities at Hanford . In the end a compromise was reached . On January 12 , 1943 , Compton , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , and Williams agreed that the semiworks would be built at Oak Ridge . 
 Both Compton and Groves proposed that DuPont operate the semiworks . Williams counter @-@ proposed that the semiworks be operated by the Metallurgical Laboratory . He reasoned that it would primarily be a research and educational facility , and that expertise was at the Metallurgical Laboratory . Compton was shocked . The Metallurgical Laboratory was part of the University of Chicago , so the university would be operating an industrial facility 500 miles ( 800 km ) from its main campus . James B. Conant told him that Harvard University " wouldn 't touch it with a ten @-@ foot pole " , but the University of Chicago 's Vice President , E. T. <unk> took a different view , and told Compton to accept . When University President Robert Hutchins returned , he greeted Compton with " I see Arthur , that while I was gone you doubled the size of my university " . 
 = = Design = = 
 A critical design decision was the cooling system . A limiting factor was that the fuel slugs would be clad in aluminum , so the operating temperature of the reactor could not exceed about 200 ° C ( 392 ° F ) . The theoretical physicists in Wigner 's group at the Metallurgical Laboratory developed several designs . They found that in heavy water the number of neutrons produced for every one absorbed ( known as k ) was 10 percent more efficient than the purest graphite . In November 1942 , the DuPont engineers chose helium as the coolant for the production plant , largely on the basis that it did not absorb <unk> contrast , the decision that the reactor would use graphite as a neutron moderator caused little debate , as heavy water was unavailable , although there was concern that there was a sufficient supply of uranium and pure graphite . 
 Not everyone agreed with the decision to use helium . Szilard in particular was an early proponent of using liquid bismuth . But the major opponent was Wigner , who argued strongly in favor of a water @-@ cooled reactor design . He realised that since water absorbed neutrons , k would be reduced by about 3 percent , but had sufficient confidence in his calculations that the water @-@ cooled reactor would . From an engineering perspective , a water @-@ cooled was straightforward to design and build , while helium posed technological problems . Wigner 's team produced a preliminary report on water cooling , designated CE @-@ 140 in April 1942 , followed by a more detailed one , CE @-@ 197 , titled " On a Plant with Water Cooling " , in July 1942 . 
 Fermi 's Chicago Pile @-@ 1 reactor , constructed under the west viewing stands of the original Stagg Field at the University of Chicago , went critical on December 2 , 1942 . This reactor only generated up to 200 W , but it demonstrated that k was higher than anticipated . This not only removed most of the objections to air @-@ cooled and water @-@ cooled reactor designs , it also greatly simplified other aspects of the design . Wigner 's team submitted blueprints of a water @-@ cooled reactor to DuPont in January 1943 . By this time , the concerns of DuPont 's engineers about the corrosiveness of water had been overcome by the mounting difficulties of using helium , and all work on helium was terminated in February . At the same time , Air was chosen for the reactor at the pilot plant . Since it would be of a quite different design to the production reactors , the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor lost its value as a prototype ; but it was considered more important to get the pilot facility up and running as soon as possible in order to supply quantities of plutonium needed for research . It was hoped that problems would be found in time to correct them in the production plants . The semiworks would also be used for training , and for developing procedures . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Although the design of the reactor was not yet complete , DuPont began construction of the plutonium semiworks on February 2 , 1943 , on an isolated 112 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) site in the Bethel Valley about 10 miles ( 16 km ) southwest of Oak Ridge officially known as the X @-@ 10 area . There was a chemical separation plant , research laboratories , waste storage area , training facility for Hanford staff , and administrative and support facilities that included a laundry , cafeteria , first aid center and fire station . Because of the subsequent decision to construct water @-@ cooled reactors at Hanford , only the chemical separation plant operated as a true pilot . The semiworks eventually became known as the Clinton Laboratories , and was operated by the University of Chicago as part of the Metallurgical Project . 
 Construction work on the reactor had to wait until DuPont had completed the design . Excavation commenced on April 27 , 1943 . A large pocket of soft clay was soon discovered , necessitating additional foundations . Further delays occurred due to wartime difficulties in procuring building materials . There was an acute shortage of both common and skilled labor ; the contractor had only three @-@ quarters of the required workforce , and there was high turnover and absenteeism , mainly the result of poor accommodations and difficulties in commuting . The township of Oak Ridge was still under construction , and barracks were built to house workers . Special arrangements with individual workers increased their morale and reduced turnover . Finally , there was unusually heavy rainfall , with 9 @.@ 3 inches ( 240 mm ) falling in July 1943 , more than twice the average of 4 @.@ 3 inches ( 110 mm ) . 
 Some 700 short tons ( 640 t ) of graphite blocks were purchased from National Carbon . The construction crews began stacking it in September 1943 . Cast uranium billets came from Metal Hydrides , Mallinckrodt and other suppliers . These were extruded into cylindrical slugs , and canned by Alcoa , which started production on June 14 , 1943 . The fuel slugs were canned primarily to protect the uranium metal from corrosion that would occur if it came into contact with water , but also to prevent the venting of gaseous radioactive fission products that might be formed when they were irradiated . The cladding had to transmit heat but not absorb too many neutrons . Aluminum was chosen . General Electric and the Metallurgical Laboratory developed a new welding technique to seal the cans airtight . The new equipment was installed in the production line at Alcoa in October 1943 . 
 Construction commenced on the pilot separation plant before a chemical process for separating plutonium from uranium had been selected . Not until May 1943 would DuPont managers decide to use the Bismuth @-@ phosphate process . The plant consisted of six cells , separated from each other and the control room by thick concrete walls . The equipment was operated from the control room by remote control . Work was completed on 26 November 1943 , but the plant could not operate until the reactor started producing irradiated uranium slugs . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor was the world 's second artificial nuclear reactor after Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , and was the first reactor designed and built for continuous operation . It consisted of a huge block , 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) long on each side , of nuclear graphite cubes , weighing around 1 @,@ 500 short tons ( 1 @,@ 400 t ) , that acted as a moderator . They were surrounded by seven feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of high @-@ density concrete as a radiation shield . In all , the reactor was 38 feet ( 12 m ) wide , 47 feet ( 14 m ) deep and 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) high . There were 36 horizontal rows of 35 holes . Behind each was a metal channel into which uranium fuel slugs could be inserted . An elevator provided access to those higher up . Only 800 ( ~ 64 % ) of the channels were ever used . 
 The reactor used cadmium @-@ clad steel control rods . Three 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) rods penetrated the reactor vertically , held in place by a clutch to form the scram system . They were suspended from steel cables that were wound around a drum , and held in place by an electromagnetic clutch . If power was lost , these rods would drop into the reactor , halting it . The other four rods , were made of boron steel and horizontally penetrated the reactor from the north side . Two of them , known as " shim " rods , were hydraulically controlled . Sand @-@ filled hydraulic accumulators could be used in the event of a power failure . The other two rods were driven by electric motors . 
 The cooling system consisted of three 55 @,@ 000 cubic feet per minute ( 1 @,@ 600 m3 / min ) electric fans . Because they used outside air , the reactor could be run at a higher power level on cold days . After going through the reactor , the air was filtered to remove radioactive particles larger than 0 @.@ <unk> inches ( 0 @.@ 0010 mm ) in diameter . This took care of over 99 percent of the radioactive particles . It was then expelled back into the air through a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) chimney . The reactor was operated from a control room in the southeast corner on the second floor . 
 In September 1942 , Compton asked a physicist , Martin D. Whitaker , to form a skeleton operating staff for X @-@ 10 . Whitaker became the inaugural director of the Clinton Laboratories , as the semiworks became officially known in April 1943 . The first permanent operating staff arrived from the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago in April 1943 , by which time DuPont began transferring its technicians to the site . They were augmented by one hundred technicians in uniform from the Army 's Special Engineer Detachment . By March 1944 , there were some 1 @,@ 500 people working at X @-@ 10 . 
 Supervised by Compton , Whitaker and Fermi , the reactor went critical on 4 November 1943 with about 30 short tons ( 27 t ) of uranium . A week later the load was increased to 36 short tons ( 33 t ) , raising its power generation to 500 kW , and by the end of the month the first 500 mg of plutonium was created . The reactor normally operated around the clock , with 10 @-@ hour weekly shutdowns for refueling . During startup , the safety rods and one shim rod were completely removed . The other shim rod was inserted at a predetermined position . When the desired power level was reached , the reactor was controlled by adjusting the partly inserted shim rod . 
 The first batch of canned slugs to be irradiated was received on December 20 , 1943 , allowing the first plutonium to be produced in early 1944 . The slugs used pure metallic natural uranium , in air @-@ tight aluminum cans 4 @.@ 1 inches ( 100 mm ) long and 1 inch ( 25 mm ) in diameter . Each channel was loaded with between 24 and 54 fuel slugs . The reactor went critical with 30 short tons ( 27 t ) of slugs , but in its later life was operated with as much as 54 short tons ( 49 t ) . To load a channel , the radiation @-@ absorbing shield plug was removed , and the slugs inserted manually in the front ( east ) end with long rods . To unload them , they were pushed all the way through to the far ( west ) end , where they fell onto a neoprene slab and fell down a chute into a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) deep pool of water that acted as a radiation shield . Following weeks of underwater storage to allow for decay in radioactivity , the slugs were delivered to the chemical separation building . 
 By February 1944 , the reactor was irradiating a ton of uranium every three days . Over the next five months , the efficiency of the separation process was improved , with the percentage of plutonium recovered increasing from 40 to 90 percent . Modifications over time raised the reactor 's power to 4 @,@ 000 kW in July 1944 . Unfortunately , operations did not detect the effect of the neutron poison xenon @-@ 135 , which caused problems with the startup of the Hanford B reactor . 
 The X @-@ 10 semiworks operated as a plutonium production plant until January 1945 , when it was turned over to research activities . By this time , 299 batches of irradiated slugs had been processed . A radioisotope building , a steam plant , and other structures were added in April 1946 to support the laboratory 's peacetime educational and research missions . All work was completed by December 1946 , adding another $ 1 @,@ 009 @,@ 000 to the cost of construction at X @-@ 10 , and bringing the total cost to $ 13 @,@ 041 @,@ 000 . Operational costs added another $ 22 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 X @-@ 10 supplied the Los Alamos Laboratory with the first significant samples of plutonium . Studies of these by Emilio G. Segrè and his P @-@ 5 Group at Los Alamos revealed that it contained impurities in the form of the isotope plutonium @-@ 240 , which has a far higher spontaneous fission rate than plutonium @-@ 239 . This meant that it would be highly likely that a plutonium gun @-@ type nuclear weapon would predetonate and blow itself apart during the initial formation of a critical mass . The Los Alamos Laboratory was thus forced to turn its development efforts to creating an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon — a far more difficult feat . 
 The X @-@ 10 chemical separation plant also proved the bismuth phosphate process that was used in the full @-@ scale separation facilities at Hanford . Finally , the reactor and chemical separation plant provided invaluable experience for engineers , technicians , reactor operators , and safety officials who then moved on to the Hanford site . 
 = = Peacetime use = = 
 After the war ended , the graphite reactor became the first facility in the world to produce radioactive isotopes for peacetime use . On August 2 , 1946 , Oak Ridge National Laboratory director Eugene Wigner presented a small container of carbon @-@ 14 to the director of the Barnard Free Skin and Cancer Hospital , for medical use at the hospital in St. Louis , Missouri . Subsequent shipments of radioisotopes , primarily iodine @-@ 131 , phosphorus @-@ 32 , molybdenum @-@ 99 / technetium @-@ 99m and carbon @-@ 14 , were for scientific , medical , industrial and agricultural uses . 
 The X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor was shut down on November 4 , 1963 , after twenty years of use . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1965 , and was designated a National Historic Landmark on October 15 , 1966 . In 1969 the American Society for Metals listed it as a landmark for its contributions to the advancement of materials science and technology , and in 2008 it was designated as a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society . The control room and reactor face are accessible to the public during scheduled tours offered through the American Museum of Science and Energy . During 2015 tours were part of a general three @-@ hour tour of the Clinton Engineer Works facilities , and were conducted on Mondays through Fridays at noon , from June 4 to September 30 , except on July 4 and 5 . 
 = = Similar reactors = = 
 The Brookhaven Graphite Research Reactor was the first nuclear reactor to be constructed in the United States following World War II . Led by Lyle Benjamin <unk> , the reactor construction began in 1947 and reached criticality for the first time on August 22 , 1950 . The reactor consisted of a 700 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 640 t ) , 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) cube of graphite fueled by natural uranium . Its primary mission was applied nuclear research in medicine , biology , chemistry , physics and nuclear engineering . One of the most significant discoveries at this facility was the development of production of <unk> @-@ 99 / technetium @-@ 99m , used today in tens of millions of medical diagnostic procedures annually , making it the most commonly used medical radioisotope . The graphite reactor was shut down in 1969 and fully decommissioned in 2012 . 
 When Britain began planning to build nuclear reactors to produce plutonium for weapons in 1946 , it was decided to build a pair of air @-@ cooled graphite reactors similar to the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Windscale . Natural uranium was used as enriched was not available , and similarly graphite was chosen as a neutron moderator because <unk> was toxic and hard to manufacture , while heavy water was unavailable . Use of water as a coolant was considered , but there were concerns about the possibility of a catastrophic nuclear meltdown in the densely @-@ populated British Isles if the cooling system failed , an event that did indeed occur in the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 . Helium was again the preferred choice as a coolant gas , but the main source of it was the United States , and under the 1946 McMahon Act , the United States would not supply it for nuclear weapons production , so , in the end , air cooling was chosen . Construction began in September 1947 , and the two reactors became operational in October 1950 and June 1951 . Both were decommissioned after the disastrous Windscale fire in October 1957 . They would be last major air @-@ cooled plutonium @-@ producing reactors ; the UK 's follow @-@ on Magnox and AGR designs used carbon dioxide instead . 
 As of 2016 , another reactor of similar design to the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor is still in operation , the Belgian BR @-@ 1 reactor of the <unk> • CEN , located in Mol , Belgium . Financed through the Belgian uranium export tax with the help of British experts , the 4 MW research reactor became critical for the first time on May 11 , 1956 . It is used for scientific purposes , such as neutron activation analysis , neutron physics experiments , calibration of nuclear measurement devices and the production of neutron transmutation doped silicon . 
 = Charles Keating = 
 Charles Humphrey Keating , Jr . ( December 4 , 1923 – March 31 , 2014 ) was an American athlete , lawyer , real estate developer , banker , financier , and activist best known for his role in the savings and loan scandal of the late 1980s . 
 Keating was a champion swimmer for the University of Cincinnati in the 1940s . From the late 1950s through the 1970s , he was a noted anti @-@ pornography activist , founding the organization Citizens for Decent Literature and serving as a member on the 1969 President 's Commission on Obscenity and Pornography . 
 In the 1980s , Keating ran American Continental Corporation and the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association , and took advantage of loosened restrictions on banking investments . His enterprises began to suffer financial problems and were investigated by federal regulators . His financial contributions to , and requests for regulatory intervention from five sitting U.S. senators led to those legislators being dubbed the " Keating Five " . 
 When Lincoln failed in 1989 , it cost the federal government over $ 3 billion and about 23 @,@ 000 customers were left with worthless bonds . In the early 1990s , Keating was convicted in both federal and state courts of many counts of fraud , racketeering and conspiracy . He served four and a half years in prison before those convictions were overturned in 1996 . In 1999 , he pleaded guilty to a more limited set of wire fraud and bankruptcy fraud counts , and was sentenced to the time he had already served . Keating spent his final years in low @-@ profile real estate activities until his death in 2014 . 
 = = Early life and military service = = 
 Keating was born on December 4 , 1923 , in Cincinnati , Ohio , into a devout Roman Catholic family . He was the son of Adele ( Kipp ) and Charles Humphrey Keating . He grew up in the Avondale and Clifton neighborhoods of that city . His younger brother William was born in 1927 . Their father came from Kentucky and managed a dairy . Charles Keating , Sr. lost a leg in a hunting accident , and then fell into a long decline from Parkinson 's disease around 1931 , and was nursed by his wife until his death in 1964 . 
 Keating began swimming at a Catholic summer camp and became passionately involved in the sport . He attended St. Xavier High School , where he was a good student , was on the swim team all four years , and also ran track and played football . In swimming he led the team to three Greater Catholic League championships , set several school records , was named all @-@ state , and was captain of the team in his senior year . Keating graduated from St. Xavier in 1941 . 
 After one semester at the University of Cincinnati in fall 1941 , Keating left because of poor grades , although he advanced to the NCAA Men 's Swimming and Diving Championships in 1942 , finishing sixth in the 200 yard breaststroke . He enlisted in the United States Navy , where he would spend four years . He trained in the Naval Air Corps to become a carrier @-@ based night fighter pilot flying F6F Hellcats . 
 During World War II , Keating was stationed in the U.S. , sometimes at Banana Creek in Florida , and flew Hellcats to armed services swimming meets . He narrowly escaped serious injury one night at Naval Air Station Vero Beach when he neglected to lower the landing gear on his Hellcat and wrecked the plane in an unexpected belly landing . Due to additional training on new intercept methods and the vagaries of squadron transfers , the war ended before he could be deployed to any combat theater . 
 = = Education and swimming = = 
 Keating was ready to return to college after finishing his Navy service in 1945 . His abilities as a swimmer made him an attractive recruit , despite his having dropped out earlier . He cut a deal with the University of Cincinnati wherein it would accept for academic credit much of his Navy service , then he would take six months of liberal arts courses before entering its law school . 
 Keating won the 200 @-@ yard breaststroke at the Ohio Intercollegiate Conference championship in 1945 . On March 30 , 1946 , Keating competed in the 200 @-@ yard breaststroke at the NCAA Men 's Swimming and Diving Championships , before a packed house of 2 @,@ 500 spectators at Yale University 's Payne Whitney Gymnasium . In an exciting , back @-@ and @-@ forth contest with Paul Murray of Cornell University and future coaching legend James Counsilman of Ohio State University , he prevailed by a foot to win the championship with a time of 2 : 26 @.@ 2 . ( The event was later reclassified as the butterfly in NCAA records due to a definitional evolution involving the two strokes . ) 
 This was the first ever national championship in any sport for the University of Cincinnati . He and teammate Roy Lagaly become the first @-@ ever Bearcats to be named All @-@ Americans . Keating was an imposing 6 feet 5 inches , a natural leader and co @-@ captain of the team with Lagaly . Of Keating , Lagaly said , " You could tell even then he was going to be very successful . He was very ambitious . Whatever he did , he did all the way . " Keating followed this by swimming for Cincinnati Gym , finishing second to future Olympic gold medalist Joseph <unk> in the 220 @-@ yard breaststroke at the April 1946 national AAU championships . 
 Keating received his law degree from the University of Cincinnati College of Law in 1948 , and would later be named a member of the university 's Athletic Hall of Fame . 
 Charles Keating was a long @-@ time supporter of U.S. swimming and beginning in 1969 he and his brother William donated $ 600 @,@ 000 to St. Xavier High School in Cincinnati to build a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art competition pool . The school 's swimming team went on to win many state titles . St. Xavier named the Keating Natatorium after the brothers ' father , and inducted Charles Keating into its initial Athletic Hall of Fame class in 1985 . The University of Cincinnati 's 2006 athletic building is named the Keating Aquatic Center , in honor of William Keating , and donations from the Keating family used to construct it . Charles Keating funded Cincinnati 's Marlins swim club ; six swimmers on the 1980 Summer Olympics squad were from its roster , including future Olympic champion Mary T. Meagher . When he later moved to Phoenix , Charles Keating built the Phoenix Swim Club , where Olympians also trained . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Keating married Mary Elaine <unk> in 1949 . She was an athletically @-@ minded Catholic from an established Cincinnati family . They had six children : daughters Kathleen , Mary , Maureen , Elaine , and Elizabeth , and a son , Charles Keating III . 
 His daughter Mary married Gary Hall , Sr. , who would go on to swim in the 1968 , 1972 , and 1976 Summer Olympics , winning a medal in each one . Charles Keating III swam in the 1976 Summer Olympics , finishing fifth in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . Keating 's grandson Gary Hall Jr. competed in the 1996 , 2000 , and 2004 Summer Olympics as a swimmer and won ten medals overall . 
 Another Keating grandson , Petty Officer 1st Class Charlie Keating IV , a Navy SEAL , was killed at age 31 in combat with ISIS in Iraq in 2016 . 
 = = Early legal and business career = = 
 After law school graduation , Keating did spot legal work for the FBI , then joined a law firm doing corporate law . On the side , he entered the business world where his ventures involved selling life insurance , running a fruit stand , and working for Roto @-@ Rooter . 
 In 1952 , along with his brother , William , and a mutual friend from law school , he became a founding partner of the Cincinnati law firm Keating , <unk> & Keating . Beginning in the late 1950s they took on Carl Lindner , Jr. as a client . Lindner was rapidly accumulating ice cream stores , supermarkets , real estate , and savings and loans , and soon essentially became Keating 's sole client . In 1956 , he filed requests for Q clearances on behalf of a small company of former Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists with an office in Newtown , Ohio ; unknown to Keating , the FBI suspected the application was fraudulent and launched an investigation of him , but no charges were made . Keating was admitted to the U.S. Supreme Court bar in 1958 . 
 In 1960 , Lindner and Keating created American Financial Corporation , a holding company of Lindner 's disparate businesses that created further subsidiaries and financial instruments , all doing business with each other . Keating was named to the board of directors of the company in 1963 . 
 = = Anti @-@ pornography activism = = 
 In 1956 , Keating joined a priest leading a group of concerned Catholics in Cincinnati who were concerned about the dangers of pornography , and he began giving talks on the subject to parents and other groups . In 1958 , Keating testified before the House Judiciary Committee on mail @-@ order pornography , saying that it was " capable of poisoning any mind at any age and of perverting our entire younger generation " , and that it was closely tied to juvenile delinquency , while also quoting a Senate Committee report that " part of the Communist conspiracy was to print ( obscene materials ) " . Keating mentioned links between pornography and Communism at other times , but distanced himself from the more fervent anti @-@ Communist groups of the early 1960s . He stated that 90 percent of obscene materials were produced for profit , not ideological reasons , and told Congress in 1960 , " I had better say [ ... ] that I am not blaming obscenity in America on the Communists . " 
 Keating founded Citizens for Decent Literature ( CDL ) in 1958 ( later renamed a number of times , the best known of which is Citizens for Decency through Law ) , which advocated reading classics not " smut . " It would grow to 300 chapters and 100 @,@ 000 members nationwide and become the largest anti @-@ pornography organization in the nation . It absorbed some other groups , such as National Citizens for Decent Literature and the Pittsburgh National Better Magazines Council . The structure of CDL was initially decentralized , but Keating grew frustrated with some local chapters taking aggressive actions he did not approve of , and so he gave it a more controlled focus with a national magazine , film production , and a greater role in legal actions . 
 Over the next two decades , CDL mailed some 40 million letters on behalf of its position and filed a series of amicus curiae briefs before the U.S. Supreme Court . Keating gained the nickname " Mr. Clean " . 
 In 1964 – 65 , Keating produced Perversion for Profit , a film featuring announcer George Putnam . It was a survey of then @-@ available prurient and obscene materials , and asserted that pornography led to moral decay . It , along with two lesser @-@ known films produced or distributed by CDL , was screened frequently throughout the country and remained in print for a long time . 
 In 1969 , Keating 's national reputation on the issue led President Nixon to appoint him to the President 's Commission on Obscenity and Pornography , which had been begun under Nixon 's predecessor , Lyndon B. Johnson . The majority on the commission issued a report which concluded that pornography does not degrade the morals of adults or cause crime and recommended that all federal , state , and local laws preventing consenting adults from obtaining pornographic materials be repealed . Keating , Nixon 's only appointee on the 18 @-@ person commission , was the leading commission dissenter from the report . 
 In September 1970 , Keating was granted a temporary restraining order from the D.C. Federal District Court to delay publication of the report , stating that he needed access to all the report 's backing materials and time to write a dissent . Several days later , Keating was given the desired materials and two weeks to write his report by the committee . 
 Keating filed his dissent , saying , " At a time when the spread of pornography has reached epidemic proportions in our country and when the moral fiber of our nation seems to be rapidly unravelling , the desperate need is for enlightenment and intelligent control of the poisons which threaten us – not the declaration of moral bankruptcy inherent in the repeal of the laws which have been the defense of decent people against the pornographer for profit . " Keating wrote , " One can consult all the experts he chooses , can write reports , make studies , etc . , but the fact that obscenity corrupts lies within the common sense , the reason , and the logic of every man . " 
 The Nixon administration tacitly supported Keating 's legal efforts , and Counsellor to the President John Ehrlichman assigned White House speechwriter Pat Buchanan to help draft the dissenting report . The commission 's majority report was denounced by congressional leaders of both parties as well as by the administration . 
 The commission involvement earned Keating further national attention , which he used to push towards stringent behavior in Cincinnati . In 1969 , Keating obtained an injunction preventing the showing in Cincinnati of softcore sexploitation master Russ Meyer 's film Vixen ! , claiming it was obscene , and the film was seized by the police the first day it opened . Showing of the film was successfully stopped in other parts of Ohio as well , and Meyer spent $ 250 @,@ 000 in defense against Keating legal actions . Keating said Meyer had done more to undermine morals in the nation than anyone else ; Meyer responded that " I was glad to do it . " The Cincinnati Vixen ! case was appealed and in 1971 the Supreme Court of Ohio upheld the prohibition . 
 In 1970 , Keating tried to block a closed @-@ circuit showing of the musical Oh ! Calcutta ! in Cincinnati , saying that " it appeals to a prurient interest in sex . " During 1972 , a Keating legal action kept a sex film theater shut as a " public nuisance " . He tried to prevent newsstands near his office from selling Playboy and Oui magazines . He denounced the Ramada Inn chain for offering adult programming on cable television to guests . Other local actions involving shutting stores and removing books from public libraries were attributed by civil liberties advocates to the " oppressive " trend that Keating had set . Such was Keating and his organization 's effectiveness that when the U.S. Supreme Court handed down the 1973 Miller v. California decision establishing that obscenity definitions be based upon local community standards , every adult bookstore and movie house in Cincinnati was closed within hours . 
 Citizens for Decent Literature and Keating often warned about homosexuality as an example of what they saw as perverse behavior . The film Perversion for Profit had included a claim that homosexuals had a slogan saying that " today 's conquest is tomorrow 's competition " ; in a 1977 speech in Miami , Keating repeated this phrase , concluding from it that homosexuality represented an endless " seduction of the innocent " . 
 In 1975 , Oui magazine gave Keating the top spot on its " Enemies of pornography " list . Hamilton County prosecutor Simon L. Leis , Jr. put Ohio pornographer Larry Flynt on trial in 1976 for pandering obscenity and for engaging in a form of organized crime . Local public opinion ran against Flynt . Flynt was convicted on both counts and received the maximum sentence of 7 to 25 years in prison . While the conviction was later overturned on appeal , the verdict again established Cincinnati 's community standards in this regard , and even after Keating left for Arizona , his influence remained in Cincinnati being a center of anti @-@ pornography fervor . In the 1996 biopic , The People vs. Larry Flynt , which reportedly exaggerated Keating 's role in the prosecution and trial , Keating was portrayed by actor James Cromwell . Attempts to show Vixen ! in Cincinnati would continue , but by the late 1990s it was still illegal to do so . 
 = = American Financial Corporation = = 
 While officially an outside lawyer , Keating functioned as a public face for Carl Lindner and American Financial Corporation and the two were close associates on business as well as legal matters ; Lindner would sometimes refer to Keating as a " founder " of American Financial . The company had easy access to credit lines , which allowed it to continually grow . The web of transactions involving the company and its subsidiaries was large and complex , and one stock analyst stated in 1977 that he had " never come across a company that has so much strange paper on its books . " 
 Keating left his law practice in 1972 and formally joined American Financial Corporation , by now a $ 1 billion enterprise , as executive vice president . Keating became Lindner 's person in charge of firing employees from newly acquired companies . Within business circles Keating gained a reputation for aggressiveness and arrogance . He took on an operational involvement in The Cincinnati Enquirer , the town 's only morning newspaper . He interfered in editorial decisions , such as adding coverage to high school sports that he or Lindner 's sons were involved in . The paper was then sold to a group including his brother , William , who had been a Republican congressman from Ohio 's 1st congressional district in the early 1970s . Charles Keating was involved in American Financial 's 1974 sale of Bantam Books , and its decision that year not to enter the investment banking field . 
 In 1975 and 1976 , several stockholder lawsuits were filed against American Financial , and Keating was under fire for aspects involving unsecured loans , stock warrants , and the sale of the Enquirer . The Securities and Exchange Commission launched a major investigation of the company and charged Lindner , Keating and others with having defrauded investors and filing false SEC reports . At particular issue was a $ 14 million loan that the SEC said was made on preferential terms . Keating resigned from American Financial in August 1976 , with conflicting stories as to whether or not Keating and Lindner had remained close or whether they had fallen out . 
 = = American Continental Corporation = = 
 Keating moved to Phoenix , Arizona in 1976 to run the real estate firm American Continental Homes , a struggling , millions @-@ losing <unk> spin @-@ off of American Financial that was given over to Keating for $ 300 @,@ 000 as part of his departure package . The move was completed when his family followed him in 1978 . In 1979 the SEC case with American Financial was settled , with Keating signing a consent agreement where he neither admitted nor denied guilt but agreed not to violate federal fraud and securities statutes . In practice , Keating was blamed for much of the irregular financial practices that had gone on and his reputation was significantly damaged . 
 Keating reaped benefits from the move to Arizona , a wide @-@ open territory in both a physical and business sense that allowed someone a fresh start . He turned the now @-@ renamed American Continental Corporation around , adding various operations and divisions in a structure somewhat reminiscent of American Financial . As chairman and controlling stockholder , Keating relied heavily upon family members , employing his son and four of his sons @-@ in @-@ law in prominent positions . Charles Keating III had a fast career rise within the company . 
 In 1979 , Keating served as head of fundraising in the Southwest for John Connally 's campaign for the 1980 Republican Party presidential nomination . Connally was a favorite of the business community , but his campaign had difficulty parlaying its fundraising successes into popular support . In early December 1979 , Keating was named campaign manager , with the existing manager being demoted to campaign strategist . Keating 's first action was as a " <unk> " who immediately fired twenty workers at the campaign 's Virginia headquarters . The campaign continued to struggle , and , by late February 1980 , Keating was out as manager , with Connally taking the role . Connally 's campaign ended two weeks later , famously known for having spent $ 11 million and gaining only one delegate . 
 Having won the 1980 election , President Reagan contacted Keating about becoming U.S. Ambassador to the Bahamas , where Keating had spent considerable time . When Keating 's run @-@ in with the SEC resurfaced in press reports , however , he was dropped from consideration . This dismayed Keating , who subsequently said , " To keep people like me out of positions like that because of yellow journalism , I don 't know what good it does . " 
 By the early 1980s , American Continental 's profits were in the millions and it had become the biggest single @-@ family home builder in Phoenix and Denver . At its peak it would have $ 6 billion in assets , a large number of subsidiaries , 2 @,@ 500 employees , and a headquarters complex on Phoenix 's Camelback Road . It had three corporate jets and a helicopter . He was a very hard worker and a strong presence to his employees ; one later said , " It 's almost magnetic . When he moves , things happen . The office would come alive when he walked in . " He inspired both camaraderie and fervent loyalty in them . While he demanded long hours , he often rewarded employees monetarily and with gifts . <unk> outside his company often found Keating arrogant and difficult to deal with . Congressman William Keating , who was well @-@ liked , said of his brother : " Charlie is impatient , aggressive , always on the move . He has clearly defined goals . I don 't think he worries about the popularity of his positions . " A Fortune profile in 1977 reported , " It seems almost impossible to find anyone who actually likes Charlie Keating . " The story rankled Keating , who later had over five thousand large yellow " I Like Charlie Keating " buttons made up which he handed out to employees and visitors . Keating said , " There are a lot of people that would say nasty things , I 'm sure , about me , but it ain 't true that nobody ever liked Charlie Keating . " 
 A devout Catholic , Keating became a heavy donor to charity when he moved to Phoenix , donating $ 100 @,@ 000 to the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul , more than $ 1 million to Covenant House , and another more than $ 1 million to Mother Teresa 's operations , including lending her his helicopter when she was in Arizona so that she could visit remote Indian reservations in the state . Covenant House 's Father Bruce Ritter said of Keating , " He makes you believe in Providence . " In 1983 , Keating and his companies made legal but unusually large campaign donations in races for the Phoenix City Council , who were responsible for approving his building projects including water usage for residential developments built around artificial ponds . The scale of donations represented a change from past practice in local Phoenix politics ; some council figures opposed the trend , while others readily asked for the funds . 
 = = Lincoln Savings and the Keating Five = = 
 In 1984 , American Continental Corporation bought Lincoln Savings and Loan Association for just over $ 50 million . Up through the early 1980s , Lincoln had been a conservatively @-@ run enterprise , with almost half its assets in home loans and only a quarter of its assets considered at risk . It made slow growth at best , and had shown a loss for several years until it made a profit of a few million dollars in 1983 . Once he took over , Keating fired the existing management . Savings and loan associations had been deregulated in the early 1980s , allowing them to make high @-@ risk investments with their depositors ' money , a change of which Keating and other savings and loan operators took advantage . When Keating later was asked why he got into savings and loans , he said , " I know the business inside out , and I always felt that an S & L , if they 'd relax the rules , was the biggest moneymaker in the world . " 
 Over the next four years Lincoln 's assets increased from $ 1 @.@ 1 billion to $ 5 @.@ 5 billion . Lincoln 's particular investments took the form of buying land , taking equity positions in real estate development projects , and buying high @-@ yield junk bonds . A sales document from this period urges staff to , " always remember the weak , meek and ignorant are always good targets . " 
 Beginning in 1985 the Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) feared that the savings industry 's risky investment practices were exposing the government 's insurance funds to huge losses . It instituted a rule whereby savings associations could hold no more than 10 percent of their assets in " direct investments " , and were thus prohibited from taking ownership positions in certain financial entities and instruments . Lincoln had become burdened with bad debt resulting from its past aggressiveness , and by early 1986 its investment practices were being investigated and audited by the San Francisco office of the FHLBB : in particular whether it had violated these direct investment rules ; Lincoln had directed accounts insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation into commercial real estate ventures . By the end of 1986 , that office of the FHLBB had found that Lincoln had $ 135 million in unreported losses and had surpassed the regulated direct investments limit by $ 600 million . 
 Keating believed that the regulators were against him because he opposed their rules . He also told his staff that some of the San Francisco regulators were likely " <unk> " who were " out to get him " for his strong moral views . Keating took measures to oppose the FHLBB , including recruiting a study from then @-@ private economist Alan Greenspan saying that direct investments were not harmful , trying to hire FHLBB members or their wives , and getting President Ronald Reagan to make a recess appointment of a Keating ally , real estate developer Lee H. Henkel Jr . , to the FHLBB . By March 1987 , however , the ally had resigned upon news of his having large loans due to Lincoln . It appeared as though the government might seize Lincoln for being insolvent . 
 Starting in January 1987 , Keating looked for help from what would become known as " the Keating Five " : U.S. Senators Alan Cranston ( D @-@ CA ) , Dennis DeConcini ( D @-@ AZ ) , John Glenn ( D @-@ OH ) , John McCain ( R @-@ AZ ) and Donald W. Riegle ( D @-@ MI ) . Keating had , or would soon make , legal political contributions of about $ 1 @.@ 3 million to the senators , and he called on them to help him resist the regulators . Keating became a personal friend of McCain following their initial contacts in 1981 , and McCain was the only one of the five with close social and personal ties to Keating . McCain and his family had made several trips at Keating 's expense , sometimes aboard American Continental 's jet , for vacations at Keating 's opulent Bahamas retreat at Cat Cay . 
 Keating asked that Lincoln be given a lenient judgment by the FHLBB , so it could limit its high risk investments and get into the relatively safe home mortgage business , allowing the business to survive . A letter from audit firm Arthur Young & Co. bolstered Keating 's case that the government investigation was taking a long time . McCain initially refused to meet with Keating over the FHLBB matter and Keating called McCain a " wimp " behind his back . The two had a heated , contentious meeting in which McCain said he had not spent years in North Vietnamese prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps to have his courage or integrity questioned ; the friendship ended and they would not speak again . In April 1987 , the group of senators met twice with FHLBB members who were investigating American Continental Corporation and Lincoln , in an attempt to end the investigation . Meanwhile , Keating filed a lawsuit against the FHLBB , saying it had leaked confidential information about Lincoln . The outgoing head of the FHLBB in Washington deferred judgment and the new head was more sympathetic to Keating . In May 1988 , the FHLBB agreed to an unprecedented memorandum of understanding giving Lincoln a clean slate and forgiveness for any violations up to that point . ( In 1991 , the senators would be rebuked to various degrees by the Senate Ethics Committee , with Cranston receiving the harshest verdict and Glenn and McCain the least . McCain later testified against Keating in a civil lawsuit brought by Lincoln bondholders , while the other four refused to testify . ) 
 = = Failure of Lincoln and American Continental = = 
 Lincoln stayed in business ; from mid @-@ 1987 to April 1989 , its assets grew from $ 3 @.@ 91 billion to $ 5 @.@ 46 billion . Following Keating 's past practices with Lindner , American Continental amassed a large collection of confusingly connected subsidiaries in real estate , banking , and insurance businesses ; these numbered at least 54 , and there were some overseas ones that auditors were not aware of . Keating was triumphant in having defeated the regulators , whom he despised as useless relics from an outmoded financial past , and defended his high salary and business practices . He spent about $ 500 @,@ 000 on radio advertisements in the Phoenix area to improve his public image ; the commercials stressed his real estate projects and his family @-@ oriented values . A 1988 Los Angeles Times profile assessed Keating as " a businessman without apparent peer in Arizona in terms of riches , clout and color . " While Keating had taken Citizens for Decency through Law with him , he had generally de @-@ emphasized his anti @-@ pornography work when he moved to Arizona . Nevertheless , X @-@ rated movies and Playboy magazine were banned from his hotels . 
 In October 1988 , Keating opened his most extravagant real estate project ever , the 250 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) , 600 @-@ room The Phoenician resort at the base of Camelback Mountain . Its construction cost $ 300 million , included many opulent , imported features , and saw a number of instances of Keating or his decorator wife making wholesale late design changes at great expense . His other grand project was Estrella , a 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) mixed @-@ use development outside of Phoenix in Goodyear , Arizona in the direction of the Sierra Estrella . Incorporating homes , offices , industrial buildings , schools , shopping , a resort and a hospital , it was intended to eventually house 200 @,@ 000 people and become a model 21st century city . American Continental wrote rules saying that Estrella homeowners could not " intentionally <unk> [ e ] a human pregnancy " or possess " adult material " , but removed them once Keating was informed that such covenants were unconstitutional . A late 1980s downturn in the Sun Belt real estate market put Estrella in jeopardy before much building could be done . 
 Asked in an interview if he ever worried about going broke , Keating responded , " All the time , every day . I come into the office with this hollow feeling in my stomach lots of time .... You get trapped almost . You get too many responsibilities . It 's a <unk> to carry . It 's risky . Dangerous . There 's the possibility of failure with it every day and every night . But in a way , it 's a challenge . It 's invigorating . There isn 't any point in not being a player – you 're here .... It 's not only the money . It 's the disgrace , yourself , your manhood . I 'm not sure I 'd have a big problem with that . On the other hand I 'm not sure I wouldn 't . " 
 As Lincoln grew , money was siphoned from Lincoln to the parent American Continental Corporation under a variety of schemes , and American Continental spent lavishly on speculative investments and personal expenses . A new regulatory investigation began in July 1988 . After Arthur Young indicated doubts about some accounting practices , Keating fired them in September 1988 and switched to Touche Ross . American Continental was desperate for cash inflow to make up for losses in real estate purchases and projects . Lincoln 's branch managers and tellers convinced customers to replace their federally @-@ insured certificates of deposit with higher @-@ yielding bond certificates of American Continental ; the customers later said they were never properly informed that the bonds were uninsured and very risky given the state of American Continental 's finances . The regulators had already adjudged the bonds to have no solvent backing . Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation chair L. William Seidman would later write that Lincoln 's push to get depositors to switch was " one of the most heartless and cruel frauds in modern memory . " In late 1988 , Keating began desperate attempts to sell Lincoln ; regulators rejected one $ 50 million potential sale due to the buyers not meeting federal requirements . 
 A December 1988 audit by the FHLBB found Lincoln in violation of many regulations and in danger of default . The following month they ordered Keating to stop transferring cash from Lincoln to American Continental , which imperiled the latter 's survival strategy and caused its stock price to nosedive . Keating tried to arrange junk bond deals with Michael Milken and place bets in the global currency markets to generate cash , but the moves failed and he lost $ 11 million in one month alone . Keating got Senators DeConcini and Cranston to pressure the regulators to let a sale go through , but this time the lawmakers were ignored . 
 American Continental went bankrupt in April 1989 , and Lincoln was seized by the FHLBB . About 23 @,@ 000 customers were left with worthless bonds . Many investors , often ones living in California retirement communities , lost their life savings , and later claimed to have suffered emotional trauma for having been duped on top of their financial devastation . The total bondholder loss came to between $ 250 million and $ 288 million . 
 The federal government was eventually liable for $ 3 @.@ 4 billion to cover Lincoln 's losses when it seized the institution . In talking to reporters in April 1989 , Keating maintained that he was the victim of a federal government that had spent years trying to destroy him , and then said , " One question , among many raised in recent weeks , had to do with whether my financial support in any way influenced several political figures to take up my cause . I want to say in the most forceful way I can : I certainly hope so . " 
 In September 1989 , Keating was hit with a $ 1 @.@ 1 billion fraud and racketeering action , filed against him by the regulators . He proclaimed that , " We 've lost everything in this thing , my wife and I. It 's devastating . " In November 1989 , Keating was subpoenaed to testify before the House Banking Committee , but refused to answer questions , invoking his right against self @-@ incrimination under the Fifth Amendment . Also in November , his Phoenician Resort was seized by the FBI ; under their operation it became known as " Club Fed " before later being sold to a Kuwaiti group . The vastly ambitious Estrella project would remain deserted and was sold in 1993 to an investment group . 
 By November 1989 , the estimated cost of the overall savings and loan crisis had reached $ 500 billion , and the media 's coverage often highlighted Keating 's role as part of what became a feeding frenzy . Keating and Lincoln Savings became convenient symbols for arguments about what had gone wrong in America 's financial system and society , as well as for 1980s greed in general , and were featured in popular culture references . A deck of playing cards would be marketed , called " The Savings and Loan Scandal " , that featured on their face Charles Keating holding up his hand , with images of the Keating Five senators portrayed as puppets on his fingers . 
 = = Legal consequences = = 
 Keating blamed government regulators for the failure of Lincoln Savings and sued for control over the bank . The suit was dismissed in August 1990 , with the judge calling the seizure fully justified . , Keating 's legal fees were running at $ 1 million per month . 
 In September 1990 , Keating and his associates were indicted by the State of California on 42 counts related to having duped Lincoln 's customers into buying worthless junk bonds of American Continental Corporation . Keating went to jail when he could not post a $ 5 million bond . He was convicted in December 1991 of 17 counts of fraud , racketeering , and conspiracy . Mother Teresa asked the court to show leniency to Keating , in recognition of the considerable sums he had donated to her charitable operations . In April 1992 , California Superior Court Judge Lance Ito gave Keating the maximum 10 @-@ year prison sentence , quoting Woody Guthrie , to wit " More people have suffered from the point of a fountain pen than from a gun . " Keating was sent to the medium @-@ security Federal Correctional Institution , Tucson to serve his time . 
 In May 1992 , Keating 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Robert M. <unk> Jr . , a senior vice president of American Continental , and chief executive of an investment firm owned by Lincoln Savings , was also implicated , pleaded guilty to three federal fraud counts in connection with the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and agreed to testify against Keating . ( In December 1993 , <unk> was sentenced to a 40 @-@ month prison term . ) 
 In January 1993 , a federal conviction followed , on 73 counts of fraud , racketeering and conspiracy . In July 1993 , Keating was given a 12 ½ year sentence . The judge ordered Keating to pay restitution of $ 122 million to the government , but Keating said he was $ 10 million in debt and had no assets to sell . 
 One case filed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission was settled in 1994 : Keating said he was bankrupt but agreed to repay millions should any hidden assets be discovered . A third case filed by the Resolution Trust Corporation resulted in a summary judgment of $ 4 @.@ 3 billion against Keating and his wife in 1994 , the largest judgment ever against a private person . The judgment was overturned on appeal in 1999 , on grounds that Keating could not be held personally liable to the government without a specific criminal conviction or some other decision at trial . Throughout his incarceration , Keating maintained his innocence , saying he was a " political prisoner " of the U.S. government and a scapegoat for the largest banking scandal in the nation 's history . 
 In April 1996 , the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco ruled that state trial judge Ito had given the jury faulty instructions about the law regarding fraud . The conviction was overturned . In December 1996 , the same Court of Appeals ruled that some of the jurors in the federal case might have been influenced by their knowledge and discussion of the results of the state case , and threw out the federal conviction . Keating was freed after 4 ½ years in prison ; he later said that staying tough during his incarceration was the thing he was proudest of . He was said to have gotten along well with other prisoners and served as best man at weddings for some that he met there . 
 In April 1999 , on the eve of the retrial of the federal case , Keating entered a plea agreement . He admitted to having committed four counts of wire and bankruptcy fraud by extracting nearly $ 1 million from American Continental Corp. while already anticipating the collapse that happened weeks later . The federal prosecutors dropped all other charges against him and his son , Charles Keating III . He was sentenced to time served . 
 In October 2000 , the U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear the government 's appeal of the overturning of the state conviction . This left Keating without any convictions other than that from his plea bargain . State prosecutors declined to move for a retrial , saying it would bring no more than a six @-@ month jail sentence and that many witnesses had died in the interim or were in bad health . Keating replied that if the government had left him alone , investors " would all be rich . " 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 Following his release from prison , Keating separated from his wife Mary . He moved in with his daughter Mary and son @-@ in @-@ law Gary Hall , Sr. in the Paradise Valley neighborhood of Phoenix . 
 During the 2000s , Keating worked as a business consultant and as of 2008 was involved in some successful real estate developments in the Phoenix market . He kept a low profile in his business operations , and declined comment during John McCain 's 2008 presidential campaign when the Keating Five scandal was brought up again by the press . During his final years , Keating maintained good physical shape through swimming and walking and was able to go out in public without being recognized . 
 Charles Keating died in a Phoenix hospital on March 31 , 2014 , at the age of 90 , after an undisclosed illness for several weeks . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Chicago Tribune 's lengthy profile of Keating in 1990 said in summary : 
 To say that Charles Keating is a complex man seems a gross understatement . Some see him as an aggressive man who got desperate when the real estate market bottomed out and crossed the line between " business as usual " and fraud . Others see him as a con artist who finally got caught , a <unk> who masked his greed with phony piety . 
 Michael <unk> and Charles Bowden 's 1993 book , Trust Me : Charles Keating and the Missing Billions , also presents Keating as a complex individual with contradictory tendencies , and concludes : 
 Charlie Keating built things , and , at some level that haunts anyone who looks over his records , he thought his schemes would work . He did not simply rob a bank . He broke a bank with his dreams . If he is simply a thief , why did he put the money into deals and projects instead of into his own pocket ? If he is just a hardworking businessman simply trying to make a profit and create jobs , why the need for jets , fancy meals , big paychecks to his family ? If he is such a devout communicant of his faith , why did he peddle hundreds of millions of dollars ' worth of junk bonds to old people when he knew his empire was in serious jeopardy ? 
 Keating steadfastly maintained that it was not his mistakes or criminal deeds but regulators ' actions that were responsible for the major losses . A 2004 Milken Institute study also made the claim that regulators ' actions were responsible for the Lincoln failure and presents Keating 's actions in a favorable light . The Milken institute was founded by Michael Milken , the " junk bond " king also convicted on felony charges , for violating U.S. securities laws . 
 Some of Keating 's 1980s judgment as a developer was later vindicated . The Phoenician became a successful hotel in the luxury segment , and the Estrella project achieved at least some of Keating 's vision and was acquired again in 2005 . 
 = Latin American Boom = 
 The Latin American Boom was a flourishing of literature , poetry and criticism in Latin America during the 1960s and 1970s , when writers from this region explored new ideas and came to international renown in a way that had not happened previously . Major figures of the boom include Julio Cortázar , Gabriel García Márquez , Carlos Fuentes , Jorge Luis Borges and Mario Vargas Llosa . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 1960s and 1970s were decades of political turmoil all over Latin America , in a political and diplomatic climate strongly influenced by the dynamics of the Cold War . This climate formed the background for the work of the writers of the Latin American Boom , and defined the context in which their sometimes radical ideas had to operate . The Cuban Revolution in 1959 and the subsequent USA attempt to thwart it through the Bay of Pigs Invasion can be seen as the start of this period . Cuba 's vulnerability led it to closer ties with the USSR , resulting in the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 when the US and USSR came dangerously close to nuclear war . Throughout the 1960s and 1970s military authoritarian regimes ruled in Argentina , Brazil , Chile , Paraguay , Peru and many others . For example , on September 11 , 1973 the democratically elected President Salvador Allende was overthrown in Chile and replaced by General Augusto Pinochet who would go on to rule until the end of the 1980s . Chile under Pinochet became " infamous for [ ... ] human rights abuses and torture techniques " , and in Argentina the 1970s brought the Dirty War , notorious for its human rights violations and the disappearances of Argentine citizens . Many of these governments ( which were supported by the US ) cooperated with each other in terms of torturing or eliminating political opponents and " disposing of their bodies " in " the so @-@ called Operation Condor . " 
 The period between 1950 and 1975 saw major changes in the way in which history and literature were approached in terms of interpretation and writing . It also produced a change in the self perception of Spanish American novelists . The development of the cities , the coming of age of a large middle class , the Cuban Revolution , the Alliance for Progress , an increase in communication between the countries of Latin America , the greater importance of the mass media , and a greater attention to Latin America from Europe and the United States all contributed to this change . The most important political events of the period were the Cuban Revolution in 1959 and the Chilean coup d 'état in 1973 . The fall of General Perón in Argentina , the protracted violent struggle of the urban guerrillas , brutally repressed in Argentina and Uruguay , and the unending violence in Colombia also affected writers , as they generated explanations , or testimonies , or provided a troubling background for their work . 
 The greater attention paid to Spanish American novelists and their international success in the 1960s , a phenomenon that was called the Boom , affected all writers and readers in that period . What mainly brought writers together and focused the attention of the world on Hispanic America was the triumph of the Cuban Revolution in 1959 , which promised a new age . The period of euphoria can be considered closed when in 1971 the Cuban government hardened its party line and the poet Heberto Padilla was forced to reject in a public document his so @-@ called decadent and deviant views . The furor over Padilla 's case brought to an end the affinity between Spanish American intellectuals and the Cuban inspirational myth . The Padilla affair is thought by some to have signalled the beginning of the end of the Boom . However , in a significant sense , the Boom has not ended ; the writers associated with the Boom have continued to publish books that have been read by audiences far larger than those enjoyed by Latin American writers prior to the Boom . The books of such writers as Carlos Fuentes and Mario Vargas Llosa are widely distributed and translated into other major European and Asian languages to a much greater extent than those of such significant pre @-@ Boom writers as José María Arguedas , Eduardo <unk> or Manuel Rojas . 
 = = Literary influences = = 
 The rise of Latin American literature began with the writings of Jose Martí , Ruben Darío and José Asunción Silva 's modernist departures from the European literary canon . European modernist writers like James Joyce have also influenced the writers of the Boom , as have the Latin American writers of the Vanguardia movement . Elizabeth Coonrod Martinez argues that the writers of the Vanguardia were the " true precursors " to the Boom , writing innovative and challenging novels before Borges and others conventionally thought to be the main Latin American inspirations for the mid @-@ 20th century movement . 
 In 1950 , Spanish American novelists were tolerated but marginal in the literary landscape , with Paris and New York representing the center of the literary world ; by 1975 they were celebrated as central figures . As well as being a publishing phenomenon , the Boom introduced a series of novel aesthetic and stylistic features to world literature . In general — and considering there are many countries and hundreds of important authors — at the start of the period , Realism prevails , with novels tinged by an existentialist pessimism , with well @-@ rounded characters lamenting their destinies , and a straightforward narrative line . In the 1960s , language loosens up , gets hip , pop , streetwise , characters are much more complex , and the chronology becomes intricate , making of the reader an active participant in the deciphering of the text . Late in the period the political adventure goes sour , while the linguistic sophistication reaches a new height , and novelists turn more to a reflection on their own writing , a fiction on fiction or metafiction , while characters and story lines show the corrosive power of a postmodern society , where all is equally available and insignificant . 
 With the success of the Boom , the work of a previous generation of writers gained access to a new and expanded public . These precursors include Jorge Luis Borges , Miguel Ángel Asturias , Arturo Uslar Pietri and Alejo Carpentier , Juan Carlos Onetti , and Juan Rulfo . 
 = = Origins = = 
 While most critics agree that the Boom started some time in the 1960s , there is some disagreement as to which work should be considered the first Boom novel . Some ( such as Alfred McAdam ) would start with Julio Cortázar 's Hopscotch ( <unk> in Spanish ) from 1963 while others prefer Vargas Llosa 's The Time of the Hero ( La ciudad y los perros in Spanish ) which won the Biblioteca Breve Award in 1962 . Fernando Alegria considers Augusto Roa Bastos ' Hijo de hombre the inaugural work of the Boom even though , as Shaw notes , " it was published in 1959 . " One could , however , even go as far back as Miguel Ángel Asturias 's 1949 novel Men of Maize . 
 Another variation is articulated by Randolph D. Pope : " The story of the Boom could start chronologically with Miguel Ángel Asturias 's El Señor Presidente ( published in 1946 , but started in 1922 ) . Other starting points could be Ernesto Sabato 's " El <unk> " ( 1948 ) or Onetti 's " El <unk> " ( 1939 ) , or even the <unk> movements of the 1920s . However , the writers of the Boom declared themselves orphaned and without any autochthonous model , caught between their admiration for Proust , Joyce , Mann , Sartre and other European writers and their need to have a Spanish American voice , even if they rejected the most respected Spanish American writers <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . " 
 The major representatives of the Boom claimed that they were an " orphan " literary generation , without a " Latin American " father " of influence ; however , they owe much of their stylistic innovation to the <unk> . Jean Franco writes that the Boom marks " a refusal to be identified with the rural or with anachronistic narratives such as the novela de la tierra . " 
 = = Hallmarks = = 
 The Boom novels are essentially modernist novels . They treat time as nonlinear , often use more than one perspective or narrative voice and feature a great number of neologisms ( the coining of new words or phrases ) , puns and even profanities . As Pope writes , in reference to the style of the Boom : " It relied on a Cubist superposition of different points of view , it made time and lineal progress questionable , and it was technically complex . Linguistically self assured , it used the vernacular without apologies . " Other notable characteristics of the Boom include the treatment of both " rural and urban settings " , internationalism , an emphasis on both the historical and the political , as well as " questioning of regional as well as , or more than , national identity ; awareness of <unk> as well as worldwide economic and ideological issues ; polemicism ; and timeliness . " Boom literature breaks down the barriers between the fantastical and the mundane , transforming this mixture into a new reality . Of the Boom writers , Gabriel García Márquez is most closely associated with the use of magical realism ; indeed , he is credited with bringing it " into vogue " after the publishing of One Hundred Years of Solitude in 1967 . 
 = = = Magical realism = = = 
 In The Ends of Literature , Brett Levinson writes that magical realism , " a key aesthetic mode within recent Latin American fiction ... materializes when Latin American history reveals itself as incapable of accounting for its own origin , an incapacity which traditionally ... represents a demand for a myth : mythos as a means to explain the beginnings which escape history 's narrative . " The writings of the Chroniclers of the Indies depicted the exotic " new world " and their accounts of conquering strange new lands became accepted as history . These often fantastical stories helped to bring about a new aesthetic , which morphed into magical realism and " ( as conceived by Alejo Carpentier ) marvelous realism or lo real <unk> . According to this aesthetic , unreal things are treated as if realistic and mundane , and mundane things as if unreal . Plots , while often based on real experiences , incorporate strange , fantastic , and legendary elements , mythical peoples , speculative settings , and characters who , while plausible , could also be unreal , and combine the true , the imaginary , and the nonexistent in such a way that they are difficult to separate . " 
 = = = Historical fiction = = = 
 An interest in history is another characteristic of the novels of the Boom period . The epitome of this is the dictator novel where historical figures and events were portrayed in a way that connections between them and contemporary events in Latin America could not be doubted . An example is Roa Bastos 's I , the Supreme , which depicts the 19th century Paraguayan dictatorship of José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia but was published at the height of Alfredo Stroessner 's regime . Nunn writes that " novelists of the Boom themselves evinced a sophisticated grasp of their genre 's ability to depict parallel and alternative history . And they actively participated in the cultural and political debates of the region that questioned the very meaning and worth of history . " 
 = = Major representatives = = 
 Who is and who is not to be included in the Boom has been widely debated and never settled . On the other hand , a few writers exerted wide and undisputed influence . While the names of many other writers may be added to the list , the following may not be omitted : 
 = = = Julio Cortázar = = = 
 Julio Cortázar was born in Belgium in 1914 to Argentinian parents with whom he lived in Switzerland until moving to Buenos Aires at the age of four . Like other Boom writers , Cortázar grew to question the politics in his country : his public opposition to Juan Domingo Perón caused him to leave his professorial position at the University of Mendoza and , ultimately , led to his exile . He moved to France , where he spent most of his professional life and , in 1981 , he became a French citizen . Like García Márquez , Cortázar publicly supported the Cuban government of Fidel Castro , as well as leftist Chilean President Salvador Allende and other left @-@ wing movements like the Sandinistas in Nicaragua . In his fiction , however , political elements were generally muted or absent until the publication of the explicitly political novel Libro de Manuel in 1973 . 
 Cortázar was influenced by Borges , as well as by Edgar Allan Poe . He was perhaps the most radically experimental of all the Boom authors . His most important work , and the one that propelled him to international recognition , is the highly experimental novel Hopscotch ( 1963 ) . This consists of 155 chapters , 99 of which are " expendable " , which can be read in multiple orders according to the reader 's predilection . 
 His other works include the short story collections <unk> ( 1951 ) , Final del juego ( 1956 ) , Las armas <unk> ( 1959 ) , Todos los <unk> el fuego ( 1966 ) . He also wrote novels such as Los <unk> ( 1960 ) and Around the Day in Eighty Worlds ( 1967 ) , and the unclassifiable Historias de <unk> y de <unk> ( 1962 ) . Cortázar died in Paris , France in 1984 . 
 = = = Carlos Fuentes = = = 
 Carlos Fuentes was born on November 11 , 1928 and began to publish in the 1950s . He was the son of a Mexican diplomat and lived in cities such as Buenos Aires , Quito , Montevideo and Rio de Janeiro , as well as Washington , D. C .. His experiences with anti @-@ Mexican discrimination in the United States led him to examine Mexican culture more closely . His 1962 novel The Death of Artemio Cruz ( La muerte de Artemio Cruz in Spanish ) , which employs innovative changes in narrative point @-@ of @-@ view , describes the life of a former Mexican revolutionary on his deathbed . Other important works include Where the Air Is Clear ( 1959 ) , Aura ( 1962 ) , Terra Nostra ( 1975 ) , and the post @-@ Boom novella The Old Gringo ( 1985 ) . 
 Fuentes not only wrote some of the most important novels of the period , but was also a critic and publicist of Spanish America . In 1955 Fuentes and Emmanuel <unk> founded the journal Revista Mexicana de <unk> which introduced Latin Americans to the works of European Modernists and the ideas of Jean @-@ Paul Sartre and Albert Camus . In 1969 he published the important critical work , La nueva novela <unk> . Fuentes held the position of professor of Latin American literature at Columbia University ( 1978 ) and at Harvard ( 1987 ) and more recently was associated with Brown University . He once said that " the so @-@ called Boom , in reality , is the result of four centuries that , <unk> , reached a moment of urgency in which fiction became the way to organize lessons from the past . " Fuentes died on May 15 , 2012 . 
 = = = Gabriel García Márquez = = = 
 Gabriel García Márquez is undoubtedly the most internationally renowned of the Boom writers . He started out as a journalist and has written many acclaimed non @-@ fiction and short stories ; his earliest published writings were short stories which appeared in Bogotá 's El Espectador newspaper in the 1940s . 
 He is best known for novels such as One Hundred Years of Solitude ( 1967 ) and The Autumn of the Patriarch ( 1975 ) , No One Writes to the Colonel ( 1962 ) , and post @-@ Boom work such as Love in the Time of Cholera ( 1985 ) . He has achieved significant critical acclaim and widespread commercial success , most notably for introducing what has been labeled magical realism to the literary world . He experimented with more or less traditional approaches to reality , so that " the most frightful , the most unusual things are told with the deadpan expression " . A commonly cited example is the physical and spiritual ascending into heaven of a character while she is hanging the laundry out to dry in One Hundred Years of Solitude . García Márquez is now considered one of the most significant authors of the 20th century , as is attested by his winning the 1982 Nobel Prize in Literature . García Márquez died on April 17 , 2014 . 
 = = = Mario Vargas Llosa = = = 
 Mario Vargas Llosa is a Peruvian novelist , short story writer , playwright , journalist and literary and political critic . He attended Lima 's University of San Marcos and subsequently attained a doctorate in Latin American literature in Spain . In fact , his thesis was on Gabriel García Márquez . He shot to fame with his novel The Time of the Hero ( 1963 ) , a scathing indictment of cruelty and corruption in a Peruvian military academy ( and , by implication , in Peruvian society ) . 
 Vargas Llosa also wrote The Green House ( 1966 ) , the epic Conversation in the Cathedral ( 1969 ) , Captain Pantoja and the Special Service ( 1973 ) , and post @-@ Boom novels such as Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter ( 1977 ) . Vargas Llosa returned to Lima in 2000 , following the resignation of President Fujimori who won the 1990 Peruvian election , beating Vargas Llosa . The Swedish Academy awarded him the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature . He is the most important living representative of the boom . 
 = = Other figures = = 
 Several other writers have been associated with the Boom . Juan Rulfo , the author of two books , only one of them a novel , was the acknowledged master incorporated a posteriori ; a writer who balances social concern , verbal experimentation and unique style . Augusto Roa Bastos of Paraguay wrote Hijo de hombre , considered by some to be the first novel of the Boom . His highly experimental I , the Supreme has been compared to Joyce 's Ulysses and is " one of the most highly regarded works of fictional history to ever come out of South America . " Manuel Puig , an Argentine , is a central figure , along with Vargas Llosa , of the <unk> @-@ Barral publishing world . The Cuban novelist José <unk> Lima , though not widely known in the English @-@ language publishing world , can also be regarded as a major figure on the basis of his major novel , Paradiso ( 1966 ) . José Donoso is a Chilean writer of both the Boom and the post @-@ Boom . In his book , Historia Personal del " Boom " , Donoso also mentions other writers associated with the movement . Examples are Jorge Amado ( although he began writing novels back in the 1930s ) of Brazil , Salvador Garmendia and Adriano González León of Venezuela , Gastón Suárez and Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz of Bolivia and David Viñas of Argentina , among many others . 
 = = Publishing Latin American Boom novelists = = 
 Publishing played a crucial role in the advent of the Boom . Major publishing houses based in Havana , Mexico City , Buenos Aires , Montevideo , Asunción or Santiago were responsible for publishing most of the Boom novels , and these cities became strong centers of cultural innovation . 
 Santiago in Chile , is presided over by the criticism of Alone , while the older generation of Benjamín Subercaseaux , Eduardo Barrios , Marta Brunet , and Manuel Rojas were quietly superseded by José Donoso . Other writers , such as Enrique Lafourcade , have a large national readership . 
 Cuba is a lively cultural center , first with the group of Orígenes , and then with <unk> de Revolución . 
 In Colombia the rural novels of Eduardo Caballero Calderón were displaced by García Márquez who was followed by Alvarez <unk> . 
 Mexico continues a tradition of strong regional writers and diverse schools of writing , from Yáñez to Sainz , with novelists such as Luis <unk> or Sergio Fernández , the first a popular , the other a refined , writer , both better known in Mexico than abroad . 
 It should be noted , however , that this period saw the publishing of Boom novels in Barcelona , reflecting the new interest of Spanish publishing houses in the Spanish American market . However , as Alejandro Herrero @-@ <unk> notes , the revenue generated by the publishing of these novels gave a boost to the Spanish economy , even as the works were subjected to Franco 's censors . Some of the <unk> Barral @-@ published novels include Mario Vargas Llosa 's The Time of the Hero ( 1963 ) and his Captain Pantoja and the Special Service ( 1973 ) , and Manuel Puig 's Betrayed by Rita Hayworth ( 1971 ) . A crucial figure " in the promotion of Latin American literature in Spain " , ( and elsewhere ) was the " super @-@ agent " Carmen <unk> , whom Vargas Llosa referred to as " The Big Mama of the Latin American novel . " 
 = = Critique = = 
 A common criticism of the Boom is that it is too experimental and has a " tendency toward elitism . " In his study of the Post @-@ Boom Donald L. Shaw writes that Mario Benedetti was very critical of Boom writers like García Márquez who , in Benedetti 's view , " represent a privileged class that had access to universal culture and were thus utterly unrepresentative of average people in Latin America . " In his article on Donoso 's break from the Boom Philip Swanson articulates another critique of the " new novel " ( i.e. Boom novel ) : " Though [ it ] was essentially a reaction against a perceived staleness in conventional realism , many of the formal experiments and innovations of modern fiction have themselves become standardized features of modern writing , leading to another form of traditionalism where one set of stereotypes has been replaced with another . " Also often criticized is the Boom 's emphasis on masculinity , both in the fact that all of the movement 's representatives were male and the treatment of female characters within the novels . The Boom fiction 's emphasis on history and the fantastic has also been the subject of criticism as it was claimed that it is too removed from the realities of Latin American political situations that it criticized . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Boom had an immediate impact as it changed the way Latin American culture was viewed around the world . The commercial success of the Boom writers had the effect of elevating them almost to rock star status in Latin America . Of course , translation played a major role in the success of the Boom writers because it gave them a much larger audience . These authors continued to produce best @-@ sellers for four decades . In addition , the Boom opened the door for new Latin American writers in terms of the international scene . A testimony to the Boom 's global impact is the fact that " up @-@ and @-@ coming international writers " look upon the likes of Fuentes , García Márquez or Vargas Llosa as their mentors . 
 = = = Post @-@ Boom = = = 
 Since the 1980s it has become common to speak of Post @-@ Boom writers , most of whom were born during the 1940s , 1950s , and 1960s , such as Roberto Bolaño , the post Boom Spanish language writer who has made the greatest impact on world literature . It is difficult to clearly situate the Post @-@ Boom as many of its writers were active before the end of the Boom . Indeed , some writers , like Jose Donoso could be said to belong to both movements . His novel The Obscene Bird of Night ( El <unk> <unk> de la noche , 1970 ) is considered , as Philip Swanson notes , " one of the classics of the Boom . " His later work , however , fits more comfortably into the post @-@ Boom . Manuel Puig and Severo <unk> are considered writers whose works embody the transition from the Boom to the Post @-@ Boom . It is important to note that this uneasiness in categorization is perpetuated by the fact that major writers of the Boom ( Fuentes , García Márquez and Vargas Llosa ) continued writing well after the end of the Boom . The post @-@ Boom is distinct from the Boom in various respects , most notably in the presence of female authors such as Isabel Allende , Luisa Valenzuela , Giannina Braschi , Cristina Peri Rossi , and Elena Poniatowska . While Valenzuela and Poniatowska were both active writers during , and in Poniatowska 's case even before , the Boom period , Allende is considered " a product of the Boom . " Shaw also identifies Antonio <unk> , Rosario Ferre and Gustavo Sainz as Post @-@ Boom writers . The Post @-@ Boom writers challenge the perceived elitism of the Boom by using a simpler , more readable style and going back to realism . 
 = Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest = 
 Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest is an adventure platform video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) . It was first released on 20 November 1995 in North America , 21 November 1995 in Japan and on 14 December 1995 in Europe . It is the second instalment of the Donkey Kong Country series and serves as a direct sequel to Donkey Kong Country . It was also re @-@ released for the Game Boy Advance in 2004 . The game was made available for download on the Wii 's Virtual Console in 2007 , and for the Wii U 's Virtual Console in 2015 . On 15 April 2016 it was also re @-@ released on the eShop for the New Nintendo 3DS . It was followed by a sequel , Donkey Kong Country 3 : Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! in 1996 . 
 The story revolves around Diddy Kong and his girlfriend , Dixie Kong , who try to rescue Donkey Kong after he is abducted by King K. Rool . The game is set on " Crocodile Isle " , in which there are eight worlds of varying environments , totalling to 47 levels . The game utilises the same Silicon Graphics technology from the original , which features the use of pre @-@ rendered 3D imagery . Diddy 's Kong Quest received critical acclaim . Praise was directed at its graphics , gameplay and varying colour palette . It is considered by many to be the best game in the series , as well as one of the most graphically and musically ambitious games on the SNES . It was the second best selling game of 1995 and the sixth best @-@ selling game on the SNES . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a 2D side @-@ scrolling platformer in which the player controls either Diddy Kong or his girlfriend Dixie Kong through 47 varying levels over eight different worlds . The main objective of the game is to rescue Donkey Kong from King K. Rool . The game features a wide amount of enemies , which include land @-@ based reptilian Kremlings , rats , bees and vultures . Enemies in underwater sections include pufferfish , eels and sharks . Each world culminates with a boss fight , which is required to be defeated in order to progress through that world . Similar to its predecessor , the player @-@ characters may neutralise most hostiles by jumping on their heads , cartwheeling through them , or throwing a barrel at them . When hit by an enemy , the active character leaves the screen , thus control will immediately switch to the other character . The player can reclaim their partner from marked DK barrels throughout the game . If both characters die , the player will lose a life and will restart from the last checkpoint , which come in the form as a star @-@ painted barrel . If the player loses all of their lives , the game will end . 
 Both Diddy and Dixie have unique attributes ; Diddy is more agile and will run faster , whereas Dixie has a higher jump and can spin her hair in order to float . The player can also pick up the other character and throw them in any direction , in similar vain to barrels . The game also features " Animal Friends " , which returns from its predecessor . Playable animals include <unk> the spider , Glimmer the anglerfish , Rambi the rhino , <unk> the rattlesnake , Clapper the seal , Enguarde the swordfish and Squawks the parrot . These animals have unique abilities which the player can utilise , such as Rambi 's ability to charge at enemies , Squawks ' ability of flight , and <unk> 's ability to jump extreme heights . 
 The game features environmental effects throughout some levels , which includes fog , rain and thunder storms . Some levels feature different mechanics and settings , such as underwater sections , riding a mine cart , grappling onto vines , and " honey " levels which feature sticky surfaces . As with its predecessor , the game features barrels which will propel the player in any direction they are facing . Aside from checkpoint barrels , some give the player temporary invincibility or an " Animal Buddy " . Bonus barrels hidden throughout the game transport the player to a bonus game , which features a challenge such as eliminating all enemies in order to earn a " <unk> " . In addition , there are some barrels that can only be activated by a specific character . Players may earn extra lives by collecting balloons , earning 100 bananas or collecting four letters which spell " KONG " . 
 The game is Dixie Kong 's first appearance in the Donkey Kong franchise . Other characters include Cranky Kong , situated in " Monkey Museum " , who is back due to " popular demand " to divulge secrets of the game world , provide comic relief , as well as offering advice . Wrinkly Kong , the wife of Cranky Kong and grandmother of Donkey Kong , makes her first appearance in this game . She runs an educational facility called " Kong <unk> " , where she gives guidance to the player . Swanky Kong runs a gameshow quiz where the player may complete quizzes and earn extra lives . Funky Kong offers an aeroplane that can connect the player to the next world . Additionally , the player can meet a large <unk> called " <unk> " , at " <unk> 's Kiosk " , who demands a number of <unk> from the characters if they want to pass onto the " Lost World " and complete a secret level . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Diddy , standing on the deck of a pirate ship , finds a note stating that Donkey Kong has been kidnapped by King K. Rool , who had demanded the entire Banana Hoard that he stole in the previous game for a ransom from the Kongs . Diddy , aided by Dixie , subsequently attempts to rescue Donkey Kong from K. Rool . Together , the two travel through Crocodile Isle and are helped on their way by an assortment of animals to defeat K. Rool and rescue Donkey Kong . Diddy and Dixie eventually battle and defeat K. Rool , though he escapes after releasing Donkey Kong . Shortly after , Diddy and Dixie discover a secret area known as the " Lost World " . After going through the Lost World , they once again defeat K. Rool in " <unk> Kore " , in a hidden geyser at the heart of Crocodile Island . Upon being defeated , K. Rool is hurled into the geyser , causing it to clog up and explode . The explosion causes all of Crocodile Island to sink , as the Kongs watch K. Rool escape on a small sailboat . 
 = = Development = = 
 Similar to its predecessor , the game utilises the same Silicon Graphics ( SGI ) and Advanced Computer Modelling ( ACM ) rendering technology . Pre @-@ rendered animations are modelled as 3D objects and then transformed into 2D sprites and background layers . Rare founder Tim Stamper served as director of the game , whereas his colleague Brendan Gunn , who had worked on the original , returned to design the game . Development of Diddy 's Kong Quest began shortly after the release of its predecessor . Rare took significant financial risks in purchasing the expensive SGI equipment used to render the graphics . David Wise , Rare 's composer from 1985 to 1994 , admitted that the workstations Rare purchased were worth £ 80 @,@ 000 each . A new compression technique they developed allowed them to incorporate more detail and animation for each sprite for a given memory footprint than previously achieved on the SNES , which better captured the pre @-@ rendered graphics . 
 Diddy 's Kong Quest 's soundtrack was composed entirely by Wise . In addition , the game 's soundtrack was the focus of an OverClocked ReMix collaboration titled Serious Monkey Business . The final track , " Donkey Kong Rescued " , was remixed by David Wise himself , featuring Grant Kirkhope on electric guitar and Robin Beanland on trumpet . Wise cited Koji Kondo 's music for the Mario and Zelda games , Geoff and Tim Follin 's music for Plok , and synthesizer @-@ based film soundtracks released in the 1980s as influences in creator the music for Donkey Kong Country series . As with its predecessor , the music was produced for the SNES 's SPC700 chip for the game to sound similar to the Korg <unk> synthesizer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received critical acclaim . The SNES version holds an aggregate score of 90 % at GameRankings , whereas the Virtual Console re @-@ release and the Game Boy Advance version both hold a score of 80 % at GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . Diddy 's Kong Quest sold a combined 4 @.@ 37 million copies in the United States and Japan on the SNES ; the total number of copies sold in Japan at 2 @.@ 21 million , and 2 @.@ 16 million in the United States . It was also the second best @-@ selling game of 1995 , after Yoshi 's Island , and the sixth best @-@ selling game on the SNES . 
 The graphics and gameplay were the most praised aspects of the game . Aaron <unk> of AllGame thought that Diddy 's Kong Quest 's graphics were superior than that of its predecessor , stating that the game " looks as cool as it plays " . Reviewing the SNES version , Frank Provo of GameSpot heralded the graphics as " more detailed " although admitting that it appeared stylistically similar to the first game . In a separate review regarding the Game Boy Advance version , Provo praised the graphics as richer and " livelier " than those of the original . In a retrospective review , Mark <unk> of IGN stated that whilst the original " boasted some of the most beautiful graphics " on the SNES at the time , Diddy 's Kong Quest offered a superior experience due to its detail , smooth animation and varying colour palette . 
 Jeff Pearson of Nintendojo stated that Rare improved the graphics for Diddy 's Kong Quest , and that the character animations appeared " much smoother and more cartoon like " in contrast to the computer generated feel in of the original . Pearson also heralded the background designs as reaching " newer heights " of quality . A reviewer of Cubed3 heralded the visuals as " unbelievable " for a 16 @-@ bit game . A reviewer of Jeux Video stated that the game " pushed the boundaries " of the console and that every detail was " devilishly handsome " , and also praised the handling of the gameplay as being " pushed to a climax " . 
 Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer stated that the graphics of the game were similar its predecessor , although he praised them both as " impressively " . However , Whitehead criticised the gameplay was " mediocre " and not " terribly imaginative " . Whitehead also expressed concern over the lack of ambition from the sequel , stating that the gameplay uses the defence of " if it ain 't broke , don 't fix it " . 
 = = = Sequels and re @-@ releases = = = 
 A direct sequel , Donkey Kong Country 3 : Dixie Kong 's Double Trouble ! , was released for the SNES in 1996 to positive reviews . In the game , Dixie Kong and Kiddy Kong must find both Donkey and Diddy Kong , who have been once again abducted by K. Rool . It was further followed by a succession of more related Donkey Kong video games , such as Donkey Kong 64 in 1999 and Donkey Kong Country Returns in 2010 . Diddy 's Kong Quest was later released for the Game Boy Advance on 15 November 2004 and on the Wii 's Virtual Console on 21 May 2007 . It was made available for the Wii U 's Virtual Console in 2015 . 
 = Thomas Metcalfe ( Kentucky ) = 
 Thomas Metcalfe ( March 20 , 1780 – August 18 , 1855 ) , also known as Thomas Metcalf or as " <unk> " , was a U.S. Representative , Senator , and the tenth Governor of Kentucky . He was the first gubernatorial candidate in the state 's history to be chosen by a nominating convention rather than a caucus . He was also the first governor of Kentucky who was not a member of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party . 
 At age 16 , Metcalfe was apprenticed to his older brother and became a stonemason . He helped construct the Green County courthouse , known as the oldest courthouse in Kentucky . Later , political opponents would mock his trade , giving him the nickname " Old Stone Hammer . " His political career began with four terms in the Kentucky House of Representatives . His service was interrupted by the War of 1812 , in which he commanded a company in the defense of Fort Meigs . At the age of thirty @-@ eight , he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives . He held his seat in the House for five terms , then resigned to run for governor . In an election decided by 709 votes , Metcalfe defeated William T. Barry in the gubernatorial election of 1828 . Metcalfe 's predecessor , Joseph Desha was so stunned by his party 's loss that he threatened not to vacate the governor 's mansion . Ultimately , however , he respected the will of the people , and allowed an orderly transition . 
 Metcalfe 's primary concern as governor was the issue of internal improvements . Among his proposed projects were a road connecting Shelbyville to Louisville and a canal on the Falls of the Ohio . When President Andrew Jackson vetoed funds to construct a turnpike connecting Maysville and Lexington , Metcalfe built it anyway , paying for it entirely with state funds . Following his term as governor , he served in the state senate , and completed the unfinished term of John J. Crittenden in the U.S. Senate in 1848 . After this , he retired to " Forest Retreat " , his estate in Nicholas County , where he died of cholera in 1855 . Metcalfe County , Kentucky was named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Metcalfe was born on March 20 , 1780 to John Metcalfe and his third wife , Sarah " Sally " Dent ( Chinn ) Metcalfe in Fauquier County , Virginia . His father served as a captain in the Revolutionary War . In 1784 , the Metcalfe family settled near Russell 's Cave in Fayette County , Kentucky . Some years later , they would move to a farm in Nicholas County . 
 Metcalfe received only a rudimentary education , and at age sixteen , he was apprenticed to his brother and learned the craft of stonemasonry . Three years later , their father died , leaving the brothers to provide for their mother and younger siblings . Metcalfe became one of the most prominent stonemasons and building contractors during the settlement period of Kentucky . A number of his stone houses survive and are listed on the National Register of Historic Places , including his first home in Robertson County . Other structures built by the Metcalfe brothers are the state 's first governor 's mansion and the Green County courthouse , known as the oldest courthouse in Kentucky , and the Presbyterian church at West Union in far southern Ohio . 
 On October 2 , 1801 , Metcalfe enlisted as a lieutenant in the 29th Regiment of the Kentucky Militia . He was promoted to captain on October 12 , 1802 . About 1806 , Metcalfe married Nancy Mason of Fairfax , Virginia . The couple had four children . Between 1817 and 1820 , Metcalfe built a house for his family in Nicholas County . The estate was dubbed " Forest Retreat " by statesman Henry Clay who , on his first visit to the newly constructed house , told Metcalfe , " Tom , you have here a veritable Forest Retreat . " 
 = = Political career = = 
 Metcalfe 's political career began in 1812 when he was elected to represent Nicholas County in the Kentucky House of Representatives . His service was interrupted by the War of 1812 . In 1813 , he raised a company of volunteers and commanded them at the Battle of Fort Meigs . While he was away at war , the voters of his district re @-@ elected him to the Kentucky House ; only thirteen votes were cast against him . He continued to serve in the Kentucky House until 1816 . 
 = = = In the House of Representatives = = = 
 At the age of thirty @-@ eight , Metcalfe was elected to the Sixteenth Congress , defeating Joshua Desha . During his tenure in the House , which lasted five terms , he was the chairman of the Committee on Indian Affairs and the Committee on Militia . He opposed the Second Bank of the United States , but favored extension of credit to purchasers of public land . In 1821 , he proposed granting preemption rights to squatters . He also opposed restrictions on slavery in Missouri and the Louisiana Purchase . 
 In James Monroe 's annual address to the legislature in December 1822 , he called on Congress to report on how to best deal with the Seminoles that inhabited the recently acquired territory of Florida . As chair of the Committee on Indian Affairs , Metcalfe delivered the report on February 21 , 1823 . His committee found that , under the terms of the Adams @-@ Onis Treaty that transferred control of Florida to the United States from Spain , the Seminoles were to be accorded the same privileges as U.S. citizens . Accordingly , the committee recommended that each Seminole family be given a land grant . They hoped that this would help break the tribal loyalties of the Seminoles and expedite their amalgamation into white society . The committee 's report was largely ignored . 
 In 1826 , Metcalfe served on a House committee that investigated allegations that Vice @-@ President John C. Calhoun had improperly benefited from a contract he awarded while serving as Secretary of War in 1822 . While Calhoun was cleared of any wrongdoing , his friend , South Carolina Representative George McDuffie , began an exchange of correspondence with Metcalfe regarding the proceedings . The correspondence became heated , and McDuffie challenged Metcalfe to a duel . As the recipient of the challenge , Metcalfe had the right to choose the terms of the engagement . He chose rifles as the weapon at a distance of 90 feet . McDuffie insisted that wounds from a previous duel had left him incapable of handling a rifle , and proposed pistols as an alternative . Metcalfe replied that he had never handled a pistol in his life . Unable to come to an agreement on the conditions of the duel , both sides eventually dropped the matter entirely . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Metcalfe resigned his seat in the House on June 1 , 1828 in order to run for the governorship of Kentucky . He was chosen as the candidate of the National Republican Party at their nominating convention and was the first gubernatorial candidate in the state to be chosen using this method . He defeated William T. Barry by a margin of 709 votes , but his running mate , Joseph R. Underwood , was badly defeated by the Democratic @-@ Republican nominee , John Breathitt . Metcalfe 's election in 1828 marked the first time the governorship had been won by a candidate who was not a Democratic @-@ Republican . However , only one Democratic @-@ Republican would hold the office between Metcalfe 's term and the election of Lazarus W. Powell in 1851 . 
 Joseph Desha , the outgoing governor , refused to believe that his party had lost the election . He disliked Metcalfe not only due to his party affiliation , but also because of his occupation as a stonemason , which he believed was too low a calling for a governor . Metcalfe 's opponents made slights on the quality of his stone work and his views on the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . When told about these charges , Metcalfe remarked " They may say what they like about my views , but the first man that dares to attack my character , I will cleave his skull with my stone hammer , as I would cleave a rock . " As word of this remark spread , Metcalfe was given the nickname " Old Stone Hammer . " Despite his threats to remain in the governor 's mansion until the legislature convened , Desha respected the will of the people , and left the residence on September 2 , 1828 . 
 Metcalfe opposed the spoils system and the doctrine of nullification . He favored protective tariffs and federal aid for internal improvements . He oversaw the establishment of a road connecting Shelbyville to Louisville . When President Andrew Jackson vetoed federal aid for a turnpike connecting Maysville and Lexington , Metcalfe continued constructing it with state funds . ( The road is now a portion of U.S. Route 68 . ) Metcalfe 's term also saw the commissioning of the state 's first railroad and the beginning of plans for a canal at the Falls of the Ohio . At the governor 's recommendation , the state legislature approved additional aid for education , and the creation of district schools . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his term as governor , Metcalfe represented Nicholas and Bracken Counties in the Kentucky Senate from 1834 to 1838 . In 1836 , he served as a Whig presidential elector , and he presided over the Kentucky Whig Convention in Harrodsburg on August 26 , 1839 . From 1840 to 1849 , he served as president of the state board of internal improvements . Finally , he was appointed and subsequently elected as a Whig to the United States Senate to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of John J. Crittenden . He served from June 23 , 1848 , to March 3 , 1849 . During his short tenure , he denounced secession , and asserted that Kentucky would remain part of the Union . 
 After his term in the Senate Metcalfe engaged in agricultural pursuits near Carlisle , Kentucky . He died of cholera in his home on August 18 , 1855 . He was interred in the family burial ground at Forest Retreat . Metcalfe County , Kentucky was formed in 1860 and named in his honor . " Forest Retreat " was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 2 , 1973 . 
 = Leonardo DiCaprio = 
 Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio ( / <unk> / ; born November 11 , 1974 ) is an American actor and a film producer . 
 In the early 1990s , DiCaprio began his career by appearing in television commercials , after which he had recurring roles in various television series such as the soap opera , Santa Barbara , and the sitcom , Growing Pains . In 1993 , he began his film career by starring as Josh in Critters 3 ( 1991 ) . He starred in the film adaptation of the memoir , This Boy 's Life ( 1993 ) , and was praised for his supporting role in What 's Eating Gilbert Grape ( 1993 ) . He gained public recognition with leading roles in The Basketball Diaries ( 1995 ) , and the romantic drama Romeo + Juliet ( 1996 ) , before achieving international fame with James Cameron 's epic romance , Titanic ( 1997 ) , which became the highest @-@ grossing film to that point . 
 Since 2000 , DiCaprio has received critical acclaim for his work in a wide range of film genres . DiCaprio 's subsequent films include , The Man in the Iron Mask ( 1998 ) , the biographical crime drama Catch Me If You Can ( 2002 ) , and the epic historical drama Gangs of New York ( 2002 ) , which marked his first of many collaborations with director , Martin Scorsese . He was acclaimed for his performances in the political war thriller Blood Diamond ( 2006 ) , the neo @-@ noir crime drama The Departed ( 2006 ) , the espionage thriller Body of Lies ( 2008 ) , the drama Revolutionary Road ( 2008 ) , the psychological thriller Shutter Island ( 2010 ) , the science fiction thriller Inception ( 2010 ) , the biographical film J. Edgar ( 2011 ) , the western Django Unchained ( 2012 ) , and the period drama The Great Gatsby ( 2013 ) . 
 DiCaprio 's portrayals of Howard Hughes in The Aviator ( 2004 ) and Hugh Glass in The Revenant ( 2015 ) won him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama , and his role as Jordan Belfort in The Wolf of Wall Street ( 2013 ) won him the award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . He won his first BAFTA award for Best Actor for The Revenant . He has been nominated for six Academy Awards — five for acting and one for producing — and in 2016 , he won the Academy Award for Best Actor for The Revenant . 
 DiCaprio is the founder of his own production company , Appian Way Productions . 
 = = Early life = = 
 DiCaprio was born in Hollywood , California , the only child of Irmelin ( née Indenbirken ) , a German @-@ born legal secretary , and George DiCaprio , an underground comics artist and producer and distributor of comic books . DiCaprio 's father is of half Italian ( from the Naples area ) and half German ( from Bavaria ) descent . DiCaprio 's maternal grandfather , Wilhelm Indenbirken , was German . His maternal grandmother , Helene Indenbirken ( 1915 – 2008 ) , a German citizen , was born as Yelena <unk> in Russia . In an interview in Russia , DiCaprio referred to himself as " half Russian " and said that two of his late grandparents were Russians . 
 DiCaprio 's parents met while attending college and subsequently moved to Los Angeles . He was named Leonardo because his pregnant mother was looking at a Leonardo da Vinci painting in a museum in Italy when DiCaprio first kicked . His parents separated when he was a year old , and he lived mostly with his mother . The two lived in several Los Angeles neighborhoods , such as Echo Park , and at 1874 <unk> Avenue in the Los Feliz district ( which was later converted into a local public library ) , while his mother worked several jobs to support them . He attended Seeds Elementary School ( now UCLA Lab School ) and John Marshall High School a few blocks away , after attending the Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies for four years . However , he dropped out of high school following his third year , eventually earning his general equivalency diploma ( GED ) . DiCaprio spent part of his childhood in Germany with his maternal grandparents , Wilhelm and Helene . He speaks a little German and Italian . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 DiCaprio 's career began with his appearance in several commercials and educational films . After being removed from the set of children 's television series Romper Room for being disruptive at the age of five , he followed his older stepbrother Adam Farrar into television commercials , landing an ad for Matchbox cars at 14 . In 1990 , he got his break on television when he was cast in the short @-@ lived series based on the movie Parenthood . After Parenthood , DiCaprio had bit parts on several shows , including The New Lassie and Roseanne , as well as a brief stint on the soap opera Santa Barbara , playing the young Mason <unk> . His involvement in Parenthood and the daily soap earned him a nomination for the Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor each . 
 = = = 1991 – 95 : Breaking into film = = = 
 DiCaprio 's debut film role was in the comedic sci @-@ fi horror film Critters 3 , in which he played the stepson of an evil landlord , a role that DiCaprio described as " your average , no @-@ depth , standard kid with blond hair . " Released in 1991 , the movie went direct @-@ to @-@ video . Soon after , he became a recurring cast member on the ABC sitcom Growing Pains , playing Luke Brower , a homeless boy who is taken in by the Seaver family . DiCaprio made his big screen breakthrough in 1992 , when he was handpicked by Robert De Niro out of 400 young actors to play the lead role in This Boy 's Life . 
 Later in 1993 , DiCaprio co @-@ starred as the mentally handicapped brother of Johnny Depp 's character in What 's Eating Gilbert Grape , a comic @-@ tragic odyssey of a dysfunctional Iowa family . Director Lasse Hallström admitted he was initially looking for a less good @-@ looking actor but finally settled on DiCaprio as he had emerged as " the most observant actor " among all auditionees . Budgeted at US $ 11 million , the film became a critical success , resulting in various accolades for DiCaprio , who was awarded the National Board of Review Award and nominated for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe for his portrayal . New York Times critic Janet Maslin praised DiCaprio 's performance , writing " the film 's real show @-@ stopping turn comes from Mr. DiCaprio , who makes Arnie 's many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch . The performance has a sharp , desperate intensity from beginning to end . " 
 DiCaprio 's first effort of 1995 was Sam Raimi 's The Quick and the Dead , a western film . Sony Pictures was dubious over DiCaprio 's casting , and as a result , co @-@ star Sharon Stone decided to pay the actor 's salary herself . The film was released to a dismal box office performance , barely grossing US $ 18 @.@ 5 million in the US , and received mixed reviews from critics . DiCaprio next starred in Total Eclipse , a fictionalized account of the homosexual relationship between Arthur Rimbaud and Paul Verlaine . He replaced River Phoenix , who died during pre @-@ production on the project . A minor art @-@ house success , the film grossed US $ 0 @.@ 34 million throughout its domestic theatrical run . 
 DiCaprio appeared in the mostly improvised short film called Don 's Plum , as a favor to aspiring director R. D. Robb . When Robb decided to expand the black @-@ and @-@ white film to feature length , however , DiCaprio and costar Tobey Maguire had its release blocked by court order , arguing that they never intended to make it a theatrical release , as it would have commercial value thanks to their stardom . The film eventually premiered at the 2001 Berlin International Film Festival , where it was well received by critics . DiCaprio 's last film of the year 1995 was The Basketball Diaries , a biopic about Jim Carroll . 
 = = = 1996 – 2001 : Mainstream success = = = 
 In 1996 , DiCaprio appeared opposite Claire Danes in Baz Luhrmann 's film Romeo + Juliet , an abridged modernization of William Shakespeare 's romantic tragedy of the same name , which retained the original Shakespearean dialogue . The project achieved a worldwide box office take of $ 147 million . 
 Later that year , he starred in Jerry <unk> ' family drama Marvin 's Room , reuniting with Robert De Niro . Based on Scott McPherson 's screenplay adaptation of his own 1991 stage play of the same name , the film revolves around two sisters , played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton , who are reunited through tragedy after 17 years of estrangement . DiCaprio portrayed Hank , Streep 's character 's troubled son , who has been committed to a mental asylum for setting fire to his mother 's house . 
 In 1997 , DiCaprio starred in James Cameron 's Titanic ( 1997 ) as twenty @-@ year @-@ old Jack Dawson , a penniless Wisconsin man who wins two tickets for the third @-@ class on the ill @-@ fated RMS Titanic . DiCaprio initially refused to portray the character but was eventually encouraged to pursue the role by Cameron , who strongly believed in his acting ability . Against expectations , the film went on to become the highest @-@ grossing film to date ( it was surpassed in 2010 by Cameron 's film Avatar ) , grossing more than $ 1 @.@ 843 billion in box @-@ office receipts worldwide , and transformed DiCaprio into a commercial movie superstar , resulting in fan worship among teenage girls and young women in general that became known as " Leo @-@ Mania " . In May 1998 , for example , his face appeared on the covers of at least four teen magazines , and three books about DiCaprio were among the top six paperbacks on The New York Times Best Seller List . More than 200 fans contacted the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to protest his not being nominated for the 70th Academy Awards . He was nominated for other high @-@ profile awards , including a second Golden Globe nomination . Upon the success of Titanic , DiCaprio stated in 2000 : " I have no connection with me during that whole Titanic phenomenon and what my face became around the world [ ... ] I 'll never reach that state of popularity again , and I don 't expect to . It 's not something I 'm going to try to achieve either . " 
 The following year , DiCaprio made a self @-@ mocking cameo appearance in Woody Allen 's caustic satire of the fame industry , Celebrity ( 1998 ) . That year , he also starred in the dual roles of the villainous King Louis XIV and his secret , sympathetic twin brother Philippe in Randall Wallace 's The Man in the Iron Mask , based on the same @-@ titled 1939 film . Despite receiving a rather mixed to negative response , the film became a box office success , grossing US $ 180 million internationally . Though DiCaprio 's performance was generally well @-@ received , with Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman writing that " the shockingly androgynous DiCaprio looks barely old enough to be playing anyone with hormones , but he 's a fluid and instinctive actor , with the face of a mischievous angel , " he was awarded a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple for both incarnations the following year . 
 DiCaprio 's next project was the drama film The Beach ( 2000 ) , an adaption of Alex Garland 's 1996 novel of the same name . He played an American backpacking tourist looking for the perfect way of life in a secret island commune in the Gulf of Thailand . Budgeted at $ <unk> million , the film became a financial success , grossing $ <unk> million worldwide , but as with DiCaprio 's previous project , the film was largely panned by critics . Todd McCarthy of Variety noted that " Richard [ DiCaprio 's role ] is too much the American Everyman and not enough of a well @-@ defined individual to entirely capture one 's interest and imagination , and DiCaprio , while perfectly watchable , does not endow him with the quirks or distinguishing marks to make this man from nowhere a dimensional character . " The next year , he was nominated for another Razzie Award for his work on the film . 
 = = = 2002 – 07 = = = 
 DiCaprio 's first film of 2002 was the biographical crime drama film Catch Me If You Can , based on the life of Frank Abagnale Jr . , who , before his 19th birthday , used his charm , confidence , and several different personas , to make millions in the 1960s writing bad checks . Directed by Steven Spielberg , the film was shot in 147 different locations in only 52 days , making it " the most adventurous , super @-@ charged movie @-@ making " DiCaprio had experienced yet . Catch Me If You Can received favorable reviews and proved to be an international success , becoming DiCaprio 's highest @-@ grossing film since Titanic with a total of US $ 351 @.@ 1 million worldwide . Roger Ebert praised his performance , and noted that while " DiCaprio , who in recent films [ ... ] has played dark and troubled characters , is breezy and charming here , playing a boy who discovers what he is good at , and does it . " The following year , DiCaprio received his third Golden Globe nomination for his work in the film . 
 Also in 2002 , DiCaprio appeared in Martin Scorsese 's Gangs of New York , a historical film set in the mid @-@ 19th century in the Five Points district of New York City . Director Scorsese initially struggled selling his idea of realizing the film until DiCaprio became interested in playing protagonist Amsterdam <unk> , a young leader of the Irish faction , and thus , Miramax Films got involved with financing the project . Nonetheless production on the film was plagued by blown @-@ out budgets and producer @-@ director squabbles , resulting in a marathon eight @-@ month shoot and , at US $ 103 million , the most expensive film Scorsese had ever made . Upon its release , Gangs of New York became a financial and critical success . DiCaprio 's acting was well @-@ received but was overshadowed by Daniel Day @-@ Lewis ' performance among most critics . 
 Forging a collaboration with Scorsese , the two paired again for a biopic of the eccentric and obsessive American film director and aviation pioneer Howard Hughes in The Aviator ( 2004 ) . <unk> on Hughes ' life from the late 1920s to 1947 , DiCaprio initially developed the project with Michael Mann , who decided against directing it after back @-@ to @-@ back film biographies in Ali and The Insider . The actor eventually pitched John Logan 's script to Scorsese , who quickly signed on to direct . The Aviator became a critical and financial success . DiCaprio received rave reviews for his performance and won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor , also receiving another Academy Award nomination . 
 In 2005 , DiCaprio was made a commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Minister of Culture for his contributions to the arts . The following year , the actor starred in both Blood Diamond and The Departed . In Edward Zwick 's war film Blood Diamond , he starred as a diamond smuggler from Rhodesia who is involved in the Sierra Leone Civil War . The film itself received generally favorable reviews , and DiCaprio was praised for the authenticity of his South African Afrikaner accent , known as a difficult accent to imitate . In Scorsese 's The Departed he played the role of Billy Costigan , a state trooper working undercover in an Irish Mob in Boston . Highly anticipated , the film was released to overwhelmingly positive reviews and became one of the highest @-@ rated wide release films of 2006 . Budgeted at US $ 90 million , it also emerged as DiCaprio and Scorsese 's highest @-@ grossing collaboration to date , easily beating The Aviator ´ s previous record of US $ 213 @.@ 7 million . DiCaprio 's performance in The Departed was applauded by critics and earned him a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor . The same year , both the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild nominated DiCaprio twice in the Best Actor category for both of his 2006 features , and in addition , DiCaprio earned his third Academy Award nomination for Blood Diamond . 
 = = = 2008 – 12 = = = 
 In 2008 , DiCaprio starred in Body of Lies , a spy film based on the novel of the same name by David Ignatius , set in context of the Middle East and the War on Terror , telling the story of three men battling a terrorist organization , and each other . Directed by Ridley Scott , DiCaprio dyed his hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role , which he chose to pursue because he considered it a throwback to political films of the 1970s such as The Parallax View ( 1974 ) and Three Days of the Condor ( 1975 ) . The film received mixed reviews from critics , and at a budget of US $ 67 @.@ 5 million , became a moderate box office success , grossing US $ 115 million worldwide . 
 The same year , DiCaprio reunited with Kate Winslet to film the drama Revolutionary Road ( 2008 ) , directed by Winslet 's then @-@ husband Sam Mendes . As both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to Titanic , it was Winslet who suggested that both should work with her on a film adaptation of the 1961 novel of the same name by Richard Yates after reading the script by Justin <unk> , knowing that plot had little in common with the 1997 blockbuster . Once DiCaprio agreed to do the film , it went almost immediately into production . He noted that he saw his character as " unheroic " and " slightly cowardly " and that he was " willing to be just a product of his environment . " Portraying a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s , DiCaprio and Winslet watched period videos promoting life in the suburbs to prepare themselves for Revolutionary Road , which eventually earned them favorable reviews . For his portrayal DiCaprio garnered his seventh Golden Globes nomination . 
 DiCaprio continued his collaborative streak with Scorsese in the 2010 psychological thriller film Shutter Island ( 2010 ) , based on the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane . He played U.S. Marshal Edward " Teddy " Daniels , who is investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island and comes to question his own sanity . The film grossed $ 294 million . 
 Also in 2010 , DiCaprio starred in director Christopher Nolan 's science @-@ fiction film Inception . Inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation , DiCaprio portrays the character of Dom Cobb , an " extractor " who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible . Cobb is promised a chance to regain his old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate target 's mind . DiCaprio was " intrigued by this concept — this dream @-@ heist notion and how this character 's gonna unlock his dreamworld and ultimately affect his real life . " Released to critical acclaim , the film grossed over $ 825 million worldwide . To star in this film , DiCaprio agreed to a pay cut from his $ 20 million fee , in favor of splitting first @-@ dollar gross points , which means he receives money coming directly off the top of ticket sales . This risk paid off , with DiCaprio earning $ 50 million from the film to become his highest payday yet . In July 2010 , it was announced that DiCaprio had pulled out of a Viking movie to be directed by Mel Gibson amid controversy over Gibson 's rage @-@ fueled rant tapes and domestic violence probe . 
 In 2011 , DiCaprio starred alongside Armie Hammer and Naomi Watts in Clint Eastwood 's J. Edgar , a biopic about J. Edgar Hoover . Written by Dustin Lance Black , the film focuses on the career of the FBI director from the Palmer Raids onwards , including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual . Reviews towards the film were mostly mixed , with many critics commending DiCaprio 's performance but feeling that , overall , the film lacked coherence . Roger Ebert praised DiCaprio 's performance as a " fully @-@ realized , subtle and persuasive performance , hinting at more than Hoover ever revealed , perhaps even to himself . " 
 In 2012 , DiCaprio starred as villainous Calvin Candie in Quentin Tarantino 's spaghetti western , Django Unchained . While filming Django Unchained , DiCaprio accidentally cut his hand on glass , but continued filming despite the injury , and Tarantino elected to use the take in the final movie . The film received positive reviews from critics and earned DiCaprio his ninth nomination from the Golden Globes . Django Unchained grossed $ 424 million worldwide . 
 = = = 2013 – present = = = 
 DiCaprio 's next film was The Great Gatsby , again with Baz Luhrmann ( who directed him in Romeo + Juliet in 1996 ) , an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald 's 1925 novel , also starring Carey Mulligan and Tobey Maguire ; the film was released on May 10 , 2013 . It received mixed reviews from critics , however DiCaprio 's portrayal as Jay Gatsby was praised . Critic Rafer Guzman of Newsday praised DiCaprio by stating , " As for Leonardo DiCaprio , he is now the Gatsby to beat . Despite a borderline comedic entrance -- haloed by fireworks and accompanied by Gershwin 's " Rhapsody in Blue " — DiCaprio nails this maddeningly enigmatic character . He 's as tough as Alan Ladd in ' 49 , as suave as Redford in ' 74 , but also vulnerable , touching , funny , a faker , a human . You hear it all in Gatsby 's favorite phrase , " old sport , " a verbal tic that stumped other actors . It 's a tremendous , hard @-@ won performance . " Matt Zoller Seitz of Roger <unk> described his performance as Gatsby as " The movie 's greatest and simplest special effect , " and states " This is an iconic performance — maybe his career best . " The film grossed $ 348 million worldwide and became Luhrmann 's highest @-@ grossing film . 
 DiCaprio reunited with Scorsese for the fifth time in The Wolf of Wall Street , a film based on the life of stockbroker Jordan Belfort , who was arrested in the late 1990s for securities fraud and money laundering . Filming began on August 8 , 2012 , in New York , and the film was released on December 25 , 2013 . The role earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and his fourth Academy Award nomination for acting . In January 2013 , DiCaprio said he was going to take a long break from acting and would " fly around the world doing good for the environment . " 
 In 2015 , DiCaprio played fur trapper Hugh Glass in the survival drama The Revenant , directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu . The film was well received by critics and DiCaprio 's performance garnered universal acclaim that earned him numerous awards , including his first win at the Academy Awards in the Best Actor category , his eleventh nomination and third win at Golden Globes in the Best Actor Drama category , and his first BAFTA award for Best Actor . On August 10 , 2015 , it was announced that Martin Scorsese will direct an adaptation of Erik Larson 's The Devil in the White City , which will star DiCaprio with a screenplay to be written by Billy Ray . 
 In October 2015 , Appian Way acquired the movie rights for a book about the Volkswagen emissions scandal . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 DiCaprio 's romantic relationships have been widely covered in the media . Among those he has dated were actress Bijou Phillips in the late 90s , model Kristen Zang , and British model and socialite Emma Miller . In 2000 , he met Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen who he dated until 2005 . He was romantically involved with Israeli model Bar Refaeli from 2005 through 2011 , during which time he met with Israeli president Shimon Peres and visited Refaeli 's hometown of Hod <unk> . 
 DiCaprio dated actress Blake Lively in 2011 , then model Erin Heatherton for most of 2012 . In 2013 he dated German model Toni <unk> until late 2014 . He dated model Kelly Rohrbach in 2015 . 
 DiCaprio owns a home in Los Angeles , California and an apartment in Battery Park City , New York . In 2009 , he bought an island off mainland Belize , on which he is planning to create an eco @-@ friendly resort . In 2014 , he purchased the original Dinah Shore residence designed by mid @-@ century modern architect Donald Wexler in Palm Springs , California . 
 In 2005 , DiCaprio 's face was severely injured when model Aretha Wilson hit him over the head with a broken bottle at a Hollywood party . After pleading guilty in 2010 , Wilson was sentenced to prison for two years . 
 During the 2004 presidential election , DiCaprio campaigned and donated to John Kerry 's presidential bid . The FEC showed that DiCaprio gave $ 2 @,@ 300 to Barack Obama 's presidential campaign in the 2008 election , the maximum contribution an individual could give in that election cycle , and $ 5 @,@ 000 to Obama 's 2012 campaign . 
 = = = Environmental activism = = = 
 Following the success of Titanic in 1997 along with earlier films , 24 @-@ year @-@ old DiCaprio established the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation in 1998 , a non @-@ profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness . Although concerned with all areas of the environment , it focuses on global warming , preserving Earth 's biodiversity and supporting renewable energy . It has worked on projects in over 40 countries and has produced two short web documentaries , Water Planet and Global Warning . 
 Because of his active involvement in those causes , he has received praise from environmental groups . Among the accolades received were the Martin Litton Environment Award , in 2001 , from Environment Now , and the Environmental Leadership Award in 2003 from Global Green USA . 
 DiCaprio chaired the national Earth Day celebration in 2000 , where he interviewed President Clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment . In 2007 he had a major role in The 11th Hour , a documentary about people 's relationship to nature and global warming . He co @-@ produced , co @-@ wrote and narrated the film . From a benefit " 11th Hour " fine art auction he organized in 2013 , he raised nearly $ 40 million to toward his foundation . He told attendees , " Bid as if the fate of the planet depended on us . " It became the world 's highest @-@ grossing environmental charity event ever held . DiCaprio states that global warming is the world 's " number @-@ one environmental challenge " . In July 2016 his foundation awarded $ 15 @.@ 6 million to help protect wildlife and the rights of native Americans , along with combating climate change . 
 He has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and has sat on the board of the World Wildlife Fund , Global Green USA , International Fund for Animal Welfare and the Natural Resources Defense Council . He traveled to Indonesia in early 2016 where he criticized the government 's palm oil industry 's slash @-@ and @-@ burn forest clearing methods . 
 He drives environment @-@ friendly vehicles , including an electric Tesla Roadster , a Fisker Karma plug @-@ in hybrid , and a Toyota Prius . His home is powered by solar panels . At the 2007 Oscar ceremony , DiCaprio and former Vice President Al Gore appeared to announce that the Academy Awards had incorporated environmentally intelligent practices in its production . He presented at the 2007 American leg of Live Earth , and in 2010 his environmental work earned DiCaprio a nomination for the VH1 Do Something Award , honoring people who do good . In 2014 he was appointed as a United Nations representative on climate change , and later that year he made an opening statement to members of the UN Climate Summit . He again spoke at the UN in April 2016 prior to the signing of Paris Climate Change Agreement . 
 In 2015 , DiCaprio executive produced a new Netflix @-@ exclusive cut of <unk> . The film explored the impact of animal agriculture on the environment and the positions of several environmental organizations on the issue . 
 At the 2016 Oscar ceremony , DiCaprio won the award for Best Actor . He used his acceptance speech to express his appreciation and worry for the environment when he said : 
 Climate change is real , it is happening right now . It is the most urgent threat facing our entire species , and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating . We need to support leaders around the world who do not speak for the big polluters , but who speak for all of humanity , for the indigenous people of the world , for the billions and billions of underprivileged people out there who would be most affected by this . For our children ’ s children , and for those people out there whose voices have been drowned out by the politics of greed . 
 DiCaprio 's use of private jets and <unk> has attracted criticism by some sections of the media . In 2016 , during a vacation in Cannes , France , he made a one @-@ day visit to New York City by private jet to collect an environmental award . Robert Rapier , an environmental analyst , said DiCaprio 's lifestyle “ diminishes his moral authority to lecture others on reducing their own carbon emissions . He demonstrates exactly why our consumption of fossil fuels continues to grow . “ It ’ s because everyone loves the combination of cost and convenience they offer . Alternatives usually require sacrifice of one form or another . ” 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 In 1998 , DiCaprio and his mother donated $ 35 @,@ 000 for a " Leonardo DiCaprio Computer Center " at the Los Feliz branch of the Los Angeles Public Library , the site of his childhood home . It was rebuilt after the 1994 Northridge earthquake and opened in early 1999 . During the filming of Blood Diamond , DiCaprio worked with 24 orphaned children from the SOS Children 's Village in Maputo , Mozambique , and was said to be extremely touched by his interactions with the children . In 2010 , he donated $ 1 million to relief efforts in Haiti after the earthquake . 
 In November 2010 , DiCaprio donated $ 1 million to the Wildlife Conservation Society at Russia 's tiger summit . DiCaprio 's persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to describe him as a " <unk> " or " real man " . In 2011 , DiCaprio joined the Animal Legal Defense Fund 's campaign to free Tony , a tiger who has spent the last decade at the Tiger Truck Stop in Grosse Tete , Louisiana . In April 2013 , DiCaprio donated $ 61 @,@ 000 to GLAAD , an organization which promotes the image of LGBT people in the media . 
 In early 2016 , at a meeting with Pope Francis , he gave a charity donation and spoke about environmental issues . A few days later , possibly influenced by his meeting with DiCaprio , the Pope said he would act in a planned faith @-@ based charity film , Beyond the Sun . It would be his first acting experience , and would also be the first time in history that a Pope appeared in a feature film . Profits from the film would be given to charities in Argentina . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 Leonardo DiCaprio filmography 
 List of awards and nominations received by Leonardo DiCaprio 
 = Duncan Robinson ( basketball ) = 
 Duncan <unk> Robinson ( born April 22 , 1994 ) is an American college basketball player for the Michigan Wolverines who has completed his redshirt sophomore season for the 2015 – 16 team . He transferred to Michigan after leading the NCAA Division III Williams <unk> to the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division III Basketball Tournament championship game . He was the 2014 Division III Rookie of the Year and a Division III All @-@ American . 
 He had played high school basketball for The Governor 's Academy before a postgraduate season at the Phillips Exeter Academy where he led the team to a New England Preparatory School Athletic Council ( NEPSAC ) Class A championship in 2013 . He earned the 2013 NEPSAC Class A tournament MVP . He was a NEPSAC All @-@ League First Team selection in both 2012 ( Class B ) and 2013 ( Class A ) . 
 Robinson made a splash at Michigan , leading the Big Ten Conference in three point shooting percentage from the beginning of conference play in December until early February . In both of Michigan 's wins in the 2016 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament , Robinson made three point shots to tie the score with less than a minute remaining . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born April 22 , 1994 in York , Maine , Robinson is the son of the Elisabeth and Jeffrey Robinson and the youngest of their three children ( after sister Marta and brother Eli ) . Jeffrey , who is 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) , had played one season for the Maine Black Bears men 's basketball team . Robinson grew up on the remote New Hampshire island of New Castle where his Maude H. Trefethen Elementary School 6th grade graduating class was composed of four students and he had to leave the island to continue his education . He attended Rye Junior High School and elected to attend The Governor 's Academy rather than Portsmouth High School , which was the public high school for students in New Castle . Without Robinson , Portsmouth still reached four consecutive New Hampshire Interscholastic Athletic Association final fours and won the 2012 state championship . 
 Robinson began his freshman season as a 5 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 70 m ) point guard for The Governor 's Academy in 2008 , but did not play much until he became " serviceable " as a junior . In his early years , he shot for hours , attempting to make 1600 shots per week . Robinson started working with trainer Noah LaRoche during his junior season . After Christmas of his junior year , he began to see a future in basketball although he was still coming off the bench . After averaging 18 @.@ 5 points as a senior at The Governor 's Academy , he was selected to the 2012 All @-@ NEPSAC Class B first team and the 2012 All @-@ Independent School League ( ISL ) team . He graduated with a 3 @.@ 55 <unk> Following his senior season , he still had visions of an NCAA Division I scholarship offer and opted for the spring and summer Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) circuit and a postgraduate year . Robinson played for Michael Crotty Jr . ' s Middlesex Magic AAU team , who helped win the <unk> National HOF Championship . Crotty had been a two @-@ time All @-@ American at Williams College , having served as point guard for the 2003 NCAA Division III Tournament champions ( and 2004 Tournament runners up ) . Following his senior season , Robinson measured 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) and 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) . By the end of the summer , he had become 6 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) and 195 pounds ( 88 @.@ 5 kg ) . 
 During the last weekend of September 2012 while on a campus visit , Division III Williams made Robinson an offer that he accepted immediately . At the time , Williams was ranked the number one liberal arts college in the country according to U.S. News & World Report , and the school was a Division III basketball powerhouse . They had gone 93 – 22 over the prior four seasons under head coach Mike Maker . In 2013 , Robinson led Phillips Exeter Academy to its first NEPSAC Class A championship victory on March 10 against Choate Rosemary Hall with a 24 @-@ point , 10 @-@ rebound MVP performance . Exeter finished the season at 28 – 1 . Nonetheless , his only scholarship offer was from NCAA Division II Merrimack College . He also had interest from Division I Brown Bears men 's basketball and Columbia Lions men 's basketball as well as Division III Bates and Amherst . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Williams College = = = 
 Prior to the November 15 , 2013 season opener against Southern Vermont College , Williams was the number one ranked Division III basketball program in the nation according to the preseason The Sporting News poll , but Williams lost in the shadow of a home court scheduling conflict despite 5 – 6 shooting by Robinson . Robinson became the only freshman starter in Maker 's six @-@ year tenure as head coach at Williams . In his 2013 – 14 freshman season at Williams , Robinson was twice named New England Small College Athletic Conference ( NESCAC ) Player of the Week during the regular season . Williams reached the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division III Basketball Tournament championship game , but fell 75 – 73 to University of Wisconsin – Whitewater as Robinson scored 17 points . After Williams took a one @-@ point lead with 4 @.@ 9 seconds left , Wisconsin pushed the ball upcourt without calling time @-@ out to score the winning basket in what Chris Strauss of USA Today described as the best NCAA basketball tournament game of the weekend . Robinson had posted 30 points in the tournament semifinal against bitter rival Amherst College who had defeated Williams in the season 's three previous meetings . Williams finished the season with a 28 – 5 record . That season , he led Williams in minutes played ( a school record 1 @,@ 110 ) , points scored ( 548 ) , three @-@ point shots made ( 81 – 179 ) , three + -point % ( 45 @.@ 3 ) , free throw percentage ( 87 @.@ 8 % ) , blocks ( 36 ) and steals ( 36 ) . He averaged 17 @.@ 1 points , 6 @.@ 5 rebounds and 34 @.@ 7 minutes per game . Following the season , he was the NESCAC Rookie of the Year and a Second Team All @-@ NESCAC selection . Robinson became Williams ' first freshman to be named All @-@ American ( 4th team , <unk> ) , first <unk> National Rookie of the Year , first freshman NCAA All @-@ Tournament Team selection and first freshman 500 @-@ point scorer . His season was described as " one of the best freshman seasons in Division III men 's basketball history " by Jeremy Leveille of <unk> in a story for <unk> 
 Following the 2013 – 14 season , Maker left Williams to become the head coach for Marist Red Foxes men 's basketball . Robinson was immediately contacted by schools from the ACC , Big 12 , Big Ten , Pac @-@ 12 , Atlantic 10 , Ivy League , Patriot League and American East conferences . Among the schools that were interested were Creighton , Boston College and Providence . After his freshman success , he had decided that he would only leave Williams to play for a winning program that was an elite academic institution and that used a system and style that he had become use to . Robinson had played against Nik Stauskas in NEPSAC play and was impressed with how Michigan 's John Beilein had developed " under @-@ recruited players " such as Stauskas who was a 1st round selection in the 2014 NBA Draft . Maker had been an assistant coach for Beilein at West Virginia from 2005 – 07 . At both Exeter and Williams , Robinson had played in systems that were similar to the one that Beilein runs at Michigan . Robinson asked Maker to contact Beilein who on faith replied that Michigan may have interest at the preferred walk @-@ on level . Robinson was not interested in walk @-@ on consideration given competing scholarship offers . A week later , after seeing video , Beilein said Michigan was considering a scholarship offer . Robinson scheduled visits to Michigan and new Atlantic 10 member Davidson . After the visit to Michigan , Robinson committed to the school . He announced his decision via Twitter on August 6 , 2014 . 
 = = = University of Michigan = = = 
 Robinson is the first player to transfer from Division III to Division I with a full scholarship according to some sources . During the 2014 – 15 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , Robinson redshirted for the 2014 – 15 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team , meaning that he could not participate in games , but could practice with the team . In December 2014 with assistant coach Jeff Meyer as his rebounder , Robinson broke Stauskas ' Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball practice record for three @-@ pointers in a drill ( five minutes , one ball , one rebounder ) by posting 78 , surpassing Stauskas by 3 . 
 In Robinson 's second game for the 2015 – 16 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team , he posted 19 points on 6 – 6 shooting ( 5 – 5 3 @-@ point shots ) from the floor against Elon . On December 12 , Michigan defeated Delaware State 80 – 33 , as Robinson made his first career start for Michigan by posting 11 points on 3 – 5 three @-@ point shooting . At the time Robinson ranked third in the nation in three @-@ point shooting percentage . Note that various sources have various eligibility thresholds . E.g. , while <unk> only requires a minimum of 1 @.@ 0 made per game , <unk> requires a minimum of 2 @.@ 5 made per game . On December 23 , Robinson tied his career high ( set twice at Williams ) with six assists against Bryant . The game marked the ninth consecutive game in which he made at least 3 3 @-@ point shots . Robinson entered conference play as the Big Ten leader in three @-@ point field goal percentage and led the Big Ten Conference in both three @-@ point field goals ( 52 ) and three @-@ point field goal percentage ( <unk> ) through the first week of the Big Ten Conference schedule . On January 12 , with leading scorer Caris LeVert sidelined , Michigan defeated ( # 3 / # 3 ) Maryland 70 – 67 as Robinson contributed 17 points on 5 – 9 three @-@ point shooting . On January 23 , Michigan defeated Nebraska 81 – 68 , behind a game @-@ high and season @-@ high 21 points by Robinson . With the Cornhusker defense challenging his three @-@ point shot , he scored more points inside the three @-@ point line than outside it for the first time as a Wolverine . The January 27 game against Rutgers marked the 17th consecutive game in which Robinson made at least two three @-@ point shots . Robinson made only one three @-@ point shot in each the subsequent two games against Penn State and ( # 22 / 21 ) Indiana . Nonetheless , Robinson entered the February 6 Michigan – Michigan State men 's basketball rivalry game against the # 10 @-@ ranked 2015 – 16 Spartans as the Big Ten Conference leader in three @-@ point shots made and three @-@ point field goal percentage , but he was held to 0 – 3 three @-@ point shooting in the game . The game marked the first time since the season opener , that Robinson did not make a single three point shot , ending a 22 @-@ game streak . On February 10 , Michigan defeated Minnesota as Robinson posted a <unk> and season @-@ high nine rebounds to go along with 14 points on 4 @-@ for @-@ 7 three @-@ point shooting . 
 On March 10 , in Michigan 's first game of the 2016 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament against Northwestern , Robinson scored 21 points including a three @-@ point shot that tied the score with 46 @.@ 5 seconds remaining in overtime . The following day , in the quarterfinals against No. 1 @-@ seeded ( # 10 / # 10 ) Indiana , Robinson again put Michigan in position to win by <unk> the score with a three @-@ point shot with 46 seconds remaining ( this time in regulation ) . The following day , in the semifinals against ( # 13 / # 13 ) Purdue , Robinson recorded his 90th three @-@ pointer of the season , becoming just the fifth Wolverine in history to reach the milestone . On March 16 , in the First Four round of the 2016 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Michigan defeated Tulsa , 67 – 62 , with support from Robinson who recorded his first double @-@ double as a Wolverine with 13 points and a season @-@ high 11 rebounds . Robinson finished the season second to Bryn Forbes ( 48 @.@ 1 % ) among Big Ten players in three @-@ point field goal percentage with a 45 @.@ 0 % mark . 
 Following the season , several other wing players left the team . Caris LeVert graduated . Aubrey Dawkins transferred to play for the UCF Knights , Kameron Chatman announced his intention to transfer . 
 = Frederick III , German Emperor = 
 Frederick III ( German : Friedrich III . , Deutscher Kaiser und König von Preußen ; 18 October 1831 – 15 June 1888 ) was German Emperor and King of Prussia for ninety @-@ nine days in 1888 , the Year of the Three Emperors . Friedrich Wilhelm Nikolaus Karl , known informally as " Fritz " , was the only son of Emperor Wilhelm I and was raised in his family 's tradition of military service . Although celebrated as a young man for his leadership and successes during the Second Schleswig , Austro @-@ Prussian and Franco @-@ Prussian wars , he nevertheless professed a hatred of warfare and was praised by friends and enemies alike for his humane conduct . Following the unification of Germany in 1871 his father , then King of Prussia , became the German Emperor . Upon Wilhelm 's death at the age of ninety on 9 March 1888 , the throne passed to Frederick , who had by then been Crown Prince for seventeen years . Frederick was suffering from cancer of the larynx when he died on 15 June 1888 , aged fifty @-@ six , following unsuccessful medical treatments for his condition . 
 Frederick married Princess Victoria , eldest daughter of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom . The couple were well @-@ matched ; their shared liberal ideology led them to seek greater representation for commoners in the government . Frederick , in spite of his conservative militaristic family background , had developed liberal tendencies as a result of his ties with Britain and his studies at the University of Bonn . As the Crown Prince , he often opposed the conservative Chancellor Otto von Bismarck , particularly in speaking out against Bismarck 's policy of uniting Germany through force , and in urging that the power of the Chancellorship be curbed . Liberals in both Germany and Britain hoped that as emperor , Frederick III would move to liberalize the German Empire . 
 Frederick and Victoria were great admirers of the Prince Consort of the United Kingdom , Victoria 's father . They planned to rule as consorts , like Albert and Queen Victoria , and to reform what they saw as flaws in the executive branch that Bismarck had created for himself . The office of Chancellor , responsible to the Emperor , would be replaced with a British @-@ style cabinet , with ministers responsible to the Reichstag . Government policy would be based on the consensus of the cabinet . Frederick " described the Imperial Constitution as ingeniously contrived chaos . " 
 The Crown Prince and Princess shared the outlook of the Progressive Party , and Bismarck was haunted by the fear that should the old Emperor die — and he was now in his seventies — they would call on one of the Progressive leaders to become Chancellor . He sought to guard against such a turn by keeping the Crown Prince from a position of any influence and by using foul means as well as fair to make him unpopular . 
 However , his illness prevented him from effectively establishing policies and measures to achieve this , and such moves as he was able to make were later abandoned by his son and successor , Wilhelm II . 
 The timing of Frederick 's death and the length of his reign are important topics among historians . The premature demise of Frederick III is considered a potential turning point in German history ; and whether or not he would have made the Empire more liberal if he had lived longer is still discussed . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Frederick William was born in the New Palace at Potsdam in Prussia on 18 October 1831 . He was a scion of the House of Hohenzollern , rulers of Prussia , then the most powerful of the German states . Frederick 's father , Prince William , was a younger brother of King Frederick William IV and , having been raised in the military traditions of the Hohenzollerns , developed into a strict disciplinarian . William fell in love with his cousin Elisa Radziwill , a Princess of the Polish nobility , but his parents felt Elisa 's rank was not suitable for the bride of a Prussian Prince and forced a more suitable match . The woman selected to be his wife , Princess Augusta of Saxe @-@ Weimar , had been raised in the more intellectual and artistic atmosphere of Weimar , which gave its citizens greater participation in politics and limited the powers of its rulers through a constitution ; Augusta was well @-@ known across Europe for her liberal views . Because of their differences , the couple did not have a happy marriage and , as a result , Frederick grew up in a troubled household , which left him with memories of a lonely childhood . He had one sister , Louise ( later Grand Duchess of Baden ) , who was eight years his junior and very close to him . Frederick also had a very good relationship with his uncle , King Frederick William IV , who has been called " the romantic on the throne " . 
 Frederick grew up during a tumultuous political period as the concept of liberalism in Germany , which evolved during the 1840s , was gaining widespread and enthusiastic support . The liberals sought a unified Germany and were constitutional monarchists who desired a constitution to ensure equal protection under the law , the protection of property , and the safeguarding of basic civil rights . Overall , the liberals desired a government ruled by popular representation . When Frederick was 17 , these emergent nationalistic and liberal sentiments sparked a series of political uprisings across the German states and elsewhere in Europe . In Germany , their goal was to protect freedoms , such as the freedom of assembly and freedom of the press , and to create a German parliament and constitution . Although the uprisings ultimately brought about no lasting changes , liberal sentiments remained an influential force in German politics throughout Frederick 's life . 
 Despite the value placed by the Hohenzollern family on a traditional military education , Augusta insisted that her son also receive a classical education . Accordingly , Frederick was thoroughly tutored in both military traditions and the liberal arts . His private tutor was Ernst Curtius , a famous archaeologist . Frederick was a talented student , particularly good at foreign languages , becoming fluent in English and French , and studying Latin . He also studied history , geography , physics , music and religion , and excelled at gymnastics ; as required of a Prussian Prince , he became a very good rider . Hohenzollern princes were made familiar with the military traditions of their dynasty at an early age ; Frederick was ten when he was commissioned as a second lieutenant into the First Infantry Regiment of Guards and invested with the Order of the Black Eagle . As he grew older , he was expected to maintain an active involvement in military affairs . But , at the age of 18 , he broke with family tradition and entered the University of Bonn where he studied history , law and governance and public policy . During his time at Bonn ( 1850 @-@ 1852 ) , his teachers included Ernst Moritz Arndt and Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann . His time spent at the university , coupled with the influence of less conservative family members , were instrumental in his embrace of liberal beliefs . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Royal marriages of the 19th century were arranged to secure alliances and to maintain blood ties among the European nations . As early as 1851 , Queen Victoria of Great Britain and her German @-@ born Prince @-@ Consort Prince Albert were making plans to marry their eldest daughter , Victoria , Princess Royal , to Frederick . The royal dynasty in Britain was predominantly German ; there was little British blood in Queen Victoria , and none in her husband . The monarchs desired to maintain their family 's blood ties to Germany , and Prince Albert further hoped that the marriage would lead to the liberalization and modernization of Prussia . King Leopold I of Belgium , uncle of the British monarch and consort , also favoured this pairing ; he had long treasured Baron Stockmar 's idea of a marriage alliance between Britain and Prussia . Frederick 's father , Prince William , had no interest in the arrangement , hoping instead for a Russian Grand Duchess as his daughter @-@ in @-@ law . However , Princess Augusta was greatly in favour of a match for her son that would bring closer connections with Britain . In 1851 , his mother sent Frederick to England , ostensibly to visit the Great Exhibition but in truth she hoped that the cradle of liberalism and home of the industrial revolution would have a positive influence on her son . Prince Albert took Frederick under his wing during his stay but it was Albert 's daughter , only eleven at the time , who guided the German prince around the Exhibition . A regular exchange of letters between Victoria and Frederick followed . 
 Frederick proposed to Victoria in 1855 , when she was 14 years old . The betrothal of the young couple was announced on May 19 , 1857 at Buckingham Palace and the Prussian Court , and their marriage took place on 25 January 1858 in the Chapel Royal of St. James 's Palace , London . To mark the occasion , Frederick was promoted to Major @-@ General in the Prussian army . Although it was an arranged marriage , the newlyweds were compatible from the start and their marriage was a loving one ; Victoria too had received a liberal education and shared her husband 's views . Of the two , Victoria was the dominant one in the relationship . The couple often resided at the Crown Prince 's Palace and had eight children : Wilhelm in 1859 , Charlotte in 1860 , Henry in 1862 , Sigismund in 1864 , Victoria in 1866 , Waldemar in 1868 , Sophia in 1870 and Margaret in 1872 . Sigismund died at the age of 2 and Waldemar at age 11 , and their eldest son , Wilhelm , suffered from a withered arm — probably due to his difficult and dangerous breech birth , although it could have also resulted from a mild case of cerebral palsy . Wilhelm , who became emperor after Frederick 's death , shared none of his parent 's liberal ideas ; his mother viewed him as a " complete Prussian " . This difference in ideology created a rift between Wilhelm and his parents , and relations between them were strained throughout their lives . 
 = = Political life = = 
 = = = Crown Prince = = = 
 When his father succeeded to the Prussian throne as King William I on 2 January 1861 , Frederick became the Crown Prince . Already twenty @-@ nine years old , he would be Crown Prince for a further twenty @-@ seven years . The new king was initially considered politically neutral ; Frederick and Prussia 's liberal elements hoped that he would usher in a new era of liberal policies . The liberals managed to greatly increase their majority in the Prussian Diet ( Landtag ) , but William soon showed that he preferred the conservative ways . On the other hand , Frederick declared himself in complete agreement with the " essential liberal policy for internal and foreign affairs " . 
 Because William was a dogmatic soldier and unlikely to change his ideas at the age of sixty @-@ four , he regularly clashed with the Diet over policies . In September 1862 , one such disagreement almost led to Frederick being crowned and replacing his father as king ; William threatened to abdicate when the Diet refused to fund his plans for the army 's reorganization . Frederick was appalled by this action , and said that an abdication would " constitute a threat to the dynasty , country and Crown " . William reconsidered , and instead on the advice of Minister of War Albrecht von Roon appointed Otto von Bismarck , who had offered to push through the military reform even against the majority of the Diet , as Minister @-@ President . The appointment of Bismarck , an authoritarian who would often ignore or overrule the Diet , set Frederick on a collision course with his father and led to his exclusion from affairs of state for the rest of William 's reign . Frederick insisted on bloodless " moral conquests " , unifying Germany by liberal and peaceful means , but it was Bismarck 's policy of blood and iron that prevailed . His protests against William 's rule peaked at Danzig on 4 June 1863 , where at an official reception in the city he loudly denounced Bismarck 's restrictions on freedom of the press . He thereby made Bismarck his enemy and his father extremely angry . Consequently , Frederick was excluded from positions of political power throughout his father 's reign . Retaining his military portfolio , he continued to represent Germany and its Emperor at ceremonies , weddings , and celebrations , such as Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee in 1887 . 
 Frederick was severely reproached by his father for his liberal ideas , so he spent a large portion of time in Britain where Queen Victoria frequently allowed him to represent her at ceremonies and social functions . 
 Frederick fought in the wars against Denmark , Austria and France . Although he had opposed military action in each case , once war had started he supported the Prussian military wholeheartedly and took positions of command . Since he had no political influence at all , these were opportunities to prove himself . Frederick experienced his first combat in the Second Schleswig War . Appointed to supervise the supreme German Confederation commander Field Marshal Wrangel and his staff , the Crown Prince tactfully managed disputes between Wrangel and the other officers . The Prussians and their Austrian allies defeated the Danes and conquered the southern part of Jutland , but after the war they spent two years politicking to assume leadership of the German states . This culminated in the Austro @-@ Prussian War . Frederick " was the only member of the Prussian Crown Council to uphold the rights of the Duke of <unk> and oppose the idea of a war with Austria which he described as fratricide . " Although he supported unification and the restoration of the medieval empire , " Fritz could not accept that war was the right way to unite Germany . " . However , when war with Austria broke out , he accepted command of one of Prussia 's three armies , with General Leonhard Graf von Blumenthal as his chief of staff . The timely arrival of his II Army was crucial to the Prussian victory in 1866 at the decisive Battle of Königgrätz , which won the war for Prussia . After the battle , William presented Frederick with the Order Pour le Mérite for his personal gallantry on the field and leadership of the II Army . Nevertheless , the bloodshed caused him great dismay . A few days before Königgrätz , Frederick had written to his wife , expressing his hope that this would be the last war he would have to fight . On the third day of the battle he wrote to her again : " Who knows whether we may not have to wage a third war in order to keep what we have now won ? " 
 Four years later Frederick was in action again , this time during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 , in which he was once more paired with Blumenthal and commanded the III Army , consisting of troops from the southern German states . He was praised for his leadership after defeating the French at the battles of Wissembourg and Wörth , and met with further successes at the Battle of Sedan and during the Siege of Paris . Frederick 's humane treatment of his country 's foes earned him their respect and the plaudits of neutral observers . After the Battle of Wörth , a London journalist witnessed the Crown Prince 's many visits to wounded Prussian soldiers and lauded his deeds , extolling the love and respect the soldiers held for Frederick . Following his victory , Frederick had remarked to two Paris journalists , " I do not like war gentlemen . If I should reign I would never make it . " One French journalist remarked that " the Crown Prince has left countless traits of kindness and humanity in the land that he fought against . " For his behaviour and accomplishments , The Times wrote a tribute to Frederick in July 1871 , stating that " the Prince has won as much honour for his gentleness as for his prowess in the war " . 
 = = = German Empire and brief reign = = = 
 In 1871 , following Prussia 's victories , the German states were united into the German Empire , with William as the Emperor and Frederick as heir @-@ apparent to the new German monarchy . Although William thought the day when he became Emperor the saddest of his life , Frederick was excited to be witness to a great day in German history . Bismarck , now Chancellor , disliked Frederick and distrusted the liberal attitudes of the Crown Prince and Princess . Often at odds with his father 's and Bismarck 's policies and actions , Frederick sided with the country 's liberals in their opposition to the expansion of the empire 's army . The Crown Prince also became involved in many public works projects , such as the establishment of schools and churches in the area of <unk> near Potsdam . To assist his father 's effort to turn Berlin , the capital city , into a great cultural centre , he was appointed Protector of Public Museums ; it was largely due to Frederick that considerable artistic collections were acquired , housed in Berlin 's new Kaiser Friedrich Museum ( later known as the Bode Museum ) after his death . In 1878 , when his father was incapacitated by injury from an assassination attempt , Frederick briefly took over his tasks but was soon relegated to the sidelines once again . His lack of influence affected him deeply , even causing him to think about suicide . 
 During an effort led , between 1879 and 1881 , by the völkisch historian Heinrich von Treitschke and the court chaplain , Adolf Stoecker to dis @-@ emancipate German Jews , the Crown Prince and Crown Princess were in opposition , Victoria writing that she saw " Treitschke and his supporters as lunatics of the most dangerous sort " , and opining that Pastor Stoecker properly belonged in an insane asylum . She went on to write that she felt ashamed of her adopted country because people like Treitschke and Stoecker " behave so <unk> towards people of a different faith and another race who become an integral part ( and by no means the worst ) of our nation ! " . Clad in the uniform of a Prussian field marshal Frederick , together with Victoria , attended a synagogue service in Berlin in 1880 to show support for tolerance in contrast to what Victoria called <unk> 's " disgraceful attacks " . Shortly afterward , Frederick gave a speech denouncing the anti @-@ Semitic movement in Germany as " a shameful blot on our time " , adding that " We are ashamed of the <unk> which has broken all bounds of decency in Berlin , but which seems to flourish under the protection of the Court clerics . " In 1881 , Frederick and Victoria again attended a synagogue service , this time in Wiesbaden " to demonstrate as clearly as we can what our convictions are " . Frederick followed this up by giving a speech in which he spoke out for " poor , ill @-@ treated Jews " of Europe . Frederick 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Queen Victoria , wrote to thank him for his speech , saying she was proud that her daughter had married someone like him , but within Junker circles , Frederick was widely criticised for his actions in support of the Jews . Prominent among the Crown Prince 's critics was his eldest son , Prince Wilhelm , who called his father a weak , cowardly man controlled by his British mother and the Jews . Beyond Wilhelm , many of the " reactionary and ' chauvinistic ' circles in Germany " had , in the words of the British historian John C. G. <unk> come to the " ... conviction that the Crown Prince and his liberal English wife were an alien , un @-@ German force that must not be allowed to accede to the throne " . 
 Germany 's progressive elements hoped that William 's death , and thus Frederick 's succession , would usher the country into a new era governed along liberal lines . The conservative William , however , lived a long life , dying at the age of 90 on 9 March 1888 . Logically , Frederick should have taken as his regnal name either Frederick I ( if the <unk> empire was considered a new entity ) or Frederick IV ( if it was considered a continuation of the old Holy Roman Empire , which had had three emperors named Frederick ) ; he himself preferred the latter . However , on the advice of Bismarck that this would create legal problems , he opted to simply keep the same regnal name he had as king of Prussia . By the time he ascended the throne , Frederick was 56 years old and suffering from a debilitating cancer of the larynx . He viewed his illness with dismay , crying " To think I should have such a horrid disgusting illness ... I had so hoped to have been of use to my country . " He received conflicting medical advice regarding treatment . In Germany , Doctor Ernst von Bergmann proposed to remove the larynx completely , but his colleague , Doctor Rudolf Virchow , disagreed ; such an operation had never been performed without the death of the patient . The British doctor Sir Morell Mackenzie , who had diagnosed the cancer , advised a tracheotomy , to which Frederick and his wife agreed . On 8 February , a month before his father died , a cannula was fitted to allow Frederick to breathe ; for the remainder of his life he was unable to speak and often communicated through writing . During the operation , Dr. Bergmann almost killed him by missing the incision in the trachea and forcing the cannula into the wrong place . Frederick started to cough and bleed , and Bergmann placed his forefinger into the wound to enlarge it . The bleeding subsided after two hours , but Bergmann 's actions resulted in an abscess in Frederick 's neck , producing pus which gave the new Emperor discomfort for the remaining months of his life . Later , Frederick would ask " Why did Bergmann put his finger in my throat ? " and complain that " Bergmann ill @-@ treated [ me ] " . The diagnosis and treatment of Prince Frederick 's fatal illness caused some medical controversy well into the next century . 
 In spite of his illness , Frederick did his best to fulfill his obligations as Emperor . Immediately after the announcement of his accession , he took the ribbon and star of his Order of the Black Eagle from his jacket and pinned it on the dress of his wife ; he was determined to honor her position as Empress . As the German Emperor , he officially received Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom ( his mother @-@ in @-@ law ) and King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway , and attended the wedding of his son Prince Henry to his niece Princess Irene . However , Frederick reigned for only 99 days , and was unable to bring about much lasting change . An edict he penned before he ascended to the throne that would limit the powers of the chancellor and monarch under the constitution was never put into effect , although he did force Robert von Puttkamer to resign as Prussian Minister of the Interior on 8 June , when evidence indicated that Puttkamer had interfered in the Reichstag elections . Dr. Mackenzie wrote that the Emperor had " an almost overwhelming sense of the duties of his position " . In a letter to Lord Napier , Empress Victoria wrote " The Emperor is able to attend to his business , and do a great deal , but not being able to speak is , of course , most trying . " Frederick had the fervour but not the time to accomplish his desires , lamenting in May 1888 , " I cannot die ... What would happen to Germany ? " 
 Frederick III died in Potsdam on 15 June 1888 , and was succeeded by his 29 @-@ year @-@ old son Wilhelm II . Frederick is buried in a mausoleum attached to the <unk> in Potsdam . After his death , William Ewart Gladstone described him as the " Barbarossa of German liberalism " . Empress Victoria went on to continue spreading Frederick 's thoughts and ideals throughout Germany , but no longer had power within the government . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Frederick believed a state should not act against the popular opinion of its inhabitants . He had a long history of liberalism , and had discussed his ideas and intentions with Victoria and others before his reign . Admiring Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Gotha and the British parliamentary system , Frederick and his wife planned to rule as consorts and liberalize Germany through the appointment of more liberal ministers . They intended to severely limit the office of Chancellor , and reorganize Germany to include many elements of British liberalism . Many historians , including William <unk> Dawson and Erich Eyck , consider that Frederick 's early death put an end to the development of liberalism within the German empire . They believe that , given a longer reign and better health , Frederick might indeed have transformed Germany into a more liberal democratic country , and prevented its militaristic path toward war . Dr. J. McCullough claims that Frederick would have averted World War I — and by extension the resulting Weimar Republic — while other historians such as Michael Balfour go even further by postulating that , as the end of World War I directly affected the state of the world 's development , the liberal German Emperor might also have prevented the outbreak of World War II . Author Michael Freund states outright that both world wars would have been averted had Frederick lived longer . Frederick 's life inspired historian Frank Tipton to speculate : " What would have happened had his father died sooner or if he himself had lived longer ? " 
 Other historians , including Wilhelm Mommsen and Arthur Rosenberg , oppose the idea that Frederick could have , or would have , liberalized Germany . They believe that he would not have dared to oppose both his father and Bismarck to change Germany 's course ; a natural soldier , he was steeped in his family 's strong military tradition , and had happily reported to his father since he joined the army at the age of ten . Andreas Dorpalen notes that Frederick had complied with most of William 's and Bismarck 's policies early in his life , and would have been unlikely to change his behaviour . According to Arthur Rosenberg , despite his liberal tendencies Frederick still firmly believed in Bismarck and his system , with Dorpalen adding that in any case Frederick had too weak and ineffectual a character to have brought about real change , regardless of how long he reigned . James J. Sheehan states that the political climate and party system of Germany during that period were too steeped in the old ways for Frederick to overcome with liberalization . Dorpalen also observes that Frederick 's liberal persona may have been exaggerated after his death , to keep the liberal movement strong in Germany , and he points out that the many mistakes made by Wilhelm II helped to paint his father in a more favorable light . 
 Frederick 's children — Wilhelm in particular — held various political positions and greatly influenced Europe . Unlike his father , Wilhelm had not personally experienced the horrors of war , and he enthusiastically embraced his family 's military heritage , coming under Bismarck 's tutelage . The Chancellor , who disapproved of Frederick 's and Victoria 's liberal ways , felt bound to increase the tensions between Wilhelm and his parents . Wilhelm grew up full of disdain for their opinions on government , and shortly after his father 's death , proclaimed that he would follow the path of his grandfather , William I. He made no reference to Frederick III . William II abandoned all of his father 's policies and ideas , and eventually led Germany into World War I. 
 Bismarck 's plan of undermining Frederick and Victoria , and of using Wilhelm II as a tool for retaining his own power , led to his own downfall . As it turned out , Wilhelm did share his father 's conviction that the position of the chancellor was too strong and should be modified in favour of a more powerful Emperor . When Bismarck realized that Wilhelm II was about to dismiss him : 
 All Bismarck 's resources were deployed ; he even asked Empress Victoria to use her influence with her son on his behalf . But the wizard had lost his magic ; his spells were powerless because they were exerted on people who did not respect them , and he who had so <unk> disregarded Kant 's command to use people as ends in themselves had too small a stock of loyalty to draw on . As Lord Salisbury told Queen Victoria : ' The very qualities which Bismarck fostered in the Emperor in order to strengthen himself when the Emperor Frederick should come to the throne have been the qualities by which he has been overthrown . ' The Empress , with what must have been a mixture of pity and triumph , told him that her influence with her son could not save him for he himself had destroyed it . 
 Churches honouring Frederick include the Kaiser @-@ Friedrich @-@ <unk> in Berlin and the former <unk> Church in Königsberg . Mount Frederick William in the Jervis Inlet area of the British Columbia Coast in Canada is named in his honour . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 18 October 1831 – 2 January 1861 : His Royal Highness Prince Frederick of Prussia 
 2 January 1861 – 18 January 1871 : His Royal Highness The Crown Prince of Prussia 
 18 January 1871 – 9 March 1888 : His Imperial and Royal Highness The German Crown Prince , Crown Prince of Prussia 
 9 March 1888 – 15 June 1888 : His Imperial and Royal Majesty The German Emperor , King of Prussia 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Domestic 
 He was Grand Master of the following orders : 
 Order of the Black Eagle 
 Order of Merit of the Prussian Crown 
 Order of the Red Eagle 
 Order of the Crown ( Prussia ) 
 Royal House Order of Hohenzollern 
 Pour le Mérite 
 Grand Cross of the Iron Cross 
 Order of St. John ( Bailiwick of Brandenburg ) 
 Kingdom of Bavaria : Knight Grand Cross of the Military Order of Max Joseph 
 Kingdom of Bavaria : Knight of the Order of Saint Hubert 
 Kingdom of Saxony : Knight Grand Cross of the Military Order of Saint Henry 
 Foreign 
 Denmark : Knight of the Order of the Elephant 
 Holy See : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem 
 Hungary : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary 
 Kingdom of Italy : Knight of the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation 
 Kingdom of Italy : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus 
 Kingdom of Italy : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy 
 Sovereign Military Order of Malta : Knight of the Order of Malta 
 Russia : Knight of the Order of St. Andrew 
 Russia : Knight of the Order of St. George 
 Spain : Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece 
 Sweden : Knight of the Order of Charles XIII 
 United Kingdom : Knight of the Order of the Garter 
 United Kingdom : Royal Victorian Order 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Issue = = 
 = Saw ( 2004 film ) = 
 Saw is a 2004 American psychological horror film directed by James Wan . It is Wan 's feature film directorial debut . The screenplay , written by Leigh Whannell , is based on a story by Wan and Whannell . The film stars Cary Elwes , Danny Glover , Monica Potter , Michael Emerson , Ken Leung , Tobin Bell and Leigh Whannell . In the film , Elwes and Whannell portrayed two men who awake to find themselves chained in a large dilapidated bathroom , with one being ordered to kill the other or his family will die . It is the first installment of the seven @-@ part Saw franchise . 
 The debut of Wan and Whannell , the screenplay was written in 2001 , but after failed attempts to get the script produced in Wan and Whannell 's home country of Australia , they were urged to travel to Los Angeles . In order to help attract producers they shot a low @-@ budget short film of the same name from a scene out of the script . This proved successful in 2003 as producers from Evolution Entertainment were immediately attached and also formed a horror genre production label Twisted Pictures . The film was given a small budget and shot for 18 days . 
 Saw was first screened on January 19 , 2004 . Lionsgate picked up the rights and released the film in the United States and Canada on October 29 , 2004 . Critical responses were generally mixed and divided , but the film gained a cult following . Compared to its low budget , Saw performed very well at the box office , grossing more than $ 100 million worldwide and becoming , at the time , one of the most profitable horror films since 1996 's Scream . The success of the film prompted a green @-@ light of a sequel soon after Saw 's opening weekend , which was released the following October . 
 The film was theatrically re @-@ released by Lionsgate on October 31 , 2014 to celebrate its tenth anniversary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Adam , a photographer , awakens in a bathtub in a large dilapidated bathroom , and finds himself chained at the ankle to a pipe . Lawrence Gordon , an oncologist , is similarly shackled across the room , and between them is a corpse holding a revolver and a microcassette recorder . Each man has a tape in his pocket , and Adam is able to retrieve the recorder . Adam 's tape urges him to escape the bathroom , while Lawrence 's tape tells him to kill Adam by six o 'clock , or his wife and daughter will be killed and he will be left to die . Adam finds a bag containing two hacksaws inside a toilet tank ; they attempt to cut through the chains , but Adam 's saw breaks and he angrily throws it at the mirror . Lawrence realizes the hacksaws are meant for their feet and identifies their captor as the Jigsaw Killer , whom Lawrence knows of because he was a suspect five months before . 
 Flashbacks show that while Lawrence was discussing the terminal brain cancer of a patient , identified as John by an orderly named Zep Hindle , with his medical students , he was approached by Detectives David Tapp and Steven Sing , who found his <unk> at the scene of a Jigsaw " game " , of which at least three have been investigated . Lawrence 's alibi clears him , but he reluctantly agrees to view the testimony of the only known survivor , a heroin addict named Amanda Young , who believes Jigsaw has helped her . 
 Meanwhile , Alison and Diana Gordon are being held captive in their home by Zep , who is watching Adam and Lawrence through a camera behind a two @-@ way mirror in the bathroom . The house is simultaneously being watched by Tapp , who has since been discharged from the force . Flashbacks show that Tapp became obsessed with the Jigsaw case after hearing Amanda 's testimony , and eventually found Jigsaw 's warehouse using the videotape from her game . He and Sing entered the warehouse , where they apprehended Jigsaw and saved a man from a drill trap , but Jigsaw escaped after slashing Tapp 's throat , and Sing was killed by a shotgun trap while pursuing him . Convinced that Lawrence is Jigsaw , Tapp began stalking him after his discharge . 
 In the bathroom , Lawrence finds a box containing a lighter , two cigarettes , and a one @-@ way cellphone . He then recalls his abduction : he was trying to use his phone after being trapped in a parking garage , and was suddenly attacked by a pig @-@ masked figure . They try to use a cigarette dipped in the corpse 's " poisoned " blood to stage Adam 's death , but the plan fails when Adam is zapped through his ankle chain . Adam then recalls his own abduction : he woke up in his photo development room to find the power was out and , after finding a puppet , was attacked by a similar pig @-@ masked figure . At gunpoint , Alison calls Lawrence and tells him not to trust Adam , who admits he was being paid to take photos of Lawrence , many of which were in the hacksaw bag . Adam also reveals his knowledge of Lawrence 's affair with one of his medical students ; Lawrence had been with her before he was abducted . Lawrence realizes from Adam 's description that Tapp was paying him . Adam finds a photo he didn 't take , of a man staring out a window of Lawrence 's house , whom Lawrence identifies as Zep . The clock then strikes six . 
 As Alison , who managed to free herself , calls Lawrence at gunpoint again , she fights Zep for the gun . The struggle gets Tapp 's attention , and he saves the Gordons and chases Zep to the sewers , where he is eventually shot during a struggle . Lawrence , aware only of gunshots and screaming , is zapped as well and loses reach of the phone ; in desperation , he saws off his foot and shoots Adam with the corpse 's revolver . Zep enters the bathroom to kill Lawrence , but is knocked down and beaten to death with the toilet tank cover by Adam , who only suffered a flesh wound . As Lawrence crawls out of the room to find help , Adam searches Zep 's body for a key and finds another microcassette recorder , which reveals that Zep was another victim , following the rules of his own game to survive a slow @-@ acting poison . As the tape ends , the " corpse " rises and is revealed to be Lawrence 's patient , John , the real Jigsaw Killer . He says the key to the chain is in the bathtub , which was drained when Adam awoke . He zaps Adam , who loses reach of Zep 's pistol , and then turns off the lights and seals the bathroom door , leaving Adam to die . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Cary Elwes as Dr. Lawrence Gordon 
 Leigh Whannell as Adam <unk> 
 Tobin Bell as John Kramer 
 Danny Glover as David Tapp 
 Monica Potter as Alison Gordon 
 Michael Emerson as Zep Hindle 
 Ken Leung as Detective Steven Sing 
 <unk> Vega as Diana Gordon 
 Shawnee Smith as Amanda Young 
 Dina Meyer as Detective Allison Kerry 
 Alexandra <unk> Chun as Carla 
 Mike Butters as Paul Leahy 
 Paul <unk> as Mark Wilson 
 Ned Bellamy as Jeff <unk> 
 Oren Koules as Donnie Greco 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 After finishing film school , Australian director James Wan and Australian writer Leigh Whannell wanted to write and fund a film . The inspiration that they needed came after watching the low @-@ budget independent film The Blair Witch Project . Another film that inspired them to finance the film themselves was Darren Aronofsky 's Pi . The two thought the cheapest script to shoot would involve two actors in one room . Whannell said , " So I actually think the restrictions we had on our bank accounts at the time , the fact that we wanted to keep the film contained , helped us come up with the ideas in the film . " One idea was to have the entire film set with two actors stuck in an elevator and being shot in the point of view of security cameras . 
 Wan pitched the idea to Whannell of two men chained to opposite sides of a bathroom with a dead body in the middle of the floor and they are trying to figure out why and how they are there . By the end of the film they realize the person lying on the floor is not dead and he is the reason they are locked in the room . Whannell initially did not give Wan the reaction he was looking for . He said , " I 'll never forget that day . I remember hanging up the phone and started just going over it in my head , and without any sort of long period of pondering , I opened my diary that I had at the time and wrote the word ' Saw ' . " Before instantaneously writing the word " Saw " in a blood @-@ red , dripping font , the two had not come up with a title . " It was one of those moments that made me aware that some things just really are meant to be . Some things are just waiting there to be discovered , " Whannell said . 
 The character of Jigsaw did not come until months later , when Whannell was working at a job he was unhappy with and began having migraines . Convinced it was a brain tumor , he went to a neurologist to have an MRI and while sitting nervously in the waiting room he thought , " What if you were given the news that you had a tumor and you were going to die soon ? How would you react to that ? " He imagined the character Jigsaw having been given one or two years to live and combined that with the idea of Jigsaw putting others in a literal version of the situation , but only giving them a few minutes to choose their fate . 
 Wan did not intend to make a " torture porn " film as the script only had one short segment of " torture . " He said the film " played out like a mystery thriller . " It was not until the sequels that the plot focused more on torture scenes . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 Whannell and Wan initially had $ 30 @,@ 000 to spend on the film , but as the script developed it was clear that more funds would be needed . The script was optioned by a producer in Sydney for a year but the deal eventually fell through . After other failed attempts to get the script produced in Australia from 2001 to 2002 , literary agent Ken Greenblat read the script and suggested they travel to Los Angeles , where their chances of finding an interested studio were greater . Wan and Whannell initially refused , due to lack of traveling funds but the pair 's agent , Stacey <unk> , convinced them to go . In order to help studios take interest in the script , Whannell provided A $ 5 @,@ 000 ( US $ 5 @,@ 000 ) to make a seven @-@ minute short film based on the script 's jaw trap scene , which they thought would prove most effective . Whannell played David , the man wearing the Reverse Bear Trap . Working at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation , Whannell and Wan knew cameramen who were willing to provide technical assistance for the short . 
 Wan shot the short with a 16mm camera in over two days and transferred the footage to DVDs to ship along with the script . Whannell wanted to play the lead character in the feature film . The short helped show that Wan and Whannell was a " director @-@ actor team " rather than just wanting to sell the script . Wan said , " Leigh and I just loved the project so much and we wanted a career in filmmaking so we stuck to our guns and said , ' Look , guys , if you want this project , we 're coming on board - Leigh has to act in it and I have to direct it . " 
 In early 2003 , while in Los Angeles and before they met with producer Gregg Hoffman , Hoffman 's friend pulled him into his office and showed him the short . Hoffman said , " About two or three minutes into it , my jaw hit the floor . " He quickly showed the short and script to his partners Mark Burg and Oren Koules of Evolution Entertainment . They later formed Twisted Pictures as a horror genre production label . The producers read the screenplay that night and two days later offered Wan and Whannell creative control and 25 % of the net profits . Even though Wan and Whannell received " better offers " from studios like DreamWorks and Gold Circle Films , they were not willing to chance Wan 's directing and Whannell acting in the lead role . In order to finance the film , Hoffman , Burg , and Koules put up a second mortgage on their Highland Avenue headquarters . Saw was given a production budget of between $ 1 million and $ 1 @.@ 2 million . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Elwes was sent the short film on DVD and immediately became interested in the film . He read the script in one sitting and was drawn in by the " uniqueness and originality " of the story . To prepare for his role as an oncologist , he met with a doctor at UCLA 's Department of Neurosurgery . 
 Smith , who is not a horror fan , initially refused the role , calling the script " horrific . " However , after watching the short , she agreed to the role , which was the part that Whannell portrayed in the short . 
 On taking the role of Jigsaw , Bell said - " I did Saw because I thought it was a fascinating location for a film to be made . These guys locked in a room , to me , was fresh . I did not anticipate the ending when I read the script , so I was quite caught by surprise and it was clear to me that if the filmmakers shot the scene well , the audience would be caught by surprise as well . The film was worth doing for that moment alone . " 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 With a shooting budget of $ 700 @,@ 000 , Saw began principal photography on September 22 , 2003 at Lacy Street Production Facility in Los Angeles for 18 days . The bathroom was the only set that had to be built . Danny Glover completed his scenes in two days . Due to the tight shooting schedule , Wan could not afford to shoot more than a couple of takes per actor . " It was a really tough struggle for me . Every day , it was me fighting to get the shots I did not get . I had high aspirations , but there 's only so much you can do . I wanted to make it in a very Hitchcockian style of filmmaking , but that style of filmmaking takes time to set up and so on , " Wan said about the very short shooting schedule . He said the style instead ended up being " more gritty and rough around the edges due to the lack of time and money that we had to shoot the movie with " and it ultimately became the aesthetic of the film . 
 In post @-@ production , Wan found he did not have enough shots or takes to work with as he was basically shooting rehearsals . Having a lot of missing gaps in the final product , he and editor Kevin Greutert created shots to mend together during editing ; such as making a shot look like a surveillance camera feed and using still photographs . " We did a lot of things to fill in gaps throughout the film . Whatever we cut to newspaper clippings and stuff like that , or we cut to surveillance cameras , or we cut to still photography within the film , which now people say , ' Wow , that 's such a cool experimental style of filmmaking ' , we really did that out of necessity to fill in gaps we did not get during the filming , " he explained . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack was mainly composed by Charlie Clouser , which took six weeks to complete . Other songs were performed by Front Line Assembly , Fear Factory , Enemy , Pitbull Daycare and Psycho Pumps . Megadeth 's song " Die Dead Enough " was originally set to be featured in the film , but was not used for undisclosed reasons . 
 The soundtrack was released on October 5 , 2004 by Koch Records . Johnny Loftus of Allmusic gave it three out of five stars . He said that Clouser " really nails it with his creaky , clammy score " and that he " understands that Saw 's horror only works with a heady amount of camp , and he draws from industrial music in the same way . " He particularly liked , " Cigarette " ; " Hello , Adam " ; and " F * * k This S * ! t , " commenting that they " blend chilling sounds with harsh percussion and deep @-@ wound keyboard stabs . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Lionsgate picked up Saw 's worldwide distribution rights at the Sundance Film Festival days before the film premiered on January 19 , 2004 . There it played to a packed theater for three nights to a very positive reaction . It was the closing film at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 18 , 2004 . Lionsgate initially planned to release the film direct @-@ to @-@ video , but due to the positive reaction at Sundance , they chose to release it theatrically by Halloween . It was released on October 1 , 2004 in the United Kingdom , October 29 , 2004 in the United States and December 2 , 2004 in Australia . The film was originally rated NC @-@ 17 ( No children under 17 permitted ) by the Motion Picture Association of America for strong graphic violence , though after being re @-@ edited , it was released with an R rating . Lionsgate held the first annual " Give Til It Hurts " blood drive for the Red Cross and collected 4 @,@ 249 pints of blood . 
 = = = Tenth anniversary re @-@ release = = = 
 On October 31 , 2014 , in honor of the film 's 10th anniversary , Saw was re @-@ released to theatres for one week . 
 The release was a box office bomb , earning only $ 650 @,@ 051 in its opening weekend , and is the third lowest @-@ grossing wide opening . At the end of its run , the release had grossed $ 815 @,@ 324 , bringing the film 's overall domestic gross to $ 56 @,@ 000 @,@ 369 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The theatrical version of the film was released on VHS and DVD on February 15 , 2005 in the United States . After its first week , it made $ 9 @.@ 4 million in DVD rentals and $ 1 @.@ 7 million in VHS rentals , making it the top rental of the week . For the second week it remained as the number one DVD rental with $ 6 @.@ 8 million , for a $ 16 @.@ 27 million two @-@ week total . It dropped to third place in VHS rentals with $ 1 @.@ 09 million , for a $ 2 @.@ 83 million two @-@ week total . The film went on to sell more than $ 70 million worth of video and DVDs . A two @-@ disc " Uncut Edition " was released on October 18 , 2005 to tie in with the release of Saw II . The short film , also entitled Saw , was included on the DVD . The film was subsequently included in a boxed set with all six sequels entitled Saw : The Complete Movie Collection , which was released in September , 2014 for the film 's tenth anniversary . The set contained the unrated editions of all seven films , though it lacked any of the special features from previous releases . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Saw opened at # 3 on Halloween weekend 2004 in 2 @,@ 315 theaters and grossed $ 18 @.@ 2 million , behind Ray ( $ 20 million ) and The Grudge ( $ 21 @.@ 8 million ) . According to Lionsgate 's exit poll , 60 % of the mostly male audience was under 25 years of age . Saw had also become Lionsgate 's second best opening , after Fahrenheit 9 / 11 's $ 23 @.@ 9 million ( 2004 ) . On its second weekend , an additional 152 theaters were added , bringing the theater count to 2 @,@ 467 . It dropped to number four , making $ 11 million , a 39 % drop from the opening weekend . 
 Saw opened in the United Kingdom to $ 2 @.@ 2 million in 301 theaters , grossing a $ 12 @.@ 3 million total in seven weeks . In Australia , it opened in 161 theaters with $ 1 @.@ 2 million and totaled out to $ 3 @.@ 1 million in six weeks . In Italy , the film opened on January 14 , 2005 in 267 theaters to $ 1 @.@ 7 million and grossed $ 6 @.@ 4 million in six weeks . Saw opened to $ 1 @.@ 5 million 187 theaters in France on March 16 , 2005 and made $ 3 @.@ 1 million by the end of its four @-@ week run . Saw came to gross $ 55 @.@ 1 million in the United States and Canada and $ 47 @.@ 9 million in other markets for a worldwide total of $ 103 million . It is the second lowest grossing film in the series after Saw VI . At the time , it became the most profitable horror film after Scream ( 1996 ) . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to Saw was mixed . On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 48 % , based on 181 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 5 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Saw is more than nasty enough for genre junkies , but far too twisted , gory , and shallow for more discerning horror fans . " Metacritic gave the film a score of 46 out of 100 , based on 32 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Dennis Harvey of Variety gave the film a negative review after its Sundance premiere . He called it a " crude concoction sewn together from the severed parts of prior horror / serial killer pics . " He called the screenplay " convoluted , " criticizing the use of " flashbacks within flashbacks " and red herrings . He described the film as being " too hyperbolic to be genuinely disturbing . " Carla Meyer of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film a positive review saying the film " combined B @-@ movie acting with a twisted mind @-@ set and visual tricks designed to camouflage cheap effects " and that it was " terrifying at some moments and <unk> creepy at many others . " She called the killing scenes " amazingly evocative for such a low @-@ budget movie . " 
 Empire 's Kim Newman gave the film four out of five stars . He said Saw is styled like early David Fincher films and " boasts an intricate structure - complex flashbacks @-@ within @-@ flashbacks explain how the characters have come to this crisis - and a satisfying mystery to go with its ghastly claustrophobia . " He ended his review saying , " As good an all @-@ out , non @-@ camp horror movie as we 've had lately . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B minus , calling it " derivative and messy and too nonsensical for its own good . " He described Jigsaw 's intent as " to show you the serial killer lurking inside yourself . " Gleiberman criticized Elwes ' performance by saying , " [ Elwes ] ought to be featured in a seminar on the perils of overacting . " Daniel M. Kimmel of the Telegram & Gazette called it " one of the most loathsome films this critic has seen in more than 20 years on the job . " 
 The New York Times 's Stephen Holden gave a mixed review saying the film " does a better @-@ than @-@ average job of conveying the panic and helplessness of men terrorized by a sadist in a degrading environment , but it is still not especially scary . What sets its demon apart from run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill movie serial killers is his impulse to humiliate and torture his victims and justify it with some twisted morality . " He said the film is " seriously undermined by the half @-@ baked , formulaic detective story in which the horror is framed . " Carina Chocano of the Los Angeles Times also gave the film a mixed review saying , " Saw is so full of twists it ends up getting snarled . For all of his flashy engineering and inventive torture scenarios , the Jigsaw Killer comes across as an amateur . Hannibal Lecter would have him for lunch . " She said the film " carelessly underscores its own shaky narrative at every turn with its mid @-@ budget <unk> . " She also noted that Elwes and Whannell had trouble keeping an American accent . Another mixed review came from Roger Ebert , who gave the film 2 out of 4 stars and lamented the gimmicks and plot contrivances but nonetheless described Saw as " well made and acted , and does what it does about as well as it could be expected to . " 
 = = = Comparisons to Seven ( 1995 ) = = = 
 When asked if the 1995 thriller film Seven was an inspiration to Saw , Whannell said " For me as the writer , definitely . I mean , Seven is just a very well constructed film , and if you 're writing a thriller , it can 't hurt to study it . In terms of the story though , James and I never really felt Seven was that close to our film . I guess if you stand back , you have two detectives chasing a psychopath , who uses vile methods to teach people lessons , and those points echo Seven . What we always liked about Saw , though , was the fact that the story is told from the point of view of two of the psychopath 's victims , instead of the police chasing after him , as you so often see . " Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman compared the plot to Seven saying , " In a blatant imitation of Seven , Saw features a lunatic sadist whose ghoulish crimes are meant , in each case , to mirror the sins of his victims . The twist here is that the psycho doesn 't do the killing . " Richard J. <unk> of Champaign @-@ Urbana 's The News @-@ Gazette said " Saw wants to be taken as another Seven . Though it features perverse gross @-@ out scenes and a villain with a superficially pedantic motive behind his crimes ( his victims , if they survive , have learned to appreciate life more ) , it lacks the finesse and polish of the David Fincher film . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On Empire magazine 's list of the 500 greatest films , Saw ranked 499th . Bloody Disgusting ranked the film tenth in its list of the Top 20 Horror Films of the Decade , with the article calling Saw " perhaps the most influential horror film of the decade , which kick @-@ started a franchise .... In light of its measly $ 1 @.@ 2 million price tag the film 's quality relative to bigger @-@ budget horror films is striking . It also takes itself seriously , which came as a breath of fresh air following the trend of wimpy tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek horror that had dominated the multiplexes post @-@ Scream . More than anything , this twisted morality tale is a film made by horror fans , for horror fans ; it 's gory , it 's depraved , and best of all it introduced a new horror icon in Jigsaw . " The Daily Telegraph listed the film number 14 on their Top 100 list that defined the 2000s . 
 = Lawrence Wetherby = 
 Lawrence Winchester Wetherby ( January 2 , 1908 – March 27 , 1994 ) was an American politician who served as lieutenant governor and governor of Kentucky . He is the only governor in state history born in Jefferson County , despite the fact that Louisville , the county seat , is the state 's most populous city . 
 After graduating from the University of Louisville , Wetherby held several minor offices in the Jefferson County judicial system before being elected lieutenant governor in 1947 . He was called Kentucky 's first " working " lieutenant governor because Governor Earle C. Clements asked him to carry out duties beyond his constitutional responsibility to preside over the state Senate , such as preparing the state budget and attending the Southern Governors Conference . In 1950 , Clements resigned to assume a seat in the U.S. Senate , elevating Wetherby to governor . Wetherby won immediate acclaim by calling a special legislative session to increase funding for education and government benefits from the state 's budget surplus . In 1951 , he won a four @-@ year full term as governor , during which he continued and expanded many of Clements ' programs , including increased road construction and industrial diversification . He endorsed the Supreme Court 's 1954 desegregation order in the case of Brown v. Board of Education and appointed a biracial commission to oversee the successful integration of the state 's schools . As chair of the Southern Governors Conference in 1954 and 1955 , he encouraged other southern governors to accept and implement desegregation . 
 Limited to one term by the state constitution , Wetherby supported Bert T. Combs to be his successor , but Combs lost in the Democratic primary to A. B. " Happy " Chandler , a former governor and factional opponent of both Wetherby and Clements . Chandler 's failure to support Wetherby 's 1956 bid to succeed Democrat Alben Barkley in the Senate contributed to his loss to Republican John Sherman Cooper . From 1964 to 1966 , Wetherby served on a commission charged with revising the state constitution , and in 1966 he was elected to the Kentucky Senate , where he provided leadership in drafting the state budget . Following this , he retired from politics and served as a consultant for Brighton Engineering . He died March 27 , 1994 of complications from a broken hip and was buried in Frankfort Cemetery in Frankfort , Kentucky . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Lawrence Wetherby was born January 2 , 1908 in Middletown , Kentucky . He was the fourth child of Samuel Davis and Fanny ( <unk> ) Wetherby . His grandfather was a surgeon in the Union Army during the Civil War . His father was also a physician and farmer , and during his childhood years , Wetherby worked on the family farm . 
 After graduating from Anchorage High School , Wetherby enrolled in the pre @-@ law program at the University of Louisville . He was a letterman on the football team in 1927 and 1928 ; he also played second base on the baseball team in 1928 and 1929 , and was a letterman in that sport in 1929 . He was later inducted into the university 's Athletic Hall of Fame . In 1929 , he earned his Bachelor of Laws degree and went to work for Judge Henry Tilford . The two would remain partners until 1950 . On April 24 , 1930 , he married Helen Dwyer ; the couple had three children . 
 Thanks to his father 's influence , Wetherby became interested in local politics at an early age . School board races fascinated him , and he allied himself with a faction of the Jefferson County Democratic Party headed by Leland Taylor and Ben Ewing . When Ewing was elected county judge in 1933 , he appointed Wetherby as a part @-@ time attorney for the Jefferson County juvenile court . He held this position through 1937 , then returned to it in 1942 and 1943 . In March 1943 , he was appointed the first trial commissioner of the juvenile court . 
 = = Lieutenant governor = = 
 Wetherby was elected chairman of the 34th Legislative District Democratic Committee in 1943 and held the position through 1956 . In March 1947 , he resigned as trial commissioner of the juvenile court in order to run for lieutenant governor . The strongest of his four opponents in the Democratic primary was Bill May , the nephew of U.S. Representative Andrew J. May . May had sought the support of gubernatorial candidate Earle C. Clements , but Clements refused , possibly because Congressman May was an ally of Clements ' political opponent John Y. Brown . Wetherby was also unable to secure Clements ' public endorsement , but he won the primary and went on to defeat Republican Orville M. Howard by over 95 @,@ 000 votes . 
 Despite Clements ' refusal to endorse Wetherby in the primary , the two generally agreed on their legislative agendas and worked well together . Some observers called Wetherby Kentucky 's first " working " lieutenant governor . Previous lieutenant governors did little beyond their constitutionally mandated duty of presiding over the Kentucky Senate , but during Clements ' administration , Wetherby was charged with preparing a state budget , presiding over the Legislative Research Commission , leading tours for the state Chamber of Commerce , and attending the Southern Governors Conference . Clements also made Wetherby executive secretary of the State Democratic Central Committee , which allowed Wetherby to make many important political contacts . 
 = = Governor of Kentucky = = 
 On November 27 , 1950 , Clements resigned to accept a seat in the U.S. Senate , elevating Wetherby to governor . One of his first actions was to call a special legislative session to convene on March 6 , 1951 for the purpose of allocating the state 's $ 10 million budget surplus . Among the expenditures approved in the special session were increases in teachers ' salaries and state benefits for the needy and government employees . Wetherby 's popularity soared as a result of this session , and he seriously considered running for the Senate seat vacated by the death of Virgil Chapman in 1951 . Instead , after talking with Clements and other Democratic leaders , he decided to seek a full , four @-@ year term as governor . 
 = = = Election of 1951 = = = 
 Among the potential candidates for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1951 was former governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler , who was about to be released as baseball commissioner . Chandler and Clements were bitter political enemies , and the possibility of a Chandler candidacy provided the Clements faction of the Democratic party with the impetus to unite behind Wetherby to prevent Chandler from gaining the nomination . Ultimately , Chandler did not seek the nomination and , despite implying that Clements controlled Wetherby , Chandler endorsed Wetherby on May 15 , 1951 . Wetherby had little trouble defeating Howell Vincent and Jesse Cecil in the Democratic gubernatorial primary , polling the largest majority ever in a Kentucky primary race . 
 In the general election , Wetherby faced Republican Court of Appeals judge Eugene Siler . Siler was a fundamentalist Christian who claimed that the state government was full of corruption , and only he could stop it . Citing the gambling in Northern Kentucky , bribery accusations against members of Clements ' and Wetherby 's administrations , and a 1951 scandal involving the University of Kentucky men 's basketball team , he referred to Frankfort as " our Nineveh on the Kentucky River " . Wetherby countered Siler 's accusations of corruption by removing one of the officials accused of bribery from office . He deployed the newly organized Kentucky State Police to counter organized crime in Campbell and Henderson counties . To further discourage crime , he supported legislation to revoke the alcohol licenses of establishments that allowed gambling . Siler 's pro @-@ temperance and anti @-@ Catholic views played well in the state 's rural areas , but cost him the vote of the growing urban population . Wetherby won the election by a vote of 346 @,@ 345 to 288 @,@ 014 . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Early in Wetherby 's term , the state 's revenues were inflated by the Korean War . Having adopted a pay @-@ as @-@ you @-@ go program for the state , he was forced to raise additional revenue after the war ended . He did so by imposing sin taxes on cigarettes , alcoholic beverages , and parimutuel betting , but he was unable to convince the General Assembly to adopt a sales tax . 
 Because three members of Wetherby 's close family had been killed in automobile accidents on the state 's roadways , improving roads was a high priority for Wetherby . Using revenue from a two @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ gallon gasoline tax passed under the Clements administration , Wetherby authorized the building , re @-@ building , or re @-@ surfacing of nearly 6 @,@ 000 miles ( 9 @,@ 700 km ) of roads during his administration . The most important of these was the state 's first toll road — the Kentucky Turnpike — connecting Louisville and Elizabethtown . He encouraged President Dwight D. Eisenhower to construct a federal toll road connecting the Great Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico . Other political leaders joined him , convincing Eisenhower to construct the long @-@ talked @-@ about Interstate Highway System . Improved roads brought increased tourism , which Wetherby supported by increasing funding to the state park system and adding Breaks Interstate Park , a new park owned jointly by Kentucky and Virginia . Wetherby also brought national attention to Kentucky as prime hunting and fishing land by conducting his own personal sporting excursions in the state . 
 Wetherby tried to diversify the industries located in Kentucky to balance the state 's primarily agrarian economy . He expanded the Agricultural and Industrial Development Board and charged it with conducting land surveys to identify potential industrial sites . He encouraged the development of modern airports in the state and supported the canalization of the Big Sandy River and improvement of the locks and dams on the Kentucky River . He continued to personally lead tours given by the state 's Chamber of Commerce . Among the industries that came to the state during his administration were the General Electric Appliance Park in Louisville and the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant in Paducah . In 1954 , he used the state police to quash labor unrest in Central City and other parts of the Western Coal Fields . He was not a pawn of industry , however : he secured passage of the state 's first laws regulating strip mining and killed a right @-@ to @-@ work bill in 1954 . 
 Neither did Wetherby ignore the needs of agriculture . Under his Green Pastures Program , measures were enacted to diversify crop production , improve beef production , and encourage soil conservation . He secured federal flood control programs for the watersheds of the Salt , Licking , Green , and Kentucky Rivers , saving valuable farmland . In 1952 , Wetherby organized an agricultural council to consolidate the work of the state 's agricultural bureaucracy . He oversaw completion of the state fairgrounds in Louisville , a project begun under Clements , to better display the state 's agricultural products . 
 Improvements in education were a hallmark of Wetherby 's term as governor . Over the course of his administration , he increased funding to education by $ 20 million . He called for the creation of an educational television network and initiated the state 's first publicly funded bookmobile program . He supported the 1954 Minimum Foundation Program , an amendment to the state constitution that allowed funding to be allocated to school districts based upon need rather than number of pupils . 
 In 1954 and 1955 Wetherby served as chairman of the Southern Governors Conference and urged the southern governors to peacefully implement desegregation as required by the Supreme Court 's decision in Brown v. Board of Education . He was one of five southern governors that refused to sign a statement opposing integration . In Kentucky , he appointed an advisory council of both white and black citizens to oversee public school integration , which was accomplished with little acrimony compared to other states . Desegregation was one issue where Wetherby and his lieutenant governor , Emerson " Doc " Beauchamp , disagreed , but because Beauchamp believed he would succeed Wetherby as governor , he did not openly oppose Wetherby 's actions . 
 Among Wetherby 's other accomplishments were the creation of a Department of Mental Health and the construction of fifteen hospitals and thirty health centers throughout the state . In 1952 , he created the Youth Authority as a central point for the administration of services to delinquent children . He constructed new state prisons , modernized the probation and parole systems , and established a more orderly system of selecting grand and petit juries . He also oversaw some voting reform measures , including the provision of funds to purchase voting machines in areas where they were desired . He was not as successful in the area of government reform . He failed in his efforts to amend the state 's constitution to allow the governor to succeed himself in office . He was also unable to win support for a plan to consolidate some of Kentucky 's counties . In 1955 , the state 's voters approved a constitutional amendment granting suffrage to eighteen @-@ year @-@ olds over Wetherby 's objections . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Both Clements and Wetherby endorsed Bert T. Combs to succeed Wetherby as governor . Wetherby had named Combs to the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1951 to fill a vacancy created by the death of Judge Roy Helm . Happy Chandler , Clements ' old foe , ran against Combs in the primary and painted him as a pawn of " Clementine " and " Wetherbine " , his derogatory nicknames for Clements and Wetherby . In fact , Chandler ran the entire campaign not just against Combs , but against Clements and Wetherby as well . He charged both Clements and Wetherby with extravagant spending in their administrations . Among his allegations were that Clements had purchased a $ 20 @,@ 000 rug for his office and that Wetherby had paneled his office with African mahogany . Chandler promised that , if elected , he would use " good , honest Kentucky wood " in his office and that all Kentuckians would be invited to the capitol to walk on the $ 20 @,@ 000 rug . Ultimately , invoices showed that no $ 20 @,@ 000 rug had been purchased by Clements and Wetherby 's paneling had been purchased from and installed by a local contractor . Chandler 's charges may have been inaccurate , but he defeated Combs in the primary and went on to win the general election . 
 Following his term as governor , Wetherby resumed his private law practice . In 1956 , Senator Alben Barkley unexpectedly died of a heart attack . The timing of his death meant that the state would elect two senators in 1956 — Clements ' term was expiring and now Barkley 's seat was vacant . President Eisenhower convinced former senator and ambassador John Sherman Cooper to be the Republican candidate for the seat , hoping Cooper 's immense popularity in the state would help his own re @-@ election bid . Barkley 's death occurred so late in the year that there was not time for a Democratic primary to choose the party 's candidate for the open seat . The Democratic state committee chose Wetherby , who was only six months removed from his term as governor . 
 Neither Wetherby nor Clements enjoyed the support of Governor Chandler . Coupled with this , Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson suffered a heart attack during the campaign , and as majority whip , Clements assumed the role of acting majority leader . This took him away from the campaign trail for extended periods of time . During the infrequent visits he was able to make to the state , he campaigned for his former lieutenant governor , Wetherby . In the general election , Cooper defeated Wetherby by 65 @,@ 000 votes and Clements lost to Thruston Ballard Morton by about 7 @,@ 000 votes . It was the first time Clements had lost a race in thirty years , and Kentucky Democrats would not elect a senator again for another sixteen years . 
 After this defeat , Wetherby moved to Franklin County and secured a position at Brighton Engineering with help from his old primary opponent , Bill May . From 1964 to 1966 , he was a delegate to an assembly charged with revising the state constitution . In 1965 , May backed Wetherby in his campaign for the Kentucky Senate . He won the election , defeating the candidate favored by Chandler , and was chosen president of that body from 1966 to 1968 . He was so effective in this position that the state 's 1966 budget was debated for only ten days before passing by a vote of 31 – 5 in virtually the same form as it was presented . 
 After his service in the state senate , Wetherby returned to Brighton Engineering , where he eventually became a vice @-@ president . He died March 27 , 1994 of complications from a broken hip . He is buried at the Frankfort Cemetery . The administration building at Western Kentucky University and a gymnasium at Morehead State University were named in his honor . 
 = English Reformation = 
 The English Reformation was a series of events in 16th century England by which the Church of England broke away from the authority of the Pope and the Roman Catholic Church . These events were , in part , associated with the wider process of the European Protestant Reformation , a religious and political movement that affected the practice of Christianity across all of Europe during this period . Many factors contributed to the process : the decline of feudalism and the rise of nationalism , the rise of the common law , the invention of the printing press and increased circulation of the Bible , the transmission of new knowledge and ideas among scholars , the upper and middle classes and readers in general . However , the various phases of the English Reformation , which also covered Wales and Ireland , were largely driven by changes in government policy , to which public opinion gradually accommodated itself . 
 Based on Henry VIII 's desire for an annulment of his marriage ( first requested of Pope Clement VII in 1527 ) , the English Reformation was at the outset more of a political affair than a theological dispute . The reality of political differences between Rome and England allowed growing theological disputes to come to the fore . Until the break with Rome , it was the Pope and general councils of the Church that decided doctrine . Church law was governed by the code of canon law with final jurisdiction in Rome . Church taxes were paid straight to Rome , and the Pope had the final word in the appointment of bishops . 
 The break with Rome was effected by a series of acts of Parliament passed between 1532 and 1534 , among them the 1534 Act of Supremacy which declared that Henry was the " Supreme Head on earth of the Church of England " . ( This title was renounced by Mary I in 1553 in the process of restoring papal jurisdiction ; when Elizabeth I reasserted the royal supremacy in 1559 her title was Supreme Governor . ) Final authority in doctrinal and legal disputes now rested with the monarch , and the papacy was deprived of revenue and the final say on the appointment of bishops . 
