 The theology and liturgy of the Church of England became markedly Protestant during the reign of Henry 's son Edward VI largely along lines laid down by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer . Under Mary , the whole process was reversed and the Church of England was again placed under papal jurisdiction . Soon after , Elizabeth reintroduced the Protestant faith but in a more moderate manner . The structure and theology of the church was a matter of fierce dispute for generations . 
 The violent aspect of these disputes , manifested in the English Civil Wars , ended when the last Roman Catholic monarch , James II , was deposed , and Parliament asked William and Mary to rule jointly in conjunction with the English Bill of Rights in 1688 ( in the " Glorious Revolution " ) , from which emerged a church polity with an established church and a number of non @-@ conformist churches whose members at first suffered various civil disabilities but which were removed over time . The legacy of the past Roman Catholic Establishment remained an issue for some time , and still exists today . A substantial minority remained Roman Catholic in England , and in an effort to disestablish it from British systems , their church organisation remained illegal until the 19th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Henry VIII : marriages and desire for a male heir = = = 
 Henry VIII ascended the English throne in 1509 at the age of 17 . He made a dynastic marriage with Catherine of Aragon , widow of his brother Arthur , in June 1509 , just before his coronation on Midsummer 's Day . Unlike his father , who was secretive and conservative , the young Henry appeared the epitome of chivalry and sociability . An observant Roman Catholic , he heard up to five masses a day ( except during the hunting season ) ; of " powerful but unoriginal mind , " he let himself be influenced by his advisors from whom he was never apart , by night or day . He was thus susceptible to whoever had his ear . 
 This contributed to a state of hostility between his young contemporaries and the Lord Chancellor , Cardinal Thomas Wolsey . As long as Wolsey had his ear , Henry 's Roman Catholicism was secure : in 1521 , he had defended the Roman Catholic Church from Martin Luther 's accusations of heresy in a book he wrote — probably with considerable help from the conservative Bishop of Rochester John Fisher — entitled The Defence of the Seven Sacraments , for which he was awarded the title " Defender of the Faith " ( Fidei Defensor ) by Pope Leo X. ( Successive English and British monarchs have retained this title to the present , even after the Anglican Church broke away from Roman Catholicism , in part because the title was re @-@ conferred by Parliament after the split . ) Wolsey 's enemies at court included those who had been influenced by Lutheran ideas , among whom was the attractive , charismatic Anne Boleyn . 
 Anne arrived at court in 1522 , from years in France where she had been educated by Queen Claude of France , as maid of honour to Queen Catherine , a woman of " charm , style and wit , with will and savagery which made her a match for Henry . " By the late 1520s , Henry wanted his marriage to Catherine annulled . She had not produced a male heir who survived into adulthood , and Henry wanted a son to secure the Tudor dynasty . 
 Before Henry 's father ( Henry VII ) ascended the throne , England had been beset by civil warfare over rival claims to the English crown . Henry wanted to avoid a similar uncertainty over the succession . Catherine 's only surviving child was Princess Mary . 
 Henry claimed that this lack of a male heir was because his marriage was " blighted in the eyes of God . " Catherine had been his late brother 's wife , and it was therefore against biblical teachings for Henry to have married her ( Leviticus 20 : 21 ) ; a special dispensation from Pope Julius II had been needed to allow the wedding in the first place . Henry argued that this had been wrong and that his marriage had never been valid . In 1527 Henry asked Pope Clement VII to annul the marriage , but the Pope refused . According to Canon Law the Pope cannot annul a marriage on the basis of a canonical impediment previously dispensed . Clement also feared the wrath of Catherine 's nephew , Holy Roman Emperor Charles V , whose troops earlier that year had sacked Rome and briefly taken the Pope prisoner . 
 The combination of his " scruple of conscience " and his captivation by Anne Boleyn made his desire to rid himself of his Queen compelling . The indictment of his chancellor Cardinal Wolsey in 1529 for praemunire ( taking the authority of the Papacy above the Crown ) , and subsequent death in November 1530 on his way to London to answer a charge of high treason left Henry open to the opposing influences of the supporters of the Queen and those who sanctioned the abandonment of the Roman allegiance , for whom an annulment was but an opportunity . 
 = = = Parliamentary debate and legislation = = = 
 In 1529 the king summoned Parliament to deal with annulment , thus bringing together those who wanted reform but who disagreed what form it should take ; it became known as the Reformation Parliament . There were Common lawyers who resented the privileges of the clergy to summon laity to their courts ; there were those who had been influenced by Lutheran evangelicalism and were hostile to the theology of Rome ; Thomas Cromwell was both . Henry 's Chancellor , Thomas More , successor to Wolsey , also wanted reform : he wanted new laws against heresy . 
 Cromwell was a lawyer and a member of Parliament — a Protestant who saw how Parliament could be used to advance the Royal Supremacy , which Henry wanted , and to further Protestant beliefs and practices Cromwell and his friends wanted . One of his closest friends was Thomas Cranmer , soon to be Archbishop . 
 In the matter of the annulment , no progress seemed possible . The Pope seemed more afraid of Emperor Charles V than of Henry . Anne and Cromwell and their allies wished simply to ignore the Pope , but in October 1530 a meeting of clergy and lawyers advised that Parliament could not empower the archbishop to act against the Pope 's prohibition . Henry thus resolved to bully the priests . 
 = = = Actions by the king against English clergy = = = 
 Having brought down his Chancellor , Cardinal Wolsey , Henry VIII finally resolved to charge the whole English clergy with praemunire to secure their agreement to his annulment . The Statute of <unk> , which forbade obedience to the authority of the Pope or of any foreign rulers , enacted in 1392 , had been used against individuals in the ordinary course of court proceedings . Now Henry , having first charged Queen Catherine 's supporters , Bishops John Fisher , Nicholas West and Henry Standish and Archdeacon of Exeter , Adam Travers , decided to proceed against the whole clergy . Henry claimed £ 100 @,@ 000 from the Convocation of Canterbury of the Church of England for their pardon , which was granted by the Convocation on 24 January 1531 . The clergy wanted the payment to be spread over five years . Henry refused . The Convocation responded by withdrawing their payment altogether , and demanded Henry fulfill certain guarantees before they would give him the money . Henry refused these conditions . He agreed only to the five @-@ year period of payment and added five articles that specified that : 
 The clergy recognise Henry as the " sole protector and Supreme Head of the Church and clergy of England " 
 The King had spiritual jurisdiction 
 The privileges of the Church were upheld only if they did not detract from the royal prerogative and the laws of the realm 
 The King pardoned the clergy for violating the statute of praemunire , and 
 The laity were also pardoned . 
 = = = Further legislative acts = = = 
 In Parliament , Bishop John Fisher championed Catherine and the clergy ; he had inserted into the first article , the phrase " ... as far as the word of God allows ... " . In Convocation , however , Archbishop Warham requested a discussion but was met by a stunned silence ; then Warham said , " He who is silent seems to consent , " to which a clergyman responded , " Then we are all silent . " The Convocation granted consent to the King 's five articles and the payment on 8 March 1531 . 
 That same year Parliament passed the Pardon to Clergy Act 1531 . 
 The breaking of the power of Rome proceeded little by little . In 1532 , Cromwell brought before Parliament the Supplication Against the Ordinaries , which listed nine grievances against the Church , including abuses of power and Convocation 's independent legislative power . Finally , on 10 May , the King demanded of Convocation that the Church renounce all authority to make laws . On 15 May , the Submission of the Clergy was subscribed , which recognised Royal Supremacy over the church so that it could no longer make canon law without royal licence — i.e. , without the King 's permission — thus emasculating it as a law @-@ making body . ( The Parliament subsequently passed this in 1534 and again in 1536 . ) The day after this , More resigned as Chancellor , leaving Cromwell as Henry 's chief minister . ( Cromwell never became Chancellor . His power came — and was lost — through his informal relations with Henry . ) 
 Several Acts of Parliament then followed . The Act in Conditional Restraint of <unk> proposed that the clergy pay no more than 5 % of their first year 's revenue ( annates ) to Rome . This was initially controversial , and required that Henry visit the House of Lords three times to browbeat the Commons . 
 The Act in Restraint of Appeals , drafted by Cromwell , apart from outlawing appeals to Rome on ecclesiastical matters , declared that 
 " This realm of England is an Empire , and so hath been accepted in the world , governed by one Supreme Head and King having the dignity and royal estate of the Imperial Crown of the same , unto whom a body politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people divided in terms and by names of Spirituality and <unk> , be bounden and owe to bear next to God a natural and humble obedience . " 
 This declared England an independent country in every respect . English historian Geoffrey Elton called this Act an " essential ingredient " of the " Tudor revolution " in that it expounded a theory of national sovereignty . The Act in Absolute Restraint of <unk> outlawed all annates to Rome , and also ordered that if cathedrals refused the King 's nomination for bishop , they would be liable to punishment by praemunire . Finally in 1534 the Acts of Supremacy made Henry " supreme head in earth of the Church of England " and disregarded any " usage , custom , foreign laws , foreign authority [ or ] prescription . " 
 Meanwhile , having taken Anne to France on a pre @-@ nuptial honeymoon , Henry married her in Westminster Abbey in January 1533 . This was made easier by the death of Archbishop Warham , a strong opponent of an annulment . Henry appointed Thomas Cranmer as his successor as Archbishop of Canterbury . Cranmer was prepared to grant the annulment of the marriage to Catherine as Henry required , going so far as to pronounce the judgement that Henry 's marriage with Catherine was against the law of God on 23 May . Anne gave birth to a daughter , Princess Elizabeth , in September 1533 . The Pope responded to the marriage by excommunicating both Henry and Cranmer from the Roman Catholic Church ( 11 July 1533 ) . Henry was excommunicated again in December 1538 . 
 Consequently , in the same year the Act of First Fruits and <unk> transferred the taxes on ecclesiastical income from the Pope to the Crown . The Act Concerning Peter 's Pence and <unk> outlawed the annual payment by landowners of one penny to the Pope . This Act also reiterated that England had " no superior under God , but only your Grace " and that Henry 's " imperial crown " had been diminished by " the unreasonable and uncharitable usurpations and exactions " of the Pope . 
 In case any of this should be resisted , Parliament passed the <unk> Act 1534 , which made it high treason punishable by death to deny Royal Supremacy . The following year , Thomas More and John Fisher were executed under this legislation . Finally , in 1536 , Parliament passed the Act against the Pope 's Authority , which removed the last part of papal authority still legal . This was Rome 's power in England to decide disputes concerning Scripture . 
 = = Theological radicalism = = 
 The break with Rome was not , by itself , a Reformation . That was to come from the dissemination of ideas . The views of the German reformer Martin Luther and his school were widely known and disputed in England . A major manifestation of theological radicalism in England was Lollardy , a movement deriving from the writings of John Wycliffe , the 14th century Bible translator , which stressed the primacy of Scripture . But after the execution of Sir John Oldcastle , leader of the Lollard rebellion of 1415 , they never again had access to the levers of power , and by the 15th century were much reduced in numbers and influence . 
 Many Lollards were still about , especially in London and the Thames Valley , in Essex and Kent , Coventry , Bristol and even in the North , who would be receptive to the new ideas when they came , who looked for a reform in the lifestyle of the clergy . They emphasised the preaching of the word over the sacrament of the altar , holding the latter to be but a memorial , but they were not party to the actions of the government . Other ideas , critical of the papal supremacy were held , not only by Lollards , but by those who wished to assert the supremacy of the secular state over the church but also by <unk> such as Thomas More and , initially , Cranmer . Other Roman Catholic reformists , including John Colet , Dean of St Paul 's , warned that heretics were not nearly so great a danger to the faith as the wicked and indolent lives of the clergy . 
 The impact of Luther 's thinking was of a different order . The main plank of his thinking , justification by faith alone rather than by good works , threatened the whole basis of the Roman Catholic penitential system with its endowed masses and prayers for the dead as well as its doctrine of purgatory . Faith , not pious acts , prayers or masses , in this view , can secure the grace of God . Moreover , printing , which had become widespread at the end of the previous century , meant that vernacular Bibles could be produced in quantity . A further English translation by William Tyndale was banned but it was impossible to prevent copies from being smuggled and widely read . The Church could no longer effectively dictate its interpretation . 
 A group in Cambridge , which met at the White Horse tavern from the mid @-@ 1520s and became known as Little Germany , soon became influential . Its members included Robert Barnes , Hugh Latimer , John Frith and Thomas <unk> — all eventually burned as heretics . Cranmer 's change of mind , borne partly by his membership of the team negotiating for the annulment , finally came through his stay with Andreas Osiander in Nuremberg in 1532 . ( Cranmer also secretly married Osiander 's niece ) . Even then the position was complicated by the fact that Lutherans were not in favour of the annulment . Cranmer ( and Henry ) felt obliged to seek assistance from Strasbourg and Basel , which brought him into contact with the more radical ideas associated with Zwingli . 
 Cromwell 's programme , assisted by Anne Boleyn 's influence over episcopal appointments , was not merely against the clergy and the power of Rome . He persuaded Henry that safety from political alliances that Rome might attempt to bring together lay in negotiations with the German Lutheran princes . There also seemed to be a possibility that Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , might act to avenge his rejected aunt ( Queen Catherine ) and enforce the Pope 's excommunication . It never came to anything but it brought to England Lutheran ideas : three sacraments only — baptism , Eucharist and penance — which Henry was prepared to countenance to maintain the possibility of an alliance . 
 More noticeable , and objectionable to many , were the Injunctions , first of 1536 and then of 1538 . The programme began with the abolition of many feast days , " the occasion of vice and idleness " which , particularly at harvest time , had an immediate effect on village life . The offerings to images were discouraged , as were pilgrimages — these injunctions were issued while monasteries were being dissolved . In some places images were burned on the grounds that they were objects of superstitious devotion , candles lit before images were prohibited , and Bibles in both English and Latin were to be bought . Thus did the Reformation begin to affect the towns and villages of England and , in many places , people did not like it . 
 = = = Dissolution of the Monasteries = = = 
 In 1534 , Cromwell initiated a Visitation of the Monasteries ostensibly to examine their character , but in fact , to value their assets with a view to expropriation . The Crown was undergoing financial difficulties , and the wealth of the church , in contrast to its political weakness , made appropriation of church property both tempting and feasible . Suppression of monasteries to raise funds was not unknown previously . Cromwell had done the same thing on the instructions of Cardinal Wolsey to raise funds for two proposed colleges at Ipswich and Oxford years before . 
 Now the Visitation allowed for an inventory of what the monasteries possessed , and the visiting commissioners claimed to have uncovered sexual immorality and financial impropriety amongst the monks and nuns , which became the ostensible justification for their suppression . The Church owned between one @-@ fifth and one @-@ third of the land in all England ; Cromwell realised that he could bind the gentry and nobility to Royal Supremacy by selling to them the huge amount of Church lands , and that any reversion to pre @-@ Royal Supremacy would entail upsetting many of the powerful people in the realm . For these various reasons the Dissolution of the Monasteries began in 1536 with the Dissolution of the Lesser Monasteries Act , affecting smaller houses — those valued at less than £ 200 a year . Henry used the revenue to help build coastal defences ( see Device Forts ) against expected invasion , and all the land was given to the Crown or sold to the aristocracy . Whereas the royal supremacy had raised few eyebrows , the attack on abbeys and priories affected lay people . Mobs attacked those sent to break up monastic buildings . Suppression commissioners were attacked by local people in several places . In Northern England there were a series of uprisings by Roman Catholics against the dissolutions in late 1536 and early 1537 . 
 In the autumn of 1536 there was a great muster , reckoned to be up to 40 @,@ 000 in number , at Horncastle in Lincolnshire . The nervous gentry managed , with difficulty , to disperse these masses — who had tried unsuccessfully to negotiate with the king by petition . The Pilgrimage of Grace was a more serious matter . Revolt spread through Yorkshire , and the rebels gathered at York . Robert Aske , their leader , negotiated the restoration of sixteen of the twenty @-@ six northern monasteries , which had actually been dissolved . However , the promises made to them by the Duke of Suffolk were ignored on the king 's orders . Suffolk was instructed to put the rebellion down . Forty @-@ seven of the Lincolnshire rebels were executed , and 132 from the northern pilgrimage . Further rebellions took place in Cornwall in early 1537 , and in Walsingham ( in Norfolk ) . These received similar treatment . 
 It took Cromwell four years to complete the process . In 1539 he moved to the dissolution of the larger monasteries that had escaped earlier . Many houses gave up voluntarily , though some sought exemption by payment . When their houses were closed down some monks sought to transfer to larger houses . Many became secular priests . A few , including eighteen Carthusians , refused and were killed to the last man . 
 Henry VIII personally devised a plan to form at least thirteen new dioceses so that most counties had one based on a former monastery ( or more than one ) , though this scheme was only partly carried out . New dioceses were established at Bristol , Gloucester , Oxford , Peterborough , Westminster and Chester , but not , for instance , at Shrewsbury , Leicester or Waltham . 
 = = = Reformation reversed = = = 
 The abolition of papal authority made way not for orderly change , but for dissension and violence . Iconoclasm , destruction , disputes within communities that led to violence , and radical challenge to all forms of faith were reported daily to Cromwell — developments which he tried to hide from the King . Once Henry knew what was afoot , he acted . Thus at the end of 1538 , a proclamation was issued forbidding free discussion of the Sacrament and forbidding clerical marriage , on pain of death . 
 Henry personally presided at the trial of John Lambert in November 1538 for denying the real presence . At the same time , he shared in the drafting of a proclamation giving Anabaptists and <unk> ten days to get out of the country . In 1539 Parliament passed the Six Articles reaffirming Roman Catholic practices such as transubstantiation , clerical celibacy and the importance of confession to a priest and prescribed penalties if anyone denied them . Henry himself observed the Easter <unk> in that year with some display . 
 On 28 June 1540 Cromwell , Henry 's longtime advisor and loyal servant , was executed . Different reasons were advanced : that Cromwell would not enforce the Act of Six Articles ; that he had supported Barnes , Latimer and other heretics ; and that he was responsible for Henry 's marriage to Anne of Cleves , his fourth wife . Many other arrests under the Act followed . Cranmer lay low . 
 In 1540 Henry began his attack upon the free availability of the Bible . In 1536 Cromwell had instructed each parish to acquire " one book of the whole Bible of the largest volume in English " by Easter 1539 . This instruction had been largely ignored , so a new version , the Great Bible ( largely William Tyndale 's English translation of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures ) , was authorised in August 1537 . But by 1539 Henry had announced his desire to have it " corrected " ( which Cranmer referred to the universities to undertake ) . 
 Many parishes were , in any case , reluctant to use English Bibles . Now the mood was conservatism , which expressed itself in the fear that Bible reading led to heresy . Many Bibles that had been put in place were removed . By the 1543 Act for the Advancement of True Religion , Henry restricted Bible reading to men and women of noble birth . He expressed his fears to Parliament in 1545 that " the Word of God , is disputed , rhymed , sung and <unk> in every ale house and tavern , contrary to the true meaning and doctrine of the same . " 
 By 1546 the conservatives , the Duke of Norfolk , <unk> , Gardiner and Tunstall were in the ascendent . They were , by the king 's will , to be members of the regency council on his death . However , by the time he died in 1547 , Edward Seymour , Earl of Hertford , brother of Jane Seymour , Henry 's third wife ( and therefore uncle to the future Edward VI ) , managed — by a number of alliances with influential Protestants such as Lisle — to gain control over the Privy Council . He persuaded Henry to change his will to replace Norfolk , <unk> , Gardiner and Tunstall as executors with Seymour 's supporters . 
 = = Edward 's Reformation = = 
 When Henry died in 1547 , his nine @-@ year @-@ old son , Edward VI , inherited the throne . Edward was a precocious child who had been brought up as a Protestant , but was initially of little account politically . Edward Seymour was made Lord Protector . He was commissioned as virtual regent with near sovereign powers . Now made Duke of Somerset , he proceeded at first hesitantly , partly because his powers were not unchallenged . When he acted it was because he saw the political advantage in doing so . 
 The 1547 Injunctions against images were a more tightly drawn version of those of 1538 , but they were more fiercely enforced , at first informally , and then by instruction . All images in churches were to be dismantled . Stained glass , shrines and statues were defaced or destroyed . <unk> , and often their lofts and screens , were cut down and bells were taken down . Vestments were prohibited and either burned or sold . Chalices were melted down or sold . The requirement of the clergy to be celibate was lifted . Processions were banned and ashes and palms were prohibited . Chantries ( endowments to provide masses for the dead ) were abolished completely . How well this was received is disputed . Modern historian A.G. Dickens contends that people had " ceased to believe in intercessory masses for souls in purgatory " , while others , such as Eamon Duffy , argue that the demolition of chantry chapels and the removal of images coincided with the activity of royal visitors . The evidence is often ambiguous . In 1549 Cranmer introduced a Book of Common Prayer in English , which while to all appearances kept the structure of the Mass , altered the theology so that the holy gifts of consecrated bread and wine were not offered to God as a sacrifice . In 1550 stone altars were replaced by wooden communion tables , a very public break with the past , as it changed the look and focus of church interiors . 
 Less visible , but still influential , was the new ordinal — which provided for Protestant ministers rather than Roman Catholic priests , an admittedly conservative adaptation of Bucer 's draft ; its Preface explicitly mentions the historic succession but it has been described as " ... another case of Cranmer 's opportunist adoption of medieval forms for new purposes . " In 1551 , the episcopate was remodelled by the appointment of Protestants to the bench . This removed the refusal of some bishops to enforce the regulations as an obstacle to change . 
 Henceforth , the Reformation proceeded apace . In 1552 , the prayer book — which the conservative Bishop Stephen Gardiner had approved from his prison cell as being " patient of a Catholic interpretation " — was replaced by a second , much more radical prayer book that altered the service to remove any sense that the Eucharist was a material sacrifice offered to God while keeping the belief that it was a sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise ( in word ) . Edward 's Parliament also repealed his father 's Six Articles . 
 The enforcement of the new liturgy did not always take place without a struggle . Conformity was the order of the day , but in East Anglia and in Devon there were rebellions , as also in Cornwall , to which many parishes sent their young men ; they were put down only after considerable loss of life . In other places the causes of the rebellions were less easy to pin down but by July throughout southern England , there was " quavering quiet , " which burst out into " stirs " in many places , most significantly in Kett 's Rebellion in Norwich . 
 Apart from these more spectacular pieces of resistance , in some places chantry priests continued to say prayers and landowners to pay them to do so . Opposition to the removal of images was widespread — so much so that when during the Commonwealth , William Dowsing was commissioned to the task of image breaking in Suffolk , his task , as he records it , was enormous . In Kent and the southeast , compliance was mostly willing and for many , the sale of vestments and plate was an opportunity to make money ( but it was also true that in London and Kent , Reformation ideas had permeated more deeply into popular thinking ) . 
 The effect of the resistance was to topple Somerset as Lord Protector , so that in 1549 it was feared by some that the Reformation would cease . The prayer book was the tipping point . But Lisle , now made Earl of Warwick , was made Lord President of the Privy Council and , ever the opportunist ( he died a public Roman Catholic ) , he saw the further implementation of the reforming policy as a means of defeating his rivals . 
 Outwardly , the destruction and removals for sale had changed the church forever . Many churches had concealed their vestments and their silver , and had buried their stone altars . There were many disputes between the government and parishes over church property . Thus , when Edward died in July 1553 and the Duke of Northumberland attempted to have the Protestant Lady Jane Grey made Queen , the unpopularity of the confiscations gave Mary the opportunity to have herself proclaimed Queen , first in Suffolk , and then in London to the acclamation of the crowds . 
 = = Roman Catholic Restoration under Mary I = = 
 From 1553 , under the reign of Henry 's Roman Catholic daughter , Mary I , the Reformation legislation was repealed and Mary sought to achieve the reunion with Rome . Her first Act of Parliament was to retroactively validate Henry 's marriage to her mother and so legitimise her claim to the throne . 
 Achieving her objective was , however , not straightforward . The Pope was only prepared to accept reunion when church property disputes had been settled — which , in practice , meant letting those who had bought former church property keep it . Thus did Cardinal Pole arrive to become Archbishop of Canterbury in Cranmer 's place . Mary could have had Cranmer imprisoned as he was tried and executed for treason — he had supported the claims of Lady Jane Grey — but she resolved to have him tried for heresy . His recantations of his Protestantism would have been a major coup . <unk> for her , he unexpectedly withdrew his recantations at the last minute as he was to be burned at the stake , thus ruining her government 's propaganda victory . 
 If Mary was to secure England for Roman Catholicism , she needed an heir . On the advice of the Holy Roman Emperor she married his son , Philip II of Spain ; she needed to prevent her Protestant half @-@ sister Elizabeth from inheriting the Crown and thus returning England to Protestantism . There was opposition , and even a rebellion in Kent ( led by Sir Thomas Wyatt ) ; even though it was provided that Philip would never inherit the kingdom if there was no heir , received no estates and had no coronation . He was there to provide an heir . But she never became pregnant , and likely suffered from cancer . Ironically , another blow fell . Pope Julius died and his successor , Pope Paul IV , declared war on Philip and recalled Pole to Rome to have him tried as a heretic . Mary refused to let him go . The support she might have expected from a grateful Pope was thus denied . 
 After 1555 , the initial reconciling tone of the regime began to harden . The medieval heresy laws were restored . The Marian Persecutions of Protestants ensued and 283 Protestants were burnt at the stake for heresy . This resulted in the Queen becoming known as Bloody Mary , due to the influence of John Foxe , one of the Protestants who fled Marian England . Foxe 's Book of Martyrs recorded the executions in such detail that it became Mary 's epitaph ; Convocation subsequently ordered that Foxe 's book should be placed in every cathedral in the land . In fact , while those who were executed after the revolts of 1536 , and the St David 's Down rebellion of 1549 , and the unknown number of monks who died for refusing to submit , may not have been tried for heresy , they certainly exceeded that number by some amount . Even so , the heroism of some of the martyrs was an example to those who witnessed them , so that in some places it was the burnings that set people against the regime . 
 There was a slow consolidation in Roman Catholic strength in Mary 's latter years . The reconciled Roman Catholic Edmund Bonner , Bishop of London , produced a catechism and a collection of homilies . Printing presses produced primers and other devotional materials , and recruitment to the English clergy began to rise after almost a decade . Repairs to long @-@ neglected churches began . In the parishes " ... restoration and repair continued , new bells were bought , and churches ' ales produced their bucolic profits . " Commissioners visited to ensure that altars were restored , roods rebuilt and vestments and plate purchased . Moreover , Pole was determined to do more than remake the past . He insisted on scripture , teaching and education , and on improving the clergy 's moral standards . 
 It is difficult to determine how far previous reigns had broken Roman Catholic devotion , with its belief in the saints and in purgatory , but certainties — especially those that drew public financial support — had been shaken . Benefactions to the church did not return significantly . Trust in clergy who had changed their minds and were now willing to leave their new wives — as they were required to do — was bound to have weakened . 
 Few monasteries , chantries , and <unk> were reinstated . " Parish religion was marked by religious and cultural sterility , " though some have observed enthusiasm , marred only by poor harvests that produced poverty and want . Full restoration of the Roman Catholic faith in England to its pre @-@ Reformation state would take time . Consequently , Protestants secretly ministering to underground congregations , such as Thomas Bentham , were planning for a long haul , a ministry of survival . Mary 's death in November 1558 , childless and without having made provision for a Roman Catholic to succeed her , would undo her consolidation . 
 = = Elizabethan Settlement = = 
 Following Mary 's childless death , her half @-@ sister Elizabeth inherited the throne . One of the most important concerns during Elizabeth 's early reign was religion . Elizabeth could not be Roman Catholic , as that church considered her illegitimate . At the same time , she had observed the turmoil brought about by Edward 's introduction of radical Protestant reforms . Communion with the Roman Catholic Church was again severed by Elizabeth . She relied primarily on her chief advisors , Sir William Cecil , as her Secretary of State , and Sir Nicholas Bacon , as the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal , for direction on the matter . Chiefly she supported her father 's idea of reforming the church but made some minor adjustments . In this way , Elizabeth and her advisors aimed at a church that included most opinions . 
 Two groups were excluded . Roman Catholics who remained loyal to the Pope would not be tolerated . They were , in fact , regarded as traitors , because the Pope had refused to accept Elizabeth as Queen of England . Roman Catholics were given the hard choice of being loyal either to their church or their country . For some priests it meant life on the run , in some cases death for treason . 
 The other group not to be tolerated was people who wanted reform to go much further , and who finally gave up on the Church of England . They could no longer see it as a true church . They believed it had refused to obey the Bible , so they formed small groups of convinced believers outside the church . The government responded with imprisonment and exile to try to crush these " ' separatists " ' . 
 The Church of England itself contained three groups . Those who believed the form of the church was just what it should be included leaders like John Jewel and Richard Hooker . A second group looked for opportunities to reintroduce some Roman Catholic practices . Under the Stuart kings they would have their chance . The third group , who came to be called Puritans , wanted to remove remaining traces of the old ways . The Stuart kings were to give them a rough passage . At the end of Elizabeth 's reign , the Church of England was firmly in place , but held the seeds of future conflict . 
 Parliament was summoned in 1559 to consider the Reformation Bill and to create a new church . The Reformation Bill defined the Communion as a consubstantial celebration as opposed to a transubstantial celebration , included abuse of the pope in the litany , and ordered that ministers should not wear the surplice or other Roman Catholic vestments . It allowed ministers to marry , banned images from churches , and confirmed Elizabeth as Supreme Governor of the Church of England . 
 The Bill met heavy resistance in the House of Lords , as Roman Catholic bishops as well as the lay peers voted against it . They reworked much of the Bill , changed the litany to allow for a transubstantial belief in the Communion and refused to grant Elizabeth the title of Supreme Head of the Church . Parliament was prorogued over Easter , and when it resumed , the government entered two new bills into the Houses — the Act of Supremacy and the Act of Uniformity . 
 = = = Act of Supremacy 1558 = = = 
 This Act made null and void ( with certain specific exceptions ) the Marian act of 1554 that had repealed all of Henry VIII 's legislation from 1529 onwards which had denied the authority of the See of Rome and also confirmed Elizabeth as Supreme Governor of the Church of England . Supreme Governor was a suitably equivocal title that made Elizabeth head of the Church without ever saying she was . This was important for two reasons : ( 1 ) it satisfied those who felt that a woman could not rule the church , and ( 2 ) it acted in a conciliatory way toward English Roman Catholics . For the clergy , Elizabeth 's changes were more wholesale than those of her half @-@ brother , Edward , had been . All but one ( Anthony Kitchin ) of the bishops lost their posts , a hundred fellows of Oxford colleges were deprived ; many dignitaries resigned rather than take the oath . The bishops who were removed from the ecclesiastical bench were replaced by appointees who would agree to the reforms . 
 On the question of images , Elizabeth 's initial reaction was to allow crucifixes and candlesticks and the restoration of roods , but some of the new bishops whom she had elevated protested . In 1560 Edmund Grindal , one of the Marian exiles now made Bishop of London , was allowed to enforce the demolition of rood lofts in London and in 1561 the Queen herself ordered the demolition of all lofts . Thereafter , the determination to prevent any further restoration was evidenced by the more thoroughgoing destruction of roods , vestments , stone altars , dooms , statues and other ornaments . The queen also appointed a new Privy Council , removing many Roman Catholic counsellors by doing so . Under Elizabeth , factionalism in the Council and conflicts at court greatly diminished . The Act of Supremacy was passed without difficulty . 
 = = = Act of Uniformity 1558 = = = 
 The Act of Uniformity 1558 , which forced people to attend Sunday service in an Anglican church with a new version of the Book of Common Prayer , passed by only three votes . The Bill of Uniformity was more cautious than the initial Reformation Bill . It revoked the harsh laws proposed against Roman Catholics , it removed the abuse of the pope from the litany and kept the wording that allowed for both consubstantial and transubstantial beliefs in the presence of Christ in the Eucharist . 
 After Parliament was dismissed , Elizabeth and Cecil drafted the Royal Injunctions . These were additions to the settlement , and largely stressed continuity with the Catholic past – clergy were ordered to wear the surplice and the use of the cope was allowed in cathedrals and collegiate chapels . The Ornaments Rubric states that the ornaments of the church and ministers thereof shall remain as they were in the second year of the reign of Edward VI , i.e. in 1548 , when Mass was still celebrated ( the Oxford Movement in the 19th century interpreted this as permission to wear <unk> , <unk> and other vestments ) . <unk> , as opposed to ordinary baker 's bread , were to be used as the bread at Communion . There had been opposition to the settlement in rural England , which for the most part was largely Roman Catholic , so the changes aimed for acceptance of the settlement . What succeeded more than anything else was the sheer length of Elizabeth 's reign ; while Mary had been able to impose her programme for a mere five years , Elizabeth had more than forty . Those who delayed , " looking for a new day " when restoration would again be commanded , were defeated by the passing of years . 
 = = = Puritans and Roman Catholics = = = 
 Elizabeth 's reign saw the emergence of Puritanism , which encompassed those Protestants who , whilst they agreed that there should be one national church , felt that the church had been but partially reformed . Puritanism ranged from hostility to the content of the Prayer Book and " popish " ceremony , to a desire for church governance to be radically reformed . Grindal was made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1575 and chose to oppose even the Queen in his desire to forward the Puritan agenda . He ended a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ word reproach to her with , " Bear with me , I beseech you Madam , if I choose rather to offend your earthly majesty than to offend the heavenly majesty of God . " He was placed under house arrest for his trouble and though he was not deprived , his death in 1583 put an end to the hopes of his supporters . 
 Grindal 's successor , Archbishop Whitgift , more reflected the Queen 's determination to discipline those who were unprepared to accept her settlement . A conformist , he imposed a degree of obedience on the clergy that apparently alarmed even the Queen 's ministers , such as Lord Burghley . The Puritan cause was not helped even by its friends . The pseudonymous " Martin Marprelate " tracts , which attacked conformist clergy with a libellous humorous tone , outraged senior Puritan clergy and set the government on an unsuccessful attempt to run the writer to earth . The defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 incidentally made it more difficult for Puritans to resist the conclusion that since God " blew with his wind and they were scattered " he could not be too offended by the religious establishment in the land . 
 On the other side , there were still huge numbers of Roman Catholics . Some conformed , bending with the times , hoping that there would be a fresh reverse . Vestments were still hidden , golden candlesticks bequeathed , chalices kept . The Mass was still celebrated in some places alongside the new Communion service but was more difficult than before . Both Roman Catholic priests and laity lived a double life , apparently conforming , but avoiding taking the oath of conformity . Only as time passed did recusancy — refusal to attend Protestant services — became more common . Jesuits and seminary priests , trained in Douai and Rome to make good the losses of English priests , encouraged this . 
 By the 1570s , an underground church was growing fast as the Church of England became more Protestant and less bearable for Roman Catholics who were still a sizeable minority . Only one public attempt to restore the old religion occurred : the Rising of the Northern earls in 1569 . It was a botched attempt ; in spite of tumultuous crowds who greeted the rebels in Durham , the rebellion did not spread . The assistance they sought did not materialise , their communication with allies at Court was poor They came nowhere near to freeing Mary Stuart , whose presence might have rallied support , from her imprisonment in Tutbury . 
 The Roman Catholic Church 's refusal to countenance occasional attendance at Protestant services , as well as the excommunication of Elizabeth by Pope Pius V in 1570 , presented the choice to Roman Catholics more starkly . The arrival of the seminary priests , while it was a lifeline to many Roman Catholics , brought further trouble . Elizabeth 's ministers took steps to stem the tide : fines for refusal to attend church were raised from 12 d. per service to £ 20 a month , fifty times an artisan 's wage ; it was now treason to be absolved from schism and reconciled to Rome ; the execution of priests began — the first in 1577 , four in 1581 , eleven in 1582 , two in 1583 , six in 1584 , fifty @-@ three by 1590 , and seventy more between 1601 and 1608 . It became treasonable for a Roman Catholic priest ordained abroad to enter the country . Because the papacy had called for the deposing of the Queen , the choice for moderate Roman Catholics lay between treason and damnation . The List of Catholic martyrs of the English Reformation was extensive . 
 There is some distance between legislation and its enforcement . The governmental attacks on recusancy were mostly upon the gentry . Few recusants were actually fined ; the fines that were imposed were often at reduced rates ; the persecution eased ; priests came to recognise that they should not refuse communion to occasional conformists . The persecutions did not extinguish the faith , but they tested it sorely . The huge number of Roman Catholics in East Anglia and the North in the 1560s disappeared into the general population in part because recusant priests largely served the great Roman Catholic houses , which alone could hide them . Without the Mass and pastoral care , yeomen , artisans and husbandmen fell into conformism . Roman Catholicism , supported by foreign or expatriate priests , came to be seen as treasonous . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the time of Elizabeth 's death a third party had emerged , " perfectly hostile " to Puritans but not adherent to Rome . It preferred the revised Book of Common Prayer of 1559 , which was without some of the matters offensive to Roman Catholics . The recusants had been removed from the centre of the stage . The new dispute was now between the Puritans ( who wished to see an end of the prayer book and episcopacy ) , and this third party ( the considerable body of people who looked kindly on the Elizabethan Settlement , who rejected <unk> , whose spirituality had been nourished by the Prayer Book and who preferred the governance of bishops ) . 
 It was between these two groups that , after Elizabeth 's death in 1603 , a new , more savage episode of the Reformation was in the process of gestation . During the reigns of the Stuart kings , James I and Charles I , the battle lines were to become more defined , leading ultimately to the English Civil War , the first on English soil to engulf parts of the civilian population . The war was only partly about religion , but the abolition of prayer book and episcopacy by a Puritan Parliament was an element in the causes of the conflict . As historian MacCulloch has noted , the legacy of these tumultuous events can be recognised , throughout the Commonwealth ( 1649 – 60 ) and the Restoration that followed it , and beyond . This third party was to become the core of the restored Church of England , but at the price for further division . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Haigh , Christopher . " The Recent Historiography of the English Reformation , " Historical Journal Vol . 25 , No. 4 ( Dec. 1982 ) , pp. 995 – 1007 in JSTOR 
 Marshall , Peter . " ( Re ) defining the English Reformation , " Journal of British Studies , July 2009 , Vol . 48 # 3 pp 564 – 586 
 Vidmar , John . English Catholic Historians and the English Reformation : 1585 – 1954 ( 2005 ) 
 Walsham , Alexandra . " History , Memory , and the English Reformation . " Historical Journal ( 2012 ) 55 # 4 pp : 899 – 938 @.@ online 
 = Hillary Clinton = 
 Hillary Diane Rodham Clinton ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; born October 26 , 1947 ) is an American politician and the nominee of the Democratic Party for President of the United States in the 2016 election . She is the first female candidate to gain that status in a major American political party . She served as the 67th United States Secretary of State from 2009 to 2013 , the junior United States Senator representing New York from 2001 to 2009 , First Lady of the United States during the presidency of Bill Clinton from 1993 to 2001 , and First Lady of Arkansas during the governorship of Bill Clinton from 1979 to 1981 and from 1983 to 1992 . 
 Clinton grew up in Chicago and the neighboring suburb of Park Ridge , Illinois . She attended Wellesley College , graduating in 1969 , and earned a J.D. from Yale Law School in 1973 . After serving as a congressional legal counsel , she moved to Arkansas , marrying Bill Clinton in 1975 . In 1977 , she co @-@ founded Arkansas Advocates for Children and Families . She was appointed the first female chair of the Legal Services Corporation in 1978 , and , the following year , became the first woman partner at Rose Law Firm . As First Lady of Arkansas ( 1979 – 81 , 1983 – 92 ) , she led a task force whose recommendations helped reform Arkansas 's public schools , and served on the boards of corporations including Walmart . 
 As First Lady of the United States , Clinton led the unsuccessful effort to enact the Clinton health plan of 1993 . In 1997 and 1999 , she helped create programs for children 's health insurance , adoption , and foster care . The only first lady to have been subpoenaed , she faced a federal grand jury in 1996 regarding the Whitewater controversy ; no charges were ever brought against her related to this or any other controversy . Her marriage endured the Lewinsky scandal of 1998 , and overall her role as first lady drew a polarized response from the public . 
 Clinton was elected in 2000 as the first female senator from New York , the only first lady ever to have sought elective office . Following the September 11 attacks , she voted to approve the war in Afghanistan . She also voted for the Iraq Resolution ( which she later regretted ) , sought to hasten the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq , and opposed the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 ( which she later commended ) . She voted against the Bush tax cuts , and voted against John Roberts and Samuel Alito for the United States Supreme Court , filibustering the latter . She was re @-@ elected to the Senate in 2006 . Running for president in 2008 , she won far more delegates than any previous female candidate , but lost the Democratic nomination to Barack Obama . 
 As Secretary of State in the Obama administration from 2009 to 2013 , Clinton responded to the Arab Spring , during which she advocated the U.S. military intervention in Libya . While she accepted responsibility for security lapses relating to the 2012 Benghazi attack , she said she had no direct role in consulate security prior to that attack . Leaving office after Obama 's first term , she wrote her fifth book and undertook speaking engagements before announcing her second presidential run in the 2016 election . Clinton won the Democratic primaries and the 2016 Democratic nomination , becoming the first woman to be nominated for president by a major U.S. political party . She faces Republican Donald Trump in the general election . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hillary Diane Rodham was born on October 26 , 1947 , at Edgewater Hospital in Chicago , Illinois . She was raised in a United Methodist family , first in Chicago and then , from the age of three , in suburban Park Ridge , Illinois . Her father , Hugh Ellsworth Rodham ( 1911 – 1993 ) , was of Welsh and English descent ; he managed a successful small business in the textile industry . Her mother , Dorothy Emma Howell ( 1919 – 2011 ) , was a homemaker of English , Scottish , French @-@ Canadian , and Welsh descent . Hillary has two younger brothers , Hugh and Tony . 
 As a child , Rodham was a favorite of her teachers at the public schools she attended in Park Ridge . She participated in sports , such as swimming and baseball , and earned numerous badges as a Brownie and as a Girl Scout . She has often told a story of being inspired by U.S. efforts during the Space Race and sending a letter to NASA around 1961 asking what she could do to become an astronaut , only to be told that no women were being accepted into that program . 
 She attended Maine East High School , where she participated in student council , the school newspaper , and was selected for National Honor Society . She won election as class vice president for her junior year , but then lost an election for class president for her senior year against two boys , one of whom told her that " you are really stupid if you think a girl can be elected president . " For her senior year , she was redistricted to Maine South High School , where she was a National Merit Finalist and graduated in the top five percent of her class of 1965 . Rodham 's mother wanted her to have an independent , professional career , and her father , otherwise a traditionalist , felt that his daughter 's abilities and opportunities should not be limited by gender . 
 Raised in a politically conservative household , Rodham helped canvass Chicago 's South Side at age thirteen following the very close 1960 U.S. presidential election , where she saw evidence of electoral fraud ( such as voting list entries showing addresses that were empty lots ) against Republican candidate Richard Nixon . She then volunteered to campaign for Republican candidate Barry Goldwater in the U.S. presidential election of 1964 . Rodham 's early political development was shaped most by her high school history teacher ( like her father , a fervent anti @-@ communist ) , who introduced her to Goldwater 's The Conscience of a Conservative , and by her Methodist youth minister ( like her mother , concerned with issues of social justice ) , with whom she saw , and afterwards briefly met , civil rights leader Martin Luther King , Jr. at a 1962 speech in Chicago 's Orchestra Hall . 
 = = = Wellesley College years = = = 
 In 1965 , Rodham enrolled at Wellesley College , where she majored in political science . During her freshman year , she served as president of the Wellesley Young Republicans ; with this Rockefeller Republican @-@ oriented group , she supported the elections to mayor of John Lindsay ( New York City ) and to U.S. senator of Edward Brooke ( Massachusetts ) . She later stepped down from this position , as her views changed regarding the American Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War . In a letter to her youth minister at this time , she described herself as " a mind conservative and a heart liberal " . In contrast to the 1960s current that advocated radical actions against the political system , she sought to work for change within it . 
 In her junior year , Rodham became a supporter of the antiwar presidential nomination campaign of Democrat Eugene McCarthy . In early 1968 , she was elected president of the Wellesley College Government Association and served through early 1969 . Following the assassination of Martin Luther King , Jr . , Rodham organized a two @-@ day student strike and worked with Wellesley 's black students to recruit more black students and faculty . In her student government role , she played a role in keeping Wellesley from being embroiled in the student disruptions common to other colleges . A number of her fellow students thought she might some day become the first female President of the United States . 
 To help her better understand her changing political views , Professor Alan Schechter assigned Rodham to intern at the House Republican Conference , and she attended the " Wellesley in Washington " summer program . Rodham was invited by moderate New York Republican Representative Charles Goodell to help Governor Nelson Rockefeller 's late @-@ entry campaign for the Republican nomination . Rodham attended the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami . However , she was upset by the way Richard Nixon 's campaign portrayed Rockefeller and by what she perceived as the convention 's " veiled " racist messages , and left the Republican Party for good . Rodham wrote her senior thesis , a critique of the tactics of radical community organizer Saul <unk> , under Professor Schechter . ( Years later , while she was first lady , access to her thesis was restricted at the request of the White House and it became the subject of some speculation . ) 
 In 1969 , she graduated with a bachelor of arts , with departmental honors in political science . After some fellow seniors requested that the college administration allow a student speaker at commencement , she became the first student in Wellesley College history to speak at the event , following commencement speaker Senator Brooke . Her speech received a standing ovation lasting seven minutes . She was featured in an article published in Life magazine , due to the response to a part of her speech that criticized Senator Brooke . She also appeared on Irv <unk> 's nationally syndicated television talk show as well as in Illinois and New England newspapers . That summer , she worked her way across Alaska , washing dishes in Mount McKinley National Park and sliming salmon in a fish processing cannery in Valdez ( which fired her and shut down overnight when she complained about unhealthful conditions ) . 
 = = = Yale Law School and postgraduate studies = = = 
 Rodham then entered Yale Law School . There she served on the editorial board of the Yale Review of Law and Social Action . During her second year , she worked at the Yale Child Study Center , learning about new research on early childhood brain development and working as a research assistant on the seminal work , Beyond the Best Interests of the Child ( 1973 ) . She also took on cases of child abuse at Yale – New Haven Hospital and volunteered at New Haven Legal Services to provide free legal advice for the poor . In the summer of 1970 she was awarded a grant to work at Marian Wright Edelman 's Washington Research Project , where she was assigned to Senator Walter Mondale 's Subcommittee on Migratory Labor . There she researched migrant workers ' problems in housing , sanitation , health and education . Edelman later became a significant mentor . Rodham was recruited by political advisor Anne Wexler to work on the 1970 campaign of Connecticut U.S. Senate candidate Joseph Duffey , with Rodham later crediting Wexler with providing her first job in politics . 
 In the late spring of 1971 she began dating Bill Clinton , also a law student at Yale . That summer she interned at the Oakland , California , law firm of <unk> , Walker and Burnstein . The firm was well known for its support of constitutional rights , civil liberties , and radical causes ( two of its four partners were current or former Communist Party members ) ; Rodham worked on child custody and other cases . Clinton canceled his original summer plans in order to live with her in California ; the couple continued living together in New Haven when they returned to law school . The following summer , Rodham and Clinton campaigned in Texas for unsuccessful 1972 Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern . She received a Juris Doctor degree from Yale in 1973 , having stayed on an extra year to be with Clinton . He first proposed marriage to her following graduation but she declined , uncertain if she wanted to tie her future to his . 
 Rodham began a year of postgraduate study on children and medicine at the Yale Child Study Center . Her first scholarly article , " Children Under the Law " , was published in the Harvard Educational Review in late 1973 . Discussing the new children 's rights movement , it stated that " child citizens " were " powerless individuals " and argued that children should not be considered equally incompetent from birth to attaining legal age , but that instead courts should presume competence except when there is evidence otherwise , on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . The article became frequently cited in the field . 
 = = Marriage and family , law career and First Lady of Arkansas = = 
 = = = From the East Coast to Arkansas = = = 
 During her postgraduate study , Rodham served as staff attorney for Edelman 's newly founded Children 's Defense Fund in Cambridge , Massachusetts , and as a consultant to the Carnegie Council on Children . In 1974 she was a member of the impeachment inquiry staff in Washington , D.C. , advising the House Committee on the Judiciary during the Watergate scandal . Under the guidance of Chief Counsel John Doar and senior member Bernard W. Nussbaum , Rodham helped research procedures of impeachment and the historical grounds and standards for impeachment . The committee 's work culminated in the resignation of President Richard Nixon in August 1974 . 
 By then , Rodham was viewed as someone with a bright political future : Democratic political organizer and consultant Betsey Wright had moved from Texas to Washington the previous year to help guide Rodham 's career . Wright thought she had the potential to become a future senator or president . Meanwhile , Clinton had repeatedly asked Rodham to marry him and she continued to demur . After failing the District of Columbia bar exam and passing the Arkansas exam , Rodham came to a key decision . As she later wrote , " I chose to follow my heart instead of my head " . She thus followed Bill Clinton to Arkansas , rather than staying in Washington , where career prospects were brighter . He was then teaching law and running for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in his home state . In August 1974 , Rodham moved to Fayetteville , Arkansas , and became one of only two female faculty members in the School of Law at the University of Arkansas , Fayetteville . 
 = = = Early Arkansas years = = = 
 At the university , Rodham gave classes in criminal law , where she was considered a rigorous teacher and tough grader . She became the first director of a new legal aid clinic at the school , securing support from the local bar association and gaining federal funding . Among her cases was one where she was obliged by request of the court to serve as defense counsel to a man accused of raping a twelve @-@ year @-@ old girl ; she put on an effective defense that led to his pleading guilty to a much lesser charge . Decades later , the woman involved said that the defense counsel had put her " through hell " during the legal process ; Clinton has called the trial a " terrible case " . During her time in Fayetteville , Rodham and several other women founded the city 's first rape crisis center . Rodham still harbored doubts about marriage , concerned that her separate identity would be lost and that her accomplishments would be viewed in the light of someone else 's . 
 Hillary Rodham and Bill Clinton bought a house in Fayetteville in the summer of 1975 , and Hillary finally agreed to marry Bill . Their wedding took place on October 11 , 1975 , in a Methodist ceremony in their living room . A story about the marriage in the Arkansas Gazette indicated that she was retaining the name Hillary Rodham . The motivation was to keep the couple 's professional lives separate and avoid apparent conflicts of interest and because , as she told a friend at the time , " it showed that I was still me . " The decision did upset both their mothers . Bill Clinton had lost the congressional race in 1974 , but in November 1976 was elected Arkansas Attorney General , and so the couple moved to the state capital of Little Rock . There , in February 1977 , Rodham joined the venerable Rose Law Firm , a bastion of Arkansan political and economic influence . She specialized in patent infringement and intellectual property law while also working pro bono in child advocacy ; she rarely performed litigation work in court . 
 Rodham maintained her interest in children 's law and family policy , publishing the scholarly articles " Children 's Policies : Abandonment and Neglect " in 1977 and " Children 's Rights : A Legal Perspective " in 1979 . The latter continued her argument that children 's legal competence depended upon their age and other circumstances and that in serious medical rights cases , judicial intervention was sometimes warranted . An American Bar Association chair later said , " Her articles were important , not because they were radically new but because they helped formulate something that had been inchoate . " Historian Garry Wills would later describe her as " one of the more important scholar @-@ activists of the last two decades " , while conservatives said her theories would usurp traditional parental authority , would allow children to file frivolous lawsuits against their parents , and exemplified legal " <unk> " theory run amok . 
 In 1977 , Rodham cofounded Arkansas Advocates for Children and Families , a state @-@ level alliance with the Children 's Defense Fund . Later that year , President Jimmy Carter ( for whom Rodham had been the 1976 campaign director of field operations in Indiana ) appointed her to the board of directors of the Legal Services Corporation , and she served in that capacity from 1978 until the end of 1981 . From mid @-@ 1978 to mid @-@ 1980 , she was the chair of that board , the first woman to do so . During her time as chair , funding for the Corporation was expanded from $ 90 million to $ 300 million ; subsequently she successfully fought President Ronald Reagan 's attempts to reduce the funding and change the nature of the organization . 
 Following her husband 's November 1978 election as Governor of Arkansas , Rodham became First Lady of Arkansas in January 1979 , her title for twelve years ( 1979 – 81 , 1983 – 92 ) . Clinton appointed her chair of the Rural Health Advisory Committee the same year , where she secured federal funds to expand medical facilities in Arkansas 's poorest areas without affecting doctors ' fees . 
 In 1979 , Rodham became the first woman to be made a full partner of Rose Law Firm . From 1978 until they entered the White House , she had a higher salary than that of her husband . During 1978 and 1979 , while looking to supplement their income , Rodham engaged in the trading of cattle futures contracts ; an initial $ 1 @,@ 000 investment generated nearly $ 100 @,@ 000 when she stopped trading after ten months . The couple also began their ill @-@ fated investment in the Whitewater Development Corporation real estate venture with Jim and Susan McDougal at this time . Both of these became subjects of controversy in the 1990s . 
 On February 27 , 1980 , Rodham gave birth to their daughter Chelsea . In November 1980 , Bill Clinton was defeated in his bid for re @-@ election . 
 = = = Later Arkansas years = = = 
 Bill Clinton returned to the governor 's office two years later after winning the election of 1982 . During her husband 's campaign , Rodham began to use the name Hillary Clinton , or sometimes " Mrs. Bill Clinton " , to assuage the concerns of Arkansas voters ; she also took a leave of absence from Rose Law to campaign for him full @-@ time . As First Lady of Arkansas again , she made a note of using Hillary Rodham Clinton as her name . She was named chair of the Arkansas Educational Standards Committee in 1983 , where she sought to reform the state 's court @-@ sanctioned public education system . In one of the Clinton governorship 's most important initiatives , she fought a prolonged but ultimately successful battle against the Arkansas Education Association to establish mandatory teacher testing and state standards for curriculum and classroom size . It became her introduction into the politics of a highly visible public policy effort . In 1985 , she introduced Arkansas 's Home Instruction Program for Preschool Youth , a program that helps parents work with their children in preschool preparedness and literacy . She was named Arkansas Woman of the Year in 1983 and Arkansas Mother of the Year in 1984 . 
 Clinton continued to practice law with the Rose Law Firm while she was First Lady of Arkansas . She earned less than the other partners , as she billed fewer hours , but still made more than $ 200 @,@ 000 in her final year there . The firm considered her a " rainmaker " because she brought in clients , partly thanks to the prestige she lent it and to her corporate board connections . She was also very influential in the appointment of state judges . Bill Clinton 's Republican opponent in his 1986 gubernatorial re @-@ election campaign accused the Clintons of conflict of interest , because Rose Law did state business ; the Clintons countered the charge by saying that state fees were walled off by the firm before her profits were calculated . 
 From 1982 to 1988 , Clinton was on the board of directors , sometimes as chair , of the New World Foundation , which funded a variety of New Left interest groups . From 1987 to 1991 , she was the first chair of the American Bar Association 's Commission on Women in the Profession , created to address gender bias in the legal profession and induce the association to adopt measures to combat it . She was twice named by The National Law Journal as one of the 100 most influential lawyers in America : in 1988 and in 1991 . When Bill Clinton thought about not running again for governor in 1990 , Hillary considered running , but private polls were unfavorable and , in the end , he ran and was re @-@ elected for the final time . 
 Clinton served on the boards of the Arkansas Children 's Hospital Legal Services ( 1988 – 92 ) and the Children 's Defense Fund ( as chair , 1986 – 92 ) . In addition to her positions with nonprofit organizations , she also held positions on the corporate board of directors of <unk> ( 1985 – 92 ) , Wal @-@ Mart Stores ( 1986 – 92 ) and Lafarge ( 1990 – 92 ) . <unk> and Wal @-@ Mart were Arkansas @-@ based companies that were also clients of Rose Law . Clinton was the first female member on Wal @-@ Mart 's board , added following pressure on chairman Sam Walton to name a woman to it . Once there , she pushed successfully for Wal @-@ Mart to adopt more environmentally friendly practices , was largely unsuccessful in a campaign for more women to be added to the company 's management , and was silent about the company 's famously anti @-@ labor union practices . 
 = = = Bill Clinton presidential campaign of 1992 = = = 
 Hillary Clinton received sustained national attention for the first time when her husband became a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination of 1992 . Before the New Hampshire primary , tabloid publications printed assertions that Bill Clinton had engaged in an extramarital affair with Arkansas lounge singer Gennifer Flowers . In response , the Clintons appeared together on 60 Minutes , where Bill Clinton denied the affair , but acknowledged " causing pain in my marriage " . This joint appearance was credited with rescuing his campaign . During it , Hillary Clinton made culturally disparaging remarks about Tammy Wynette 's outlook on marriage as described in her classic song " Stand by Your Man " , and later in the campaign about how she could have chosen to be like women staying home and baking cookies and having teas , but wanted to pursue her career instead . The remarks were widely criticized , particularly by those who were , or defended , stay @-@ at @-@ home mothers , and in retrospect , were ill @-@ considered by her own admission . Bill Clinton said that in electing him , the nation would " get two for the price of one " , referring to the prominent role his wife would assume . Beginning with Daniel Wattenberg 's August 1992 The American Spectator article " The Lady Macbeth of Little Rock " , Hillary Clinton 's own past ideological and ethical record came under attack from conservatives . At least twenty other articles in major publications also drew comparisons between her and Lady Macbeth . 
 = = First Lady of the United States = = 
 = = = Role as first lady = = = 
 When Bill Clinton took office as president in January 1993 , Hillary Rodham Clinton became the First Lady of the United States , and her press secretary reiterated that she would be using that form of her name . She was the initial first lady to hold a postgraduate degree and to have her own professional career up to the time of entering the White House . She was also the first to have an office in the West Wing of the White House in addition to the usual first lady offices in the East Wing . She was part of the innermost circle vetting appointments to the new administration and her choices filled at least eleven top @-@ level positions and dozens more lower @-@ level ones . After Eleanor Roosevelt , Clinton is regarded as the most openly empowered presidential wife in American history . 
 Some critics called it inappropriate for the first lady to play a central role in matters of public policy . Supporters pointed out that Clinton 's role in policy was no different from that of other White House advisors and that voters had been well aware that she would play an active role in her husband 's presidency . Bill Clinton 's campaign promise of " two for the price of one " led opponents to refer derisively to the Clintons as " co @-@ presidents " or sometimes the Arkansas label " <unk> " . The pressures of conflicting ideas about the role of a first lady were enough to send Clinton into " imaginary discussions " with the also @-@ politically @-@ active Eleanor Roosevelt . From the time she came to Washington , she also found refuge in a prayer group of The Fellowship that featured many wives of conservative Washington figures . Triggered in part by the death of her father in April 1993 , she publicly sought to find a synthesis of Methodist teachings , liberal religious political philosophy , and <unk> editor Michael Lerner 's " politics of meaning " to overcome what she saw as America 's " sleeping sickness of the soul " ; that would lead to a willingness " to remold society by redefining what it means to be a human being in the twentieth century , moving into a new millennium . " Other segments of the public focused on her appearance , which had evolved over time from inattention to fashion during her days in Arkansas , to a popular site in the early days of the World Wide Web devoted to showing her many different , and frequently analyzed , hairstyles as first lady , to an appearance on the cover of Vogue magazine in 1998 . 
 = = = Health care and other policy initiatives = = = 
 In January 1993 , President Clinton named First Lady Clinton to chair a Task Force on National Health Care Reform , hoping to replicate the success she had in leading the effort for Arkansas education reform . Unconvinced regarding the merits of the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , she privately urged that passage of health care reform be given higher priority . The recommendation of the task force became known as the Clinton health care plan , a comprehensive proposal that would require employers to provide health coverage to their employees through individual health maintenance organizations . Its opponents quickly derided the plan as " Hillarycare " , and it faced opposition from even some Democrats in Congress . Some protesters against the proposed plan became vitriolic , and during a July 1994 bus tour to rally support for the plan , Clinton wore a bulletproof vest at times . 
 Failing to gather enough support for a floor vote in either the House or the Senate , although Democrats controlled both chambers , the proposal was abandoned in September 1994 . Clinton later acknowledged in her memoir that her political inexperience partly contributed to the defeat , but cited many other factors . The First Lady 's approval ratings , which had generally been in the high @-@ 50s percent range during her first year , fell to 44 percent in April 1994 and 35 percent by September 1994 . 
 Republicans made the Clinton health care plan a major campaign issue of the 1994 midterm elections , which saw a net Republican gain of fifty @-@ three seats in the House election and seven in the Senate election , winning control of both ; many analysts and pollsters found the plan to be a major factor in the Democrats ' defeat , especially among independent voters . The White House subsequently sought to downplay Hillary Clinton 's role in shaping policy . Opponents of universal health care would continue to use " Hillarycare " as a pejorative label for similar plans by others . 
 Along with Senators Ted Kennedy and Orrin Hatch , she was a force behind the passage of the State Children 's Health Insurance Program in 1997 , a federal effort that provided state support for children whose parents could not provide them with health coverage , and conducted outreach efforts on behalf of enrolling children in the program once it became law . She promoted nationwide immunization against childhood illnesses and encouraged older women to seek a mammogram to detect breast cancer , with coverage provided by Medicare . She successfully sought to increase research funding for prostate cancer and childhood asthma at the National Institutes of Health . The First Lady worked to investigate reports of an illness that affected veterans of the Gulf War , which became known as the Gulf War syndrome . 
 Enactment of welfare reform was a major goal of her husband 's , but when the first two bills on it came from the Republican @-@ controlled Congress lacked protections for people going off welfare , she urged him to veto them , which he did . A third version came up during his 1996 general election campaign that restored some of the protections but cut the scope of benefits in other areas ; critics , including her past mentor Edelman , urged her to get the president to veto it again . But she decided to support the bill , which became the Welfare Reform Act of 1996 , as the best political compromise available . This caused a rift with Edelman that Clinton later called " sad and painful " . 
 Together with Attorney General Janet Reno , Clinton helped create the Office on Violence Against Women at the Department of Justice . In 1997 , she initiated and shepherded the Adoption and Safe Families Act , which she regarded as her greatest accomplishment as first lady . In 1999 , she was instrumental in the passage of the Foster Care Independence Act , which doubled federal monies for teenagers aging out of foster care . As first lady , Clinton hosted numerous White House conferences , including ones on Child Care ( 1997 ) , on Early Childhood Development and Learning ( 1997 ) , and on Children and Adolescents ( 2000 ) . She also hosted the first @-@ ever White House Conference on Teenagers ( 2000 ) and the first @-@ ever White House Conference on Philanthropy ( 1999 ) . 
 Clinton traveled to 79 countries during this time , breaking the mark for most @-@ traveled first lady held by Pat Nixon . She did not hold a security clearance or attend National Security Council meetings , but played a role in U.S. diplomacy attaining its objectives . A March 1995 five @-@ nation trip to South Asia , on behest of the U.S. State Department and without her husband , sought to improve relations with India and Pakistan . Clinton was troubled by the plight of women she encountered , but found a warm response from the people of the countries she visited and gained a better relationship with the American press corps . The trip was a transformative experience for her and presaged her eventual career in diplomacy . 
 In a September 1995 speech before the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing , Clinton argued very forcefully against practices that abused women around the world and in the People 's Republic of China itself , declaring that " it is no longer acceptable to discuss women 's rights as separate from human rights " . Delegates from over 180 countries heard her say : " If there is one message that echoes forth from this conference , let it be that human rights are women 's rights and women 's rights are human rights , once and for all . " In doing so , she resisted both internal administration and Chinese pressure to soften her remarks . The speech became a key moment in the empowerment of women and years later females around the world would recite Clinton 's key phrases . She was one of the most prominent international figures during the late 1990s to speak out against the treatment of Afghan women by the Taliban . She helped create Vital Voices , an international initiative sponsored by the U.S. to promote the participation of women in the political processes of their countries . It and Clinton 's own visits encouraged women to make themselves heard in the Northern Ireland peace process . 
 = = = Whitewater and other investigations = = = 
 First Lady Clinton was a subject of several investigations by the United States Office of the Independent Counsel , committees of the U.S. Congress , and the press . 
 The Whitewater controversy was the focus of media attention from the publication of a New York Times report during the 1992 presidential campaign and throughout her time as first lady . The Clintons had lost their late @-@ 1970s investment in the Whitewater Development Corporation ; at the same time , their partners in that investment , Jim and Susan McDougal , operated Madison Guaranty , a savings and loan institution that retained the legal services of Rose Law Firm and may have been improperly subsidizing Whitewater losses . Madison Guaranty later failed , and Clinton 's work at Rose was scrutinized for a possible conflict of interest in representing the bank before state regulators that her husband had appointed . She said she had done minimal work for the bank . Independent counsels Robert Fiske and Kenneth Starr subpoenaed Clinton 's legal billing records ; she said she did not know where they were . The records were found in the First Lady 's White House book room after a two @-@ year search and delivered to investigators in early 1996 . The delayed appearance of the records sparked intense interest and another investigation concerning how they surfaced and where they had been . Clinton 's staff attributed the problem to continual changes in White House storage areas since the move from the Arkansas Governor 's Mansion . On January 26 , 1996 , Clinton became the first first lady to be subpoenaed to testify before a federal grand jury . After several Independent <unk> had investigated , a final report was issued in 2000 that stated there was insufficient evidence that either Clinton had engaged in criminal wrongdoing . 
 Scrutiny of the May 1993 firings of the White House Travel Office employees , an affair that became known as " Travelgate " , began with charges that the White House had used audited financial irregularities in the Travel Office operation as an excuse to replace the staff with friends from Arkansas . The 1996 discovery of a two @-@ year @-@ old White House memo caused the investigation to focus on whether Hillary Clinton had orchestrated the firings and whether the statements she made to investigators about her role in the firings were true . The 2000 final Independent Counsel report concluded she was involved in the firings and that she had made " factually false " statements , but that there was insufficient evidence that she knew the statements were false , or knew that her actions would lead to firings , to prosecute her . 
 Following deputy White House counsel Vince Foster 's July 1993 suicide , allegations were made that Hillary Clinton had ordered the removal of potentially damaging files ( related to Whitewater or other matters ) from Foster 's office on the night of his death . Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr investigated this , and , by 1999 , Starr was reported to be holding the investigation open , despite his staff having told him there was no case to be made . When Starr 's successor Robert Ray issued his final Whitewater reports in 2000 , no claims were made against Hillary Clinton regarding this . An outgrowth of the " Travelgate " investigation was the June 1996 discovery of improper White House access to hundreds of FBI background reports on former Republican White House employees , an affair that some called " Filegate " . Accusations were made that Hillary Clinton had requested these files and that she had recommended hiring an unqualified individual to head the White House Security Office . The 2000 final Independent Counsel report found no substantial or credible evidence that Hillary Clinton had any role or showed any misconduct in the matter . 
 In March 1994 , newspaper reports revealed her spectacular profits from trading in 1978 – 79 , thus leading to the cattle futures controversy . Allegations were made in the press of conflict of interest and disguised bribery , and several individuals analyzed her trading records , but no formal investigation was made and she was never charged with any wrongdoing . 
 There was a controversy that arose in early 2001 over gifts made to the White House , rather than to the Clintons personally , that were removed and shipped to the Clintons ' private residence during the last year of Bill Clinton 's time in office . Following public pressure the couple returned $ 134 @,@ 000 worth of such gifts . Hillary Clinton faced additional criticism for having possibly solicited personal gifts shortly before being sworn in as a senator , at which time she would have been barred from accepting them . 
 = = = Response to Lewinsky scandal = = = 
 In 1998 , the Clintons ' relationship became the subject of much speculation when investigations revealed that the President had engaged in an extramarital affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky . Events surrounding the Lewinsky scandal eventually led to the Impeachment of Bill Clinton by the House of Representatives and later acquittal by the Senate . When the allegations against her husband were first made public , Hillary Clinton stated that they were the result of a " vast right @-@ wing conspiracy " , characterizing the Lewinsky charges as the latest in a long , organized , collaborative series of charges by Bill Clinton 's political enemies rather than any wrongdoing by her husband . She later said that she had been misled by her husband 's initial claims that no affair had taken place . After the evidence of President Clinton 's encounters with Lewinsky became incontrovertible , she issued a public statement reaffirming her commitment to their marriage , but privately was reported to be furious at him and was unsure if she wanted to stay in the marriage . The White House residence staff noticed a pronounced level of tension between the couple during this period . 
 Public reaction varied . Some women admired her strength and poise in private matters made public , some sympathized with her as a victim of her husband 's insensitive behavior , others criticized her as being an enabler to her husband 's indiscretions , while still others accused her of cynically staying in a failed marriage as a way of keeping or even fostering her own political influence . Her public approval ratings in the wake of the revelations shot upward to around 70 percent , the highest they had ever been . In her 2003 memoir , she would attribute her decision to stay married to " a love that has persisted for decades " and add : " No one understands me better and no one can make me laugh the way Bill does . Even after all these years , he is still the most interesting , energizing and fully alive person I have ever met . " 
 Matters surrounding the Lewinsky scandal left Bill Clinton with substantial legal bills ; in 2014 , Hillary Clinton would state that she and Bill had left the White House " not only dead broke , but in debt . " The statement may have been literally accurate but ignored the potentially enormous earnings potential of presidents upon leaving office as well as the couple 's ability to secure loans from banks . 
 = = = Traditional duties = = = 
 Clinton initiated and was founding chair of the Save America 's Treasures program , a national effort that matched federal funds to private donations to preserve and restore historic items and sites , including the flag that inspired " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and the First Ladies Historic Site in Canton , Ohio . She was head of the White House Millennium Council and hosted Millennium Evenings , a series of lectures that discussed futures studies , one of which became the first live simultaneous webcast from the White House . Clinton also created the first White House Sculpture Garden , located in the Jacqueline Kennedy Garden , which displayed large contemporary American works of art loaned from museums . 
 In the White House , Clinton placed donated handicrafts of contemporary American artisans , such as pottery and glassware , on rotating display in the state rooms . She oversaw the restoration of the Blue Room to be historically authentic to the period of James Monroe and the Map Room to how it looked during World War II . Working with Arkansas interior decorator Kaki <unk> over an eight @-@ year period , she oversaw extensive , privately funded redecoration efforts around the building , often trying to make it look brighter . These included changing the look of the Treaty Room , a presidential study , to along 19th century lines . Overall the redecoration brought mixed notices , with Victorian furnishings for the Lincoln Sitting Room being criticized the most . Clinton hosted many large @-@ scale events at the White House , such as a Saint Patrick 's Day reception , a state dinner for visiting Chinese dignitaries , a contemporary music concert that raised funds for music education in public schools , a New Year 's Eve celebration at the turn of the 21st century , and a state dinner honoring the bicentennial of the White House in November 2000 . 
 = = 2000 U.S. Senate election = = 
 When New York 's long @-@ serving U.S. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement in November 1998 , several prominent Democratic figures , including Representative Charles Rangel of New York , urged Clinton to run for Moynihan 's open seat in the Senate election of 2000 . Once she decided to run , the Clintons purchased a home in Chappaqua , New York , north of New York City , in September 1999 . She became the first first lady of the United States to be a candidate for elected office . Initially , Clinton expected to face Rudy Giuliani , the Mayor of New York City , as her Republican opponent in the election . Giuliani withdrew from the race in May 2000 after he was diagnosed with prostate cancer and matters related to his failing marriage became public , and Clinton instead faced Rick Lazio , a Republican member of the U.S. House of Representatives representing New York 's 2nd congressional district . Throughout the campaign , opponents accused Clinton of carpetbagging , as she had never resided in New York nor participated in the state 's politics before the 2000 Senate race . 
 Clinton began her campaign by visiting every county in the state , in a " listening tour " of small @-@ group settings . She devoted considerable time in traditionally Republican Upstate New York regions . Clinton vowed to improve the economic situation in those areas , promising to deliver 200 @,@ 000 jobs to the state over her term . Her plan included tax credits to reward job creation and encourage business investment , especially in the high @-@ tech sector . She called for personal tax cuts for college tuition and long @-@ term care . 
 The contest drew national attention . Lazio blundered during a September debate by seeming to invade Clinton 's personal space trying to get her to sign a fundraising agreement . The campaigns of Clinton and Lazio , along with Giuliani 's initial effort , spent a record combined $ 90 million . Clinton won the election on November 7 , 2000 , with 55 percent of the vote to Lazio 's 43 percent . She was sworn in as U.S. senator on January 3 , 2001 , making her the first ( and so far only ) woman to have held an elected office either while ( for a brief period ) or after serving as first lady . 
 = = United States Senate = = 
 = = = First term = = = 
 Upon entering the Senate , Clinton maintained a low public profile and built relationships with senators from both parties . She forged alliances with religiously inclined senators by becoming a regular participant in the Senate Prayer Breakfast . She served on five Senate committees : Committee on Budget ( 2001 – 02 ) , Committee on Armed Services ( 2003 – 09 ) , Committee on Environment and Public Works ( 2001 – 09 ) , Committee on Health , Education , Labor and Pensions ( 2001 – 09 ) and Special Committee on Aging . She was also a member of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe ( 2001 – 09 ) . 
 Following the September 11 attacks , Clinton sought to obtain funding for the recovery efforts in New York City and security improvements in her state . Working with New York 's senior senator , Charles Schumer , she was instrumental in securing $ 21 billion in funding for the World Trade Center site 's redevelopment . She subsequently took a leading role in investigating the health issues faced by 9 / 11 first responders . Clinton voted for the USA Patriot Act in October 2001 . In 2005 , when the act was up for renewal , she expressed concerns with the USA Patriot Act Reauthorization Conference Report regarding civil liberties , before voting in favor of the USA PATRIOT Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005 in March 2006 that gained large majority support . 
 Clinton strongly supported the 2001 U.S. military action in Afghanistan , saying it was a chance to combat terrorism while improving the lives of Afghan women who suffered under the Taliban government . Clinton voted in favor of the October 2002 Iraq War Resolution , which authorized President George W. Bush to use military force against Iraq . 
 After the Iraq War began , Clinton made trips to Iraq and Afghanistan to visit American troops stationed there . On a visit to Iraq in February 2005 , Clinton noted that the insurgency had failed to disrupt the democratic elections held earlier and that parts of the country were functioning well . Observing that war deployments were draining regular and reserve forces , she co @-@ introduced legislation to increase the size of the regular U.S. Army by 80 @,@ 000 soldiers to ease the strain . In late 2005 , Clinton said that while immediate withdrawal from Iraq would be a mistake , Bush 's pledge to stay " until the job is done " was also misguided , as it gave Iraqis " an open @-@ ended invitation not to take care of themselves " . Her stance caused frustration among those in the Democratic Party who favored quick withdrawal . Clinton supported retaining and improving health benefits for reservists and lobbied against the closure of several military bases , especially those in New York . She used her position on the Armed Services Committee to forge close relationships with a number of high @-@ ranking military officers . ( By 2014 and 2015 Clinton had fully reversed herself on the Iraq War Resolution , saying that she " got it wrong " and the vote in support had been a " mistake " . ) 
 Senator Clinton voted against President Bush 's two major tax cut packages , the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 . Clinton voted against the 2005 confirmation of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the United States and the 2006 confirmation of Samuel Alito to the U.S. Supreme Court , filibustering the latter . 
 In 2005 , Clinton called for the Federal Trade Commission to investigate how hidden sex scenes showed up in the controversial video game Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas . Along with Senators Joe Lieberman and Evan Bayh , she introduced the Family Entertainment Protection Act , intended to protect children from inappropriate content found in video games . In 2004 and 2006 , Clinton voted against the Federal Marriage Amendment that sought to prohibit same @-@ sex marriage . ( Clinton opposed same @-@ sex marriage until 2013 . ) 
 Looking to establish a " progressive infrastructure " to rival that of American conservatism , Clinton played a formative role in conversations that led to the 2003 founding of former Clinton administration Chief of Staff John Podesta 's Center for American Progress , shared aides with Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington , founded in 2003 , and advised the Clintons ' former antagonist David Brock 's Media Matters for America , created in 2004 . Following the 2004 Senate elections , she successfully pushed new Democratic Senate leader Harry Reid to create a Senate war room to handle daily political messaging . 
 = = = 2006 re @-@ election campaign = = = 
 In November 2004 , Clinton announced that she would seek a second Senate term . Clinton easily won the Democratic nomination over opposition from antiwar activist Jonathan <unk> . The early frontrunner for the Republican nomination , Westchester County District Attorney Jeanine Pirro , withdrew from the contest after several months of poor campaign performance . Clinton 's eventual opponent in the general election was Republican candidate John Spencer , a former mayor of Yonkers . Clinton won the election on November 7 , 2006 , with 67 percent of the vote to Spencer 's 31 percent , carrying all but four of New York 's sixty @-@ two counties . Her campaign spent $ 36 million for her re @-@ election , more than any other candidate for Senate in the 2006 elections . Some Democrats criticized her for spending too much in a one @-@ sided contest , while some supporters were concerned she did not leave more funds for a potential presidential bid in 2008 . In the following months , she transferred $ 10 million of her Senate funds toward her presidential campaign . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 Clinton opposed the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 , for both military and domestic political reasons ( by the following year , she was privately acknowledging that the surge had been successful ) . In March of that year , she voted in favor of a war @-@ spending bill that required President Bush to begin withdrawing troops from Iraq by a deadline ; it passed almost completely along party lines but was subsequently vetoed by Bush . In May , a compromise war funding bill that removed withdrawal deadlines but tied funding to progress benchmarks for the Iraqi government passed the Senate by a vote of 80 – 14 and would be signed by Bush ; Clinton was one of those who voted against it . Clinton responded to General David Petraeus 's September 2007 Report to Congress on the Situation in Iraq by saying , " I think that the reports that you provide to us really require a willing suspension of disbelief . " 
 In March 2007 , in response to the dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy , Clinton called on Attorney General Alberto Gonzales to resign . Regarding the high @-@ profile , hotly debated comprehensive immigration reform bill known as the Secure Borders , Economic Opportunity and Immigration Reform Act of 2007 , Clinton cast several votes in support of the bill , which eventually failed to gain cloture . 
 As the financial crisis of 2007 – 08 reached a peak with the liquidity crisis of September 2008 , Clinton supported the proposed bailout of the U.S. financial system , voting in favor of the $ 700 billion law that created the Troubled Asset Relief Program , saying that it represented the interests of the American people . It passed the Senate 74 – 25 . 
 In 2007 , Clinton and Virginia Sen. Jim Webb called for an investigation into whether the body armor issued to soldiers in Iraq was adequate . 
 = = 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 Clinton had been preparing for a potential candidacy for U.S. President since at least early 2003 . On January 20 , 2007 , she announced via her website the formation of a presidential exploratory committee for the United States presidential election of 2008 , stating " I 'm in , and I 'm in to win . " No woman had ever been nominated by a major party for the presidency . When Bill Clinton became president in 1993 , a blind trust was established ; in April 2007 , the Clintons liquidated the blind trust to avoid the possibility of ethical conflicts or political embarrassments as Hillary Clinton undertook her presidential race . Later disclosure statements revealed that the couple 's worth was now upwards of $ 50 million , and that they had earned over $ 100 million since 2000 , with most of it coming from Bill Clinton 's books , speaking engagements , and other activities . 
 Throughout the first half of 2007 , Clinton led candidates competing for the Democratic presidential nomination in opinion polls for the election . Senator Barack Obama of Illinois and former Senator John Edwards of North Carolina were her strongest competitors . The biggest threat to her campaign was her past support of the Iraq War , which Obama had opposed from the beginning . Clinton and Obama both set records for early fundraising , swapping the money lead each quarter . 
 By September 2007 , polling in the first six states holding Democratic contests showed that Clinton was leading in all of them , with the races being closest in Iowa and South Carolina . By the following month , national polls showed Clinton far ahead of Democratic competitors . At the end of October , Clinton suffered a rare poor debate performance against Obama , Edwards , and her other opponents . Obama 's message of change began to resonate with the Democratic electorate better than Clinton 's message of experience . The race tightened considerably , especially in the early states of Iowa , New Hampshire , and South Carolina , with Clinton losing her lead in some polls by December . 
 In the first vote of 2008 , she placed third in the January 3 Iowa Democratic caucus behind Obama and Edwards . Obama gained ground in national polling in the next few days , with all polls predicting a victory for him in the New Hampshire primary . Clinton gained a surprise win there on January 8 , defeating Obama narrowly . It was the first time a woman had won a major American party 's presidential primary for the purposes of delegate selection . Explanations for Clinton 's New Hampshire comeback varied but often centered on her being seen more sympathetically , especially by women , after her eyes welled with tears and her voice broke while responding to a voter 's question the day before the election . 
 The nature of the contest fractured in the next few days . Several remarks by Bill Clinton and other surrogates , and a remark by Hillary Clinton concerning Martin Luther King , Jr. and Lyndon B. Johnson , were perceived by many as , accidentally or intentionally , limiting Obama as a racially oriented candidate or otherwise denying the post @-@ racial significance and accomplishments of his campaign . Despite attempts by both Hillary Clinton and Obama to downplay the issue , Democratic voting became more polarized as a result , with Clinton losing much of her support among African Americans . She lost by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin to Obama in the January 26 South Carolina primary , setting up , with Edwards soon dropping out , an intense two @-@ person contest for the twenty @-@ two February 5 Super Tuesday states . Bill Clinton had made more statements attracting criticism for their perceived racial implications late in the South Carolina campaign , and his role was seen as damaging enough to her that a wave of supporters within and outside of the campaign said the former President " needs to stop " . The South Carolina campaign had done lasting damage to Clinton , eroding her support among the Democratic establishment and leading to the prized endorsement of Obama by Ted Kennedy . 
 On Super Tuesday , Clinton won the largest states , such as California , New York , New Jersey and Massachusetts , while Obama won more states ; they almost evenly split the total popular vote . But Obama was gaining more pledged delegates for his share of the popular vote due to better exploitation of the Democratic proportional allocation rules . 
 The Clinton campaign had counted on winning the nomination by Super Tuesday and was unprepared financially and logistically for a prolonged effort ; lagging in Internet fundraising , Clinton began loaning money to her campaign . There was continuous turmoil within the campaign staff and she made several top @-@ level personnel changes . Obama won the next eleven February contests across the country , often by large margins , and took a significant pledged delegate lead over Clinton . On March 4 , Clinton broke the string of losses by winning in Ohio among other places , where her criticism of NAFTA , a major legacy of her husband 's presidency , helped in a state where the trade agreement was unpopular . Throughout the campaign , Obama dominated caucuses , for which the Clinton campaign largely ignored preparation . Obama did well in primaries where African Americans or younger , college @-@ educated , or more affluent voters were heavily represented ; Clinton did well in primaries where Hispanics or older , non @-@ college @-@ educated , or working @-@ class white voters predominated . Behind in delegates , Clinton 's best hope of winning the nomination came in persuading uncommitted , party @-@ appointed superdelegates . 
 Clinton 's admission in late March , that her repeated campaign statements about having been under hostile fire from snipers during a March 1996 visit to U.S. troops at Tuzla Air Base in Bosnia and Herzegovina were not true , attracted considerable media attention . On April 22 , she won the Pennsylvania primary and kept her campaign alive . On May 6 , a narrower @-@ than @-@ expected win in the Indiana primary , coupled with a large loss in the North Carolina primary , ended any realistic chance she had of winning the nomination . She vowed to stay on through the remaining primaries , but stopped attacks against Obama ; as one advisor stated , " She could accept losing . She could not accept quitting . " She won some of the remaining contests , and indeed over the last three months of the campaign won more delegates , states , and votes than Obama , but she failed to overcome Obama 's lead . 
 Following the final primaries on June 3 , 2008 , Obama had gained enough delegates to become the presumptive nominee . In a speech before her supporters on June 7 , Clinton ended her campaign and endorsed Obama . By campaign 's end , Clinton had won 1 @,@ 640 pledged delegates to Obama 's 1 @,@ 763 ; at the time of the clinching , Clinton had 286 superdelegates to Obama 's 395 , with those numbers widening to 256 versus 438 once Obama was acknowledged the winner . Clinton and Obama each received over 17 million votes during the nomination process with both breaking the previous record . Clinton was the first woman to run in the primary or caucus of every state , and she eclipsed , by a very wide margin , Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm 's 1972 marks for most votes garnered and delegates won by a woman . Clinton gave a passionate speech supporting Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention and campaigned frequently for him in Fall 2008 , which concluded with his victory over McCain in the general election on November 4 . Clinton 's campaign ended up severely in debt ; she owed millions of dollars to outside vendors and wrote off the $ 13 million that she lent it herself . The debt was eventually paid off by the beginning of 2013 . 
 = = U.S. Secretary of State = = 
 = = = Nomination and confirmation = = = 
 In mid @-@ November 2008 , President @-@ elect Obama and Clinton discussed the possibility of her serving as U.S. Secretary of State in his administration . She was initially quite reluctant , but on November 20 , she told Obama she would accept the position . On December 1 , President @-@ elect Obama formally announced that Clinton would be his nominee for Secretary of State . Clinton said she did not want to leave the Senate , but that the new position represented a " difficult and exciting adventure " . As part of the nomination and in order to relieve concerns of conflict of interest , Bill Clinton agreed to accept several conditions and restrictions regarding his ongoing activities and fundraising efforts for the William J. Clinton Foundation and Clinton Global Initiative . 
 The appointment required a Saxbe fix , passed and signed into law in December 2008 . Confirmation hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee began on January 13 , 2009 , a week before the Obama inauguration ; two days later , the Committee voted 16 – 1 to approve Clinton . By this time , her public approval rating had reached 65 percent , the highest point since the Lewinsky scandal . On January 21 , 2009 , Clinton was confirmed in the full Senate by a vote of 94 – 2 . Clinton took the oath of office of Secretary of State and resigned from the Senate that same day . She became the first former first lady to serve in the United States Cabinet . 
 = = = First half of tenure = = = 
 Clinton spent her initial days as Secretary of State telephoning dozens of world leaders and indicating that U.S. foreign policy would change direction : " We have a lot of damage to repair . " She advocated an expanded role in global economic issues for the State Department and cited the need for an increased U.S. diplomatic presence , especially in Iraq where the Defense Department had conducted diplomatic missions . Clinton announced the most ambitious of her departmental reforms , the Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review , which establishes specific objectives for the State Department 's diplomatic missions abroad ; it was modeled after a similar process in the Defense Department that she was familiar with from her time on the Senate Armed Services Committee . The first such review was issued in late 2010 and called for the U.S. leading through " civilian power " as a cost @-@ effective way of responding to international challenges and defusing crises . It also sought to institutionalize goals of empowering women throughout the world . A cause Clinton advocated throughout her tenure was the adoption of <unk> in the developing world , to foster cleaner and more environmentally sound food preparation and reduce smoke dangers to women . 
 In an internal debate regarding the war in Afghanistan during 2009 , Clinton sided with the military 's recommendations for a maximal " Afghanistan surge " , recommending 40 @,@ 000 troops and no public deadline for withdrawal ; she prevailed over Vice President Joe Biden 's opposition , but eventually supported Obama 's compromise plan to send an additional 30 @,@ 000 troops and tie the surge to a timetable for eventual withdrawal . In March 2009 , Clinton presented Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov with a " reset button " symbolizing U.S. attempts to rebuild ties with that country under its new president , Dmitry Medvedev . The photo op was remembered for a mistranslation into Russian . The policy , which became known as the Russian reset , led to improved cooperation in several areas during Medvedev 's time in office , but relations would worsen considerably following Vladimir Putin 's return to the position in 2012 . In October 2009 , on a trip to Switzerland , Clinton 's intervention overcame last @-@ minute snags and saved the signing of an historic Turkish – Armenian accord that established diplomatic relations and opened the border between the two long @-@ hostile nations . In Pakistan , she engaged in several unusually blunt discussions with students , talk show hosts , and tribal elders , in an attempt to repair the Pakistani image of the U.S. Beginning in 2010 , she helped organize a diplomatic isolation and international sanctions regime against Iran , in an effort to force curtailment of that country 's nuclear program ; this would eventually lead to the multinational Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action being agreed to in 2015 . 
 Clinton and Obama forged a good working relationship without power struggles ; she was a team player within the administration and a defender of it to the outside , and was careful that neither she nor her husband would upstage the president . Clinton formed an alliance with Secretary of Defense Gates as they shared similar strategic outlooks . Obama and Clinton both approached foreign policy as a largely non @-@ ideological , pragmatic exercise . She met with him weekly but did not have the close , daily relationship that some of her predecessors had had with their presidents ; moreover , certain key areas of policymaking were kept inside the White House or Pentagon . Nevertheless , the president had trust in her actions . 
 In a prepared speech in January 2010 , Clinton drew analogies between the Iron Curtain and the free and unfree Internet . Chinese officials reacted negatively towards it and the speech garnered attention as the first time a senior American official had clearly defined the Internet as a key element of American foreign policy . In July 2010 , she visited Korea , Vietnam , Pakistan , and Afghanistan , all the while preparing for the July 31 wedding of daughter Chelsea amid much media attention . 
 In late November 2010 , she led the U.S. damage control effort after WikiLeaks released confidential State Department cables containing blunt statements and assessments by U.S. and foreign diplomats , by contacting foreign leaders in Europe and the Middle East ahead of the release . 
 = = = Second half of tenure = = = 
 The 2011 Egyptian protests posed the most challenging foreign policy crisis for the administration yet . Clinton 's public response quickly evolved from an early assessment that the government of Hosni Mubarak was " stable " , to a stance that there needed to be an " orderly transition [ to ] a democratic participatory government " , to a condemnation of violence against the protesters . Obama came to rely upon Clinton 's advice , organization , and personal connections in the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes response to developments . As Arab Spring protests spread throughout the region , Clinton was at the forefront of a U.S. response that she recognized was sometimes contradictory , backing some regimes while supporting protesters against others . 
 As the Libyan Civil War took place , Clinton 's shift in favor of military intervention aligned her with Ambassador to the UN Susan Rice and National Security Council figure Samantha Power and was a key turning point in overcoming internal administration opposition from Defense Secretary Gates , security advisor Thomas E. <unk> , and counterterrorism advisor John Brennan in gaining the backing for , and Arab and U.N. approval of , the 2011 military intervention in Libya . Secretary Clinton testified to Congress that the administration did not need congressional authorization for its military intervention in Libya , despite objections from some members of both parties that the administration was violating the War Powers Resolution , and the State Department 's legal advisor argued the same when the Resolution 's 60 @-@ day limit for unauthorized wars was passed ( a view that prevailed in a legal debate within the Obama administration ) . Clinton later used U.S. allies and what she called " convening power " to promote unity among the Libyan rebels as they eventually overthrew the Gaddafi regime . The aftermath of the Libyan Civil War saw the country becoming a failed state , and the wisdom of the intervention and interpretation of what happened afterward would become the subject of considerable debate . 
 During April 2011 internal deliberations of the president 's innermost circle of advisors over whether to order U.S. special forces to conduct a raid into Pakistan against Osama bin Laden , Clinton was among those who argued in favor , saying the importance of getting bin Laden outweighed the risks to the U.S. relationship with Pakistan . Following completion of the mission on May 2 , which resulted in bin Laden 's death , Clinton played a key role in the administration 's decision not to release photographs of the dead al @-@ Qaeda leader . During internal discussions regarding Iraq in 2011 , Clinton argued for keeping a residual force of up to 10 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 U.S. troops there ( all ended up being withdrawn after negotiations for a revised U.S. – Iraq Status of Forces Agreement failed ) . 
 In a speech before the United Nations Human Rights Council in December 2011 , Clinton said that " Gay rights are human rights " , and that the U.S. would advocate for gay rights and legal protections of gays abroad . The same period saw her overcome internal administration opposition with a direct appeal to Obama and stage the first visit to Burma by a U.S. secretary of state since 1955 , as she met with Burmese leaders as well as opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and sought to support the 2011 Burmese democratic reforms . She also said that the 21st century would be " America 's Pacific century " , a declaration that was part of the Obama administration 's " pivot to Asia " . 
 During the Syrian Civil War , Clinton and the Obama administration initially sought to persuade Syrian President Bashar al @-@ Assad to engage popular demonstrations with reform , then as government violence rose in August 2011 , called for him to relinquish power . The administration joined a number of allied countries in delivering non @-@ lethal assistance to rebels opposed to the Assad government , as well as to humanitarian groups working in Syria . During mid @-@ 2012 , Clinton formed a plan with CIA Director David Petraeus to further strengthen the opposition by arming and training vetted groups of Syrian rebels , but the proposal was rejected by the White House , who were reluctant to become entangled in the conflict and who feared that extremists hidden among the rebels might turn the weapons against other targets . 
 In December 2012 , Clinton was hospitalized for a few days for treatment of a blood clot in her right transverse venous sinus . Her doctors had discovered the clot during a follow @-@ up examination for a concussion she had sustained when she had fainted and fallen nearly three weeks earlier , after developing severe dehydration from a viral intestinal ailment acquired during a trip to Europe . The clot , which caused no immediate neurological injury , was treated with anticoagulant medication , and her doctors subsequently said she made a full recovery . 
 = = = Overall themes = = = 
 Throughout her time in office , and in her final speech concluding it , Clinton viewed " smart power " as the strategy for asserting U.S. leadership and values — in a world of varied threats , weakened central governments , and increasingly important nongovernmental entities — by combining military hard power with diplomacy and U.S. soft power capacities in global economics , development aid , technology , creativity , and human rights advocacy . As such , she became the first secretary of state to methodically implement the smart power approach . In debates over use of military force , she was generally one of the more hawkish voices in the administration . In August 2011 she hailed the ongoing multinational military intervention in Libya and the initial U.S. response towards the Syrian Civil War as examples of smart power in action . 
 Clinton greatly expanded the State Department 's use of social media , including Facebook and Twitter , both to get its message out and to help empower citizens of foreign countries vis @-@ à @-@ vis their governments . And in the Mideast turmoil , Clinton particularly saw an opportunity to advance one of the central themes of her tenure , the empowerment and welfare of women and girls worldwide . Moreover , in a formulation that became known as " the Hillary Doctrine " , she viewed women 's rights as critical for U.S. security interests , due to a link between the level of violence against women and gender inequality within a state and the instability and challenge to international security of that state . In turn , there was a trend of women around the world finding more opportunities , and in some cases feeling safer , as the result of her actions and visibility . 
 Clinton visited 112 countries during her tenure , making her the most widely traveled secretary of state ( Time magazine wrote that " Clinton 's endurance is legendary " ) . The first secretary of state to visit countries such as Togo and Timor @-@ Leste , she believed that in @-@ person visits were more important than ever in the virtual age . As early as March 2011 , she indicated she was not interested in serving a second term as Secretary of State should Obama be re @-@ elected in 2012 ; in December 2012 , following that re @-@ election , Obama nominated Senator John Kerry to be Clinton 's successor . Her last day as Secretary of State was February 1 , 2013 . Upon her departure , analysts commented that Clinton 's tenure did not bring any signature diplomatic breakthroughs as some other Secretaries of State had , and highlighted her focus on goals that she thought were less tangible but would have more lasting effect . 
 = = = Benghazi attack and subsequent hearings = = = 
 On September 11 , 2012 , the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi , Libya , was attacked , resulting in the deaths of the U.S. Ambassador , J. Christopher Stevens , and three other Americans . The attack , questions surrounding the security of the U.S. consulate , and the varying explanations given afterward by administration officials for what had happened , became politically controversial in the U.S. On October 15 , Clinton took responsibility for the question of security lapses and said the differing explanations were due to the inevitable fog of war confusion after such events . 
 On December 19 , a panel led by Thomas R. Pickering and Michael Mullen issued its report on the matter . It was sharply critical of State Department officials in Washington for ignoring requests for more guards and safety upgrades and for failing to adapt security procedures to a deteriorating security environment . It focused its criticism on the department 's Bureau of Diplomatic Security and Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs ; four State Department officials at the assistant secretary level and below were removed from their posts as a consequence . Clinton said she accepted the conclusions of the report and that changes were underway to implement its suggested recommendations . 
 Clinton gave testimony to two congressional foreign affairs committees on January 23 , 2013 , regarding the Benghazi attack . She defended her actions in response to the incident and , while still accepting formal responsibility , said she had had no direct role in specific discussions beforehand regarding consulate security . Congressional Republicans challenged her on several points , to which she responded . In particular , after persistent questioning about whether the administration had issued inaccurate " talking points " after the attack , Clinton responded with the much @-@ quoted rejoinder , " With all due respect , the fact is we had four dead Americans . Was it because of a protest or was it because of guys out for a walk one night who decided that they 'd they go kill some Americans ? What difference at this point does it make ? It is our job to figure out what happened and do everything we can to prevent it from ever happening again , Senator . " In November 2014 , the House Intelligence Committee issued a report that concluded there had been no wrongdoing in the administration 's response to the attack . 
 The House Select Committee on Benghazi was created in May 2014 and conducted a two @-@ year investigation related to the 2012 attack . Its actions were often seen through the prism of domestic politics . This was especially the case in September 2015 , when House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy credited the Benghazi hearings with lowering Clinton 's poll numbers , thereby contradicting the Republicans ' previous talking points on the investigation . On October 22 , 2015 , Clinton testified at an all @-@ day and nighttime session before the committee . The hearing included many heated exchanges between committee members and Clinton , and between the committee members themselves . Clinton was widely seen as emerging largely unscathed from the hearing , because of what the media perceived as a calm and unfazed demeanor , and a lengthy , meandering , repetitive line of questioning from the committee . The committee issued competing final reports in June 2016 that broke along partisan lines , with the Republican report offering some new details about the attack but no new evidence of culpability by Clinton . 
 = = = Email controversy = = = 
 A controversy arose in March 2015 , when it was revealed by the State Department 's inspector general that Clinton had exclusively used personal email accounts on a non @-@ government , privately maintained server — in lieu of email accounts maintained on federal government servers — when conducting official business during her tenure as Secretary of State . Some experts , officials , members of Congress , and political opponents , contended that her use of private messaging system software and a private server violated State Department protocols and procedures , and federal laws and regulations governing recordkeeping requirements . 
 The controversy occurred against the backdrop of Clinton 's 2016 presidential election campaign and hearings held by the House Select Committee on Benghazi . 
 The New York Times reported in February of 2016 that nearly 2 @,@ 100 emails contained in Clinton 's server were retroactively marked classified by the State Department . A later FBI investigation found that Clinton both sent and received 110 emails that contained classified information , including a " small number " that contained markings indicating classified status . 
 Additionally , the intelligence community 's inspector general wrote Congress to say that some of the emails " contained classified State Department information when originated . " In a joint statement released on July 15 , 2015 , the inspector general of the State Department and the inspector general of the intelligence community said that through their review of the emails , they found information that was classified when sent , remained so as of their inspection , and " never should have been transmitted via an unclassified personal system . " They also stated unequivocally that those secrets never should have been stored outside of secure government computer systems . Clinton had said over a period of months that she kept no classified information on the private server that she set up in her house . 
 Government policy , reiterated in the nondisclosure agreement signed by Clinton as part of gaining her security clearance , is that sensitive information can be considered as classified even if not marked as such . After allegations were raised that some of the emails in question fell into the so @-@ called " born classified " category , an FBI probe was initiated regarding how classified information was handled on the Clinton server . In May 2016 , the inspector general of the State Department criticized her use of a private email server while she was Secretary of State stating that she had not requested permission to use it and even if she had , she would not have been given permission . 
 Clinton maintained that she did not send or receive any confidential emails from her personal server . In a Democratic debate with Bernie Sanders on February 4 , 2016 , Clinton said , " I never sent or received any classified material – they are retroactively classifying it . " In a Meet the Press interview , Clinton said , " Let me repeat what I have repeated for many months now , I never received nor sent any material that was marked classified . " On July 2 , 2016 , Clinton stated : " Let me repeat what I have repeated for many months now , I never received nor sent any material that was marked classified . " 
 On July 5 , 2016 , the FBI concluded its investigation . In a statement , FBI director James Comey said : 
 110 e @-@ mails in 52 e @-@ mail chains have been determined by the owning agency to contain classified information at the time they were sent or received . Eight of those chains contained information that was Top Secret at the time they were sent ; 36 chains contained Secret information at the time ; and eight contained Confidential information , which is the lowest level of classification . Separate from those , about 2 @,@ 000 additional e @-@ mails were “ up @-@ classified ” to make them Confidential ; the information in those had not been classified at the time the e @-@ mails were sent . 
 Only three emails were found to be marked as classified , although they lacked classified headers and were only marked with a small " c " in parentheses , described as " portion markings " by Comey . They found that Clinton used her personal email extensively while outside the United States , both sending and receiving work @-@ related emails in the territory of sophisticated adversaries . The FBI assessed that it " is possible that hostile actors gained access to Secretary Clinton 's personal email account . " Comey stated that although Clinton was " extremely careless in their handling of very sensitive , highly classified information " , the FBI was expressing to the Justice Department that " no charges are appropriate in this case . " On July 6 , 2016 , U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch confirmed that the investigation into Hillary Clinton 's use of private email servers while secretary of state will be closed without criminal charges . 
 = = Clinton Foundation and speeches = = 
 When Clinton left the State Department she became a private citizen for the first time in thirty years . She and her daughter joined her husband as named members of the Bill , Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation in 2013 . There she focused on early childhood development efforts , including an initiative called Too Small to Fail and a $ 600 million initiative to encourage the enrollment of girls in secondary schools worldwide , led by former Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard . 
 Clinton also led the No Ceilings : The Full Participation Project , a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to gather and study data on the progress of women and girls around the world since the Beijing conference in 1995 ; its March 2015 report said that while " There has never been a better time in history to be born a woman ... this data shows just how far we still have to go . " The foundation began accepting new donations from foreign governments , which it had stopped doing while she was secretary . 
 She began work on another volume of memoirs , and made appearances on the paid speaking circuit . There she received $ 200 @,@ 000 – 225 @,@ 000 per engagement , often appearing before Wall Street firms or at business conventions . She also made some unpaid speeches on behalf of the foundation . For the fifteen months ending in March 2015 , Clinton earned over $ 11 million from her speeches . For the overall period 2007 – 14 , the Clintons earned almost $ 141 million , paid some $ 56 million in federal and state taxes , and donated about $ 15 million to charity . As of 2015 , she was estimated to be worth over $ 30 million on her own , or $ 45 – 53 million with her husband . 
 Clinton resigned from the foundation 's board in April 2015 , when she began her presidential campaign , and the foundation said it would accept new foreign governmental donations from six Western nations only . 
 = = 2016 presidential campaign = = 
 On April 12 , 2015 , Clinton formally announced her candidacy for the presidency in the 2016 election . She had a campaign @-@ in @-@ waiting already in place , including a large donor network , experienced operatives , and the Ready for Hillary and Priorities USA Action political action committees , and other infrastructure . The campaign 's headquarters were established in the New York City borough of Brooklyn . Focuses of her campaign have included raising middle class incomes , establishing universal preschool and making college more affordable , and improving the Affordable Care Act . Initially considered a prohibitive favorite to win the Democratic nomination , Clinton has faced an unexpectedly strong challenge from self @-@ professed democratic socialist Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont , whose longtime stance against the influence of corporations and the wealthy in American politics has resonated with a dissatisfied citizenry troubled by the effects of income inequality in the U.S. and has contrasted with Clinton 's Wall Street ties . 
 In the initial contest of the primaries season , Clinton only very narrowly won the Iowa Democratic caucuses , held February 1 , over an increasingly popular Sanders , making her the first woman to win the Iowa caucuses . In the first primary , held in New Hampshire on February 9 , she lost to Sanders by a wide margin . Sanders was an increasing threat in the next contest , the Nevada caucuses on February 20 , but Clinton managed a five @-@ percentage @-@ point win , aided by final @-@ days campaigning among casino workers . She followed that with a lopsided victory in the South Carolina primary on February 27 . These two victories stabilized her campaign and showed an avoidance of the management turmoil that harmed her 2008 effort . 
 On March 1 ( " Super Tuesday " ) , Clinton won seven of eleven contests , including a string of dominating victories across the South buoyed , as in South Carolina , by African @-@ American voters , and opened up a significant lead in pledged delegates over Sanders . She maintained this delegate lead across subsequent contests during the primary season , with a consistent pattern throughout being that Sanders did better among younger , whiter , more rural , and more liberal voters and in states that held caucuses or where eligibility was open to independents , while Clinton did better among older and more diverse voter populations and in states that held primaries or where eligibility was restricted to registered Democrats . 
 By June 6 , 2016 , she had earned enough pledged delegates and supportive superdelegates for the media to consider her the presumptive nominee . The next day , after winning most of the states in the final major round of primaries , Clinton held a victory rally in Brooklyn in which she became the first woman to claim the status of presumptive nominee for a major American political party . By campaign 's end , Clinton had won 2 @,@ 219 pledged delegates to Sanders ' 1 @,@ 832 ; with an estimated 594 superdelegates compared to Sanders ' 47 . She received almost 17 million votes during the nominating process , as opposed to Sanders ' 13 million . 
 Clinton was formally nominated at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia on July 26 , 2016 , becoming the first woman to be nominated for president by a major U.S. political party . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Several organizations have attempted to measure Clinton 's place on the political spectrum scientifically using her Senate votes . National Journal 's 2004 study of roll @-@ call votes assigned Clinton a rating of 30 in the political spectrum , relative to the Senate at the time , with a rating of 1 being most liberal and 100 being most conservative . National Journal 's subsequent rankings placed her as the 32nd @-@ most liberal senator in 2006 and 16th @-@ most liberal senator in 2007 . A 2004 analysis by political scientists Joshua D. Clinton of Princeton University and Simon Jackman and Doug Rivers of Stanford University found her to be likely the sixth @-@ to @-@ eighth @-@ most liberal senator . The Almanac of American Politics , edited by Michael Barone and Richard E. Cohen , rated her votes from 2003 through 2006 as liberal or conservative , with 100 as the highest rating , in three areas : Economic , Social , and Foreign . Averaged for the four years , the ratings are : Economic 
 = 75 liberal , 23 conservative ; Social = 
 83 liberal , 6 conservative ; Foreign 
 = 66 liberal , 30 conservative . Total average = 
 75 liberal , 20 conservative . 
 Organizations have also attempted to give newer assessments of Clinton once she reentered elective politics in 2015 . Based on her stated positions from the 1990s to the present , On the Issues places her in their " Left Liberal " region on their two @-@ dimensional grid of social and economic ideologies , with a social score of 80 on a scale of 0 more @-@ restrictive to 100 less @-@ government stances and an economic score of 10 on a scale of 0 more @-@ restrictive to 100 less @-@ government stances . <unk> , which does a data aggregation of campaign contributions , votes , and speeches , gives her a <unk> rating on a one @-@ dimensional left @-@ right scale from 10L ( most liberal ) to 10C ( most conservative ) . Through 2008 , she had an average lifetime 90 percent " Liberal Quotient " from Americans for Democratic Action , and a lifetime 8 percent rating from the American Conservative Union . 
 In a Gallup poll conducted during May 2005 , 54 percent of respondents considered Clinton a liberal , 30 percent considered her a moderate , and 9 percent considered her a conservative . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Clinton has been a lifelong Methodist , attending various churches throughout her lifetime ; all belonging to the United Methodist Church : 
 First United Methodist Church of Park Ridge , Illinois – in her early life , 
 First United Methodist Church of Little Rock , Arkansas – while in Arkansas , 
 Foundry United Methodist Church in Washington , D.C. – as First Lady of the United States , 
 Metropolitan Community United Methodist Church in New York City , New York – currently a congregant . 
 She discussed her faith at 2014 United Methodist Women church rally at the Kentucky International Convention Center in Louisville , Kentucky . However , she has infrequently discussed her faith while campaigning . James Macintyre for Christianity Today has written that her Christian faith is " undeniably strong " and compared her lightly worn but " very real " faith to that of British prime minister Theresa May . Clinton 's friend Lissa Muscatine has suggested that perhaps because Clinton 's faith has motivated her so deeply , she has rarely talked about it . 
 In early 2016 , a Pew poll was released finding that over 4 in 10 Americans believed Clinton was not very religious . As of 2016 , Clinton has openly discussed her Christianity on several occasions , discussing for example the importance of loving one 's neighbor as oneself , of helping the poor and " creating opportunities for others to be lifted up " . Clinton has also expressed disappointment that " Christianity , which has such great love at its core , is sometimes used to condemn so quickly and judge so harshly . " 
 Professor Paul <unk> , author of God and Hillary Clinton : A Spiritual Life , has suggested that Clinton 's political positions are rooted in her faith . Clinton reportedly often repeats John Wesley 's maxim " Do all the good you can , by all the means you can , in all the ways you can . " 
 = = Writings and recordings = = 
 As First Lady of the United States , Clinton published a weekly syndicated newspaper column titled " Talking It Over " from 1995 to 2000 . It focused on her experiences and those of women , children , and families she met during her travels around the world . 
 In 1996 , Clinton presented a vision for the children of America in the book It Takes a Village : And Other Lessons Children Teach Us . The book made the Best Seller list of The New York Times and Clinton received the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album in 1997 for the book 's audio recording . 
 Other books published by Clinton when she was first lady include Dear Socks , Dear Buddy : Kids ' Letters to the First Pets ( 1998 ) and An Invitation to the White House : At Home with History ( 2000 ) . In 2001 , she wrote an afterword to the children 's book Beatrice 's Goat . 
 In 2003 , Clinton released a 562 @-@ page autobiography , Living History , for which publisher Simon & Schuster paid Clinton a near @-@ record advance of $ 8 million . The book set a first @-@ week sales record for a nonfiction work , went on to sell more than one million copies in the first month following publication , and was translated into twelve foreign languages . Clinton 's audio recording of the book earned her a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album . 
 In 2014 , Clinton published a second memoir , Hard Choices , which focused on her time as Secretary of State . It has sold about 250 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Cultural and political image = = 
 Over a hundred books and scholarly works have been written about Hillary Rodham Clinton , from many perspectives . A 2006 survey by the New York Observer found " a virtual cottage industry " of " anti @-@ Clinton literature " , put out by <unk> Publishing and other conservative imprints , with titles such as Madame Hillary : The Dark Road to the White House , Hillary 's Scheme : Inside the Next Clinton 's Ruthless Agenda to Take the White House , and Can She Be Stopped ? : Hillary Clinton Will Be the Next President of the United States Unless ... Books praising Clinton did not sell nearly as well ( other than the memoirs written by her and her husband ) . When she ran for Senate in 2000 , a number of fundraising groups such as Save Our Senate and the Emergency Committee to Stop Hillary Rodham Clinton sprang up to oppose her . Van Natta found that Republican and conservative groups viewed her as a reliable " bogeyman " to mention in fundraising letters , on a par with Ted Kennedy , and the equivalent of Democratic and liberal appeals mentioning Newt Gingrich . 
 Hillary Clinton has also been featured in the media and popular culture from a wide spectrum of varying perspectives . In 1995 , writer Todd S. Purdum of The New York Times characterized Clinton as a Rorschach test , an assessment echoed at the time by feminist writer and activist Betty Friedan , who said , " Coverage of Hillary Clinton is a massive Rorschach test of the evolution of women in our society . " She has been the subject of many satirical impressions on Saturday Night Live , beginning with her time as first lady , and has made guest appearances on the show herself , in 2008 and in 2015 , to face @-@ off with her doppelgängers . 
 Clinton has often been described in the popular media as a polarizing figure , with some arguing otherwise . James Madison University political science professor Valerie <unk> 's 2007 study used the American National Election Studies ' " feeling thermometer " polls , which measure the degree of opinion about a political figure , to find that such polls during Clinton 's first lady years confirm the " conventional wisdom that Hillary Clinton is a polarizing figure " , with the added insight that " affect towards Mrs. Clinton as first lady tended to be very positive or very negative , with a fairly constant one fourth of respondents feeling ambivalent or neutral " . University of California , San Diego political science professor Gary Jacobson 's 2006 study of partisan polarization found that in a state @-@ by @-@ state survey of job approval ratings of the state 's senators , Clinton had the fourth @-@ largest partisan difference of any senator , with a 50 @-@ percentage @-@ point difference in approval between New York 's Democrats and Republicans . 
 Northern Illinois University political science professor Barbara Burrell 's 2000 study found that Clinton 's Gallup poll favorability numbers broke sharply along partisan lines throughout her time as first lady , with 70 to 90 percent of Democrats typically viewing her favorably while only 20 to 40 percent of Republicans did . University of Wisconsin – Madison political science professor Charles Franklin analyzed her record of favorable versus unfavorable ratings in public opinion polls , and found that there was more variation in them during her first lady years than her Senate years . The Senate years showed favorable ratings around 50 percent and unfavorable ratings in the mid @-@ 40 percent range ; Franklin noted that , " This sharp split is , of course , one of the more widely remarked aspects of Sen. Clinton 's public image . " McGill University professor of history Gil Troy titled his 2006 biography of her Hillary Rodham Clinton : <unk> First Lady , and wrote that after the 1992 campaign , Clinton " was a polarizing figure , with 42 percent [ of the public ] saying she came closer to their values and lifestyle than previous first ladies and 41 percent disagreeing . " Troy further wrote that Hillary Clinton " has been uniquely controversial and contradictory since she first appeared on the national radar screen in 1992 " and that she " has alternately fascinated , bedeviled , bewitched , and appalled Americans . " 
 Burrell 's study found women consistently rating Clinton more favorably than men by about ten percentage points during her first lady years . Jacobson 's study found a positive correlation across all senators between being women and receiving a partisan @-@ polarized response . Colorado State University communication studies professor <unk> <unk> Anderson describes the first lady position as a " site " for American womanhood , one ready made for the symbolic negotiation of female identity . In particular , Anderson states there has been a cultural bias towards traditional first ladies and a cultural prohibition against modern first ladies ; by the time of Clinton , the first lady position had become a site of heterogeneity and paradox . Burrell , as well as biographers Jeff Gerth and Don Van Natta Jr . , note that Clinton achieved her highest approval ratings as first lady late in 1998 , not for professional or political achievements of her own , but for being seen as the victim of her husband 's very public infidelity . University of Pennsylvania communications professor Kathleen Hall Jamieson saw Hillary Clinton as an exemplar of the double bind , who though able to live in a " both @-@ and " world of both career and family , nevertheless " became a surrogate on whom we projected our attitudes about attributes once thought incompatible " , leading to her being placed in a variety of no @-@ win situations . Quinnipiac University media studies professor Lisa Burns found press accounts frequently framing Clinton both as an exemplar of the modern professional working mother and as a political interloper interested in usurping power for herself . University of Indianapolis English professor Charlotte Templin found political cartoonists using a variety of stereotypes — such as gender reversal , radical feminist as <unk> , and the wife the husband wants to get rid of — to portray Hillary Clinton as violating gender norms . 
 Going into the early stages of her presidential campaign for 2008 , a Time magazine cover showed a large picture of her , with two <unk> labeled " Love Her " , " Hate Her " , while Mother Jones titled its profile of her " Harpy , Hero , Heretic : Hillary " . Democratic <unk> activists consistently rated Clinton very low in polls of their desired candidates , while some conservative figures such as Bruce Bartlett and Christopher Ruddy were declaring a Hillary Clinton presidency not so bad after all . An October 2007 cover of The American Conservative magazine was titled " The Waning Power of Hillary Hate " . By December 2007 , communications professor Jamieson observed that there was a large amount of misogyny present about Clinton on the Internet , up to and including Facebook and other sites devoted to depictions reducing Clinton to sexual humiliation . She noted , in response to widespread comments on Clinton 's laugh , that " We know that there 's language to condemn female speech that doesn 't exist for male speech . We call women 's speech shrill and strident . And Hillary Clinton 's laugh was being described as a cackle . " The " bitch " epithet , which had been applied to Clinton going back to her first lady days and had been seen by <unk> <unk> Anderson as a tool of containment against women in American politics , flourished during the campaign , especially on the Internet but via conventional media as well . Following Clinton 's " choked up moment " and related incidents in the run @-@ up to the January 2008 New Hampshire primary , both The New York Times and Newsweek found that discussion of gender 's role in the campaign had moved into the national political discourse . Newsweek editor Jon Meacham summed the relationship between Clinton and the American public by saying that the New Hampshire events " brought an odd truth to light : though Hillary Rodham Clinton has been on the periphery or in the middle of national life for decades ... she is one of the most recognizable but least understood figures in American politics . " 
 Once she became Secretary of State , Clinton 's image seemed to improve dramatically among the American public and become one of a respected world figure . She gained consistently high approval ratings ( by 2011 , the highest of her career except during the Lewinsky scandal ) , and her favorable @-@ unfavorable ratings during 2010 and 2011 were the highest of any active , nationally prominent American political figure . A 2012 Internet meme , " Texts from Hillary " , was based around a photograph of Clinton sitting on a military plane wearing sunglasses and using a mobile phone and imagined the recipients and contents of her text messages . It achieved viral popularity among younger , technically adept followers of politics . Clinton sought to explain her popularity by saying in early 2012 , " There 's a certain consistency to who I am and what I do , and I think people have finally said , ' Well , you know , I kinda get her now . ' " She continued to do well in Gallup 's most admired man and woman poll and in 2015 she was named the most admired woman by Americans for a record fourteenth straight time and twentieth time overall . 
 Her favorability ratings dropped , however , after she left office and began to be viewed in the context of partisan politics again . By September 2015 , with her 2016 presidential campaign underway and beset by continued reports regarding her private email usage at the State Department , her ratings had slumped to the some of her lowest levels ever . During 2016 she acknowledged that : " I 'm not a natural politician , in case you haven 't noticed . " Journalist Indira A. R. Lakshmanan , who has covered Clinton extensively both as a presidential candidate and as secretary of state , believes that Clinton 's persona is almost completely different in the two roles and that while Clinton definitely has the political skills that an officeholder needs , " Clearly , however , something seems to happen to Clinton when the task is asking people to vote for her . " 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = = Cited bibliography = = = 
 = Replaceable You = 
 " Replaceable You " is the fourth episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 6 , 2011 . In the episode , Homer gets a new assistant named Roz who is secretly out to steal his job . Meanwhile , Bart teams up with Martin Prince for the upcoming Springfield Elementary science fair , constructing robot baby seals that become popular with the senior citizens at the Springfield Retirement Castle . The role of Roz was played by American actress Jane Lynch . " Replaceable You " was seen by approximately eight million viewers during its original broadcast , and it has received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer is initially happy to get an organized , cheerful new assistant at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , a very tall woman named Roz Davis . However , when he and Barney head out to see a film during their work shift , Roz reveals this to Mr. Burns , who demotes Homer to Roz 's job and gives Roz Homer 's position . Roz proceeds to charm the regulars at Moe 's Tavern while finding dozens of ways to make Homer 's job miserable . After Ned Flanders sees Homer is depressed , Homer tells him about Roz , and is shocked to learn that Ned knew Roz back in Ohio ; they were part of the same Christian group , and when Ned gave her a congratulatory hug for winning a " no @-@ fun run " he learned that Roz cannot stand any physical contact . When Roz wins a " Worker of Millennium " award at the plant , Homer manipulates Burns into giving Roz a hug . She proceeds to beat Burns up , and is fired . Roz then compliments Homer for being much smarter than she expected , in terms Homer does not quite understand . 
 Elsewhere , Bart is not ready for the upcoming Springfield Elementary science fair . He ends up working with Martin Prince and after Bart comes up with a general idea — cool robotics — Martin does all the work and constructs an adorable robotic baby seal . However , it is revealed that when the wiring is tampered with , they become violent attackers . The seal wins first prize at the Fair , to Lisa 's disdain . When she goes to the Springfield Retirement Castle to whine about the injustice to Grampa , the seniors citizen see the seal visibly cheer up Jasper and the value of the invention becomes clear . All of the senior citizens then get their own seals , and they become happier and healthier , which angers a consortium of local businesses ( led by the local funeral home ) who want the <unk> to go back to being miserable and more rapidly dying . The group figures out the wiring secret and reworks the seals so their fury returns , even causing the death of Mrs. Glick . Chief Wiggum has all the robots impounded . Bart and Martin enlist the aid of Professor Frink who then gets a larger group of nerds to remotely hack into the robot software and make them nice again . They succeed and as a result , Chief Wiggum releases all the seals , who return to the nursing home . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Stephanie Gillis and directed by Mark Kirkland . American actress Jane Lynch guest starred in the episode as Roz . Showrunner Al Jean noted in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that it was easy to cast Lynch , since " she can do edge , sweetness , and a mix of both " . He further noted that the crew was happy when she agreed to take the role , and that he was " embarrassed [ the show ] didn ’ t ask her before she was so successful because she ’ s funny in everything she does . " Lynch recorded her scenes together with cast member Dan Castellaneta , who voices Homer . In an interview with the website Hollywood Outbreak , she commented that " It was pretty amazing to every once in a while look up at his face and go ' Oh my God , it 's that guy that does that voice . ' " Lynch added that she " had the best time . I would do it again and again . This is kind of very much a milestone in my career . I will point to this as a big deal . " In an interview with Fox All Access , Lynch revealed that she is a longtime fan : " Indeed I am a fan of The Simpsons . I started watching twenty years ago . I remember the first season . I remember clearly moments from the episodes and I thought it was revolutionary , the comedy of it . I really loved it . " 
 As with most episodes of The Simpsons , the music was composed by Alf Clausen and edited by Chris Ledesma . In a blog written by Ledesma , it was revealed prior to the airing of the episode that it would contain the use of the waltz " Tales from the Vienna Woods " by Johann Strauss II as well as a musical cue similar to the style of the main theme from the film Catch Me If You Can . The episode features several other references to popular culture as well . For example , Homer skips work to go see a film called Paul <unk> : Water Park Cop , a parody of the 2009 film Paul Blart : Mall Cop . In addition , there is a brief shot of the character Bender from the animated television series Futurama . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Replaceable You " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 6 , 2011 . It was watched by approximately eight million people during this broadcast . In the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 3 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating ( down eight percent from the previous episode ) and ten percent share . The Simpsons became the highest @-@ rated program in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of total viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing before new episodes of Family Guy , American Dad ! , and Allen Gregory . For the week of October 31 – November 6 , " Replaceable You " finished fifteenth in the ratings among all network prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Replaceable You " has received mixed reviews from television critics . Josh Harrison of Ology wrote positively about the episode , giving it an eight out of ten rating . He commented : " This episode of The Simpsons swerved toward the wacky in the best possible . I approve of this bounce @-@ back from the decidedly meh Treehouse of Horrors [ the previous episode of the series — ' Treehouse of Horror XXII ' ] and I 'm looking forward to what 's next . " Stephanie Krikorian of The Wall Street Journal 's Speakeasy publication named Lynch 's appearance one of the television highlights of the week November 6 – 13 . She wrote that " Simply put , Jane Lynch is good TV . Even the cartoon version , non @-@ track @-@ suit @-@ wearing Jane Lynch was worth watching . Her role as a schemer on this week ’ s Simpsons was no exception , making her performance voicing Roz one of the top moments in this week ’ s Rewind . " 
 The A.V. Club critic Hayden Childs was more negative , giving the episode a C − rating and criticizing the two plots and the lack of good jokes . He wrote that while there was " some comic potential " in the premise , the writers failed to deliver funny material . Commenting on the plot with Homer and Roz , Childs explained that " there ’ s some comic possibility and resonance in having Homer stabbed in the back at work . Many people have been stabbed in the back by an ambitious colleague . Unfortunately , Homer may not be the best character to give this sort of storyline a heart . Homer is a bad employee who deserves to be ratted out by his subordinate . The fact that she is selfish and mean doesn ’ t add to this story . Yes , that is the sort of person who would stab someone in the back for their own gain , but yes , Homer also had it coming . Where is the joke ? " 
 = Nyon Conference = 
 The Nyon Conference was a diplomatic conference held in Nyon , Switzerland in September 1937 to address attacks on international shipping in the Mediterranean Sea during the Spanish Civil War . The conference was convened in part because Italy had been carrying out unrestricted submarine warfare , although the final conference agreement did not accuse Italy directly ; instead , the attacks were referred to as " piracy " by an unidentified body . Italy was not officially at war , nor did any submarine identify itself . The conference was designed to strengthen non @-@ intervention in the Spanish Civil War . The United Kingdom and France led the conference , which was also attended by Bulgaria , Egypt , Greece , Romania , Turkey , the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia . 
 The first agreement , signed on 14 September 1937 , included plans to counterattack aggressive submarines . Naval patrols were established ; the United Kingdom and France were to patrol most of the western Mediterranean and parts of the east , and the other signatories were to patrol their own waters . Italy was to be allowed to join the agreement and patrol the Tyrrhenian Sea if it wished . A second agreement followed three days later , applying similar provisions to surface ships . Italy and Germany did not attend , although the former took up naval patrols in November . In marked contrast to the actions of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee and the League of Nations , this conference succeeded in preventing attacks by submarines . 
 = = Context and organisation = = 
 The Non @-@ Intervention Committee , a group of twenty @-@ four nations set up in 1936 and based in London , had attempted to restrict the flow of weapons to the parties of the Spanish Civil War . For the United Kingdom , it formed part of the policy of appeasement towards Germany and Italy and aimed at preventing a proxy war – with Italy and Germany supporting Franco 's Nationalist Coalition on one side and the Soviet Union supporting the Republican faction on the other – from escalating into a major pan @-@ European conflict . An Anglo @-@ Italian " Gentleman 's Agreement " had been signed on 2 January 1937 , with each party respecting the rights of the other in the Mediterranean and aimed at improving Anglo @-@ Italian relations . In May 1937 , Neville Chamberlain succeeded Stanley Baldwin as British Prime Minister , and adopted a new policy of dealing directly with Germany and Italy . The British believed they could convince Italy to abandon Germany through appeasement . 
 Under a Non @-@ Intervention Committee plan , neutral observers were posted to Spanish ports and borders . The plan also assigned zones of patrol to the United Kingdom , France , Germany and Italy , and patrols began in April . Following attacks on the German cruiser Leipzig on 15 and 18 June , Germany and Italy withdrew from the patrols . The United Kingdom and France offered to replace Germany and Italy in patrols of their sections , but the latter powers believed these patrols would be too partial . The British Admiralty proposed four plans in response to attacks on British shipping , favouring sending significant naval resources to the Mediterranean as the best solution ; previous control measures had been widely evaded . As suspected by the other powers , Italy was behind some of these attacks . Whilst officially being at peace , the Italian leadership had ordered the commencement of unrestricted submarine warfare , referred to in discussion as a campaign of piracy without mention of Italy . These plans would be the basis for a Mediterranean meeting , suggested by French Foreign Minister Yvon Delbos . Meanwhile , on the night of 31 August to 1 September , the Italian submarine Iride unsuccessfully attacked the British destroyer Havock with torpedoes , between the Gulf of Valencia and the Balearic Islands , strengthening British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden 's sceptical stance towards Italy . The attack led the British representative in Rome to protest to the Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs , but without response . 
 Up to 60 @,@ 000 Italian volunteers were now operating in Spain , and the removal of foreign nationals was discussed by the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . Italy had made a declaration that it would stop Italian volunteers from fighting in Spain on 7 January 1937 , and put a moratorium on volunteers on 20 January , also agreeing to support limitations on the number of volunteers on the 25th . Italy continued to request that belligerent rights be given to the Nationalists and Republicans , so both would gain the right to search vessels for contraband , thus removing the need for naval patrols . This request was opposed by the United Kingdom , France and the Soviet Union . British recognition of Italian sovereignty over Abyssinia following the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War was an important issue during Anglo @-@ Italian discussions in August 1937 . Following Eden 's disagreement with Chamberlain and Lord Halifax , Leader of the House of Lords and influential politician , over the issue , any agreement recognising Italian sovereignty was postponed until after the planned shipping conference had taken place . 
 On 5 or 6 September , the British arranged a conference for all parties with a Mediterranean coastline , along with Germany . The conference was to be held at Nyon , Switzerland – Geneva was avoided because Italians associated it with the actions of the League of Nations over the Abyssinian Crisis . The United Kingdom agreed to France 's request to extend an invitation to the Soviet Union , but blocked France 's attempt to invite a representative from Republican Spain . Portugal expressed surprise at not being invited . Camille <unk> , the new French Prime Minister , opposed direct intervention on the Spanish question . The Soviet Union accepted the invitation , indicating that it would use the opportunity to blame Italy for the attacks on shipping . The Soviet government formally accused the Italians of sinking two Soviet merchant vessels , the <unk> and the <unk> , an accusation the Italians described as " aggressive and offensive " . This was perhaps an attempt by the Soviet Union to push Italy and Germany away from the conference . Germany rejected the invitation , stating that piracy and other issues the conference was to discuss should be handled only by normal meetings of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee , not a conference like Nyon . The United Kingdom and France rejected this suggestion , and continued to prepare for the conference . Soon after , the Italians similarly declined . The Non @-@ Intervention Committee , it said , also had the advantage of including other European powers , notably Poland and Portugal . 
 = = Provisions = = 
 British and French naval staffs rejected the idea of a convoy system in draft proposals . The British wanted to curb submarine activity , on the theory that focusing on covert submarine attacks would help avoid confrontation , whereas the French considered surface vessels and aircraft just as important . The French protested at a plan to create multi @-@ nation squadrons , unhappy at the prospect of French ships coming under foreign command . On 8 September , plans were discussed in the British Cabinet , including the setting up of eight groups of three destroyers for the western Mediterranean . Preliminary talks with the French were held on 9 September , and the conference began on the 10th . Proceedings took two forms : discussions between the British and French , and formal meetings of all attending parties . Many of the other nations opposed the participation of the Soviet Navy in the Mediterranean , so the United Kingdom and France agreed to handle Aegean patrols . This was , perhaps surprisingly , accepted by the Soviet Union . 
 The conference ended on 14 September with the signing of the " Mediterranean Agreement " . Signatories were the countries of Bulgaria , Egypt , France , Greece , Romania , Turkey , the United Kingdom , the USSR and Yugoslavia . The agreement noted attacks on neutral shipping by submarines , in contravention of the London Naval Treaty ( signed in 1930 ) and the Submarine Protocol , part of the Second London Naval Treaty ( signed in 1936 ) . 
 The agreement provided that any submarine that attacked neutral shipping was to be sunk if possible , including submarines in the vicinity of a recent attack that were determined to be responsible for the attack . French and British fleets would patrol the seas west of Malta and attack any suspicious submarines , with the division of patrols between the United Kingdom and France to be decided by their governments . Both countries would patrol the high seas and territorial waters of signatory countries in the Mediterranean . The British would provide slightly more than half the 60 destroyers needed , with the French providing the remainder and most of the accompanying aircraft . It was agreed that Italy could participate in patrols of the Tyrrhenian Sea if it wished to do so . In the Eastern Mediterranean , British and French ships would patrol up to the Dardanelles , but not in the Adriatic Sea . In this area , signatory countries would patrol their own territorial waters , and would provide any reasonable assistance to the French and British patrols . The future revision of these provisions , including the way the area had been divided into zones , was specifically allowed . Submarine activity would be banned , subject to two exemptions : travel on the surface accompanied by a surface ship , and activity in certain areas for training purposes . Governments would only allow foreign submarines into each of their territorial waters in extreme situations , such as immediate distress . Merchant shipping would also be advised to stick to particular shipping routes . The agreement repeated the suggestion that Italy join in the proposal . Delbos announced that similar proposals about surface craft would be prepared . The provisions of the agreement would come into force on 20 September . The British and French knew that the secret Italian submarine operations had already been paused , but actions to enforce the conference agreement started at midnight on 19 / 20 September . The delegates to the agreement were happy ; The Times likened them to cricketers , " reviewing their innings , over by over " . 
 The French and British naval staffs moved to Geneva , where a second agreement was signed on 17 September 1937 . It extended the rules governing submarine warfare to surface vessels , and had the same signatories . Official versions of both agreements were published in French and English . Several proposals were not implemented : for instance , the British Admiral Ernle Chatfield wanted the Spanish parties to be able to verify that the flag a ship was displaying was correct , thereby preventing attacks on British shipping if Republican ships continued to use the British flag as a means of escape . This would have benefited the Nationalists , and the French insisted that this provision be dropped . Greece and Turkey wanted ships with a clear identifying mark to be excluded , so as to avoid being forced to fire on a German or Italian warship . This was rejected , but an amendment was made allowing nations to issue their preferred orders in their own territorial waters . A suggestion to fire at any attacking aircraft was easily passed . Another suggestion on surface ships ( which incorrectly stated no attack had yet been proven ) was eventually toughened with the addition of a clause stating aggressors would be attacked , at the request of the French . A Soviet proposal strengthening the effect of the agreement was made . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Meanwhile , on 13 September , Italy was invited to join in the agreement . Italy unequivocally rejected it , refusing to patrol the Tyrrhenian Sea . It demanded " absolute parity " with the United Kingdom and France , meaning the same right of patrol in the Mediterranean . Italy subsequently indicated that its refusal would be reversed if such parity was granted . Meanwhile , on the 15th , Benito Mussolini 's government sent two submarines to Francisco Franco 's National Faction . The Soviet Union refused to use routes patrolled by the Italians ; the Turks , Greeks and Yugoslavs refused to let the Italians use their ports . A compromise was signed on 30 September , and Italian patrols started on 10 November . The British government , and in particular Neville Chamberlain , desired better relations with Italy and these were achieved with the signing of the Anglo @-@ Italian Agreements of 1938 . 
 The patrols were a strain on the Royal Navy and the provisions were relaxed with French agreement , effective from January . Submarine activity soon returned and full patrols were resumed in early February . On the whole , submarine activity during this period did not amount to much ; patrols were again relaxed in May , and the agreement suspended in August . The success of the conference was in marked contrast to the failure of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . The Nationalists and Italians switched to using air power against shipping ; at least one ship was sunk off the Spanish coast by aircraft in the final months of 1937 . 
 In the United Kingdom , Eden described the submarine attacks as savage . He also noted that attacks on submarines would be restricted to suitably extreme circumstances and that the two parties in the war would still not be able to engage neutral vessels . He was keen to avoid an " Anglo @-@ Franco @-@ Soviet bloc " . The British press was in favour of the agreement , although The Times and The Guardian expressed some concerns . British historians have tended to see the Nyon Conference as an important stand against aggression , with some reservations . Christopher Seton @-@ Watson describes it as a " diplomatic victory " , but Jill Edwards points out that it failed to achieve a change in Italian policy . The agreement created further divisions between Eden as foreign minister and Neville Chamberlain as prime minister . 
 Maxim Litvinov , the Soviet representative , was pleased with the outcome . The agreement also allowed for greater military resources to be deployed to the Mediterranean as needed . Litvinov , in particular , stressed the Soviet Union 's " indisputable right " to commit naval forces to the Mediterranean ( something Germany and Italy had opposed in meetings of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee ) . He also said he regretted that Spanish merchant shipping had been left out – the other nations believed this would have amounted to formal intervention into the civil war . Aretas Akers @-@ <unk> , Viscount <unk> and British Ambassador to the Soviet Union , reported that the Soviets considered the conference with " tempered satisfaction " , and that they claimed credit for their delegation 's role . 
 Elsewhere , French public opinion was strongly in favour of the outcome of the conference , the only criticism coming from the far left that Republican ships would not receive direct protection . The German mood was restrained , where the press were satisfied by the Soviet exclusion from patrols . In Spain , the Republicans – on the verge of disaster – were largely in favour , and the Nationalists strongly against . The Republicans praised the improved safety of the shipping routes , but were somewhat unhappy that belligerent rights had not been granted to both sides . The Nationalists made several complaints , including one over the route recommended to shipping , but none of these resulted in changes to the agreement . The agreement was welcomed by other members of the League of Nations . Italian historians tend to downplay the importance of the Nyon Conference , often seeing it as a mere extension of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . 
 = Music of Kingdom Hearts = 
 The music of the Kingdom Hearts video game series was composed by Yoko Shimomura with orchestral music arranged by Kaoru Wada . The original soundtracks of the games have been released on three albums and a fourth compilation album . The soundtracks to the Kingdom Hearts games feature several musical pieces from both Disney films and Final Fantasy games , including such pieces as " Mickey Mouse Club March " by Jimmie Dodd , " This Is Halloween " by Danny Elfman , and " One @-@ Winged Angel " by Nobuo Uematsu . They also feature several vocal songs , the most notable being the two main theme songs , " Hikari " and " Passion " . The two themes were written and performed by Japanese American pop star Hikaru Utada . " Hikari " and " Passion " were originally in Japanese , but English versions were also produced , titled " Simple and Clean " and " Sanctuary " , respectively . 
 Although the majority of the music has been released only in Japan , the first soundtrack was released worldwide and tracks from the Kingdom Hearts series have been featured in Video Games Live at multiple venues . The music has overall been well received and several tracks have received particular praise . The two main themes were well received by both video game and music critics , and did well on Japan 's Oricon Weekly Singles chart . 
 = = Musical pieces = = 
 The Kingdom Hearts games feature music that ranges from dark to cheerful to sorrowful . Several musical pieces are included that have either met with a positive reception or were already well known – mostly from Disney films . Such pieces include " Mickey Mouse Club March " by Jimmie Dodd ; " Winnie The Pooh " by Robert B. Sherman and Richard M. Sherman ; " This Is Halloween " by Danny Elfman ; " He 's a Pirate " by Geoff <unk> , Klaus <unk> , and Hans Zimmer ; and " Beauty and the Beast " by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken . Other well @-@ known tracks include " Night on Bald Mountain " ( rendered " A Night on the Bare Mountain " ) by Modest Mussorgsky , and a remixed version of " One @-@ Winged Angel " by Final Fantasy series composer Nobuo Uematsu . Some Disney worlds in Kingdom Hearts feature corresponding music from their related Disney film . Original tracks include the title screen track , " Dearly Beloved " , and the two theme songs , " Simple and Clean " and " Sanctuary " . The soundtracks feature a mix of piano and orchestral pieces . The main themes differ from the other music in that they are pop songs . The series also features several vocal songs — the most notable being the two theme songs . Kingdom Hearts II includes more vocal songs found specifically in the Atlantica world , which features rhythm @-@ based minigames set in the world of The Little Mermaid . Such vocal songs include " Part of Your World " and " Under the Sea " , both by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman . 
 = = = " Hikari " and " Simple and Clean " = = = 
 " Hikari " ( 光 , lit . " light " ) is the theme song to the Japanese release of Kingdom Hearts , the first game in the series as well as the Game Boy Advance sequel Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories and its remake Re : Chain of Memories , the PlayStation Portable prequel Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , as well as the theme to Kingdom Hearts coded and its DS remake Re : Coded . Its English counterpart , " Simple and Clean " , is the theme song to the English release of the games as well as the Japanese re @-@ release of the first game , Kingdom Hearts Final Mix . Both songs were written and performed by Hikaru Utada . This marked the first time she had produced a song for a video game . Although the two songs share a similar melody and background music , the meaning of the songs ' lyrics differ as " Simple and Clean " is not a literal translation of " Hikari " . The single , " Hikari " , was released in Japan on March 20 , 2002 and proved to be very popular ; it sold over 270 @,@ 000 copies in a week . " Simple And Clean " ( full version and PLANITb Remix ) is included on Utada 's single release of " <unk> " , which debuted on Japan 's Oricon charts at number one and stayed on the charts for 19 weeks . It was later included as a bonus track on Utada 's 2009 English @-@ language album This Is the One . Both songs have a " PLANITb remix " , which are house versions , and " Hikari " has a " Godson Mix " . The different versions are used at various points in the game ; the " Short Edit " version of the PLANITb remix is used for the opening sequence and the full version of the original song is used for the ending sequence . 
 = = = " Passion " and " Sanctuary " = = = 
 " Passion " is the theme song for the Japanese release of Kingdom Hearts II , and the Nintendo DS title , Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days . Its English counterpart , " Sanctuary " , is the theme song for the English versions and Kingdom Hearts II – FINAL <unk> . Like the first theme , Hikaru Utada wrote and performed both the Japanese and English versions , and there are two mixes . The " ~ opening version ~ " mix is played during the opening movies , and the " ~ after the battle ~ " version is played after defeating the final boss of the games . " Sanctuary " and " ~ after the battle ~ " were both used in Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days for DS . " Passion " was included in the Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack and a CD single was released on December 14 , 2005 . " Sanctuary " was first previewed on MTV.com in early 2006 . Both the " Opening " and " After the Battle " versions of " Sanctuary " were later released in May 2009 as bonus tracks on Utada 's second American album , This Is the One . The " After the Battle " versions of " Passion " and " Sanctuary " also serve as the ending theme songs for the 3DS game , Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 Yoko Shimomura composed the music for the three main Kingdom Hearts games and their remakes . She began composing video game music in 1988 , and joined Square in 1993 , but left in 2002 to work freelance . In creating music , Shimomura gathers inspiration from different things outside of her daily routine , like traveling or when she is emotionally moved . She has a respect for solo and orchestral pieces , such as Piano Sonata No. 7 by Ludwig van Beethoven , Ballade No. 1 by Frédéric Chopin , and La Valse by Maurice Ravel . Shimomura was initially hesitant to handle the music for the first Kingdom Hearts ; the mix of a Square @-@ style story and Disney characters made it hard to imagine what the game would be like , which made it difficult to compose the music . Many of the musical pieces are arrangements of Disney themes , which Shimomura stated she enjoyed arranging . Shimomura felt a great deal of pressure working on such recognizable tunes , and made an effort to maintain the original mood and atmosphere of them while complying with the technical specifications of the PlayStation 2 . For example , the original orchestrated arrangement of the song " This is Halloween " from The Nightmare Before Christmas was impossible to reproduce on the PlayStation 2 's sound system . To keep aspects of it intact , Shimomura used a trial and error method to arrange the piece . 
 In creating original music , Shimomura wanted to create compositions that would make players feel good while playing to accompany the action aspect of Kingdom Hearts . She played the game and looked over scripts and illustrations for inspiration . After coming up with ideas , she discussed them with director Tetsuya Nomura and the game planners . For the PlayStation 2 re @-@ release of Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , she and her team spent much of their time working on the fight music ; Shimomura wanted the different fight music to reflect different emotions such as happiness and sadness . To handle the large workload for Kingdom Hearts coded , Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days and Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , Shimomura composed the most prominent themes , while the rest was created by other composers . In retrospect , Shimomura has stated that the Kingdom Hearts series combined the scenes and music well , and she felt very honored her music has entered into people 's hearts . She has also commented that she enjoyed working on the project , despite its hardships , and is proud of the work . 
 The two main theme songs were written and performed by Japanese American artist Hikaru Utada . She wrote two versions for each , one in Japanese and one in English ; the latter is used for international releases of the games . " Hikari " and " Passion " are the Japanese version theme songs for Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II respectively , while their English counterparts are called " Simple and Clean " and " Sanctuary " . Utada was the only singer Nomura had in mind for the first Kingdom Hearts theme song . He considered Utada an iconic young singer whose music could break language and international barriers . Her involvement , along with the first song 's Japanese title , was announced in January 2002 . Utada 's involvement with the sequel was announced in July 2005 . Nomura chose not to have a different singer perform the second theme song because he believed fans associated Utada with Kingdom Hearts . Utada derived her inspiration from the worlds and characters in Kingdom Hearts ; she also received written explanations of the stories from Nomura . Nomura stated that the vocals of the second theme tie in more closely with the game 's story than " Hikari " / " Simple and Clean " did with Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories . Conversely , Nomura commented that Utada 's theme songs influenced several factors in creating the games . 
 = = Releases = = 
 Aside from being featured in the Kingdom Hearts video games , the music has been released via a variety of methods . Soundtracks for the first and third game were released shortly after the games ' release . These were followed by a compilation set which featured unreleased tracks from the series , as well as new and rearranged versions of tracks from the re @-@ released versions of the games . The first soundtrack was released in Japan , United States and Europe . All other albums were released only in Japan . Though the two main themes were released as part of the game soundtracks , they were officially released as singles a week prior to the games ' releases . Utada 's 2009 album This Is the One features the theme songs " Simple And Clean " and " Sanctuary " . Tracks from Kingdom Hearts series have also been played by Play ! A Video Game Symphony at various venues in the United States and around the world . Arnie Roth arranged Kingdom Hearts pieces for the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in September 2009 . Music from Kingdom Hearts is included in Yoko Shimomura 's best works compilation album Drammatica . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack is the official soundtrack for the video game Kingdom Hearts . It was first released in Japan on March 27 , 2002 by Toshiba @-@ EMI , and later released in Europe on November 25 , 2002 by Virgin Records and the United States on March 23 , 2003 by Walt Disney Records . The soundtrack is a 2 @-@ CD set which contains most of music in the original version of the game along with two bonus tracks . The music was composed by Yoko Shimomura , with vocals done by Hikaru Utada for " Simple And Clean " and " Hikari " . The orchestral music was arranged by Kaoru Wada and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra . Because Kingdom Hearts Final Mix was released after the soundtrack , additional tracks from it were not included . 
 The soundtrack has met with an overall positive reception . IGN listed the opening track for Kingdom Hearts , " Dearly Beloved " , as number four on their top ten list of RPG title tracks . In their " Best of 2002 " awards , Kingdom Hearts was nominated for the " Best Sound in a PlayStation 2 Game Editor 's Choice Award " and was a runner up for " Best Sound in Game 2002 Reader 's Choice Award " . Allmusic rated the first soundtrack a 3 out of 5 . GameSpy described the soundtrack as " pleasant , melodious , and most of all fitting for the various situations in which it plays " and complimented the English translation of " Simple And Clean " . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts -Final <unk> Additional Tracks = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts -Final <unk> Additional Tracks is a separate CD that features new tracks from the re @-@ release of the first game , Kingdom Hearts Final Mix . It was released in Japan on December 26 , 2002 , by Walt Disney Records . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack is the official soundtrack for Kingdom Hearts II video game . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed and produced by Yoko Shimomura , with the main orchestral tracks arranged by Kaoru Wada and performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra . Vocals were performed by Hikaru Utada for the theme song , " Passion " . The soundtrack was released in Japan on January 25 , 2006 . 
 The soundtrack received positive remarks from critics . G4TV awarded Kingdom Hearts II " Best Soundtrack " at their 2006 G @-@ Phoria awards show . GameSpy complimented the soundtrack but stated it was not as good as the first game 's soundtrack . GameInformer called the musical score " unforgettable " . GameSpot stated the " superb soundtrack " further enhanced the gaming experience and rated the sound a 9 out of 10 . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack Complete = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack Complete is a compilation album of the video game music from the three main games in the series , Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , and Kingdom Hearts II . The boxset contains music composed and produced by Yoko Shimomura , with the main orchestral tracks arranged by Kaoru Wada . The album also features various unreleased tracks from the series , as well as new and rearranged versions of tracks from the two Final Mix releases and Re : Chain of Memories . The compilation boxset was released in Japan on March 28 , 2007 . 
 The collection has printed images on each disc and includes a deluxe booklet containing new illustrations designed by director and character designer Tetsuya Nomura and comments from Yoko Shimomura . A special CD carrying case featuring artwork of Sora and Roxas was also released as a bonus . The soundtrack comprises nine discs with 229 tracks in total . Discs one and two contain unaltered tracks from the Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack while discs three to six contain lengthier and looped tracks from the Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack . Discs seven and eight contain tracks from Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories while disc nine contains bonus tracks from Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Piano Collections Kingdom Hearts = = = 
 On May 27 , 2009 , Square Enix released a collection of Kingdom Hearts music arranged for the piano . The tracks are popular pieces chosen by members of Square Enix 's music website . A mini concert was held on April 2 , 2009 in Tokyo to preview the album , attendees of which were drawn from a lottery held on the Square Enix Members website . There , composer Yoko Shimomura described the album as consisting of easy listening piano solo arrangements . Tracks 5 through 8 are a sonata on the various themes of the series . 
 " The Other Promise " is used for a cutscene of Kingdom Hearts Re : coded in Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix . 
 = = = Piano Collections Kingdom Hearts Field & Battle = = = 
 Piano Collections Kingdom Hearts Field & Battle is the second compilation album of compositions from the Kingdom Hearts series arranged for solo piano by Sachiko Miyano and Natsumi Kameoka . Unlike the first album , which features mostly character themes and background music , this compilation features themes from battles and worlds . Square Enix announced it at the 2009 Tokyo Game Show , and released it in Japan on January 13 , 2010 . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep & 358 / 2 Days Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep & 358 / 2 Days Original Soundtrack is a three @-@ disc album containing music from the games Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep and Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , as well as Kingdom Hearts Re : coded , composed by Yoko Shimomura . It was released on February 2 , 2011 . Discs one and two contain music from Birth by Sleep , and disc three contains music from 358 / 2 Days ( tracks 1 through 13 ) , Re : coded ( tracks 14 through 20 ) , and Birth by Sleep : Final Mix ( tracks 21 through 27 ) . Tracks from 358 / 2 Days and Re : coded are in pure orchestrated form , and are not digitized as they are in the original game releases . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Dream Drop Distance Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts Dream Drop Distance Original Soundtrack is a three @-@ disc album containing music from Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance , released on April 18 , 2012 . Unlike previous soundtracks , this set features a collaboration between composers Yoko Shimomura , Takeharu Ishimoto , and Tsuyoshi Sekito , containing musical compositions from all three . Among the songs included are tracks from The World Ends with You , originally composed by Ishimoto , who remixed them for Dream Drop Distance . Orchestral arrangements were provided by Kaoru Wada . 
 Track listing 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts 10th Anniversary Fan Selection <unk> & <unk> = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts 10th Anniversary Fan Selection <unk> & <unk> is a 2 @-@ CD album made in <unk> of the series ' 10th anniversary . The tracks included in the album were chosen by fans in the series ' official website . It was released in Japan on September 19 , 2012 . 
 Track listing 
 = = Reception = = 
 The music of Kingdom Hearts was overall well received . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot felt the background music was appropriate for each setting . However , he complained that the music loops were too short and repetitive . IGN reviewer David Smith was impressed by the production values that went into the music of Kingdom Hearts , namely the use of the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra and excellent arrangements of pieces such as " Night on Bald Mountain " and " Under the Sea " . He also praised composer Yoko Shimomura 's ability to maintain the atmosphere while keeping a " common thread of character running through the soundtrack " . Daniel Kalabakov of SoundtrackCentral.com called Shimomura 's orchestral composition sophisticated and stated that the score possesses unique qualities . He also stated that though the album is excellent , he considered it one of Shimomura 's weaker albums overall . In reviewing Shimomura 's compilation album Drammatica , SoundtrackCentral.com reviewer Adam Corn considered the Kingdom Hearts tracks one of the highlights of the album . Jim <unk> of Gaming Age stated the music was one of the best aspects of the first game and the orchestrated soundtrack is better quality than the " midi @-@ sounding " tunes of previous Final Fantasy games . GameSpy 's Benjamin Turner had positive comments about the main theme , but found some worlds ' background music weak . A second GameSpy reviewer , Gerald Villoria , complimented both PlayStation 2 game soundtracks , but stated Kingdom Hearts II 's soundtrack was not as good as the first game 's . 
 Several tracks garnered extra attention and their own positive reception . " Hikari " debuted at number one on the Oricon Weekly Singles chart in Japan . It stayed at number one for three weeks and stayed on the chart for thirteen weeks . " Hikari " sold more than 270 @,@ 000 copies during its first week on sale , and by August 2002 , it sold over 860 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . In 2008 , Guinness World Records listed it as the best @-@ selling video game theme song in Japan . Kalabakov complimented Utada 's singing and the instrumentation of " Hikari " , but commented that he was not a fan of pop songs . Turner was impressed by the translation of " Hikari " into English , and felt Utada 's vocals were a good addition to the opening and ending segments of the game . " Passion " debuted at number four on the Oricon Weekly Singles chart in Japan where it stayed on the chart for nine weeks . G4TV 's Miguel Concepcion was particularly pleased by " Dearly Beloved " , the track that plays during the title screen . IGN echoed the sentiment and listed it as number four in their top ten list of RPG title tracks . They commented that the track lifted the doubts they had about the game 's potential . Kalabakov referred to it as a fitting " fairy tale @-@ style " piece to the game 's setting . He further stated that it was a simple piece that was " not short on emotion " . 
 = Boeing C @-@ 17 Globemaster III in Australian service = 
 The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) operates eight Boeing C @-@ 17 Globemaster III large transport aircraft . Four C @-@ 17s were ordered in mid @-@ 2006 to improve the Australian Defence Force 's ( ADF 's ) ability to operate outside Australia and its region . The aircraft entered service between November 2006 and January 2008 , the second pair being delivered ahead of schedule . Two more Globemasters were ordered in 2011 , the sixth being delivered to the RAAF in November 2012 . Another two C @-@ 17s were ordered in October 2014 , with the final aircraft being delivered in November 2015 . The Globemasters are built to the same specifications as those operated by the United States Air Force ( USAF ) , and the Australian aircraft are maintained through an international contract with Boeing . 
 All of the RAAF 's Globemasters are assigned to No. 36 Squadron and are based at RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland . The aircraft have supported ADF operations in Afghanistan , Iraq and other locations in the Middle East , as well as training exercises in Australia and the United States . They have also transported supplies and personnel as part of relief efforts following natural disasters in Australia , Japan , New Zealand and several other countries . The C @-@ 17s are highly regarded throughout the Australian military for their ability to carry large amounts of cargo across long distances , and the process through which they were acquired has been identified as an example of good practice in defence procurement . 
 = = Acquisition = = 
 = = = Selection = = = 
 The RAAF began considering options for heavy transport aircraft to provide a strategic airlift capability during the early 2000s . This investigation was initiated after the ADF deployment to East Timor in 1999 and operations in the Middle East from 2001 revealed shortcomings in the RAAF 's ability to transport the increasingly large and heavy vehicles and other items of equipment used by the Australian Army . To support these operations , the ADF found that it needed long @-@ ranged aircraft capable of carrying larger loads than could be accommodated in the RAAF 's force of Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules transports . As a result of this capability gap , the ADF needed to use USAF transports and chartered Russian @-@ built commercial heavy lift aircraft to move supplies and equipment from Australia to its forces in Afghanistan and the Middle East . This experience proved frustrating , as both categories of aircraft were often not available and the commercial transports were expensive to lease . In addition , the crash of a civil @-@ chartered Ilyushin Il @-@ 76 in East Timor in 2003 raised concerns within the ADF about the safety of the Russian transport aircraft . Following advocacy from the military , the Australian Government announced as part of an update to its national security strategy in December 2005 that it would consider acquiring heavy lift aircraft to supplement the RAAF 's Lockheed Martin C @-@ 130J Super Hercules transports . This initiative was one of several measures announced in the government 's Defence Update 2005 paper , which sought to better prepare the ADF to operate in locations distant from Australia . 
 In early 2006 a project office was established within the Defence Materiel Organisation ( DMO ) to evaluate the options for acquiring heavy lift aircraft . The office considered the Boeing C @-@ 17 Globemaster III , which was in service with the USAF at the time , as well as the Airbus <unk> Atlas , which was yet to make its first flight . Boeing aggressively marketed the C @-@ 17 to the Australian Government during this period . Though unstated , commonality with the USAF and the United Kingdom 's RAF was also considered advantageous . In March 2006 , Minister for Defence Brendan Nelson announced that the government had decided to purchase three C @-@ 17s and take out an option for a fourth . Nelson also announced that the C @-@ 17s would be operated by No. 36 Squadron RAAF , which was to transfer its C @-@ 130H Hercules to No. 37 Squadron and relocate from RAAF Base Richmond in New South Wales to RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland . Amberley was selected over Richmond as the base for the Globemasters as its runways and engineering facilities were better able to support large aircraft . 
 The government exercised the option to purchase a fourth C @-@ 17 between the time this announcement was made and the signing of the final contract on 31 July 2006 . The total cost of the four aircraft was $ <unk> million , and Boeing also received an A $ 85 million contract to allow Australia to join the " virtual fleet " global C @-@ 17 sustainment program . Additional funding was allocated to build headquarters and maintenance facilities at Amberley as well as to upgrade the air movements facilities at RAAF Bases Darwin , Edinburgh , Townsville , and Pearce . The package of funding needed to purchase and introduce the Globemasters into service was provided as a supplement to the government 's long @-@ term defence funding program , so the ADF did not have to forego any other planned capabilities . The C @-@ 17s were acquired through the United States Government 's Foreign Military Sales program , meaning that they were first delivered to the USAF and then transferred to the RAAF . The USAF provided some of the C @-@ 17 delivery " slots " it had purchased to the RAAF to enable the type to rapidly enter Australian service , making them identical to American C @-@ 17 even in paint scheme , the only difference being the national markings . This allowed delivery to commence within nine months of commitment to the program . 
 = = = Delivery and sustainment = = = 
 The RAAF received its first four C @-@ 17s between late 2006 and early 2008 . The initial aircraft , which was allocated the serial number A41 @-@ 206 , was completed in October 2006 and arrived in Australia on 4 December that year . A welcome ceremony attended by Prime Minister John Howard , Nelson and other dignitaries was held at Defence Establishment Fairbairn in Canberra . The second aircraft , A41 @-@ 207 , was delivered on 11 May 2007 . A41 @-@ 208 was handed over to the RAAF on 18 December 2007 , and A41 @-@ 209 was accepted on 18 January 2008 . The first two aircraft were delivered in accordance with the expected schedule , and the third and fourth were each delivered two months early . The RAAF also acquired a C @-@ 17 flight simulator , which entered service in January 2010 . In the 2012 – 13 edition of its annual Major Projects Report , the Australian National Audit Office judged that a lesson for the Australian Government from the successful procurement of the first four Globemasters was that purchasing major equipment on an " off @-@ the @-@ shelf " basis allows " considerable acceleration of the standard acquisition cycle " . Similarly , Australian Strategic Policy Institute analyst Mark Thomson wrote in 2008 that " the breakneck speed with which the C @-@ 17 acquisition was executed ( and the good outcomes of the acquisition ) provides an example of what can be achieved " through off @-@ the @-@ shelf purchasing , and that such projects generally deliver better outcomes for the ADF than attempts to develop equipment tailored to Australia 's needs . 
 The Australian Government ordered a further two C @-@ 17s during 2011 and 2012 . In February 2011 Minister for Defence Stephen Smith announced that an additional C @-@ 17 would be purchased for a cost of $ <unk> million . This aircraft was ordered to prevent a shortfall of airlift capacity while the original four C @-@ 17s underwent scheduled heavy maintenance . The decision to purchase this aircraft also supplanted an earlier plan to acquire an additional two C @-@ 130Js . As the deadline for A41 @-@ 206 to be temporarily taken out of service for maintenance was rapidly approaching , the USAF agreed to transfer a C @-@ 17 airframe that was nearing completion to the RAAF . This aircraft was delivered on 14 September 2011 , and arrived in Australia nine days later . At the ceremony held to welcome A41 @-@ 210 , Smith announced that the government intended to order another C @-@ 17 . The $ <unk> million contract for this aircraft was signed in March 2012 , and it was delivered to the RAAF on 1 November that year . Funding for these two aircraft was obtained through a combination of supplements to the Defence budget and reallocating unspent funds from ADF projects running behind schedule . 
 Owing to budget constraints and the scheduled closure of Boeing 's Globemaster production line in 2015 , it was considered unlikely in 2012 that the RAAF would acquire additional Globemasters . However , in August 2014 Minister for Defence David Johnston stated that the Government was likely to purchase a further one or two C @-@ 17s . The Government announced that it would purchase two additional Globemasters in October 2014 , and requested information on the pricing and availability for a further pair of aircraft . In November 2014 Australia lodged a formal request with the United States Defense Security Cooperation Agency for four C @-@ 17s and associated equipment , for a total cost of $ <unk> billion . An order for the RAAF 's seventh and eighth Globemasters was formally announced by Prime Minister Tony Abbott on 10 April 2015 . The first of the new C @-@ 17s arrived in Australia on 29 July 2015 , and the second on 4 November that year . These two aircraft were among the last C @-@ 17s to have been built before the production line was closed , and it is not expected that the RAAF will acquire additional Globemasters . It was reported in December 2014 that the New Zealand Government was considering purchasing between two and four Globemasters , and Australian Aviation journalist Andrew McLaughlin suggested that any such acquisition would build on Australia 's C @-@ 17 support infrastructure . However , the New Zealand Government ultimately decided to not purchase any Globemasters . 
 Maintenance of the Australian Globemasters is undertaken by both the RAAF and Boeing . As part of Australia 's membership of the Globemaster III Sustainment Partnership , Air Force technicians are responsible for routine servicing and Boeing handles major maintenance tasks . Boeing also provides technical support for RAAF Globemasters during deployments outside of Australia , and the company is paid in return for achieving contractually mandated aircraft availability targets . Due to the economies of scale arising from a large international maintenance program , the contract with Boeing is considered to be cheaper than attempting to support the aircraft through unique Australian contracts . It is expected that the RAAF 's Globemasters will remain in service for 30 years . 
 The ADF and defence commentators have judged that the Globemaster acquisition has significantly increased the RAAF 's airlift capabilities . The aircraft have a maximum range of 10 @,@ 389 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 455 mi ) and are capable of operating from short and unsealed airstrips . Each Globemaster can carry up to 77 @,@ 519 kilograms ( 170 @,@ 900 lb ) of cargo , and the large size of the aircraft means that it can accommodate outsize items . Maximum loads include 102 passengers , 36 personnel on stretchers , an M1 Abrams tank , three Eurocopter Tiger helicopters or five Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicles . These are much larger loads than can be transported by the Air Force 's C @-@ 130 Hercules transports , and the RAAF website states that each C @-@ 17 can carry three times as much cargo as a C @-@ 130 . Flown with a joystick and fly @-@ by @-@ wire controls , the C @-@ 17 is also highly manoeuvrable and responsive considering its size . Ian <unk> , the defence correspondent for News Corp Australia , judged that the C @-@ 17s have " changed the game " for the RAAF by allowing the force to rapidly transport large amounts of cargo into combat zones . According to aviation journalist Nigel <unk> , the Globemaster 's capabilities have made it a highly regarded asset throughout the Australian Defence Organisation . 
 = = Operational service = = 
 = = = Training and combat operations = = = 
 Ahead of the delivery of Australia 's first C @-@ 17s , RAAF personnel received training on the aircraft in the United States . From May 2006 a group of pilots and loadmasters led by Wing Commander Linda Corbould , the commanding officer designate of No. 36 Squadron , undertook conversion training with the USAF 's C @-@ 17 units at Altus Air Force Base and Charleston Air Force Base . A group of 48 technical personnel also received training at Charleston and McChord Air Force Base from September that year . No. 36 Squadron began a period of intensive training once Corbould delivered A41 @-@ 206 to Amberley on 7 December 2006 , and the unit achieved initial operating capability status in September 2007 . Also in 2007 , the RAAF 's No. 1 Air Operations Support Squadron was expanded by 80 personnel to provide air load teams to support the Globemasters . A project to acquire the equipment needed to allow the RAAF 's C @-@ 17s to be used in the aeromedical evacuation role and develop associated crew procedures began in late 2007 . The first Globemaster aeromedical evacuation sortie was flown on 5 September 2008 , the day after the type was certified to operate in this role . On 8 December 2008 , Corbould led the RAAF 's first all @-@ female aircrew during a training flight over South East Queensland to mark the second anniversary of the entry of the Globemaster into service . A team of USAF trainers was posted to Amberley until the RAAF had sufficient C @-@ 17 pilots who were qualified to instruct others . The RAAF began training new C @-@ 17 pilots in early 2010 after the flight simulator was delivered , and the first Australian @-@ trained pilots graduated in early May that year . No. 36 Squadron achieved final operating capability status in December 2011 . The components for a simulated C @-@ 17 cargo compartment were delivered to Amberley in early 2013 , and this facility was commissioned in November that year . The simulator is used to train air movements and medical staff as well as to develop and trial new cargo carrying techniques for the C @-@ 17s . The first Australian trained Globemaster loadmasters graduated in mid @-@ 2014 . 
 The RAAF 's Globemasters have supported Australian military deployments worldwide . The Air Mobility Control Centre manages the tasking of the Globemasters , and tries to allocate them to missions for which they are the most cost @-@ effective option . As of September 2008 , No. 36 Squadron was conducting fortnightly flights to transport supplies from Australia to bases in the Middle East ; at this time the supplies were moved into the combat zones in Iraq and Afghanistan using C @-@ 130 transports . Direct C @-@ 17 flights into the major Australian base at Tarin Kot in Afghanistan began in July 2009 . As No. 36 Squadron 's structure does not enable it to permanently station Globemasters in the Middle East , the usual practice has been for one of the type to carry a load of cargo from Australia and then conduct missions in the region for several days before returning to Amberley . In a speech delivered in early 2013 , Smith stated that during the previous year the Globemasters had supported operations in the Middle East by flying " 60 missions , about 330 hours of flight time , during which the C @-@ <unk> moved 190 vehicles , 1 @,@ 800 passengers and over 3 @,@ 600 tonnes of cargo and conducted 20 aeromedical evacuations " . In late 2013 a detachment of two Globemasters , three air crews and a large number of other personnel from No. 36 Squadron was established at Al Minhad Air Base in the United Arab Emirates . This detachment was the first time that Australian C @-@ 17s had been deployed away from Amberley for more than two weeks , and was established to transport ADF equipment out of Afghanistan as part of the reduction of the Australian force in the country . Overall , around 100 Globemaster sorties were conducted to fly equipment out of Tarin Kot between November 2012 and the end of 2013 . All Australian C @-@ 17s that fly into Afghanistan are fitted with a Large Aircraft Infrared Countermeasures system for protection against missiles . 
 In December 2013 one of the Globemasters which was deployed to the Middle East was , along with a RAAF Hercules , tasked with flying peacekeepers into South Sudan to reinforce the United Nations force there following an outbreak of fighting . This airlift was completed in mid @-@ January , by which time the Australian C @-@ 17 had made eight flights into South Sudan from Brindisi in Italy and Djibouti . During September and December 2014 RAAF Globemasters flew five sorties into Iraq to deliver weapons and ammunition destined for Iraqi forces fighting the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . 
 C @-@ 17s have also supported ADF training . In this role they have moved helicopters and other equipment between Australian bases , and supported training deployments to the United States . In April 2010 , members of the Australian Army 's No. 176 ( Air Dispatch ) Squadron became the first paratroopers to jump from a non @-@ American Globemaster ; the type was first used to support training by the Army 's Parachute Training School in June that year . A C @-@ 17 transported an Army M1 Abrams tank for the first time during a training exercise conducted on 11 May 2012 . To mark the arrival of the RAAF 's final Globemaster , four of the aircraft flew over Brisbane together on 22 November 2012 . Each of the C @-@ 17s involved in the flight carried a different type of cargo to showcase the type 's capabilities ; A41 @-@ 211 was configured for aeromedical evacuation tasks , another C @-@ 17 embarked an Abrams tank , one carried two Tiger helicopters and the fourth was loaded with several <unk> . 
 Despite the wide range of tasks which have been assigned to the aircraft , the RAAF is currently not operating its Globemasters in all the roles the type is capable of . In February 2013 the Air Force was reported to be investigating using C @-@ 17s to drop special forces boats as well as supplies to warships . The Australian C @-@ 17s have also not yet been refuelled while in flight , though it is planned to develop this capability once the flying boom refuelling systems fitted to the RAAF 's new KC @-@ 30A tanker aircraft become operational . 
 = = = Humanitarian tasks = = = 
 In addition to their military tasks , the C @-@ 17s have formed part of the Australian Government 's response to natural disasters . In November 2007 a C @-@ 17 delivered 27 tonnes of supplies to Port Moresby in Papua New Guinea following heavy flooding caused by Cyclone Guba . At the conclusion of the ADF response to this disaster , another C @-@ 17 mission was conducted to return Army Sikorsky S @-@ 70A @-@ 9 Black Hawks to their base at Townsville . During May 2008 a C @-@ 17 flew 31 tonnes of emergency equipment from Australia to Yangon in Burma following Cyclone Nargis . Later in the month a RAAF Globemaster transported two Aérospatiale SA 330 Puma helicopters from South Africa to Thailand , from where the helicopters flew into Burma . On 1 October 2009 , C @-@ 17s transported supplies and ADF evacuation teams from RAAF Base Richmond to Samoa following the earthquake there . Two days later another C @-@ 17 sortie delivered medical personnel and other specialists to Padang in Indonesia after the Sumatra earthquakes . In August 2010 , two C @-@ 17s were dispatched to deliver emergency supplies to Pakistan following widespread flooding there . 
 No. 36 Squadron was particularly active during 2011 . In January that year the squadron had to evacuate two C @-@ 17s from Amberley to Richmond when the base was threatened by rising floodwaters during the Queensland floods ; of the other two Globemasters , one was in the Middle East and the other was undergoing maintenance and could not be flown . The aircraft stranded at Amberley was moved onto high ground during the crisis at the base and escaped without damage . The two Richmond @-@ based C @-@ 17s subsequently flew over 227 tones of supplies to flood @-@ affected regions of Queensland . When flooding also took place in Victoria during January , No. 36 Squadron transported 100 @,@ 000 sandbags to Melbourne and flew Royal Australian Navy personnel and vehicles into the state from HMAS Albatross in New South Wales . No. 36 Squadron returned to Amberley after the flood waters dropped in mid @-@ February . In early February the north Queensland city of Cairns was threatened by Cyclone Yasi , and the RAAF conducted two C @-@ 17 sorties and two C @-@ 130 sorties to evacuate patients from Cairns Base Hospital on the night of 1 / 2 February . After the cyclone passed over the Queensland coast , C @-@ 17s flew 200 tonnes of groceries into Cairns over a two @-@ day period as part of Operation Yasi Assist . No. 36 Squadron also contributed aircraft to the Australian response to the 2011 Christchurch earthquake in late February , the C @-@ 17s flying urban search and rescue teams into the city from the 23rd of the month and evacuating Australian citizens on their return flights . 
 Three of the Australian C @-@ 17s were deployed to Japan following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami on 11 March . The first aircraft departed Australia two days after the disaster carrying 75 emergency response personnel , most of whom were members of Fire and Rescue NSW . After delivering these personnel to Yokota Air Base , the C @-@ 17 remained in Japan to provide additional airlift to the Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces ( JSDF ) . In this role , the C @-@ 17 moved elements of the Japanese 15th Brigade from Okinawa to Honshu , and also transported supplies from a JSDF base in Hokkaido . On 21 / 22 March , two other C @-@ 17s ( including one temporarily brought back from the Middle East ) flew a large water cannon system from RAAF Base Pearce in Western Australia to Yokota ; owned by the Bechtel corporation , the water cannon formed part of the efforts to bring the badly damaged Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant under control . With the arrival of these aircraft , all three of the available Australian C @-@ 17s were in Japan ( the fourth was still undergoing maintenance at Amberley ) . The RAAF maintained a C @-@ 17 , two flight crews and support personnel in Japan until 25 March . By the end of this deployment the Australian aircraft had conducted 31 sorties and delivered 450 tonnes of cargo . No. 36 Squadron maintained a C @-@ 17 in the Middle East over most of this period . Also in March 2011 , Smith stated that the Australian Government would probably provide C @-@ 17s to transport humanitarian supplies to Libya if the United Nations requested assistance . 
 The RAAF 's C @-@ 17s responded to several other natural disasters between late 2011 and 2013 . In October 2011 a Globemaster flew a water purification plant to Samoa , from where it was transported by Royal New Zealand Air Force aircraft to Tuvalu . C @-@ 17s also transported supplies to Fiji and Samoa in December 2012 following Cyclone Evan . In January 2013 two Globemasters flew power generators and transformers from Amberley to Hobart following the Tasmanian bushfires . Later that month C @-@ 17s were used to transport aviation fuel and other supplies into the Queensland town of Bundaberg after it was affected by heavy flooding . In November 2013 a Globemaster flew a civilian medical team and its equipment from Australia to Cebu in the Philippines as part of the relief effort following Typhoon Haiyan ; an RAAF C @-@ 130 subsequently transported the medical team from Cebu to Tacloban in the disaster zone . 
 In July 2014 , an Australian C @-@ 17 was sent to aid the transportation of the victims ' bodies of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 . The aircraft flew the first 24 bodies from Kharkiv , Ukraine to Eindhoven Airport in the Netherlands , on 23 July . The remaining victims ' bodies will be flown into the Netherlands in cooperation with an RNLAF Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules . The plan is that , once all bodies have been retrieved from the crash site , the Globemaster will repatriate those bodies identified as Australian . 
 In November 2015 the first flight by an RAAF C @-@ 17 to Antarctica was conducted . The aircraft transported supplies for the Australian Antarctic Division from Hobart to Wilkins Runway , and its crew practised evacuating casualties from Wilkins after the cargo was unloaded . This flight was reported to have been first time the RAAF had flown missions to the Australian Antarctic Territory since the Antarctic Flight was withdrawn in 1963 . Further flights occurred in early 2016 . 
 = Laozi = 
 Laozi ( also Lao @-@ Tzu / <unk> / or Lao @-@ Tze , Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lǎozǐ , lit . " Old Master " ) was an ancient Chinese philosopher and writer . He is known as the reputed author of the Tao Te Ching and the founder of philosophical Taoism , and as a deity in religious Taoism and traditional Chinese religions . Although a legendary figure , he is usually dated to around the 6th century BC and reckoned a contemporary of Confucius , but some historians contend that he actually lived during the Warring States period of the 5th or 4th century BC . A central figure in Chinese culture , Laozi is claimed by both the emperors of the Tang dynasty and modern people of the Li surname as a founder of their lineage . Laozi 's work has been embraced by various anti @-@ authoritarian movements as well as Chinese Legalism . 
 = = Names = = 
 In traditional accounts , Laozi 's personal name is usually given as Li Er ( <unk> , Old * <unk> <unk> , Mod . Lǐ <unk> ) and his courtesy name as <unk> ( trad . <unk> , <unk> . <unk> , Old * <unk> @-@ lang , Mod . <unk> ) . A prominent posthumous name was Li Dan ( <unk> , Lǐ <unk> ) . 
 Laozi itself is an honorific title : <unk> ( Old * <unk> , " old , venerable " ) and <unk> ( Old * <unk> ′ , " master " ) . It is usually pronounced / <unk> / in English . It has been romanized numerous ways , sometimes leading to confusion . The most common present form is Laozi or Lǎozǐ , based on the Hanyu Pinyin system adopted by Mainland China in 1958 and Taiwan in 2009 . During the 20th century , Lao @-@ tzu was more common , based on the formerly prevalent Wade – Giles system . In the 19th century , the title was usually romanized as Lao @-@ <unk> . Other forms include the variants Lao @-@ <unk> and Lao @-@ tsu . 
 As a religious figure , he is worshipped under the name " Supreme Old Lord " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and as one of the " Three Pure Ones " . During the Tang , he was granted the title " Supremely Mysterious and Primordial Emperor " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Historical views = = 
 In the mid @-@ twentieth century , a consensus emerged among scholars that the historicity of the person known as Laozi is doubtful and that the Tao Te Ching was " a compilation of Taoist sayings by many hands . " Alan Watts urged more caution , holding that this view was part of an academic fashion for skepticism about historical spiritual and religious figures and stating that not enough would be known for years – or possibly ever – to make a firm judgment . 
 The earliest certain reference to the present figure of Laozi is found in the 1st @-@ century BCE Records of the Grand Historian collected by the historian Sima Qian from earlier accounts . In one account , Laozi was said to be a contemporary of Confucius during the 6th or 5th century BCE . His surname was Li and his personal name was Er or Dan . He was an official in the imperial archives and wrote a book in two parts before departing to the west . In another , Laozi was a different contemporary of Confucius titled Lao <unk> ( <unk> ) and wrote a book in 15 parts . In a third , he was the court astrologer Lao Dan who lived during the 4th @-@ century BCE reign of Duke Xian of Qin . The oldest text of the Tao Te Ching so far recovered was written on bamboo slips and dates to the late 4th century BCE . 
 According to traditional accounts , Laozi was a scholar who worked as the Keeper of the Archives for the royal court of Zhou . This reportedly allowed him broad access to the works of the Yellow Emperor and other classics of the time . The stories assert that Laozi never opened a formal school but nonetheless attracted a large number of students and loyal disciples . There are many variations of a story retelling his encounter with Confucius , most famously in the Zhuangzi . 
 He was sometimes held to have come from the village of Chu Jen in Chu . In accounts where Laozi married , he was said to have had a son named Zong who became a celebrated soldier . Many clans of the Li family trace their descent to Laozi , including the emperors of the Tang dynasty . This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage ( 隴西李氏 ) . According to the <unk> , while many ( if not all ) of these lineages are questionable , they provide a testament to Laozi 's impact on Chinese culture . 
 The third story in Sima Qian states that Laozi grew weary of the moral decay of life in <unk> and noted the kingdom 's decline . He ventured west to live as a hermit in the unsettled frontier at the age of 80 . At the western gate of the city ( or kingdom ) , he was recognized by the guard Yinxi . The sentry asked the old master to record his wisdom for the good of the country before he would be permitted to pass . The text Laozi wrote was said to be the Tao Te Ching , although the present version of the text includes additions from later periods . In some versions of the tale , the sentry was so touched by the work that he became a disciple and left with Laozi , never to be seen again . In others , the " Old Master " journeyed all the way to India and was the teacher of Siddartha Gautama , the Buddha . Others claim he was the Buddha himself . 
 A seventh @-@ century work , the <unk> <unk> ( " Pearly Bag of the Three Caverns " ) , embellished the relationship between Laozi and Yinxi . Laozi pretended to be a farmer when reaching the western gate , but was recognized by Yinxi , who asked to be taught by the great master . Laozi was not satisfied by simply being noticed by the guard and demanded an explanation . Yinxi expressed his deep desire to find the Tao and explained that his long study of astrology allowed him to recognize Laozi 's approach . Yinxi was accepted by Laozi as a disciple . This is considered an exemplary interaction between Daoist master and disciple , reflecting the testing a seeker must undergo before being accepted . A would @-@ be adherent is expected to prove his determination and talent , clearly expressing his wishes and showing that he had made progress on his own towards realizing the Tao . 
 The Pearly Bag of the Three Caverns continues the parallel of an adherent 's quest . Yinxi received his ordination when Laozi transmitted the Daodejing , along with other texts and precepts , just as Taoist adherents receive a number of methods , teachings and scriptures at ordination . This is only an initial ordination and Yinxi still needed an additional period to perfect his virtue , thus Laozi gave him three years to perfect his Dao . Yinxi gave himself over to a full @-@ time devotional life . After the appointed time , Yinxi again demonstrates determination and perfect trust , sending out a black sheep to market as the agreed sign . He eventually meets again with Laozi , who announces that Yinxi 's immortal name is listed in the heavens and calls down a heavenly procession to clothe Yinxi in the garb of immortals . The story continues that Laozi bestowed a number of titles upon Yinxi and took him on a journey throughout the universe , even into the nine heavens . After this fantastic journey , the two sages set out to western lands of the barbarians . The training period , reuniting and travels represent the attainment of the highest religious rank in medieval Taoism called " Preceptor of the Three Caverns " . In this legend , Laozi is the perfect Daoist master and Yinxi is the ideal Taoist student . Laozi is presented as the Tao personified , giving his teaching to humanity for their salvation . Yinxi follows the formal sequence of preparation , testing , training and attainment . 
 The story of Laozi has taken on strong religious overtones since the Han dynasty . As Taoism took root , Laozi was worshipped as a god . Belief in the revelation of the Tao from the divine Laozi resulted in the formation of the Way of the Celestial Master , the first organized religious Taoist sect . In later mature Taoist tradition , Laozi came to be seen as a personification of the Tao . He is said to have undergone numerous " transformations " and taken on various guises in various incarnations throughout history to initiate the faithful in the Way . Religious Taoism often holds that the " Old Master " did not disappear after writing the Tao Te Ching but rather spent his life traveling and revealing the Tao . 
 Taoist myths state that Laozi was conceived when his mother gazed upon a falling star . He supposedly remained in her womb for 62 years before being born while his mother was leaning against a plum tree . ( The Chinese surname Li shares its character with " plum " . ) Laozi was said to have emerged as a grown man with a full grey beard and long earlobes , both symbols of wisdom and long life . Other myths claim that he was reborn 13 times after his first life during the days of <unk> . In his last incarnation as Laozi , he lived nine hundred and ninety years and spent his life traveling to reveal the Tao . 
 = = Tao Te Ching = = 
 Laozi is traditionally regarded as the author of the Daodejing ( Tao Te Ching ) , though the identity of its author ( s ) and / or compiler ( s ) has been debated throughout history . It is one of the most significant treatises in Chinese cosmogony . As with most other ancient Chinese philosophers , Laozi often explains his ideas by way of paradox , analogy , appropriation of ancient sayings , repetition , symmetry , rhyme , and rhythm . In fact , the whole book can be read as an analogy – the ruler is the awareness , or self , in meditation and the myriad creatures or empire is the experience of the body , senses and desires . 
 The Tao Te Ching , often called simply Laozi after its reputed author , describes the Dao ( or Tao ) as the source and ideal of all existence : it is unseen , but not transcendent , immensely powerful yet supremely humble , being the root of all things . People have desires and free will ( and thus are able to alter their own nature ) . Many act " unnaturally " , upsetting the natural balance of the Dao . The Daodejing intends to lead students to a " return " to their natural state , in harmony with Dao . Language and conventional wisdom are critically assessed . Taoism views them as inherently biased and artificial , widely using paradoxes to sharpen the point . 
 Livia Kohn provides an example of how Laozi encouraged a change in approach , or return to " nature " , rather than action . Technology may bring about a false sense of progress . The answer provided by Laozi is not the rejection of technology , but instead seeking the calm state of wu wei , free from desires . This relates to many statements by Laozi encouraging rulers to keep their people in " ignorance " , or " simple @-@ minded " . Some scholars insist this explanation ignores the religious context , and others question it as an apologetic of the philosophical coherence of the text . It would not be unusual political advice if Laozi literally intended to tell rulers to keep their people ignorant . However , some terms in the text , such as " valley spirit " ( <unk> ) and " soul " ( po ) , bear a metaphysical context and cannot be easily reconciled with a purely ethical reading of the work . 
 Wu wei ( <unk> ) , literally " non @-@ action " or " not acting " , is a central concept of the Daodejing . The concept of wu wei is multifaceted , and reflected in the words ' multiple meanings , even in English translation ; it can mean " not doing anything " , " not forcing " , " not acting " in the theatrical sense , " creating nothingness " , " acting spontaneously " , and " flowing with the moment . " 
 It is a concept used to explain <unk> ( <unk> ) , or harmony with the Dao . It includes the concepts that value distinctions are ideological and seeing ambition of all sorts as originating from the same source . Laozi used the term broadly with simplicity and humility as key virtues , often in contrast to selfish action . On a political level , it means avoiding such circumstances as war , harsh laws and heavy taxes . Some Taoists see a connection between wu wei and esoteric practices , such as <unk> " sitting in oblivion " ( emptying the mind of bodily awareness and thought ) found in the Zhuangzi . 
 Some of Laozi 's famous sayings include : 
 " When goodness is lost , it is replaced by morality . " 
 " Without Darkness , there can be no Light . " 
 " The usefulness of a pot comes from its emptiness . " 
 " The best people are like water , which benefits all things and does not compete with them . It stays in lowly places that others reject . This is why it is so similar to the Way . " 
 " When people see some things as beautiful , other things become ugly . When people see some things as good , other things become bad . " 
 " Try to change it and you will ruin it . Try to hold it and you will lose it . " 
 " Those who know do not say . Those who say do not know . " 
 " When you realize there is nothing lacking , the whole world belongs to you . " 
 " Nature does not hurry , yet everything is accomplished . " 
 " A good traveler has no fixed plans , and is not intent on arriving . " 
 " Music in the soul can be heard by the universe . " 
 " A journey of a thousand miles starts under one 's feet . " 
 " The more that laws and regulations are given prominence , the more thieves and robbers there will be . " 
 = = = Taoism = = = 
 Laozi is traditionally regarded as the founder of Taoism , intimately connected with the Daodejing and " primordial " ( or " original " ) Taoism . Popular ( " religious " ) Taoism typically presents the Jade Emperor as the official head deity . Intellectual ( " elite " ) Taoists , such as the Celestial Masters sect , usually present Laozi ( Laojun , " Lord Lao " ) and the Three Pure Ones at the top of the pantheon of deities . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Potential officials throughout Chinese history drew on the authority of non @-@ Confucian sages , especially Laozi and Zhuangzi , to deny serving any ruler at any time . Zhuangzi , Laozi 's most famous follower in traditional accounts , had a great deal of influence on Chinese literati and culture . 
 Political theorists influenced by Laozi have advocated humility in leadership and a restrained approach to statecraft , either for ethical and pacifist reasons , or for tactical ends . In a different context , various anti @-@ authoritarian movements have embraced the Laozi teachings on the power of the weak . 
 Left @-@ libertarians have been highly influenced by Laozi . In his 1937 book Nationalism and Culture , the anarcho @-@ syndicalist writer and activist Rudolf Rocker praised Laozi 's " gentle wisdom " and understanding of the opposition between political power and the cultural activities of the people and community . In his 1910 article for the Encyclopedia Britannica , Peter Kropotkin also noted that Laozi was among the earliest exponents of essentially anarchist concepts . More recently , anarchists such as John P. Clark and Ursula K. Le Guin have written about the conjunction between anarchism and Taoism in various ways , highlighting the teachings of Laozi in particular . In her rendition of the Tao Te Ching , Le Guin writes that Laozi " does not see political power as magic . He sees rightful power as earned and wrongful power as usurped ... He sees sacrifice of self or others as a corruption of power , and power as available to anyone who follows the Way . No wonder anarchists and Taoists make good friends . " 
 The right @-@ libertarian economist Murray Rothbard suggested that Laozi was the first libertarian , likening Laozi 's ideas on government to F.A. Hayek 's theory of spontaneous order . James A. Dorn agreed , writing that Laozi , like many 18th century liberals , " argued that minimizing the role of government and letting individuals develop spontaneously would best achieve social and economic harmony . " Similarly , the Cato Institute 's David Boaz includes passages from the Daodejing in his 1997 book The Libertarian Reader . Philosopher Roderick Long , however , argues that libertarian themes in Taoist thought are actually borrowed from earlier Confucian writers . 
 = = Additional sources = = 
 <unk> , Max ( 1969 ) , Lao Tzu and Taoism , Translated by Greaves , Roger , Stanford , Calif : Stanford University Press , p . 176 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8047 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Kohn , Livia ; Lafargue , Michael , eds . ( 1998 ) , Lao @-@ Tzu and the Tao @-@ Te @-@ Ching , Albany : State University of New York Press , p . 320 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7914 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Lao , Tzu ( 2009 ) , Lao @-@ Tzu 's <unk> , Porter , Bill ( Red Pine ) ( 3rd Revised ed . ) , Port Townsend , WA : Copper Canyon Press , p . 200 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 290 @-@ 4 
 = = Translations into English = = 
 Henricks , Robert G. ( 1992 ) , Lao Tzu : Te @-@ Tao Ching – A New Translation Based on the Recently Discovered Ma @-@ wang @-@ tui Texts ( Classics of Ancient China ) , New York : Ballantine Books , p . 320 , ISBN 0 @-@ 345 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Klaus , Hilmar ( 2009 ) , The Tao of Wisdom . Laozi – Daodejing . Chinese – English – German . Aachen : <unk> , Aachen , Germany : <unk> , p . 600 , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0055 @-@ 1 
 Legge , James , The Tao Teh King , or The Tao and its characteristics 
 Le Guin , Ursula K. ( 2009 ) , Lao Tzu : Tao Te Ching : A Book about the Way and the Power of the Way ( 2nd ed . ) , Washington , D.C : Shambhala Publications Inc . , p . 192 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 744 @-@ 1 
 Roberts , Moss ( 2004 ) , Dao De Jing : The Book of the Way , Berkeley : University of California Press , p . 235 , ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Waley , Arthur ( 1994 ) , The Way and Its Power : Lao Tzu 's Tao Te Ching and Its Place in Chinese Thought , UNESCO Collection of Representative Works , New York : Grove Press , p . 262 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8021 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Side @-@ by @-@ side translations of the Tao Te Ching 
 = Edinburgh Trams = 
 Edinburgh Trams is a tramway in Edinburgh , Scotland , operated by Transport for Edinburgh . It is a 14 @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) line between York Place in New Town and Edinburgh Airport , with 15 stops . 
 Construction began in June 2008 , and after encountering delays it opened on 31 May 2014 . The scheme had an initial estimated cost of £ 375 million in 2003 , but by May 2008 , when contracts were signed , the cost had risen to £ 521 million . The final cost after delays was £ 776 million . 
 = = History = = 
 Edinburgh Corporation Tramways ran from 1871 until 16 November 1956 . After that date , public transport consisted of buses and a limited network of commuter rail lines . Towards the end of the 20th century , there was revived interest in trams and networks were introduced in Birmingham , Croydon , Manchester , Nottingham and Sheffield . 
 Proposals for a tram network were made in the 1990s , and a plan to build a line along Princes Street and Leith Walk to Newhaven was proposed in 1999 by the City of Edinburgh Council , Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise and the New Edinburgh Tramways Company . 
 = = = Proposals for the Edinburgh tram network = = = 
 A 2001 proposal envisaged three routes , lines 1 , 2 and 3 . The first was a circular route around the northern suburbs , and the others were radial routes to Newbridge in the west and Newcraighall in the south . All lines would have passed through the city centre . In May 2004 , a 15 @-@ year operating contract was awarded to Transdev , to operate and maintain the tram network . This contract was cancelled in 2009 . 
 Two bills to reintroduce a tram network were passed by the Scottish Parliament in March 2006 . Lines 1 and 2 received parliamentary permission , but funding the entire network was deemed impossible . Line 3 , to be paid for by a proposed Edinburgh congestion charge , was scrapped when the charge was heavily defeated in a referendum and construction of the remaining two lines was split into four phases : 
 Phase 1a 18 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 11 @.@ 5 mi ) from Newhaven to Edinburgh Airport via Princes Street , combining parts of lines 1 and 2 
 Phase 1b 5 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) from Haymarket to Granton Square via Crewe Toll , comprising most of the remainder of line 1 
 Phase 2 linking Granton Square and Newhaven , completing the line 1 loop 
 Phase 3 extending the airport line to Newbridge , completing line 2 
 The future of the scheme came under threat in 2007 , when the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) published its manifesto for the Scottish Parliamentary election . The party made clear its intention to cancel the scheme , along with the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link , to save £ <unk> 
 Following a lost vote in the Scottish Parliament , the SNP @-@ led minority Scottish Government agreed to continue the line from the airport to Leith on condition that no more public money would be supplied . A report by Audit Scotland , commissioned by the Scottish Government , confirmed that the cost projections were sound . The cost of the scheme in 2003 was estimated at £ 498 million , £ 375 million in funding from the Scottish Government and £ 45 million from Edinburgh Council . 
 On 25 October 2007 , the council approved the final business case . Approval was given on 22 December 2007 for TIE to sign contracts with CAF to supply vehicles and BBS ( a consortium of Bilfinger Berger and Siemens ) to design and construct the network . Contract negotiations finished in April 2008 , and construction started in June 2008 . By this stage the cost of the project was estimated at £ 521 million . Funding problems and political disputes led to the scaling back of the original plans . In April 2009 , the council cancelled phase 1b , citing revenue shortfall created by the economic slowdown to save an estimated £ 75 million . The Granton extension was also cancelled . 
 = = = Construction : 2007 – 2012 = = = 
 Until August 2011 , the project was overseen by Transport Initiatives Edinburgh ( TIE ) , a company wholly owned by the City of Edinburgh Council , who were responsible for project @-@ managing the construction of the tramway . 
 After the draft business case was accepted by the Scottish Government in March 2007 , initial construction work commenced in July 2007 , with the diversion of underground utilities in preparation for track @-@ laying in Leith . These works followed a plan by System Design Services ( SDS ) , a joint design team led by Parsons Brinckerhoff and Halcrow Group . 
 In May 2008 , final contracts to build the tram system were awarded to BSC , a consortium of Bilfinger Berger , Siemens and Spanish tram builder Construcciones y <unk> de Ferrocarriles ( CAF ) . 
 The tramway uses a mix of street running and segregated off @-@ road track , with conventional tram stop platforms . Stops are fitted with shelters , ticket machines , lighting and CCTV . The network is operated from a depot in Gogar , close to the A8 roundabout , north of Gyle Centre tram stop . 
 The route of the line required the construction of bridges to cross railway lines at Edinburgh Park and Stenhouse , and a tunnel under the A8 near the Gogar roundabout . A bridge at <unk> was widened . Works to build a tram interchange at Haymarket station involved the demolition of a Category C ( S ) listed building , the former Caledonian <unk> on Haymarket Terrace . 
 Some on @-@ street track was laid in a special foundation with cobbled road surfacing designed to be sympathetic with the style of Edinburgh streets but was removed in many places due to objections from cyclists . The trams are powered by overhead cables attached to purpose @-@ built poles or mounted on the sides of buildings . Nine electrical sub @-@ stations were planned for the line to Newhaven , both underground and above @-@ ground but only five were built after the line was truncated at York Place . 
 = = = = Project revisions and delays = = = = 
 In 2008 and 2009 , the project met with delays to work on tramway infrastructure . Phase 1b of the project was cancelled because of a funding shortfall in April 2009 . Contractual disputes delayed track @-@ laying in the city centre . In December 2009 , media reported that the project budget was running over £ 545 million , and the system was unlikely to come into operation until February 2012 or later . The operating contract with Transdev was cancelled in December 2009 to reduce costs and it was announced that the trams would be operated by Edinburgh Trams Limited , a subsidiary of Transport for Edinburgh . In March 2010 , Bilfinger Berger announced that the estimated completion date would be in 2014 . 
 = = = = Contractual disputes = = = = 
 In February 2009 , work on the Princes Street section stopped due to contractual disagreements between TIE and BSC after the latter submitted a request for an additional £ 80 million of funding . Edinburgh Council believed the contractors ' claims were unjustified as they had agreed to fixed @-@ price contracts . After negotiations , BSC agreed to commence construction in March 2009 within the original budget , although disagreements remained . Work restarted and line construction went ahead . 
 In August 2009 , TIE began legal proceedings against the BSC consortium over delays to the project , and track @-@ laying on Leith Walk , Shandwick Place and Haymarket was suspended . At issue were alleged changes to BSC 's work specification , including track works on Princes Street and £ 5 million additional costs for foundation work near Murrayfield Stadium . The BSC consortium alleged that TIE had not diverted the underground utilities in time for track @-@ laying to begin , breaching contractual agreements and costing the consortium additional staffing expenditure . 
 In January 2010 the independent arbiter found in favour of TIE on some points , but on most of the disputed issues ruled in favour of BSC and awarded the consortium 90 % of its additional costs , estimated to be up to £ 80m . 
 Delays in track laying and depot construction affected vehicle testing . By September 2009 , construction was reported to be nine months behind schedule , and CAF was due to deliver the first trams from its factory in Spain . With key project dependency out of synchronisation , TIE held discussions with Transport for London about delivering the trams to Croydon to conduct operational tests on the Tramlink network . Tram vehicle testing commenced in March 2010 on the Siemens test track in Wildenrath , Germany . The tests included recreating the steep gradients of Leith Walk , and using weights to simulate the heavy passenger load expected during a Murrayfield match day . 
 = = = = Funding crisis = = = = 
 Following further disputes and delays , it was reported in March 2010 that Edinburgh Council was considering cancelling the contract with Bilfinger Berger . By June 2010 , the project 's cost had risen to £ 600 million . Council project managers were reported to be in crisis talks , considering options including : borrowing £ 55 million to fund the increased costs ; phasing the introduction of the tram line , so that trams would initially run between the airport and Haymarket ; and terminating the contract with Bilfinger Berger . The council asked TIE to draw up costs for truncating the line at four places : Haymarket station , York Place , the foot of Leith Walk or Ocean Terminal . 
 Work resumed in May 2011 at priority locations , Haymarket Yards and Gogar , while the project 's future was decided by the council . In August 2011 it was announced TIE would be disbanded and consultants Turner & Townsend would manage the project . 
 On 30 June 2011 , Edinburgh Council voted to continue the line between Edinburgh Airport and St Andrew Square . Costs rose to an estimated £ <unk> , leaving the council with a shortfall of more than £ 200m . The option to scrap the project was considered , but rejected . On 25 August 2011 , the council voted to cut the line to run between the airport and Haymarket , reducing the expected cost to £ <unk> . A week later , after the Scottish Government threatened to withhold £ 72 million of funding , the council reversed its decision , restoring the terminus at St Andrew Square . On 29 November 2011 it was announced that the eastern terminus would be at York Place instead of St Andrew Square ; the intention had been to build the tracks to a reversing point at York Place ( without a stop for passengers ) . Extending passenger services from St Andrew Square to York Place would enable Broughton Street , Picardy Place and the surrounding area to be better served at comparatively little additional cost . 
 The first electric wires were energised in October 2011 within the depot at Gogar . Testing trams began in December 2011 near the depot at Gogar , on a 500 metres ( 550 yd ) length of track . On 15 December 2011 , the contractors handed the depot to the City of Edinburgh Council . 
 The first completed section of line , between the depot and Edinburgh Airport , was used to test a tram at full speed on 19 December 2012 . 
 With extra interest payments factored in , the cost of the line is expected to exceed £ 1 billion . 
 = = = = Criticism = = = = 
 Delays in construction were criticised by businesses , who claimed their income was damaged by long @-@ term road closures in the centre of the city , and also by some residents . 
 Cycling groups voiced safety concerns after cyclists suffered accidents when bicycle wheels became caught in the track . They reported the road surface around the tracks was crumbling , raising further safety problems . In response , <unk> promised to carry out repairs and Edinburgh Trams agreed to fund special training for cyclists . Further safety concerns were raised by residents along the routes about the suspension of overhead electric cables from residential buildings , and some property owners refused permission for cables to be attached . 
 To remedy crumbling tarmac along the tracks on Princes Street , the road was closed in September 2011 and remained closed for ten months . A road closure between Haymarket and Shandwick Place in March 2012 led to complaints from businesses and residents . It remained closed until October 2013 . 
 = = = Completion : 2013 – 2014 = = = 
 From late 2012 , work continued mostly on schedule . More than 150 metres ( 160 yd ) of flawed concrete trackbed had to be replaced between Shandwick Place and Haymarket . In June 2013 , overhead electric wires were installed on the city centre portion of the route . This was considered the last major step in the construction process . 
 Controversy erupted over concessionary travel for the elderly and disabled . Originally , it was planned that concessionary travel , that is the ability of those with a Scottish National Entitlement Card to travel on public transport free @-@ of @-@ charge , was not going to be offered on the tramway . This was despite the fact that Edinburgh Trams is to be run by Lothian Buses , who are mandated to offer free travel to those with concession cards on all their bus routes . This revelation quickly caused city leaders to support an Edinburgh Evening News campaign to ensure that concessionary travel would be offered on the new tramway . City transport convener Lesley Hinds stated " People in Edinburgh have paid through their council tax and their taxes for the trams to get up and running and it would be wrong for a large proportion of the population not to be allowed to use their concessionary bus pass " . 
 Despite this , the Scottish Government refused to pay for concessionary travel for the tram scheme , as it does for all bus routes in Scotland . Talks between the Scottish Government and Edinburgh Council eventually decided that concession cards should be valid for tram travel , but that they should be paid for by the Council instead of the Government . It was revealed on 15 August 2013 that the cards would be valid , and that travel would be paid for by Edinburgh Council . However , only people with cards issued in Edinburgh would be able to use them . This compromise upset many people in the Lothians , who often commute or travel into Edinburgh . 
 Works on the tram scheme were running two months ahead of schedule by September 2013 , when Edinburgh Council announced the tramway would open by May 2014 . All tram and road works were completed by 19 October with testing of the trams between the depot and Edinburgh Park commencing on 8 October 2013 . This was followed by the energising of tram wires from Bankhead tram stop to York Place on 19 November , marking the first time that the route was completely energised . Testing along the full length of the route began on 5 December . 
 The tramway opened to passengers on 31 May 2014 . 
 = = = Post @-@ completion = = = 
 A non @-@ statutory public inquiry to scrutinise the delivery of the project was announced on 5 June 2014 . This was subsequently upgraded by the Scottish Government on 7 November 2014 to a statutory inquiry to ensure that key personnel would provide evidence . Edinburgh Council stated on 17 March 2014 that works would be conducted along Leith Walk to prepare it for a possible future extension of tram service . In December 2014 , Edinburgh Council ordered a detailed business case for extending the line to Leith . The council said in July 2015 that three options for an extension to Leith had been costed . These were a £ 144 @.@ 7 million extension to Newhaven , a £ 126 @.@ 6 million extension to Ocean Terminal , or a £ 78 @.@ 7 million extension to the Foot of the Leith Walk . On 19 November 2015 , the Council received the backing of the City Chambers to extend the line to Newhaven , as originally intended . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 A £ 40 million contract to build 27 <unk> 3 trams , sufficient for phase 1a and ( unbuilt ) 1b lines , was awarded to CAF . When the line was cut back to York Place , only 17 trams would be needed . An unsuccessful attempt was made in 2011 to lease ten trams to Transport for London for use on Tramlink . 
 The trams are bi @-@ directional , 42 @.@ 8 metres ( 140 ft 5 in ) long and with low @-@ floor access to meet UK Rail Vehicle Access Regulations for disabled people . Each tram has a capacity of 250 , allowing for 78 seated and 170 standing passengers and 2 wheelchairs . 
 A full @-@ size mockup of the front of the tram was constructed in 2009 and displayed on Princes Street for public viewing , moving to Constitution Street at the foot of Leith Walk in April 2009 . 
 In April 2010 , the first tram was delivered and displayed at the Princes Street stop at the bottom of The Mound . It was moved to open storage in <unk> . The 27th tram was delivered in December 2012 . 
 All of the trams are painted white with rose madder and platinum stripes , a livery mandated by Transport for Edinburgh shared with minor variation by Lothian Buses . 
 = = Operations , fares and ticketing = = 
 = = = Route = = = 
 The 14 @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) route begins running on @-@ street at York Place , in the city centre . It turns into North St Andrew Street , crosses St Andrew Square . From the square , it heads southeast into Princes Street , and west along the street toward Haymarket , via Shandwick Place , Atholl Place , and West Maitland Street . At Haymarket , the route heads onto a segregated track parallel to the Glasgow to Edinburgh mainline . It follows the railway line west for about 6 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) , to Edinburgh Park railway station . There , it leaves the railway line on a segregated track and heads north to Gogar Roundabout from where it heads northwest via <unk> Park and Ride to Edinburgh Airport , where it terminates . 
 An additional tram stop is planned to open in December 2016 in the Gogar area , between the Gyle Centre and <unk> tram stops . This stop , to be called Edinburgh Gateway , will be built alongside a new railway station on the Fife Circle Line to form a transport interchange between Edinburgh Trams and the Fife Circle and Edinburgh to Aberdeen Lines . 
 = = = Fare structure = = = 
 Ticketing and fares are integrated with Lothian Buses . The single fare is the same as on Lothian Buses , and day tickets and <unk> are valid on trams and buses . A single journey between any two stops with the exception of Edinburgh Airport costs £ 1 @.@ 60 for adults and 80p for children . For travel including the Edinburgh Airport tram stop , a single fare is £ 5 , and an open return ticket is available for £ 8 . 
 The " Ridacard " is a smartcard season ticket issued by Transport for Edinburgh ; it is valid on both Edinburgh Trams and Lothian Buses ( available for 1 week , 4 weeks or annually ) . On 1 September 2014 , a rechargeable pre @-@ paid smartcard for single journeys on both buses and trams , called " <unk> " , was introduced . 
 Free travel is available to holders of City of Edinburgh Council @-@ issued Scottish National Entitlement Cards which are eligible for concessionary travel , and for a companion travelling with the cardholder of National Entitlement Cards with a companion entitlement . Passengers with National Entitlement Cards eligible for concessionary travel but issued by other local authorities are not offered any fare concession , with the exception of blind or visually impaired cardholders . 
 An onboard fare of £ 10 is charged to passengers who have not pre @-@ purchased a ticket or validated either a Ridacard , a National Entitlement Card or an m @-@ ticket before boarding . 
 = = = Ticket machines = = = 
 At the request of Lothian Buses , installation of 30 ticket machines at key bus stops began in 2007 . Passengers had to purchase tickets before boarding the bus , reducing dwell times but were not popular with users and were scrapped in 2011 . Consideration was given to installing similar on @-@ street ticket machines and new , advanced machines ( capable of reading smartcards and accepting credit / debit cards ) were installed in early 2014 at each tram stop . The new ticket machines are the <unk> @-@ Plus type supplied by the French @-@ based company <unk> . 
 = = = Bikes on board = = = 
 In May and June 2015 cyclists were allowed to board the trams with their bikes , during a trial period which was supported by cycle campaign groups <unk> and Pedal on Parliament . Following this , Edinburgh trams became the first light rail network in the UK to permit the carriage of bikes on a permanent basis , with up to two bicycles being allowed per tram outwith peak hours ( <unk> to <unk> , and 4pm to 6.30pm ) and excluding the festival period ( 7 − 31 August ) and other large events . 
 = = = Staffing = = = 
 Fifty @-@ two ticket inspectors have been recruited to prevent fare dodging . Edinburgh Council is aiming for a 3 % fare evasion rate , lower than any other tramway in Britain . Thirty @-@ two drivers were employed , after passing psychological tests designed to eliminate risk @-@ takers . 
 = = = Journey times and frequency = = = 
 Services operate between 05 : 00 and midnight , at 8- to 10 @-@ minute intervals from Monday to Saturday and at 12 @-@ 15 @-@ minute intervals on Sundays . Journey times are approximately 40 minutes from the city centre to the airport . The first morning and last evening services commence and terminate at the Gyle Centre . 
 = = = Financial performance = = = 
 During 2014 Edinburgh Trams lost almost £ 450 @,@ 000 , though this was less than expected due to higher than predicted passenger numbers . 
 = George O 'Malley = 
 George O 'Malley is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actor T. R. Knight from 2005 to 2009 . Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , O 'Malley worked his way up to resident level , while his relationships with his colleagues Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) formed a focal point of the series . O 'Malley married and divorced Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , and also entertained romantic correlations with Meredith , Izzie Stevens , and Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) . 
 Knight auditioned for the show , expecting a one @-@ season run . In 2007 , Knight 's co @-@ star Isaiah Washington ( Preston Burke ) insulted him with a homophobic slur , which resulted in the termination of Washington 's Grey 's Anatomy contract . In 2009 , after the conclusion of the fifth season , it was confirmed that Knight would not be returning for the show 's sixth season . The actor stated the reason for his departure was due to a " breakdown in communication " with Rhimes , his character 's lack of screen time , as well as his decision to come out as openly gay . Knight received generally positive reviews for his performance as O 'Malley , and garnered a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . Despite this , his death received mixed feedback . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 George O 'Malley is introduced as a fellow surgical intern to Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) ; the five of them working under Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) . O 'Malley and Stevens move in with Meredith , for whom he has romantic feelings . On the first day of internship , O 'Malley is selected by chief of cardiothoracic surgery Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) as the first intern to perform surgery . He freezes in the operating room , and is mocked by his peers , and earns the nickname " 007 " because of almost killing a patient in such a simple operation ( referring to James Bond 's " licence to kill " ) . O 'Malley dates nurse Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) , breaking up with her when he contracts syphilis from her , which she in turn contracted from Karev . His friendship with Karev is further strained when the two become trapped in an elevator with a patient who begins to bleed out . Karev freezes , and O 'Malley is able to save the patient single @-@ handedly . He goes on to admit his feelings to Meredith , and the two have a one @-@ night stand . When Meredith tells him that sleeping together was a mistake , O 'Malley begins avoiding her and starts dating orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . 
 During a camping trip , O 'Malley learns that Torres has slept with chief of plastic surgery Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , and also discovers that Burke is experiencing tremors in his hand . When O 'Malley 's father is diagnosed with esophageal cancer and a leaking aortic valve , he refuses to allow Burke to operate on him , instead contacting Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , Burke 's medical school rival . His relationship with Torres is strained when he confronts her about sleeping with Sloan , but he allows her to support him through his father 's deteriorating health . Complications from his father 's surgery leave him in multi @-@ system organ failure , and his life support is turned off . In an attempt to overcome his grief , O 'Malley elopes with Callie to Las Vegas . He later begins to feel that he was mistaken to marry her , and sleeps with Stevens while intoxicated . Stevens confesses that she is in love with him , so O 'Malley considers transferring to a different hospital so he can be faithful to his wife . However , he is ineligible to transfer after failing the intern exams . O 'Malley decides to repeat his intern year , and confesses to Torres that he slept with Stevens , leading the two to divorce . O 'Malley and Stevens embark on a short @-@ lived relationship , only to discover there is no real chemistry between them . 
 O 'Malley moves in with new intern Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Meredith 's half @-@ sister . Lexie and O 'Malley discover that he only failed his exam by a single point , leading him to confront Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , the chief of surgery , to ask for a chance to retake the exam . He passes the second attempt , and begins to distance himself from Lexie , who has fallen in love with him . O 'Malley supports Stevens when she discovers she has melanoma , and walks her down the aisle as she marries Karev . O 'Malley begins to display a talent for trauma surgery , and is told by the chief of trauma surgery Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) that it is definitely his specialty . He then abruptly and inexplicably decides to join the United States army . While his friends at the hospital prepare an intervention to convince O 'Malley to stay , they all work on a severely disfigured John Doe , brought in after a horrible bus accident , in which he pushed a woman out of the way and saved her life . When Meredith goes to check on John Doe , he seems to recognize her and will not let go of her hand . After several attempts at trying , he succeeds in tracing " 007 " on Meredith 's hand . Shocked , she realizes " John Doe " is in fact O 'Malley . She informs the other surgeons and they rush him to surgery . However , he flatlines and is ultimately declared <unk> . His organs are donated after Stevens confirms that is what O 'Malley would have wanted , and he is buried a week later . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 T. R. Knight signed on for the pilot as O 'Malley , expecting that the role might be short @-@ lived , because he liked that the character was multi @-@ faceted . In October 2006 , news reports surfaced that Washington had insulted Knight with a homophobic slur , during an argument with Patrick Dempsey ( Derek Shepherd ) . Shortly after , the details of the argument became public , and Knight later disclosed that the slur made him come out as gay . " I was under no delusions , " Knight said at the time . " My friends on the set knew . We talked about it . Publicly it 's not my thing to call up People magazine and be like , ' Hey , you want to know something about me ? ' ... I could 've just let it slide and not said anything , but it became important . It became important to make the statement . " The situation seemed somewhat resolved when Washington issued a statement , apologizing for his " unfortunate use of words during the recent incident on @-@ set " . 
 At the 64th Golden Globe Awards , while being interviewed on the red carpet , Washington joked , " I love gay . I wanted to be gay . Please let me be gay . " Later , Washington claimed he never used the slur , labeling it " vile " . In June 2007 , it was reported that the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) and Shonda Rhimes had chosen not to renew Washington 's contract with the show , not immediately specifying a reason . In a subsequent interview , Washington claimed that " they fired the wrong guy " ( referring to Knight ) , and said he was considering filing a lawsuit as a result . He accused Knight of using the controversy to bolster his own career and increase his salary on Grey 's Anatomy . 
 On July 2 , 2007 , Washington appeared on Larry King Live , to present his side of the controversy . According to Washington , he never used the " F Word " in reference to Knight , but rather blurted it out in an unrelated context in the course of an argument " provoked " by Dempsey , who he felt was treating him like a " B @-@ word " , a " P @-@ word " , and the " F @-@ word " , which Washington said conveyed " somebody who is being weak and afraid to fight back " . In 2009 , Rhimes told Entertainment Weekly that she may not have handled the incident correctly , stating : " I wasn 't interested in what anybody thought publicly . I was interested in what was going on right here on the ground ... with the people I work with every day . Did I do it perfectly ? Of course not . This is my first television show . It was a learning experience . " Knight said that Rhimes was among those for discouraging him to come out , however Rhimes said : " I remember saying [ to fellow executive producer ] , ' This is our proudest day here . T.R. got to come out and I got to say to him that it wouldn 't affect his character ' because he was concerned he was going to come out and George would suddenly be gay . [ ... ] The idea that a gay actor can 't play a straight man is insulting . " 
 In December 2008 , reports speculated that Knight requested to be released from his contract and that " they were working out the details " at that time . In June 2009 , after the conclusion of the fifth season of Grey 's Anatomy , it was confirmed that Knight would not be returning for the show 's sixth season . The actor stated the reason for his departure was due to a " breakdown in communication " with Rhimes , O 'Malley 's lack of screen time , as well as his decision to be openly gay . Prior to the official announcement of his departure , there was speculation that the role of O 'Malley would be recast , but Rhimes labeled it as a " hilarious , ridiculous rumor " . After the confirmation of his exit , Knight told TV Guide : " Leaving Grey 's Anatomy was not an easy decision for me to make . I am extremely grateful to have had the opportunity to play this character and will miss my fellow cast and crew very much . I continue to wish them the very best , and wholeheartedly thank all of the fans who have supported me and the show with such passion and enthusiasm . " In a statement confirming Knight 's departure , Rhimes said : " I think I speak for the entire Grey 's Anatomy family when I say we wish T.R. Knight the best in his future endeavors . He is an incredibly talented actor and a person whose strength of character is admired by all of us . " 
 In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Rhimes said she tried to talk him out of quitting , explaining : " I looked in his face and he was really sure . It felt like the right thing for him . " However , in another interview , Knight said of his exit : " My five @-@ year experience proved to me that I could not trust any answer that was given [ about O 'Malley ] . " Knight was " at peace " with his departure , saying : " There just comes a time when it 's so clear that moving on is the best decision . " However , Heigl tried to talk Knight out of leaving , saying : " I didn 't think it was the right decision . I felt like some of the problems could be worked through . But by the time it came to fruition , I was [ glad ] for him because he was ready to go . " On the topic of losing a US $ 14 million contract , Knight commented : " From an outsider 's perspective , I get the [ impression that ] ' He 's just a spoiled actor , he doesn ’ t know how good he has it . ' There are a lot of people who would like to be in my position . But in the end , I need to be fulfilled in my work . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 O 'Malley was characterized a " hapless naif " . On the topic of O 'Malley 's longtime crush on Meredith in the second season , Knight said : " What 's going to be very interesting to see is what he 's going to do with Meredith . It 's getting close to time . Whatever he chooses to do will inform who he is the rest of his life . " After their sexual encounter occurred onscreen , Knight said in an interview with Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune : " George wasn 't really paying full attention . He was letting his own feelings override his respect for Meredith . A person really clued in would get that there wasn 't anything coming back , but he was so in his head about it and caught up in his own feelings that he wasn 't listening . It 's not just that he loves her ... it 's a kind of selfish love he had for her . " He also added that , " I think George has a lot of growing up to do . Part of that is making horrible , stupid mistakes . He 's been pretty sheltered . " 
 Series writer Stacy McKee said of the sexual encounter : " There 's no turning back . There 's nothing George and Meredith can do . The damage is done – things will never be the same . They 've just changed something important in their lives forever . " When asked if O 'Malley was becoming more assertive , Knight said : 
 Knight also commented that the character does not appreciate himself and his positive traits . On the topic of O 'Malley performing open heart surgery in an elevator , Knight said : " It 's a slow change but he 's starting to realize , ' The way I have been doing things is not working . ' The big thing about the open @-@ heart surgery in the elevator was he was forced into it . He needs to be kind of kicked in the ( butt ) to do these things . " 
 Knight felt a parallel to George in that his " confidence isn 't always at its absolute highest " , but overall he sees more differences than similarities . However , when the actor starts to think he is so different from O 'Malley , an awkward move can suggest otherwise . " I was walking , doing a scene with Katherine Heigl . I finished my line with her , and then I walked straight into the light stand . " Critical of her affair with O 'Malley , Knight 's co @-@ star Heigl explained : " They really hurt somebody , and they didn 't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it . I have a really hard time with that kind of thing . I 'm maybe a little too black and white about it . " Speaking of O 'Malley 's relationship with Lexie , Rhimes offered her insight : " I love them as friends . They make good friends . We all have that friend we met in school or the gym or somewhere – we just hit it off right away . And right away there was no pretense or airs . Just pure honesty . That 's Lexie and George . They 're really good friends and I can see the friendship evolving into something even greater . " When asked what his " favorite George moment " was , Knight said his relationships with Stevens and Bailey . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fans were " widely against " O 'Malley 's affair with Meredith in the second season , however certain fans who supported their relationship were critical when Torres was introduced as a love interest for him . Fans and critics were also against O 'Malley 's relationship with Stevens in the fourth season ; Maclean 's said : " George must die . He 's slept with virtually everyone except the male cast and has been in love with virtually everyone except the male cast . And he 's not that great of a doctor . Evolve or die . " Christopher Monfette of IGN said O 'Malley and Stevens were a " mismatch " , adding : " Unfortunately , while it 's refreshing to see a plotline driven by activity versus apathy , the idea of these two ever @-@ affable , best @-@ friend characters suddenly discovering their potential , out @-@ of @-@ nowhere love for each other quickly feels both force @-@ fed and emotionally @-@ incorrect . " Similarly , DVD Verdict stated that George and Izzie were " one of the strongest ' best friend ' vibes on television " for the first three seasons , explaining " they were perfect as friends [ while ] George and Callie made a good couple . " UGO.com put the two on their list of " Character Couples Who Should Have Never Happened " . 
 Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly said that when O 'Malley told Torres about his affair with Stevens , the scene was too " melodramatic " . Laura Burrows , also of IGN , said that the fourth season premiere " introduced a new side of George " . Armstrong said of O 'Malley and Stevens ' reconciliation : " George and Izzie are finally on the old Grey 's Anatomy road to ruin . And I admit this is a good lesson in Grey 's viewing as well as life : Sit tight if you hate something , as nothing is permanent . " Armstrong also commented that the " sparkling " friendship development between Lexie and O 'Malley " won her over " . The following year , Monfette observed of O 'Malley 's lack of screen time : " His growing interest in trauma surgery at the side of Owen leads to an interesting development in the finale , but the character is virtually side @-@ lined this season . " Carina MacKenzie of the Los Angeles Times said of the character 's death : " The time @-@ lapse episode was an interesting choice , and though we sped through six weeks of mourning in two hours , it didn 't feel rushed to me . I 'm not sure the show could have held my attention for another season of crippling sadness . " 
 The Huffington Post 's Michael Pascua commented that O 'Malley 's funeral did not live up to his expectations , writing that it " wasn 't as sad as [ he ] thought it would be " . In 2006 , Knight and the other cast of Grey 's Anatomy were nominated for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series , at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards . Also in 2006 , the cast won the award for Best Cast – Television Series at the 11th Satellite Awards . The cast won the award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 13th Screen Actors Guild Awards , and were nominated again the following year . Knight 's performance in season three earned him a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Supply of Goods ( Implied Terms ) Act 1973 = 
 The Supply of Goods ( Implied Terms ) Act 1973 ( c 13 ) was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that provided implied terms in contracts for the supply of goods and for hire @-@ purchase agreements , and limited the use of exclusion clauses . The result of a joint report by the England and Wales Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission , First Report on Exemption Clauses , the Act was granted the Royal Assent on 18 April 1973 and came into force a month later . It met with a mixed reaction from academics , who praised the additional protection it offered while at the same time questioning whether it was enough ; several aspects of the Act 's draftsmanship and implementation were also called into question . Much of the Act was repealed by the Sale of Goods Act 1979 , which included many of the 1973 Act 's provisions . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under earlier contractual theory a contract was an " empty form " that the two parties , as equal partners , could use to create such obligations and rights as they saw fit . Once a contract was signed , ways to get out of it were limited to whether it had been signed under duress , misrepresentation , or fraud . The general theory was freedom of contract ; a contract can include almost any terms , as long as both parties agree to them . But in reality this doctrine was problematic . Firstly , while the idea that a person should be held to those terms he agrees to and signs works well with individually negotiated contracts , it does not with " standard form " contracts – printed , non @-@ specific contracts drawn up in advance by one party , such as those used by banks . Such contracts can include clauses that severely restrict the rights of one party ( exclusion clauses ) . Secondly , while the idea that signing a contract indicates consent worked well when there was little disparity between the parties , when the parties are a small business or individual and a major corporation , the smaller party may have to " take or leave " the contract , which can be a problem if all other corporations in the industry use similar terms . Although it had long been argued that " unfair " clauses should be struck down , the courts were obliged by the doctrine of freedom of contract to uphold them . 
 In <unk> ( Harrow ) Ltd v Wallis [ 1956 ] 1 W.L.R. 936 the courts developed the doctrine of fundamental breach ; if one party had breached the contract in such a way that , if there was no exclusion clause , it would void the contract , such a contract could be set aside . Although a step forward , this doctrine was problematic , as pointed out by Lord Reid in Suisse Atlantique Societe d <unk> SA v NV Rotterdamsche <unk> Centrale [ 1967 ] 1 AC 361 ; it failed to discriminate between exclusion clauses that were the result of unequal bargaining and those that were not . In 1970 the England and Wales Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission produced their First Report on Exemption Clauses , designed to reform this area of law . The Supply of Goods ( Implied Terms ) Act 1973 was partially based on that report , but it went further in some respects . It was given the Royal Assent on 18 April 1973 , and came into force a month later . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act extends the reach of implied conditions first laid out in the Sale of Goods Act 1893 . Section 1 replaced Section 12 of the 1893 Act , containing 3 types of implied undertakings to title ; a condition that the seller has the right to sell , or will when the property has passed to him , a warranty that the goods have no additional costs that the buyer has not been informed of , and a warranty of quiet possession . These provisions cannot be excluded , although if there is , in the original contract , a provision that the seller can only transfer what title he has , there is no condition that the seller has the right to sell . The Act also regulated sale by description , where products are sold based on a description given of them . Section 2 provides that " a sale of goods shall not be prevented from being a sale by description by reason only that , being exposed for sale or hire , they are selected by the buyer " . This is to ensure that a sale in a self @-@ service store is considered sale by description , and that the sale is therefore covered by other provisions . 
 Section 3 covers the " <unk> quality " of goods . With the exception of defects that are pointed out to the consumer , or which the consumer should easily have been able to see , sellers are expected to provide goods of " <unk> quality " . This is defined as goods " fit for the purpose or purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard to any description applied to them , the price ( if relevant ) and all the other circumstances " . Unlike the 1893 Act , the goods must be fit for purpose only if sold " in the course of a business " . Previously , those provisions did not extend to goods sold by an agent ; under the new Act all implied terms were extended to sales by agents , unless it was clear that the goods were not being sold in the course of a business . 
 The Act is designed to prevent the avoidance of implied terms through exclusion clauses . It provides ( in Section 4 ) that any attempt to exclude a seller in consumer sales from Sections 2 and 3 is void . In non @-@ consumer sales an exclusion clause is void " to the extent that it is shown that it would not be fair or reasonable to allow reliance on the term " . The burden of proof in such situations is on the party seeking to avoid liability through the exclusion clause . For determining whether it is " fair or reasonable " to allow the exclusion clause , five tests are used ; 1 ) whether the parties were of equal bargaining strength , 2 ) whether the buyer was induced to agree to the clause , 3 ) whether the buyer knew , or ought to have known of the exclusion clause , 4 ) where the liability is conditional , if the condition is reasonable and 5 ) whether the goods were supplied as part of a special order . These basic tests were later extended into the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 . 
 Hire @-@ purchase agreements are also regulated by this Act . The provisions are very similar to those for sale of goods agreements , with the section on exclusion clauses identical . Under the 1893 Act , conditional sale agreements ( where the buyer takes possession of the goods , but the seller retains the right to repossess them ) were treated as hire @-@ purchase agreements , despite being fundamentally sales . With the unification of provisions for hire @-@ purchase and sale of goods agreements , conditional sale agreements are now treated as sales . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Christopher Carr , an academic and practising lawyer , called the implementation of Section 1 " slightly awkward " , suggesting that in some ways it was more limited than the provisions contained in the Sale of Goods Act 1893 from the seller 's point of view . Unlike with the 1893 Act , a seller cannot exclude the provisions , and while the right to sell can be excluded it is not clear how this might be done . Turpin complimented the section on hire @-@ purchase agreements , although noting some flaws in draftsmanship ; he also questioned whether or not the protection given to consumers would be sufficient . Prior to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 , the Supply of Goods ( Implied Terms ) Act 1973 was one of the few limitations on clauses in consumer contracts . Most of it was eventually superseded by the Sale of Goods Act 1979 , which included many of the Act 's provisions . 
 = Death Valley National Park = 
 Death Valley National Park is a national park in the United States . Straddling the border of California and Nevada , located east of the Sierra Nevada , it occupies an interface zone between the arid Great Basin and Mojave deserts in the United States . The park protects the northwest corner of the Mojave Desert and contains a diverse desert environment of salt @-@ flats , sand dunes , badlands , valleys , canyons , and mountains . It is the largest national park in the lower 48 states and has been declared an International Biosphere Reserve . Approximately 95 % of the park is a designated wilderness area . It is the hottest and driest of the national parks in the United States . The second @-@ lowest point in the Western Hemisphere is in Badwater Basin , which is 282 feet ( 86 m ) below sea level . The park is home to many species of plants and animals that have adapted to this harsh desert environment . Some examples include creosote bush , bighorn sheep , coyote , and the Death Valley pupfish , a survivor of much wetter times . 
 A series of Native American groups inhabited the area from as early as 7000 BC , most recently the Timbisha around 1000 AD who migrated between winter camps in the valleys and summer grounds in the mountains . A group of European @-@ Americans that became stuck in the valley in 1849 while looking for a shortcut to the gold fields of California gave the valley its name , even though only one of their group died there . Several short @-@ lived boom towns sprang up during the late 19th and early 20th centuries to mine gold and silver . The only long @-@ term profitable ore to be mined was borax , which was transported out of the valley with twenty @-@ mule teams . The valley later became the subject of books , radio programs , television series , and movies . Tourism blossomed in the 1920s , when resorts were built around Stovepipe Wells and Furnace Creek . Death Valley National Monument was declared in 1933 and the park was substantially expanded and became a national park in 1994 . 
 The natural environment of the area has been shaped largely by its geology . The valley itself is actually a graben . The oldest rocks are extensively metamorphosed and at least 1 @.@ 7 billion years old . Ancient , warm , shallow seas deposited marine sediments until rifting opened the Pacific Ocean . Additional sedimentation occurred until a subduction zone formed off the coast . This uplifted the region out of the sea and created a line of volcanoes . Later the crust started to pull apart , creating the current Basin and Range landform . Valleys filled with sediment and , during the wet times of glacial periods , with lakes , such as Lake Manly . 
 In 2013 , Death Valley National Park was designated as a dark sky park by the International Dark @-@ Sky Association . 
 = = Geographic setting = = 
 There are two major valleys in the park , Death Valley and Panamint Valley . Both of these valleys were formed within the last few million years and both are bounded by north – south @-@ trending mountain ranges . These and adjacent valleys follow the general trend of Basin and Range topography with one modification : there are parallel strike @-@ slip faults that perpendicularly bound the central extent of Death Valley . The result of this shearing action is additional extension in the central part of Death Valley which causes a slight widening and more subsidence there . 
 Uplift of surrounding mountain ranges and subsidence of the valley floor are both occurring . The uplift on the Black Mountains is so fast that the alluvial fans ( fan @-@ shaped deposits at the mouth of canyons ) there are small and steep compared to the huge alluvial fans coming off the Panamint Range . Fast uplift of a mountain range in an arid environment often does not allow its canyons enough time to cut a classic V @-@ shape all the way down to the stream bed . Instead , a V @-@ shape ends at a slot canyon halfway down , forming a ' wine glass canyon . ' Sediment is deposited on a small and steep alluvial fan . 
 At 279 feet ( 85 m ) below sea level , Badwater Basin on Death Valley 's floor is the second @-@ lowest depression in the Western Hemisphere ( behind Laguna del <unk> in Argentina ) , while Mount Whitney , only 85 miles ( 137 km ) to the west , rises to 14 @,@ 505 feet ( 4 @,@ 421 m ) . This topographic relief is the greatest elevation gradient in the contiguous United States and is the terminus point of the Great Basin 's southwestern drainage . Although the extreme lack of water in the Great Basin makes this distinction of little current practical use , it does mean that in wetter times the lake that once filled Death Valley ( Lake Manly ) was the last stop for water flowing in the region , meaning the water there was saturated in dissolved materials . Thus the salt pans in Death Valley are among the largest in the world and are rich in minerals , such as borax and various salts and hydrates . The largest salt pan in the park extends 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the Ashford Mill Site to the Salt Creek Hills , covering some 200 square miles ( 520 km2 ) of the valley floor . The best known playa in the park is the Racetrack , known for its moving rocks . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Death Valley is the hottest and driest place in North America because of its lack of surface water and its low relief . It is so frequently the hottest spot in the United States that many tabulations of the highest daily temperatures in the country omit Death Valley as a matter of course . 
 On the afternoon of July 10 , 1913 , the United States Weather Bureau recorded a high temperature of 134 ° F ( 56 @.@ 7 ° C ) at Greenland Ranch ( now Furnace Creek ) in Death Valley . This temperature stands as the highest ambient air temperature ever recorded at the surface of the Earth . ( A report of a temperature of 58 ° C ( 136 @.@ 4 ° F ) recorded in Libya in 1922 was later determined to be inaccurate . ) Daily summer temperatures of 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) or greater are common , as well as below freezing nightly temperatures in the winter . July is the hottest month , with an average high of 115 ° F ( 46 ° C ) and an average low of 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) . December is the coldest month , with an average high of 65 ° F ( 18 ° C ) and an average low of 39 ° F ( 4 ° C ) . The record low is 15 ° F ( − 9 @.@ 4 ° C ) . 
 Several of the larger Death Valley springs derive their water from a regional aquifer , which extends as far east as southern Nevada and Utah . Much of the water in this aquifer has been there for many thousands of years , since the Pleistocene ice ages , when the climate was cooler and wetter . Today 's drier climate does not provide enough precipitation to recharge the aquifer at the rate at which water is being withdrawn . 
 The highest range within the park is the Panamint Range with Telescope Peak being its highest point at 11 @,@ 049 feet ( 3 @,@ 368 m ) . The Death Valley region is a transitional zone in the northernmost part of the Mojave Desert and consists of five mountain ranges removed from the Pacific Ocean . Three of these are significant barriers : the Sierra Nevada , the Argus Range , and the Panamint Range . Air masses tend to lose moisture as they are forced up over mountain ranges , in what climatologists call a rainshadow effect . 
 The exaggerated rainshadow effect for the Death Valley area makes it North America 's driest spot , receiving about 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) of rainfall annually at Badwater ( some years fail to register any measurable rainfall ) . Annual average precipitation varies from 1 @.@ 92 inches ( 49 mm ) overall below sea level to over 15 inches ( 380 mm ) in the higher mountains that surround the valley . When rain does arrive it often does so in intense storms that cause flash floods which remodel the landscape and sometimes create very shallow ephemeral lakes . 
 The hot , dry climate makes it difficult for soil to form . Mass wasting , the down @-@ slope movement of loose rock , is therefore the dominant erosive force in mountainous area , resulting in " skeletonized " ranges ( mountains with very little soil on them ) . Sand dunes in the park , while famous , are not nearly as widespread as their fame or the dryness of the area may suggest . The Mesquite Flat dune field is the most easily accessible from the paved road just east of Stovepipe Wells in the north @-@ central part of the valley and is primarily made of quartz sand . Another dune field is just 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the north but is instead mostly composed of travertine sand . The highest dunes in the park , and some of the highest in North America , are located in the Eureka Valley about 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the north of Stovepipe Wells , while the Panamint Valley dunes and the Saline Valley dunes are located west and northwest of the town , respectively . The Ibex dune field is near the seldom @-@ visited Ibex Hill in the southernmost part of the park , just south of the Saratoga Springs marshland . All of the latter four dune fields are accessible only via unpaved roads . Prevailing winds in the winter come from the north , and prevailing winds in the summer come from the south . Thus the overall position of the dune fields remains more or less fixed . 
 There are rare exceptions to the dry nature of the area . In 2005 , an unusually wet winter created a ' lake ' in the Badwater Basin and led to the greatest wildflower season in the park 's history . In October 2015 , a " 1000 year flood event " with over three inches of rain caused major damage in Death Valley National Park . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Early inhabitants and transient populations = = = 
 Four Native American cultures are known to have lived in the area during the last 10 @,@ 000 years . The first known group , the <unk> Spring People , were hunters and gatherers who arrived in the area perhaps 9 @,@ 000 years ago ( 7000 BC ) when there were still small lakes in Death Valley and neighboring Panamint Valley . A much milder climate persisted at that time , and large game animals were still plentiful . By 5 @,@ 000 years ago ( 3000 BC ) the Mesquite Flat People displaced the <unk> Spring People . Around 2 @,@ 000 years ago the Saratoga Spring People moved into the area , which by then was probably already a hot , dry desert . This culture was more advanced at hunting and gathering and was skillful at <unk> . They also left mysterious stone patterns in the valley . 
 One @-@ thousand years ago , the nomadic Timbisha ( formerly called Shoshone and also known as Panamint or <unk> ) moved into the area and hunted game and gathered mesquite beans along with pinyon pine nuts . Because of the wide altitude differential between the valley bottom and the mountain ridges , especially on the west , the Timbisha practiced a vertical migration pattern . Their winter camps were located near water sources in the valley bottoms . As the spring and summer progressed and the weather warmed , grasses and other plant food sources ripened at progressively higher altitudes . November found them at the very top of the mountain ridges where they harvested pine nuts before moving back to the valley bottom for winter . 
 The California Gold Rush brought the first people of European descent known to visit the immediate area . In December 1849 two groups of California Gold Country @-@ bound white travelers with perhaps 100 wagons total stumbled into Death Valley after getting lost on what they thought was a shortcut off the Old Spanish Trail . Called the Bennett @-@ Arcane Party , they were unable to find a pass out of the valley for weeks ; they were able to find fresh water at various springs in the area , but were forced to eat several of their oxen to survive . They used the wood of their wagons to cook the meat and make jerky . The place where they did this is today referred to as " Burned Wagons Camp " and is located near the sand dunes . 
 After abandoning their wagons , they eventually were able to hike out of the valley . Just after leaving the valley , one of the women in the group turned and said , " Goodbye Death Valley , " giving the valley they endured its name . Included in the party was William Lewis Manly whose autobiographical book Death Valley in ' 49 detailed this trek and popularized the area ( geologists later named the prehistoric lake that once filled the valley after him ) . 
 = = = Boom and bust = = = 
 The ores that are most famously associated with the area were also the easiest to collect and the most profitable : evaporite deposits such as salts , borate , and talc . Borax was found by Rosie and Aaron Winters near Furnace Creek Ranch ( then called Greenland ) in 1881 . Later that same year , the Eagle Borax Works became Death Valley 's first commercial borax operation . William Tell Coleman built the Harmony Borax Works plant and began to process ore in late 1883 or early 1884 , continuing until 1888 . This mining and smelting company produced borax to make soap and for industrial uses . The end product was shipped out of the valley 165 miles ( 266 km ) to the Mojave railhead in 10 @-@ ton @-@ capacity wagons pulled by " twenty @-@ mule teams " that were actually teams of 18 mules and two horses each . 
 The teams averaged two miles ( 3 km ) an hour and required about 30 days to complete a round trip . The trade name 20 @-@ Mule Team Borax was established by Francis Marion Smith 's Pacific Coast Borax Company after Smith acquired Coleman 's borax holdings in 1890 . A memorable advertising campaign used the wagon 's image to promote the <unk> brand of granular hand soap and the Death Valley Days radio and television programs . In 1914 , the Death Valley Railroad was built to serve mining operations on the east side of the valley . Mining continued after the collapse of Coleman 's empire , and by the late 1920s the area was the world 's number one source of borax . Some four to six million years old , the Furnace Creek Formation is the primary source of borate minerals gathered from Death Valley 's playas . 
 Other visitors stayed to prospect for and mine deposits of copper , gold , lead , and silver . These sporadic mining ventures were hampered by their remote location and the harsh desert environment . In December 1903 , two men from Ballarat were prospecting for silver . One was an out @-@ of @-@ work Irish miner named Jack Keane and the other was a one @-@ eyed Basque butcher named Domingo <unk> . Quite by accident , Keane discovered an immense ledge of free @-@ milling gold by the duo 's work site and named the claim the Keane Wonder Mine . This started a minor and short @-@ lived gold rush into the area . The Keane Wonder Mine , along with mines at Rhyolite , Skidoo and Harrisburg , were the only ones to extract enough metal ore to make them worthwhile . Outright <unk> such as <unk> also occurred , but most ventures quickly ended after a short series of prospecting mines failed to yield evidence of significant ore ( these mines now dot the entire area and are a significant hazard to anyone who enters them ) . The boom towns which sprang up around these mines flourished during the 1900s ( decade ) but soon declined after the Panic of 1907 . 
 = = = Early tourism = = = 
 The first documented tourist facilities in Death Valley were a set of tent houses built in the 1920s where Stovepipe Wells is now located . People flocked to resorts built around natural springs thought to have curative and restorative properties . In 1927 , Pacific Coast Borax turned the crew quarters of its Furnace Creek Ranch into a resort , creating the Furnace Creek Inn and resort . The spring at Furnace Creek was harnessed to develop the resort , and as the water was diverted , the surrounding marshes and wetlands started to shrink . 
 Soon the valley was a popular winter destination . Other facilities started off as private <unk> but were later opened to the public . Most notable among these was Death Valley Ranch , better known as Scotty 's Castle . This large ranch home built in the Spanish Revival style became a hotel in the late 1930s and , largely because of the fame of Death Valley Scotty , a tourist attraction . Death Valley Scotty , whose real name was Walter Scott , was a gold miner who pretended to be owner of " his castle " , which he claimed to have built with profits from his gold mine . Neither claim was true , but the real owner , Chicago millionaire Albert Mussey Johnson , encouraged the myth . When asked by reporters what his connection was to Walter Scott 's castle , Johnson replied that he was Mr. Scott 's banker . 
 = = = Protection and later history = = = 
 President Herbert Hoover proclaimed a national monument in and around Death Valley on February 11 , 1933 , setting aside almost two million acres ( 8 @,@ 000 km2 ) of southeastern California and small parts of southwesternmost Nevada . Twelve companies worked in Death Valley using Civilian Conservation Corps workers during the Great Depression and on into the early 1940s . They built barracks , graded 500 miles ( 800 km ) of roads , installed water and telephone lines , and erected a total of 76 buildings . Trails in the Panamint Range were built to points of scenic interest , and an adobe village , laundry and trading post were constructed for Shoshone Indians . Five campgrounds , restrooms , an airplane landing field and picnic facilities were also built . 
 Creation of the monument resulted in a temporary closing of the lands to prospecting and mining . However , Death Valley was quickly reopened to mining by Congressional action in June of the same year . As improvements in mining technology allowed lower grades of ore to be processed , and new heavy equipment allowed greater amounts of rock to be moved , mining in Death Valley changed . Gone were the days of the " single @-@ blanket , jackass prospector " long associated with the romantic west . Open pit and strip mines scarred the landscape as international mining corporations bought claims in highly visible areas of the national monument . The public outcry that ensued led to greater protection for all national park and monument areas in the United States . 
 In 1976 , Congress passed the Mining in the Parks Act , which closed Death Valley National Monument to the filing of new mining claims , banned open @-@ pit mining and required the National Park Service to examine the validity of tens of thousands of pre @-@ 1976 mining claims . Mining was allowed to resume on a limited basis in 1980 with stricter environmental standards . 
 The park 's Resources Management Division monitors mining within park boundaries and continues to review the status of 125 <unk> mining claims and 19 patented claim groups , while ensuring that federal guidelines are followed and the park 's resources are protected . In 2005 , the Billie Mine , an underground borax mine located along the road to Dante 's View , closed , ending mining in the park . 
 Death Valley National Monument was designated a biosphere reserve in 1984 . On October 31 , 1994 , the monument was expanded by 1 @.@ 3 million acres ( 5 @,@ 300 km2 ) and re @-@ designated as a national park , via congressional passage of the California Desert Protection Act ( Public Law 103 @-@ 433 ) . Consequently , the elevated status for Death Valley made it the largest national park in the contiguous United States . Many of the larger cities and towns within the boundary of the regional ground water flow system that the park and its plants and animals rely upon are experiencing some of the fastest growth rates of any place in the United States . Notable examples within a 100 @-@ mile ( 160 km ) radius of Death Valley National Park include Las Vegas and Pahrump , Nevada . In the case of Las Vegas , the local Chamber of Commerce estimates that 6 @,@ 000 people are moving to the city every month . Between 1985 and 1995 , the population of the Las Vegas Valley increased from 550 @,@ 700 to 1 @,@ 138 @,@ 800 . 
 In 1977 , parts of Death Valley were used by director George Lucas as a filming location for Star Wars , providing the setting for the fictional planet Tatooine . 
 = = Geologic history = = 
 The park has a diverse and complex geologic history . Since its formation , the area that comprises the park has experienced at least four major periods of extensive volcanism , three or four periods of major sedimentation , and several intervals of major tectonic deformation where the crust has been reshaped . Two periods of glaciation ( a series of ice ages ) have also had effects on the area , although no glaciers ever existed in the ranges now in the park . 
 = = = Basement and Pahrump Group = = = 
 Little is known about the history of the oldest exposed rocks in the area due to extensive metamorphism ( alteration of rock by heat and pressure ) . Radiometric dating gives an age of 1 @,@ 700 million years for the metamorphism during the Proterozoic . About 1 @,@ 400 million years ago a mass of granite now in the Panamint Range intruded this complex . Uplift later exposed these rocks to nearly 500 million years of erosion . 
 The Proterozoic sedimentary formations of the Pahrump Group were deposited on these basement rocks . This occurred following uplift and erosion of any earlier sediments from the Proterozoic basement rocks . The Pahrump is composed of arkose conglomerate ( quartz clasts in a concrete @-@ like matrix ) and mudstone in its lower part , followed by dolomite from carbonate banks topped by algal mats as stromatolites , and finished with basin @-@ filling sediment derived from the above , including possible glacial till from the hypothesized Snowball Earth glaciation . The very youngest rocks in the Pahrump Group are basaltic lava flows . 
 = = = Rifting and deposition = = = 
 A rift opened and subsequently flooded the region as part of the breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia in the Neoproterozoic ( by about 755 million years ago ) and the creation of the Pacific Ocean . A shoreline similar to the present Atlantic Ocean margin of the United States lay to the east . An algal mat @-@ covered carbonate bank was deposited , forming the Noonday Dolomite . Subsidence of the region occurred as the continental crust thinned and the newly formed Pacific widened , forming the Ibex Formation . An angular unconformity ( an uneven gap in the geologic record ) followed . 
 A true ocean basin developed to the west , breaking all the earlier formations along a steep front . A wedge of clastic sediment then began to accumulate at the base of the two underwater precipices , starting the formation of opposing continental <unk> . Three formations developed from sediment that accumulated on the wedge . The region 's first known fossils of complex life are found in the resulting formations . Notable among these are the Ediacara fauna and trilobites , the evolution of the latter being part of the Cambrian Explosion of life . 
 The sandy mudflats gave way about 550 million years ago to a carbonate platform ( similar to the one around the present @-@ day Bahamas ) , which lasted for the next 300 million years of Paleozoic time ( refer to the middle of the timescale image ) . Death Valley 's position was then within ten or twenty degrees of the Paleozoic equator . Thick beds of carbonate @-@ rich sediments were periodically interrupted by periods of emergence . Although details of geography varied during this immense interval of time , a north @-@ northeasterly trending coastline generally ran from Arizona up through Utah . The resulting eight formations and one group are 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 km ) thick and underlay much of the Cottonwood , Funeral , Grapevine , and Panamint ranges . 
 = = = Compression and uplift = = = 
 In the early @-@ to @-@ mid- Mesozoic the western edge of the North American continent was pushed against the oceanic plate under the Pacific Ocean , creating a subduction zone . A subduction zone is a type of contact between different crustal plates where heavier crust slides below lighter crust . <unk> volcanoes and uplifting mountains were created as a result , and the coastline was pushed to the west . The Sierran Arc started to form to the northwest from heat and pressure generated from subduction , and compressive forces caused thrust faults to develop . 
 A long period of uplift and erosion was concurrent with and followed the above events , creating a major unconformity , which is a large gap in the geologic record . Sediments worn off the Death Valley region were carried both east and west by wind and water . No <unk> to Eocene @-@ aged sedimentary formations exist in the area , except for some possibly Jurassic @-@ age volcanic rocks ( see the top of the timescale image ) . 
 Erosion over many millions of years created a relatively featureless plain . Thirty @-@ five million years ago , sluggish streams migrated laterally over its surface . Several other similar formations were also laid down . 
 = = = Stretching and lakes = = = 
 Basin and Range @-@ associated stretching of large parts of crust below southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico started around 16 million years ago and the region is still spreading . This stretching began to affect the Death and Panamint valleys area by 3 million years ago . Before this , rocks now in the Panamint Range were on top of rocks that would become the Black Mountains and the Cottonwood Mountains . Lateral and vertical transport of these blocks was accomplished by movement on normal faults . Right @-@ lateral movement along strike @-@ slip faults that run parallel to and at the base of the ranges also helped to develop the area . <unk> forces , probably associated with northwesterly movement of the Pacific Plate along the San Andreas Fault ( west of the region ) , is responsible for the lateral movement . 
 Igneous activity associated with this stretching occurred from 12 million to 4 million years ago . Sedimentation is concentrated in valleys ( basins ) from material eroded from adjacent ranges . The amount of sediment deposited has roughly kept up with this subsidence , resulting in retention of more or less the same valley floor elevation over time . 
 Pleistocene ice ages started 2 million years ago , and melt from alpine glaciers on the nearby Sierra Nevada Mountains fed a series of lakes that filled Death and Panamint valleys and surrounding basins ( see the top of the timescale image ) . The lake that filled Death Valley was the last of a chain of lakes fed by the Amargosa and Mojave Rivers , and possibly also the Owens River . The large lake that covered much of Death Valley 's floor , which geologists call Lake Manly , started to dry up 10 @,@ 500 years ago . <unk> and playas were created as ice age glaciers retreated , thus drastically reducing the lakes ' water source . Only faint shorelines are left . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Habitat varies from <unk> at 282 feet ( 86 m ) below sea level to the sub @-@ alpine conditions found on the summit of Telescope Peak , which rises to 11 @,@ 049 feet ( 3 @,@ 368 m ) . Vegetation zones include <unk> Bush , Desert Holly , and mesquite at the lower elevations and sage up through shadscale , <unk> , Joshua Tree , pinyon @-@ juniper , to <unk> Pine and Bristlecone Pine woodlands . The <unk> is devoid of vegetation , and the rest of the valley floor and lower slopes have sparse cover , although where water is available , an abundance of vegetation is usually present . These zones and the adjacent desert support a variety of wildlife species , including 51 species of native mammals , 307 species of birds , 36 species of reptiles , 3 species of amphibians , and 2 species of native fish . 
 Small mammals are more numerous than large mammals , such as bighorn sheep , coyotes ( image ) , bobcats , kit foxes , cougars , and mule deer . Mule deer are present in the pinyon / juniper associations of the Grapevine , Cottonwood , and Panamint ranges . Bighorn sheep are a rare species of mountain sheep that exist in isolated bands in the Sierra and in Death Valley . These are highly adaptable animals and can eat almost any plant . They have no known predators , but humans and burros compete for habitat . 
 The ancestors of the Death Valley <unk> swam to the area from the Colorado River via a long @-@ since dried @-@ up system of rivers and lakes ( see Lake Manly ) . They now live in two separate populations : one in Salt Creek and another in <unk> Marsh . Death Valley is one of the hottest and driest places in North America , yet it is home to over 1 @,@ 000 species of plants ; 23 of which , including the very rare Rock Lady ( <unk> <unk> ) , are not found anywhere else . 
 Adaptation to the dry environment is key . For example , creosote bush and mesquite have tap @-@ root systems that can extend 50 feet ( 15 m ) down in order to take advantage of a year @-@ round supply of ground water . The diversity of Death Valley 's plant communities results partly from the region 's location in a transition zone between the Mojave Desert , the Great Basin Desert and the Sonoran Desert . This location , combined with the great relief found within the Park , supports vegetation typical of three biotic life zones : the lower Sonoran , the Canadian , and the Arctic / Alpine in portions of the Panamint Range . Based on the Munz and Keck ( 1968 ) classifications , seven plant communities can be categorized within these life zones , each characterized by dominant vegetation and representative of three vegetation types : scrub , desert woodland , and coniferous forest . <unk> further subdivide some communities into zones , especially on the valley floor . 
 Unlike more typical locations across the Mojave Desert , many of the water @-@ dependent Death Valley habitats possess a diversity of plant and animal species that are not found anywhere else in the world . The existence of these species is due largely to a unique geologic history and the process of evolution that has progressed in habitats that have been isolated from one another since the Pleistocene epoch . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Sightseeing is available by personal automobile , four @-@ wheel drive , bicycle , mountain bike ( on established roadways only ) , and hiking . Riding through the park on motorcycle is also a popular pastime . State Route 190 , the Badwater Road , the Scotty 's Castle Road , and paved roads to Dante 's View and Wildrose provide access to the major scenic viewpoints and historic points of interest . More than 350 miles ( 560 km ) of unpaved and four @-@ wheel @-@ drive roads provide access to wilderness hiking , camping , and historical sites . All vehicles must be licensed and street legal . There are hiking trails of varying lengths and difficulties , but most backcountry areas are accessible only by cross @-@ country hiking . There are literally thousands of hiking possibilities . The normal season for visiting the park is from October 15 to May 15 , because of summer extremes in temperature . Costumed living history tours of the historic Death Valley Scotty 's Castle are conducted for a fee , but as of October 2015 , are suspended due to flood damage to the Scotty 's Castle buildings and grounds . 
 There are nine designated campgrounds within the park , and overnight backcountry camping permits are available at the Visitor Center . <unk> Parks & Resorts owns and operates a private resort , the Furnace Creek Inn and Ranch Resort , which comprises two separate and distinct hotels : the Furnace Creek Inn is a four @-@ star historic hotel , and the Furnace Creek Ranch is a three @-@ star ranch @-@ style property reminiscent of the mining and prospecting days . Death Valley Lodging Company operates the Stovepipe Wells Village motel . Stovepipe Wells Village is the only authorized concession operations located in Death Valley National Park . There are a few motels near various entrances to the park , in Shoshone , Death Valley Junction , Beatty , Nevada , and Panamint Springs . 
 The visitor center is located in the Furnace Creek resort area on State Route 190 . A 12 @-@ minute introductory slide program is shown every 30 minutes . During the winter season — November through April — rangers offer interpretive tours and a wide variety of walks , talks , and slide presentations about Death Valley cultural and natural history . The visitor center has displays dealing with the park 's geology , climate , wildlife and natural history . There are also specific sections dealing with the human history and pioneer experience . The Death Valley Natural History Association maintains a bookstore specifically geared to the natural and cultural history of the park . 
 Death Valley National Park is a popular location for stargazing as it has one of the darkest night skies in the United States . Despite Death Valley 's remote location , its air quality and night visibility are threatened by civilization . In particular , light pollution is introduced by nearby Las Vegas . The darkest skies are , in general , located in the northwest of the park . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Suillus brevipes = 
 Suillus brevipes is a species of fungus in the family Suillaceae . First described by American mycologists in the late 19th century , it is commonly known as the stubby @-@ stalk or the short @-@ stemmed slippery Jack . The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) produced by the fungus are characterized by a chocolate to reddish @-@ brown cap covered with a sticky layer of slime , and a short whitish stipe that does not have either a partial veil or prominent dark or colored glandular dots . The cap can reach a diameter of about 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) , while the stipe is up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long and 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . Like other bolete mushrooms , S. brevipes produces spores in a vertically arranged layer of spongy tubes with openings that form a layer of small yellowish pores on the underside of the cap . 
 Suillus brevipes grows in a mycorrhizal association with various species of two- and three @-@ needled pines , especially lodgepole and ponderosa pine . The fungus is found throughout North America , and has been introduced to several other countries via transplanted pines . In the succession of mycorrhizal fungi associated with the regrowth of jack pine after clearcutting or wildfires , S. brevipes is a multi @-@ stage fungus , found during all stages of tree development . The mushrooms are edible , and are high in the essential fatty acid linoleic acid . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically as Boletus <unk> by American mycologist Charles Frost in 1874 . In 1885 , Charles Horton Peck , who had found specimens in pine woods of Albany County , New York , explained that the species name was a taxonomic homonym ( Boletus <unk> was already in use for another species named by Ventenat in 1863 ) , and so renamed it to Boletus brevipes . Its current name was assigned by German Otto Kuntze in 1898 . William Alphonso Murrill renamed it as Rostkovites brevipes in 1948 ; the genus Rostkovites is now considered to be synonymous with Suillus . 
 Agaricales specialist Rolf Singer included Suillus brevipes in the subsection Suillus of genus Suillus , an infrageneric ( a taxonomic level below genus ) grouping of species characterized by a cinnamon @-@ brown spore print , and pores less than 1 mm wide . Molecular phylogenetic analyses of ribosomal DNA sequences shows that the most closely related species to Suillus brevipes include S. luteus , S. pseudobrevipes , and S. weaverae ( formerly <unk> weaverae ) . 
 The specific epithet is derived from the Latin brevipes , meaning " short @-@ footed " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " stubby @-@ stalk " or the " short @-@ stemmed slippery Jack " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is deep brown to reddish @-@ brown , later fading to tan with age , and it does not bruise with handling . The cap surface is smooth , and , depending on the moisture in the environment , may range from sticky to the touch to slimy . Depending on its maturity , the cap shape may range from spherical to broadly convex . The cap diameter measures 5 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) , and the cap cuticle can be peeled from the surface . The tubes are yellow , becoming olive @-@ green with age , and they have an attachment to the stipe that ranges from adnate ( with most of the tube fused to the stipe ) to decurrent ( with the tubes broadly attached , but running somewhat down the length of the stipe ) . They are typically up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) deep , and there are about 1 – 2 tube mouths ( pores ) per millimeter . The pores are pale yellow , round , 1 – 2 mm wide , and do not change color when bruised . 
 The stipe is white to pale yellow , dry , solid , not bruising , and pruinose ( having a very fine whitish powder on the surface ) . A characteristic feature of many Suillus species are the glandular dots found on the stipe — clumps of hyphal cell ends through which the fungus secretes various metabolic wastes , leaving a sticky or resinous " dot " . In S. brevipes , the form of the glandular dots is variable : they may be absent , slightly underdeveloped or obscurely formed with age . The stipe is usually short in comparison to the diameter of the cap , typically 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long and 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . It is either of equal width throughout , or may taper downwards ; its surface bears minute puncture holes at maturity , and is it slightly fibrous at the base . Collections made in New Zealand tend to have a reddish coloration at the very base of the stipe . The flesh of the mushroom is initially white , but turns pale yellow in age . The odor and taste are mild . The spore print is cinnamon @-@ brown . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are elliptical to oblong , smooth , and have dimensions of 7 – 10 by 3 – 4 µm . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are thin @-@ walled , club @-@ shaped to roughly cylindrical , and measure 2 – 25 by 5 – 7 µm . They bear either two or four spores . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia that are found on the face of a gill ) are roughly cylindrical with rounded ends , thin @-@ walled , and 40 – 55 by 5 – 8 µm . The cells often have brown contents , and in the presence of 2 % potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) will appear hyaline ( translucent ) or vinaceous ( red wine @-@ colored ) ; in Melzer 's reagent they become pale yellow or brown . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edge of a gill ) are 30 – 60 by 7 – 10 µm , club @-@ shaped to almost cylindrical , thin @-@ walled , with brown <unk> material at the base , and arranged like a bundle of fibers . In KOH they appear hyaline , and are pale yellow in Melzer 's reagent . Caulocystidia ( found on the stipe ) are 60 – 90 by 7 – 9 µm , mostly cylindrical with rounded ends , and arranged in bundles with brown pigment particles at the base . The caulocystidia stain vinaceous in KOH . The cuticle of the cap is made of a layer of interwoven gelatinous hyphae that are individually 2 – 5 µm thick ; the gelatinous hyphae are responsible for the sliminess of the cuticle . There are no clamp connections in the hyphae . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Like many species of the genus Suillus , S. brevipes is edible , and the mushroom is considered choice by some . The odor is mild , and the taste mild or slightly acidic . Field guides typically recommended to remove the slimy cap cuticle , and , in older specimens , the tube layer before consumption . The mushrooms are common in the diet of grizzly bears in Yellowstone National Park . 
 The fatty acid composition of S. brevipes fruit bodies has been analyzed . The cap contained a higher lipid content than the stipe — 18 @.@ 4 % of the dry weight , compared to 12 @.@ 4 % . In the cap , linoleic acid made up 50 @.@ 7 % of the total lipids ( 65 @.@ 7 % in the stipe ) , oleic acid was 29 @.@ 9 % ( 12 @.@ 4 % in the stipe ) , followed by palmitic acid at 10 @.@ 5 % ( 12 @.@ 6 % in the stipe ) . <unk> acid — a member of the group of essential fatty acids called omega @-@ 6 fatty acids — is an essential dietary requirement for humans . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Several Suillus species which grow under pines could be confused with S. brevipes . S. granulatus has a longer stipe , and distinct raised granules on the stipe . S. brevipes is differentiated from S. albidipes by not having a cottony roll of velar tissue ( derived from a partial veil ) at the margin when young . S. pallidiceps is by distinguished its pale yellow cap color ; and S. <unk> has a veil . S. pungens has a characteristic pungent odor , compared to the mild smell of S. brevipes , and like S. granulatus , has glandular dots on the stipe . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Suillus brevipes is a mycorrhizal fungus , and it develops a close symbiotic association with the roots of various tree species , especially pine . The underground mycelia form a sheath around the tree rootlets , and the fungal hyphae penetrate between the cortical cells of the root , forming ectomycorrhizae . In this way , the fungus can supply the tree with minerals , while the tree reciprocates by supplying carbohydrates created by photosynthesis . In nature , it associates with two- and three @-@ needle pines , especially lodgepole and ponderosa pine . Under controlled laboratory conditions , the fungus has been shown to form ectomycorrhizae with ponderosa , lodgepole , loblolly , eastern white , patula , pond , radiata , and red pines . In vitro mycorrhizal associations formed with non @-@ pine species include Pacific madrone , bearberry , western larch , Sitka spruce , and coast Douglas @-@ fir . Fungal growth is inhibited by the presence of high levels of the heavy metals cadmium ( 350 ppm ) , lead ( 200 ppm ) , and nickel ( 20 ppm ) . 
 During the regrowth of pine trees after disturbance like clearcutting or wildfire , there appears an orderly sequence of mycorrhizal fungi as one species is replaced by another . A study on the ecological succession of ectomycorrhizal fungi in Canadian jack pine forests following wildfire concluded that S. brevipes is a multi @-@ stage fungus . It appears relatively early during tree development ; fruit bodies were common in 6 @-@ year @-@ old tree stands , and the fungus colonized the highest proportion of root tips . The fungus persists throughout the life of the tree , having been found in tree stands that were 41 , 65 , and 122 years old . There is , however , a relative reduction in the prevalence of the fungus with increasing stand age , which may be attributed to increased competition from other fungi , and a change in habitat brought about by closure of the forest canopy . Generally , S. brevipes responds favorably to silvicultural practices such as thinning and clearcutting . A 1996 study demonstrated that fruit bodies increased in abundance as the severity of disturbance increased . It has been suggested that the thick @-@ walled , wiry rhizomorphs produced by the fungus may serve as an adaptation that helps it to survive and remain viable for a period of time following disturbance . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Suillus brevipes grows singly , scattered , or in groups on the ground in late summer and autumn . A common — and sometimes abundant — mushroom , it occurs over most of North America ( including Hawaii ) , south to Mexico , and north to Canada . This species has been found in Puerto Rico growing under planted Pinus <unk> , where it is thought to have been introduced inadvertently from North Carolina by the USDA Forest Service in 1955 . Other introductions have also occurred in exotic pine plantations in Argentina , India , New Zealand , Japan , and Taiwan . 
 = Histoire Naturelle = 
 The Histoire Naturelle , générale et particulière , avec la description du Cabinet du Roi ( 1749 – 1804 ) is an encyclopaedic collection of 36 large ( quarto ) volumes written over much of his working life by the Comte de Buffon , and continued in eight more volumes after his death by his colleagues , led by Bernard Germain de Lacépède . The books cover what was known of the " natural sciences " at the time , including what would now be called material science , physics , chemistry and technology as well as the natural history of animals . 
 = = Histoire Naturelle , an encyclopaedic work = = 
 The Histoire Naturelle , générale et particulière , avec la description du Cabinet du Roi is the work that the Comte de Buffon ( 1707 – 1788 ) is remembered for . He worked on it for some 50 years , initially at Montbard in his office in the Tour Saint @-@ Louis , then in his library at Petit <unk> . 36 volumes came out between 1749 and 1789 , followed by 8 more after his death , thanks to Bernard Germain de Lacépède . It includes all the knowledge available in his time on the " natural sciences " , a broad term that includes disciplines which today would be called material science , physics , chemistry and technology . Buffon notes the morphological similarities between men and apes , although he considered apes completely devoid of the ability to think , differentiating them sharply from human beings . Buffon 's attention to internal anatomy made him an early comparative anatomist . " L ’ intérieur , dans les <unk> vivants , est le fond du <unk> de la nature " , he wrote in his Quadrupèdes , " the interior , in living things , is the foundation of nature 's design . " 
 The Histoire Naturelle , which was meant to address the whole of natural history , actually covers only minerals , birds , and the quadrupeds among animals . It is accompanied by some discourses and a theory of the earth by way of introduction , and by supplements including an elegantly written account of the epochs of nature . 
 The Suppléments cover a wide range of topics ; for example , in ( Suppléments IV ) , there is a Discours sur le style ( Discourse on Style ) and an Essai d <unk> morale ( essay on Moral Arithmetic ) . 
 Louis Jean @-@ Marie Daubenton assisted Buffon on the quadrupeds ; Philippe Guéneau de Montbeillard worked on the birds . They were joined , from 1767 , by Barthélemy Faujas de Saint @-@ Fond , the abbot Gabriel <unk> and Charles @-@ Nicolas @-@ <unk> <unk> de <unk> . The whole descriptive and anatomical part of l ’ Histoire des Quadrupèdes was the work of Daubenton and Jean @-@ Claude <unk> . 
 Buffon attached much importance to the illustrations ; Jacques de Sève illustrated the quadrupeds and François @-@ Nicolas Martinet illustrated the birds . Nearly 2000 plates adorn the work , representing animals with care given both to aesthetics and anatomical accuracy , with dreamlike and mythological settings . 
 On minerals , Buffon collaborated with André Thouin . Barthélemy Faujas de Saint @-@ Fond and Louis Bernard Guyton de Morveau provided sources for the mineral volumes . 
 L ’ Histoire Naturelle met immense success , almost as great as Encyclopédie by Diderot , which came out in the same period . The first three volumes of L ’ Histoire Naturelle , générale et particulière , avec la description du cabinet du Roi were reprinted three times in six weeks . 
 The encyclopaedia appeared in 36 volumes : 
 3 volumes in 1749 : De la manière d ’ <unk> l ’ histoire naturelle followed by Théorie de la Terre , Histoire Générale des animaux and Histoire Naturelle de l ’ homme 
 12 volumes on quadrupeds ( 1753 to 1767 ) 
 9 volumes on birds ( 1770 to 1783 ] ) 
 5 volumes on minerals ( 1783 to 1788 ) , the last including Traité de l ’ <unk> , the last work published by Buffon in his lifetime 
 7 volumes of supplements ( 1774 to 1789 ) , including Époques de la nature ( from 1778 ) . 
 L ’ Histoire Naturelle was initially printed at the Imprimerie royale in 36 volumes ( 1749 – 1789 ) . In 1764 Buffon bought back the rights to his work . It was continued by Bernard Germain de Lacépède , who described the egg @-@ laying quadrupeds , snakes , fishes and cetaceans in 8 volumes ( 1788 – 1804 ) . 
 Buffon was assisted in the work by Jacques @-@ François Artur ( 1708 – 1779 ) , Gabriel Léopold Charles Amé <unk> ( 1748 – 1785 ) , Louis Jean @-@ Marie Daubenton ( 1716 – 1799 ) , Edme @-@ Louis Daubenton ( 1732 – 1786 ) , Jacques de Sève ( <unk> 1742 – 1788 ) , Barthélemy Faujas de Saint @-@ Fond ( 1741 – 1819 ) , Philippe Guéneau de Montbeillard ( 1720 – 1785 ) , Louis @-@ Bernard Guyton @-@ Morveau ( 1737 – 1816 ) , Bernard Germain de Lacépède ( 1756 – 1825 ) , François @-@ Nicolas Martinet ( 1731 – 1800 ) , the anatomist Jean @-@ Claude <unk> ( 1728 – 1802 ) , Charles @-@ Nicolas @-@ <unk> <unk> de <unk> ( 1751 – 1812 ) , and André Thouin ( 1747 – 1823 ) . 
 = = Approach = = 
 Each group is introduced with a general essay . This is followed by an article , sometimes of many pages , on each animal ( or other item ) . The article on the wolf begins with the claim that it is one of the animals with a specially strong appetite for flesh ; it asserts that the animal is naturally coarse and cowardly ( <unk> et <unk> ) , but becoming crafty at need , and hardy by necessity , driven by hunger . The language , as in this instance , is elegant and elaborate , even " flowery and ornate " . Buffon was roundly criticised by his fellow academics for writing a " purely popularizing work , empty and puffed up , with little real scientific value " . 
 The species is named in Greek , Latin , Italian , Spanish , German , English , Swedish , and Polish . The zoological descriptions of the species by Gessner , Ray , Linnaeus , Klein and Buffon himself ( " Canis ex <unk> flavescens . Lupus vulgaris . Buffon . <unk> <unk> <unk> . 235 " ) are cited . 
 The text is written as a continuous essay , without the sections on identification , distribution and behaviour that might have been expected from other natural histories . Parts concern human responses rather than the animal itself , as for example that the wolf likes human flesh , and the strongest wolves sometimes eat nothing else . Measurements may be included ; in the case of the wolf , 41 separate measurements are tabulated , in pre @-@ revolutionary French feet and inches starting with the " Length of the whole body measured in a straight line from the end of the muzzle to the anus <unk> 3 feet . 7 inches . " ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) ; the " Length of the largest claws " is given as " 10 lines " ( 2 @.@ 2 cm ) . 
 The wolf is illustrated standing in farmland , and as a complete skeleton standing on a stone plinth in a landscape . The account of the species occupies 32 pages including illustrations . 
 = = Editions = = 
 = = = Buffon 's original edition continued by Lacépède = = = 
 The original edition of the Histoire Naturelle by Buffon comprised 36 volumes in quarto , divided into the following series : Histoire de la Terre et de l 'Homme , Quadrupèdes , Oiseaux , Minéraux , Suppléments . Buffon edited 35 volumes in his lifetime . Soon after his death , the fifth and final volume of l ’ Histoire des <unk> appeared in 1788 at the Imprimerie des <unk> du Roi . The seventh and final volume of Suppléments by Buffon was published posthumously in 1789 through Lacépède 's hands . Lacépède continued the part of the Histoire Naturelle which dealt with animals . A few months before Buffon 's death , en 1788 , Lacépède published , as a continuation , the first volume of his Histoire des Reptiles , on egg @-@ laying quadrupeds . The next year , he wrote a second volume on snakes , published during the French Revolution . Between 1798 and 1803 , he brought out the volume Histoire des Poissons . Lacépède made use of the notes and collections left by Philibert Commerson ( 1727 – 1773 ) . He wrote Histoire des Cétacés which was printed in 1804 . At that point , the Histoire Naturelle , by Buffon and Lacépède , thus contained 44 quarto volumes forming the definitive edition . 
 = = = Variations in the editions by Buffon and Lacépède = = = 
 Another edition in quarto format was printed by the Imprimerie royale in 36 volumes ( 1774 – 1804 ) . It consisted of 28 volumes par Buffon , and 8 volumes by Lacépède . The part containing anatomical articles by Louis Jean @-@ Marie Daubenton was dropped . The supplements were merged into the relevant articles in the main volumes . 
 The Imprimerie royale also published two editions of the Histoire Naturelle in duodecimo format ( 1752 – 1805 ) , occupying 90 or 71 volumes , depending on whether or not they included the part on anatomy . In this print format , the original work by Buffon occupied 73 volumes with the part on anatomy , or 54 volumes without the part on anatomy . The continuation by Lacépède took up 17 duodecimo volumes . 
 A de luxe edition of Histoire Naturelle des Oiseaux ( Birds ) ( 1771 – 1786 ) was produced by the Imprimerie royale in 10 folio and quarto volumes , with 1008 engraved and hand @-@ coloured plates , executed under Buffon 's personal supervision by Edme @-@ Louis Daubenton , cousin and brother @-@ in @-@ law of Buffon 's principal collaborator . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 The Histoire Naturelle was translated into languages including English , German , Swedish , Russian and Italian . Many translations , often partial ( single volumes , or all volumes to a certain date ) , abridged , reprinted in the same translation by different printers , or with additional text ( for example on insects ) and new illustrations , were made at the end of the eighteenth century and the start of the nineteenth century , presenting a complicated publication history . Early translations were necessarily only of the earlier volumes . Given the complexity , all catalogue dates other than of single volumes should be taken as approximate . 
 R. Griffith published an early translation of the volume on The Horse in London in 1762 . T. Bell published a translation of the first six volumes in London between 1775 and 1776 . William Creech published an edition in Edinburgh between 1780 and 1785 . T. Cadell and W. Davies published another edition in London in 1812 . An abridged edition was published by Wogan , Byrne et al. in Dublin in 1791 ; that same year R. Morison and Son of Perth , J. and J. Fairbairn of Edinburgh and T. Kay and C. Forster of London published their edition . W. Strahan and T. Cadell published a translation with notes by the encyclopaedist William <unk> in London around 1785 . Barr 's Buffon in ten volumes was published in London between 1797 and 1807 . W. Davidson published an abridged version including the natural history of insects taken from Swammerdam , Brookes , Goldsmith et al . , with " elegant engravings on wood " ; its four volumes appeared in Alnwick in 1814 . 
 German translations include those published by Joseph Georg <unk> 1784 – 1785 ; by Pauli , 1772 – 1829 ; Grund and Holle , 1750 – 1775 ; and Johann Samuel Heinsius , 1756 – 1782 . 
 Italian translations include those published by <unk> <unk> around 1788 and <unk> in 1959 . 
 Per Olof <unk> translated an 1802 – 1803 French abridgement into Swedish , publishing it in Örebro in 1806 – 1807 . 
 A Russian version ( The General and <unk> Natural History by Count Buffon ; " <unk> и <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) was brought out by The Imperial Academy of Sciences ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) in St. Petersburg between 1789 and 1808 . 
 = = = Children 's = = = 
 An abridged edition for children was published by Frederick Warne in London and Scribner , Welford and Co. c . 1870 . 
 = = Contents by volume = = 
 The original edition was arranged as follows : 
 Natural history , and description of the king 's cabinet of curiosities 
 Volume I : Premier Discours - De la manière d ’ <unk> et de <unk> l ’ histoire naturelle , Second Discours - Histoire et théorie de la Terre , <unk> de la théorie de la Terre , 1749 
 Volume II : Histoire générale des Animaux , Histoire Naturelle de l 'Homme , 1749 
 Volume III : Description du cabinet du Roi , Histoire Naturelle de l 'Homme , 1749 
