 The coroner reports credited the Earp party with killing four men — Frank Stilwell , Curly Bill , Indian Charlie , and Johnny Barnes — in their two @-@ week @-@ long ride . In 1888 Wyatt Earp gave an interview to California historian H. H. Bancroft during which he claimed to have killed " over a dozen stage robbers , murderers , and cattle thieves " in his time as a lawman . 
 = = Life after Tombstone = = 
 The gunfight in Tombstone lasted only 30 seconds , but it would end up defining Earp for the rest of his life . After Wyatt killed Frank Stilwell in Tucson , his movements received national press coverage and he became a known commodity in Western folklore . 
 = = = Deals Faro in Colorado = = = 
 After killing the four Cowboys , Wyatt and Warren Earp , Holliday , Sherman McMaster , " Turkey Creek " Jack Johnson , and Texas Jack Vermillion left Arizona . Wyatt never returned to Tombstone . The group stopped in Albuquerque , New Mexico , where they met Deputy U.S. Marshal Bat Masterson , Wyatt 's friend . Masterson went with them to Trinidad , Colorado , where Masterson opened a Faro game in a saloon and later became Marshal . 
 Wyatt dealt faro at Masterson 's saloon for several weeks before he , McMaster , Vermillion , and Warren Earp left in May 1882 for Gunnison , Colorado . 
 The Earps and Texas Jack set up camp on the outskirts of Gunnison , where they remained quietly at first , rarely going into town for supplies . In Gunnison , they were reported to have pulled a " gold brick scam " on a German visitor named Ritchie by trying to sell him gold @-@ painted rocks for $ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 Wyatt and Holliday , who had been fast friends since Holliday saved Earp 's life in Dodge City during 1878 , had a serious disagreement and parted ways in Albuquerque . According to a letter written by former New Mexico Territory Governor Miguel Otero , Wyatt and Holliday were eating at " Fat Charlie 's " The Retreat Restaurant in Albuquerque " when Holiday said something about Earp becoming ' a damn Jew @-@ boy . ' Earp became angry and left … . [ Henry ] Jaffa told me later that Earp ’ s woman was a Jewess . Earp did mezuzah when entering the house . " Wyatt was staying with prominent businessman Henry N. Jaffa , who was also president of New Albuquerque ’ s Board of Trade . Jaffa was also Jewish , and based on the letter , Earp had , while staying in Jaffa ’ s home , honored Jewish tradition by performing the mezuzah upon entering his home . Earp 's anger at Holliday 's racial slur may indicate that the relationship between Josephine Marcus and Wyatt Earp was much more serious at the time than is commonly known . The information in the letter is compelling because at the time it was written in the 1940s , no one knew of any relationship between Wyatt Earp and Josephine Marcus while living in Tombstone . The only way Ortero could write about these things was if he knew someone with personal knowledge of the individuals involved . Holliday and Dan Tipton headed to Pueblo in late April 1882 and then Denver . Holliday and Wyatt met again in June 1882 in <unk> Wyatt helped to keep his friend from being convicted on murder charges against Frank Stillwell ; and then again lastly Wyatt was able to see his old friend Holliday in the late winter of 1886 , where they met in the lobby of the Windsor Hotel . Sadie Marcus described the skeletal Holliday as having a continuous cough and standing on " unsteady legs . ” 
 = = = Meets Josephine in San Francisco = = = 
 Sadie , traveling as either Mrs. J. C. Earp or Mrs. Wyatt Earp , left Tombstone for her family in San Francisco via Los Angeles on March 25 , 1882 . This was one week after Morgan Earp was assassinated and five days after Wyatt set out in pursuit of those he believed responsible . 
 In July , four months later , Wyatt traveled from Colorado to San Francisco where Sadie was living with her half @-@ sister Rebecca and husband Aaron Wiener , and where his brother Virgil was seeking treatment for his arm . Wyatt remained in San Francisco for about nine months until early 1883 , when he and Sadie left San Francisco together for Silverton , Colorado , where silver and gold mining were flourishing . It was the first of many mining camps and boom towns they lived in . Sadie was Wyatt 's common @-@ law wife until his death 46 years later . 
 = = = Mattie asks for divorce = = = 
 Wyatt still owned a house in Tombstone with his common @-@ law wife Mattie Blaylock , but she waited for him in Colton , where his parents and Virgil were living . But during the summer of 1882 , she sent Wyatt a letter saying she wanted a divorce . She had met a gambler from Arizona and he had asked her to marry him . Wyatt , who did not believe in divorce , refused . She ran away with the gambler anyway , and he later abandoned her in Arizona . 
 She moved to Pinal City , Arizona , where she resumed life as a prostitute . Mattie struggled with addictions and committed " suicide by opium poisoning " on July 3 , 1888 . 
 = = = Dodge City War = = = 
 During what became known as the Dodge City War , the Mayor tried to run Earp 's friend Luke Short , part owner of the Long Branch saloon , first out of business and then out of town . Short appealed to Masterson who contacted Earp . On May 31 , 1883 , Earp and Sadie went with Bat Masterson , Johnny Millsap , Shotgun John Collins , Texas Jack Vermillion , and Johnny Green to Dodge City to help Short . 
 Short was in Kansas City to appeal to Governor George Washington Glick for help but to no avail . When he returned , Short 's allies marched up Front Street into Short 's saloon , where they were sworn in as deputies by constable " Prairie Dog " Dave Marrow . The town council offered a compromise to allow Short to return for ten days to get his affairs in order , but Earp refused to compromise . When Short returned , there was no force ready to turn him away . Short 's Saloon reopened , and the Dodge City War ended without a shot being fired . 
 = = = Idaho mining venture = = = 
 In 1884 , Wyatt and his wife Josie , his brothers Warren and James , and James ' wife Bessie arrived in Eagle City , Idaho , another new boomtown that was created as a result of the discovery of gold , silver , and lead in the Coeur d 'Alene area . ( It 's now a ghost town in Shoshone County ) . Wyatt joined the crowd looking for gold in the Murray @-@ Eagle mining district . They paid $ 2 @,@ 250 for a 50 feet ( 15 m ) diameter white circus , in which they opened a dance hall and saloon called The White Elephant . An advertisement in a local newspaper suggests gentlemen " come and see the elephant " . 
 Earp was named Deputy Sheriff in the area including newly incorporated Kootenai County , Idaho , which was disputing jurisdiction of Eagle City with Shoshone County . There were a considerable number of disagreements over mining claims and property rights , which Earp had a part in . On March 28 , several feet of snow were still on the ground . Bill Buzzard , a miner of dubious reputation , began constructing a building when one of Wyatt 's partners , Jack Enright , tried to stop the construction . Enright claimed the building was on part of his property . Words were exchanged and Buzzard reached for his Winchester . He fired several shots at Enright and a skirmish developed . Allies of both sides quickly took defensive positions between snowbanks and began shooting at one another . Deputy Sheriff Wyatt Earp and his brother James stepped into the middle of the fray and helped peacefully resolve the dispute before anyone was seriously hurt . Shoshone County Deputy W. E. Hunt then arrived and ordered the parties to turn over their weapons . 
 In about April 1885 , it was reported that Wyatt Earp used his badge to join a band of claim jumpers in Embry Camp , later renamed Chewelah , Washington . Within six months their substantial stake had run dry , and the Earps left the Murray @-@ Eagle district . About 10 years later , after the Fitzimmons @-@ Sharkey fight , a reporter hunted up Buzzard and extracted a story from him that accused Wyatt of being the brains behind lot @-@ jumping and a real @-@ estate fraud , further tarnishing his reputation . 
 = = = San Diego real estate boom = = = 
 After the Coeur d 'Alene mining venture died out , Earp and Josie briefly went to El Paso , Texas before moving in 1887 to San Diego , where the railroad was about to arrive and a real estate boom was underway . They stayed for about four years , living most of the time in the Brooklyn Hotel . Earp speculated in San Diego 's booming real estate market . Between 1887 and around 1896 he bought four saloons and gambling halls , one on Fourth Street and the other two near Sixth and E , all in the " respectable " part of town . They offered 21 games including faro , blackjack , poker , keno , and other Victorian @-@ American games of chance like <unk> and monte . At the height of the boom , he made up to $ 1 @,@ 000 a night in profit . Wyatt also owned the Oyster Bar located in the first granite @-@ faced building in San Diego , the four @-@ story Louis Bank Building at 837 5th Avenue , one of the more popular saloons in the Stingaree district . One of the reasons it drew a good crowd was the Golden Poppy brothel upstairs . Owned by Madam Cora , each room was painted a different color , like emerald green , summer yellow , or ruby red , and each prostitute was required to dress in matching garments . 
 Wyatt had a long @-@ standing interest in boxing and horse racing . He refereed boxing matches in San Diego , Tijuana , and San Bernardino . In the 1887 San Diego City Directory he was listed as a capitalist or gambler . He won his first race horse " Otto Rex " in a card game and began investing in racehorses . He also judged prize fights on both sides of the border and raced horses . Earp was one of the judges at the County Fair horse races held in Escondido in 1889 . As rapidly as the boom started , it came to an end , and the population of San Diego fell from a high of 40 @,@ 000 in 1885 when Earp arrived to only 16 @,@ 000 in 1890 . 
 On July 3 , 1888 , Mattie Blaylock , who had always considered herself Wyatt 's wife , committed suicide in Pinal , Arizona Territory , by taking an overdose of laudanum . 
 = = = San Francisco horse racing = = = 
 The Earps moved back to San Francisco in 1891 in part so Josie could be closer to her family . Earp developed a reputation as a sportsman as well as a gambler . He held onto his San Diego properties but their value fell , but he could not pay the taxes and was forced to sell the lots . He continued to race horses , but by 1896 he could no longer afford to own them but raced them on behalf of the owner of a horse stable in Santa Rosa that he managed for her . From 1891 to 1897 , they lived in at least four different locations in the city : 145 Ellis St. , 720 McAllister St. , <unk> Seventh Ave. and 1004 Golden Gate Ave . In Santa Rosa , Earp personally competed in and won a harness race . 
 = = = Relationship to Marcus = = = 
 Josephine wrote in I Married Wyatt Earp : The Recollections of Josephine Sarah Marcus , that she and Wyatt were married in 1892 by the captain of multimillionaire Lucky Baldwin 's yacht off the California coast . Raymond Nez wrote that his grandparents witnessed their marriage , but no public record of the marriage has been found . Baldwin , a horse breeder and racer , also owned the Santa Anita racetrack in Los Angeles , which Wyatt — a long @-@ time horse aficionado — frequented when he was in town . 
 Earp 's relationship with Josephine Marcus was at times tempestuous . He had a mischievous sense of humor . He knew his wife preferred Josephine and detested " Sadie " , but early in their relationship he began calling her by that name . Josephine gambled to excess and Wyatt had affairs . Josephine later developed a reputation as a shrew who made life difficult for Earp . 
 Josephine frequently griped about Wyatt ’ s lack of work and financial success and even his character and personality . Wyatt would often go on long walks to get away from her . He was furious about her gambling habit , during which she lost considerable sums of money . Each may have engaged in extramarital affairs . Josephine could be controlling . Grace Spolidora was a teenager during the Earp 's many visits to her family 's home near Needles , California and sometimes went to San Diego with them . She attributed the highly exaggerated stories about Earp to Josephine . Sadie " would always interfere whenever Wyatt would talk with Stuart Lake . She always interfered ! She wanted him to look like a church @-@ going saint and blow things up . Wyatt didn 't want that at all ! " 
 = = = Fixes Fitzsimmons @-@ Sharkey fight = = = 
 On December 2 , 1896 , Earp was a last @-@ minute choice as referee for a boxing match that the promoters billed as the heavyweight championship of the world . Bob Fitzsimmons was set to fight Tom Sharkey that night at the Mechanics ' Pavilion in San Francisco . Earp had refereed 30 or so matches in earlier days , though not under the Marquis of Queensbury rules , but under the older and more liberal London Prize Ring Rules . The fight may have been the most anticipated fight on American soil that year . Fitzsimmons was favored to win , and the public and even civic officials placed bets on the outcome . 
 Fitzsimmons dominated Sharkey throughout the fight , and in the eighth round , he hit Sharkey with his famed " solar plexus punch " , an uppercut under the heart that could render a man temporarily helpless . Fitzsimmons ' next punch apparently caught Sharkey below the belt and Sharkey dropped , clutched his groin , and rolled on the canvas , screaming foul . Wyatt stopped the bout , ruling that Fitzsimmons had hit Sharkey below the belt , but virtually no one witnessed the punch . Earp awarded the fight to Sharkey , who attendants carried out as " limp as a rag " . The 15 @,@ 000 fans in attendance greeted his decision with loud boos and catcalls . It was widely believed that there had been no foul and Earp had bet on Sharkey . While several doctors verified afterward that Sharkey had been hit hard below the belt , the public had bet heavily on Fitzsimmons and they were livid at the outcome . 
 Fitzsimmons went to court to overturn Earp 's decision . Newspaper accounts and testimony over the next two weeks revealed a conspiracy among the boxing promoters to fix the fight 's outcome . 
 Stories about the fight and Earp 's contested decision were distributed nationwide to a public that until that time knew little of Wyatt Earp . Earp was parodied in editorial cartoon caricatures and vilified in newspaper stories across the United States . 
 On December 17 , Judge Sanderson finally ruled that prize fighting was illegal in San Francisco and the courts would not determine who the winner was . Sharkey retained the purse , but the decision provided no vindication for Earp . Until the fight , Earp had been a minor figure known regionally in California and Arizona . Afterward , his name was known from coast to coast in the worst possible way . Earp sold his interest in his horses on December 20 and left San Francisco shortly afterward . He only returned when he caught a boat to Alaska . Earp 's decision left a smear on his public character that followed him until he died and afterward . 
 Eight years later , Dr. B. Brookes Lee was arrested in Portland , Oregon . He had been accused of treating Sharkey to make it appear that he had been fouled by Fitzsimmons . Lee admitted it was true . " I fixed Sharkey up to look as if he had been fouled . How ? Well , that is something I do not care to reveal , but I will assert that it was done — that is enough . There is no doubt that Fitzsimmons was entitled to the decision and did not foul Sharkey . I got $ 1 @,@ 000 for my part in the affair . " 
 = = = Klondike Gold Rush = = = 
 On August 5 , 1897 , Earp and Josie once again joined in a mining boom and left Yuma , Arizona , for San Francisco , where they boarded the steamship Rosalie for Dawson in the Yukon to join in the Alaska Gold Rush . Earp had secured the backing of a syndicate of sporting men to open a gambling house there . He arrived in Dawson on September 12 , 1897 where he planned to open a Faro game . Earp and Josephine returned briefly to San Francisco on October 11 aboard the steamship City of Seattle with plans to return north as soon as possible . Upon returning north , Wyatt was offered a job as the marshal in Wrangell , Alaska , but he served for only 10 days . 
 The Earps may have spent the winter in Wrangell before setting out for Dawson in the spring on board the Governor Pingree but by the time they reached Rampart on the Yukon River , freeze @-@ up has set in . The Earps rented a cabin from Rex Beach for $ 100 a month and spent the winter of 1898 – 1899 there . He managed a small store during the spring of 1899 in St. Michael on the Norton Sound , a major gateway to the Alaskan interior via the Yukon River . By this time he decided the rush to stake a claim in the Klondike was over . Earp headed for Nome , Alaska , instead . In September , Earp and partner Charles E. Hoxie built the Dexter Saloon in Nome , the city 's first two story wooden building and its largest and most luxurious saloon . The second floor had twelve " <unk> " upstairs decorated with fine mirrors , thick carpets , draperies , and sideboards . The building was used for a variety of purposes because it was so large : 70 by 30 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 m × 9 @.@ 1 m ) with 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) ceilings . Earp used the club rooms upstairs as a brothel , another fact that Josephine worked hard to see was omitted from stories about him . 
 On July 6 , 1900 , Wyatt 's brother Warren was shot and killed in a saloon in Willcox , Arizona . Wyatt learned about his death soon after , and although there are some modern rumors that he went to Arizona to avenge his brother 's death , no evidence has been found to support that theory . 
 While in Alaska , Wyatt rubbed elbows with future novelist Rex Beach , writer Jack London , playwright Wilson Mizner , and boxing promoter Tex Rickard , with whom Earp developed a long @-@ lasting relationship . Rickard was a partner in the Northern Saloon and gambling house in Nome . Both the Dexter and the Northern Saloon competed for business with more than 60 other saloons in town serving an estimated 20 @,@ 000 residents . Wyatt was arrested twice in Nome for minor offenses , including being drunk and disorderly , although he was not tried . Most members of law enforcement were corrupt or otherwise engaged . 
 = = = Saloon in Seattle = = = 
 In November 1899 , Earp apparently left Alaska and went to Seattle , Washington , with a plan to open a saloon and gambling room . On November 25 , 1899 the Seattle Star described him as " a man of great reputation among the toughs and criminals , inasmuch as he formerly walked the streets of a rough frontier mining town with big pistols stuck in his belt , spurs on his boots and a devil @-@ may @-@ care expression upon his official face " . The Seattle Daily Times was less full of praise , announcing in a very small article that he had a reputation in Arizona as a " bad man " . 
 He faced considerable opposition to his plan from John Considine , who controlled all three gaming operations in town . Although gambling was illegal , Considine had worked out an agreement with Police Chief C.S. Reed . But Earp partnered with an established local gambler name Thomas <unk> and they opened the Union Club saloon and gambling operation in Seattle 's Pioneer Square . The Seattle Star noted two weeks later that Earp 's saloon was earning a large following . Considine unsuccessfully tried to intimidate Earp , but his saloon continued to prosper . On March 23 , 1900 , the state of Washington filed charges against several gamblers , including Earp and his partner . The club 's furnishings were confiscated and burned . The Earps returned briefly to San Francisco in April 1900 , but within a couple of months , Wyatt and Josephine returned to Oregon and caught the SS Alliance for Alaska . 
 = = = Silver boom in Tonopah = = = 
 Wyatt and Josie left Alaska and arrived in Los Angeles at the <unk> Hotel on December 13 , 1901 . They had an estimated $ 80 @,@ 000 , a relative fortune ( equivalent to about $ 2 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 today ) . Three months later , in February 1902 , they arrived in Tonopah , Nevada , known as the " Queen of the Silver Camps " , where silver and gold had been discovered in 1900 and a boom was under way . Wyatt and Josie opened the Northern Saloon in Tonopah and he served as a Deputy U.S. Marshal under Marshal J.F. Emmitt . His saloon , oil , and copper mining interests produced some income for a period . 
 After Tonopah 's gold strike waned , they moved in 1905 to Goldfield , Nevada , where his brother Virgil and his wife were living . Tex Rickard was also already there and had opened a second Northern Saloon . He hired Wyatt as a pit boss . Wyatt also staked mining claims just outside Death Valley and elsewhere in the Mojave Desert . In 1906 he discovered several deposits of gold and copper near the Sonoran Desert town of Vidal , California on the Colorado River and filed more than 100 mining claims near the Whipple Mountains . While in Los Angeles they lived in at least nine small Los Angeles rentals as early as 1885 and as late as 1929 , mostly in the summer . 
 = = = Life in Los Angeles = = = 
 In 1910 , when he was 62 , the Los Angeles Police Department hired Wyatt and former Los Angeles detective Arthur Moore King at $ 10 @.@ 00 per day to carry out various tasks " outside the law " such as retrieving criminals from Mexico , which he did very capably . This led to Wyatt 's final armed confrontation . In October 1910 he was asked by former Los Angeles Police Commissioner H. L. Lewis to head up a posse to protect surveyors of the American Trona Company who were attempting to wrest control of mining claims for vast deposits of potash on the edge of Searles Lake held in receivership by the foreclosed California Trona Company . Wyatt and the group he guarded were regarded as claim jumpers and were confronted by armed representatives of the other company . King wrote , " it was the <unk> thing he had ever seen " . With guns pulled , Wyatt came out of his tent with a Winchester rifle , firing a round at the feet of Federal Receiver Stafford W. Austin . " Back off or I 'll blow you apart , or my name is not Wyatt Earp " . The owners summoned the U.S. Marshal who arrested Earp and 27 others , served them with a summons for contempt of court , and sent them home . Earp 's actions did not resolve the dispute , which eventually escalated into the " Pot Ash Wars " of the Mojave Desert . 
 On July 23 , 1911 , Earp was arrested in Los Angeles and charged with attempting to fleece J. Y. Peterson , a realty broker , in a fake faro game . Since money had not changed hands the charge against Earp was reduced to vagrancy and he was released on $ 500 bail . 
 = = = Happy Days mine = = = 
 The Earps bought a small cottage in Vidal , the only home they ever owned . Beginning in 1911 and until Wyatt 's health began in to fail in 1928 , Wyatt and Josie Earp summered in Los Angeles and spent the rest of the year in the desert working their claims . The " Happy Days " mine was located in the Whipple Mountains a few miles north of Vidal . The cottage was the only permanent residence they owned the entire time they were married . Wyatt had some modest success with the Happy Days gold mine and they lived on the slim proceeds of income from that and oil wells in Oakland and Kern County . 
 In about 1923 , Charles Welsh , a retired railroad engineer and friend that Earp had known since Dodge City , frequently invited the Earps to visit his family in San Bernardino . The Welsh family did not appreciate Josephine 's gambling habits . They noted that she received an allowance from her family ( likely her only living relative , half @-@ sister Rebecca and husband Aaron Wiener ) and gambled it away , often leaving Wyatt hungry . 
 When the Welsh family moved to Los Angeles , the Earps accepted an invitation to stay with them for a while in their top floor apartment until the Earps found a place to rent . After Earp and Josie moved into a bungalow nearby , Charlie Welsh 's daughter , Grace Spolidora , recalled that Josie , who had never had many domestic skills , did very little housekeeping or cooking for Wyatt . She and her sister Alma were concerned about the care Josie gave Wyatt . Even though he was very ill , she still did not cook for him . Spolidora , her sisters , and her mother brought in meals . 
 = = = Flood manuscript = = = 
 Earp began to collaborate with John Flood , a mining engineer and good friend , on a biography beginning in 1925 . The two men sat together every Sunday in the kitchen of Earp 's modest , rented bungalow . While Wyatt sipped a drink and smoked a cigar , they tried to tell Earp 's story . But Josephine was always present . She often interrupted and insisted " You can 't write that ! It needs to be clean . " She also demanded that they add more " pep " to the manuscript , which in her mind meant including the word " <unk> ! " in all caps . In the chapter about the shootout , the manuscript includes 109 uses of " <unk> " . She thought Earp needed to be shown as a hero , and the manuscript includes a chapter titled " Conflagration " in which Earp saves two women , one a cripple , from a Tombstone fire . 
 In 1990 , Spolidora was interviewed by a member of the San Bernardino historical society . She had been a teenager during the Earps ' many visits to the family home near Needles , California and sometimes went to San Diego with them . She attributed the highly exaggerated stories about Wyatt Earp to Josephine . Sadie " would always interfere whenever Wyatt would talk with Stuart Lake . She always interfered ! She wanted him to look like a church @-@ going saint and blow things up . Wyatt didn 't want that at all ! " 
 = = = Movie connections = = = 
 While living in Los Angeles , Earp became an unpaid film consultant for several silent cowboy movies . In 1916 , he went with his friend Jack London , who he knew from Nome , Alaska , to visit the set of former cowboy , sailor and movie actor @-@ turned @-@ film director Raoul Walsh who was shooting at the studio of Mutual Film conglomerate in <unk> , California . Walsh took the two men to dinner at Al Levy 's Cafe on Main and Third Street . During the meal , the highest paid entertainer in the world , Charlie Chaplin , dropped by to greet Wyatt Earp . Chaplin was impressed by both men , but particularly the former Tombstone marshal . 
 In 1915 , Earp visited the set of director Allan Dwan 's movie , The Half @-@ Breed , starring Douglas Fairbanks . In his autobiography , Dwan recalled , " As was the custom in those days , he [ Earp ] was invited to join the party and mingle with our background action . " Earp became friends with William Hart and later Tom Mix , the two most famous movie cowboys of their era . Hart was a stickler for realism in his depictions of Western life , and may have relied on Earp for advice . Earp later frequently visited the sets of movie director John Ford , whose movies starred Harry Carey . 
 In the early 1920s , Earp was given the honorary title of Deputy Sheriff in San Bernardino County , California . On January 25 , 1926 , Wyatt 's only surviving brother James died of cerebral apoplexy in San Bernardino , California . 
 = = = No regrets = = = 
 Two years before his death , Earp defended his decisions before the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral and his actions afterward in an interview with Stuart Lake , author of the 1931 largely fictionalized biography , Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal . He wrote Lake : 
 For my handling of the situation at Tombstone , I have no regrets . Were it to be done over again , I would do exactly as I did at that time . If the outlaws and their friends and allies imagined that they could intimidate or exterminate the Earps by a process of murder , and then hide behind alibis and the technicalities of the law , they simply missed their guess . I want to call your particular attention again to one fact , which writers of Tombstone incidents and history apparently have overlooked : with the deaths of the <unk> , the Clantons , Stillwell , Florentino Cruz , Curly Bill , and the rest , organized , politically protected crime and depredations in Cochise County ceased . 
 He also said , " The good Lord owes me an explanation for the things that have happened in my life . 
 = = Death = = 
 Wyatt Earp was the last surviving Earp brother and the last surviving participant of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral when he died at home in the Earps ' small rented bungalow at 4004 W 17th Street , in Los Angeles , of chronic cystitis on January 13 , 1929 at the age of 80 . Charlie Welsh 's daughter Grace Spolidora and his daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Alma , were the only witnesses to Wyatt 's cremation . Josephine was apparently too full of grief to assist . Wyatt was survived by Josephine and sister Adelia . He had no children . 
 = = = Hollywood pallbearers = = = 
 The funeral was held at the Congregational Church on Wilshire Boulevard . Earp 's pallbearers were William J. Hunsaker , ( Earp 's attorney in Tombstone and noted LA attorney ) ; Jim Mitchell ( Los Angeles Examiner reporter and Hollywood screenwriter ) ; George W. Parsons ( founding member of Tombstone 's " Committee of Vigilance " ) ; Wilson Mizner ( a friend of Wyatt 's during the Klondike Gold Rush ) ; John Clum ( a good friend from his days in Tombstone , former Tombstone mayor , and editor of The Tombstone Epitaph ) ; William S. Hart ( good friend and western actor and silent film star ) ; and Tom Mix ( friend and western film star ) . Mitchell wrote Wyatt 's local obituary . The newspapers reported that Tom Mix cried during his friend 's service . When Josephine did not attend Wyatt 's funeral , Grace Spolidora was furious . " She didn 't go to his funeral , even . She wasn 't that upset . She was peculiar . I don 't think she was that devastated when he died . " 
 = = = Privately buried = = = 
 Josie , who was of Jewish heritage , had Earp 's body cremated and secretly buried his remains in the Marcus family plot at the Hills of Eternity , a Jewish cemetery in Colma , California . When she died in 1944 , her remains were interred alongside his . In 1957 , the Tombstone Restoration Commission looked for Wyatt 's ashes with the goal of having them moved to Tombstone . They contacted family members seeking permission and the location of his ashes , but no one could tell them where Wyatt was buried , not even his closest living relative , George Earp . Arthur King , a deputy to Earp from 1910 to 1912 , finally revealed that Josephine had buried Wyatt 's cremated remains in Colma , California , and the Tombstone Commission cancelled its plans to relocate his ashes . 
 On July 8 , 1957 , thieves excavated the Earp 's grave in an apparent attempt to steal his cremated remains , but unable to find them , stole the simple , 600 pounds ( 270 kg ) grave marker . The stone was eventually returned but a new , more elaborate marker was erected later on . Their gravesite is the most visited resting place in the Jewish cemetery . 
 = = = Still controversial = = = 
 At the time of his death , he was still well known for his decision ending the Fitzimmons @-@ Sharkey fight along with the gunfight in Tombstone . His Associated Press obituary described him as a " gun @-@ fighter , whose blazing six @-@ shooters , were for most of his life allied with the side of law and order " . It also gave prominent attention to his officiating of the Fitzsimmons @-@ Sharkey fight . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 Like his brothers , Wyatt Earp was a physically imposing figure for his day : 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , when most men were about 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) . He was described in 1887 by the Los Angeles Herald as " quiet , unassuming , broad @-@ shouldered , with a large blonde mustache . He is dignified , self @-@ contained , game and fearless , and no man commands greater respect ... " He weighed about 165 to 170 pounds ( 75 to 77 kg ) , was long @-@ armed , and muscular , and was very capable of using his fists instead of his weapon to control those resisting his authority . 
 At about the same time , The Mirror , a newspaper in Monroe , Iowa printed a wire story originating in Denver . The anonymous reporter described Wyatt in detail : 
 Wyatt Earp , a man whose trigger finger had considerable to do in making the border history of the West , was in Denver for several days last week . He is tall and athletic . His eyes are blue and fringed with light lashes and set beneath blonde eyebrows . His hair , which was once as yellow as gold , is beginning to be stranded with white . A heavy , tawny mustache shades his firm mouth and sweeps below his strong , square chin . He wore ... a neat gray tailor @-@ made suit , immaculate linen and fashionable <unk> . With a Derby hat and a pair of tan shoes , he was a figure to catch a lady 's eye ... 
 In 1926 , writer Adela Rogers St. Johns met the elderly Earp for the first time . 
 He was straight as a pine tree , tall and magnificently built . I knew he was nearly 80 , but in spite of his snow white hair and mustache , he did not seem or look old . His greetings were warm and friendly . I stood in awe . Somehow , like a mountain , or desert , he reduced you to size . 
 = = Contemporary reputation = = 
 Among his peers , Wyatt was respected . His deputy Jimmy Cairns described Wyatt 's work as a police officer in Wichita , Kansas . " Wyatt Earp was a wonderful officer . He was game to the last ditch and apparently afraid of nothing . The cowmen all respected him and seemed to recognize his superiority and authority at such times as he had to use it . " He described Wyatt as " the most dependable man I ever knew ; a quiet , unassuming chap who never drank and in all respects a clean young fellow " . 
 When citizens of Dodge City learned the Earps had been charged with murder after the gunfight , they sent letters endorsing and supporting the Earps to Judge Wells Spicer . 
 John Clum , owner of The Tombstone Epitaph and mayor of Tombstone while Wyatt was a gambler and lawman there , described him in his book It All Happened in Tombstone . 
 Wyatt 's manner , though friendly , suggested a quiet reserve ... Frequently it has happened that men who have served as peace officers on the frontier have craved notoriety in connection with their dealings with the outlaw element of their time . Wyatt Earp deprecated such notoriety , and during his last illness he told me that for many years he had hoped the public would weary of the narratives — distorted with fantastic and fictitious embellishments — that were published from time to time concerning him , and that his last years might be passed in undisturbed obscurity . 
 Bill Dixon knew Wyatt early in his adult life . He wrote : 
 Wyatt was a shy young man with few intimates . With casual acquaintances he seldom spoke unless spoken to . When he did say anything it was to the point , without fear or favor , which wasn 't relished by some ; but that never bothered Wyatt . To those who knew him well he was a genial companion . He had the most even disposition I ever saw ; I never knew him to lose his temper . He was more intelligent , better educated , and far better mannered than the majority of his associates , which probably did not help them to understand him . His reserve limited his friendships , but more than one stranger , down on his luck , has had firsthand evidence of Wyatt 's generosity . I think his outstanding quality was the nicety with which he gauged the time and effort for every move . That , plus his absolute confidence in himself , gave him the edge over the run of men . 
 Public perception of his life has varied over the years as media accounts of his life have changed . The story of the Earps ' actions in Tombstone were published at the time by newspapers nationwide . Shortly after the shooting of Curly Bill , the Tucson Star wrote on March 21 , 1882 , in an editorial about the O.K. Corral gunfight , that the Cowboys had been ordered to put their hands up and after they complied , were shot by the Earps , stating , " The whole series of killings cannot be classed other than cold blooded murder . " 
 Famous lawman Bat Masterson described Wyatt in 1907 . 
 Wyatt Earp was one of the few men I personally knew in the West in the early days whom I regarded as absolutely destitute of physical fear . I have often remarked , and I am not alone in my conclusions , that what goes for courage in a man is generally fear of what others will think of him – in other words , personal bravery is largely made up of self @-@ respect , egotism , and apprehension of the opinions of others . Wyatt Earp 's daring and apparent recklessness in time of danger is wholly characteristic ; personal fear doesn 't enter into the equation , and when everything is said and done , I believe he values his own opinion of himself more than that of others , and it is his own good report he seeks to preserve ... He never at any time in his career resorted to the pistol excepting cases where such a course was absolutely necessary . Wyatt could scrap with his fists , and had often taken all the fight out of bad men , as they were called , with no other weapons than those provided by nature . 
 = = = Experience in gun fights = = = 
 Wyatt was reputed to be an expert with a pistol . He showed no fear of any man . The Tombstone Epitaph said of Wyatt , " bravery and determination were requisites , and in every instance proved himself the right man in the right place " . 
 Wyatt was lucky during the few gun fights he took part in from his earliest job as an assistant police officer in Wichita to Tombstone , where he was briefly Deputy U.S. Marshal . Unlike his lawmen brothers Virgil and James , Wyatt was never wounded , although once his clothing and his saddle was shot through with bullet holes . According to John H. Flood 's biography ( as dictated to him by Wyatt Earp ) , Wyatt vividly recalled a presence that in several instances warned him away or urged him to take action . This happened when he was on the street , alone in his room at the Cosmopolitan Hotel , at Bob Hatch 's Pool Hall , where he went moments before Morgan was assassinated , and again when he approached Iron Springs and surprised Curly Bill Brocius , killing him . 
 = = Later reputation = = 
 After the shootout in Tombstone , his pursuit and murder of those who attacked his brothers , and after leaving Arizona , Wyatt was often the target of negative newspaper stories that disparaged his and his brothers ' reputation . His role in history has stimulated considerable ongoing scholarly and editorial debate . A large body of literature has been written about Wyatt Earp and his legacy , some of it highly fictionalized . Considerable portions of it are either full of admiration and flattery or hostile debunking . 
 Wyatt was repeatedly criticized in the media over the remainder of his life . His wife Josephine wrote , " The falsehoods that were printed in some of the newspapers about him and the unjust accusations against him hurt Wyatt more deeply than anything that ever happened to him during my life with him , with the exception of his mother 's death and that of his father and brother , Warren . " 
 = = = Negative publicity = = = 
 On April 16 , 1894 , the Fort Worth Gazette wrote that Virgil Earp and John Behan had a " deadly feud " . It described Behan as " an honest man , a good official , and possessed many of the attributes of a gentleman " . Earp , on the other hand , " was head of band of desperadoes , a partner in stage robbers , and a friend of gamblers and professional killers ... Wyatt was the boss killer of the region . " 
 Former nemesis Johnny Behan continued to spread rumors about the Earps for the next 20 years . On December 7 , 1897 , he was quoted in a story in the Washington Post , reprinted by the San Francisco Call , describing the Earp 's lawbreaking behavior in Tombstone . After referring to the Fitzimmons @-@ Sharkey fight , the article quoted Behan . " The Clanton brothers and the <unk> were a tough lot of rustlers who were the main perpetrators of the <unk> rife in that region . Between them and Earps rose a bitter feud over the division of the proceeds of the looting . The Earp boys believed they had failed to get a fair divide of the booty and swore vengeance . They caught their former allies in Tombstone unarmed and shot three of them dead while their hands were uplifted . " Behan went on to say , " They were hauled up before a Justice of the Peace ... Warrants were issued for their arrest , and , summoning a posse , I went out to bring the Earps in . They were chased entirely out of the country and Tombstone knew them no more . " Up until he died in 1912 , Johnny Behan lambasted the Earps as the bad men who had attacked the cowboys . 
 After Earp left Alaska in 1901 , the New York Sun printed a story in 1903 that described a confrontation Earp had reportedly had with a short 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) Cockney Canadian Mountie , who embarrassed Earp by demanding that he leave his weapon in his room . The story was reprinted as far away as New Zealand by the Otago Witness . The Dawson Record commented on the story , mocking the newspaper as a " venerable dispenser of truth . " 
 On April 13 , 1921 , the Arizona Republican ran a lengthy interview with Thomas Raines , a former resident of Tombstone . Raines remembered the Earps as having shot the Cowboys and killing Ike Clanton before they had a chance to surrender . He recalled that the Cowboys " were leading their horses out of the gate when they were confronted , almost from ambush , by four of the Earps , Virgil . Wyatt , Morgan and Jim and by Doc Holliday . Virgil Earp , armed with a sawed off express shotgun , and accompanying his demand with profanity , yelled " Hands up ! " But he didn 't wait for the action demanded and shot almost as soon as he spoke . Tom <unk> [ sic ] showed his empty bands , and cried . ' Gentlemen , I am unarmed . ' Holliday answered with the discharge of his shotgun . Ike Clanton fell at the first fire , mortally wounded , but he rolled over and fired two shots from his pistol between his bent knees . " 
 During 1922 , Frederick R. <unk> published the book When the West Was Young , which included a story about Wyatt 's time in Tombstone , but he mangled many basic facts . He described the Earp @-@ Clanton differences as the falling @-@ out of partners in crime . 
 On March 12 , 1922 , the Sunday Los Angeles Times ran a short , scandalous article titled " Lurid Trails Are Left by Olden @-@ Day Bandits " by J.M. Scanland . It described Wyatt and his brothers as a gang , comparable to the Dalton Gang , who waylaid the cowboys in the shoot out at the O.K. Corral . It said that the Earps were allies of Frank Stilwell , who had informed on them , so they killed him , and that Earp had died in Colton , California . In an article titled , " Lurid Trails Are Left By Olden Day Bandits , " the author described the Earp 's relationship with Sheriff Behan and the Cowboys : 
 Trouble arose between them and Sheriff John Behan , who tried to ' clean up ' the town . Trouble began when four cowboys refused to recognize the right of the Earp gang to rule the town . The cowboys were Bill and Ike Clanton and Tom and Frank <unk> . The Earps ordered the cowboys out of town and they were preparing to leave when they were waylaid and a gun battle followed during which Virgil Earp was shot in the leg , Morgan Earp in the shoulder and Ike Clanton was killed . The town was aroused and Frank Stilwell , who led the stage robberies , brought the trouble to a climax when he informed against his partners , because the Earps would not divide fairly . In a gun battle that followed , Stilwell killed Morgan Earp . A few months later another stage was robbed , and the driver , ' Bud ' Philpot , was killed . 
 Josephine and Earps ' friend and actor William Hart both wrote letters to the publisher . Josephine demanded that the error " must be corrected and printed in the same sensational manner " given to the correction as to the original article , which the paper published . 
 In 1924 , a story in a San Francisco paper said interviewing him was " like pulling teeth " . Earp did not trust the press and he preferred to keep his mouth shut . But the story by Scanland galvanized Earp . He was tired of all the lies perpetuated about him and became determined to get his story accurately told . He began to collaborate on a biography with his friend John Flood in 1925 . It took Earp until 1927 to track down J.M. Scanland , the author of the LA Times article , and extract a written retraction from him . These and other reports bothered Earp a great deal , and he finally decided to do something about them . 
 = = = Walter Noble Burns = = = 
 Author Walter Noble Burns visited Earp in September 1926 and asked him questions with the intent to write a book about Earp . Earp declined because he was already collaborating with John Flood . Burns visited Tombstone and based on what he learned decided instead to focus his book on Doc Holliday . He pestered Earp for facts , and on March 27 the next year , Earp finally responded to Burn 's repeated requests in an 11 @-@ page letter outlining the basic facts from Earp 's point of view . 
 When their efforts to get the Flood manuscript published failed , the Earps decided to appeal to Burns , whose own book was near publication . But he was not interested . His book was about to be published , free of the constraints imposed by a collaboration with Earp . Burns wrote them , " I should not now care to undertake another book which , in part at least , would be upon much the same lines ... I should have been delighted six months ago to accept your offer but it is too late now . My book has championed Mr. Earp 's cause throughout and I believe will vindicate his reputation in Tombstone in a way that he will like . " When Burns turned them down , Josephine actively worked to stop the publication of his book , fearful that their efforts to publish Wyatt 's biography would be thwarted as a result . 
 In late 1927 , Burns published Tombstone , An Iliad of the Southwest , a mesmerizing tale " of blood and thunder " , that christened Earp as the " Lion of Tombstone " . " Strong , bold , forceful , picturesque was the fighter of the old frontier . Something epic in him , fashioned in Homeric mold . In his way , a hero . " It included a good deal about Wyatt as well , much to the Wyatt and Josie 's displeasure . Readers and reviewers found they had a difficult time discerning between " fact and fiction " . The book was the first to popularize its subject for a mass reading audience . Burns treated Earp as a mythical figure , a " larger @-@ than @-@ life hero whose many portrayals in film , television , and books often render fidelity to truth the first casualty . " 
 = = = Billy Breakenridge = = = 
 While living in Vidal , Wyatt and Josie were visited by Billy Breakenridge , the former Tombstone deputy under John Behan . He pressed Wyatt for details about his time in Tombstone to add to his book <unk> : Bringing Law to the Mesquite . Breakenridge was assisted by Western novelist William MacLeod Raine , who since 1904 had published more than 25 novels about Western history . The book was published in 1928 before Wyatt died . It depicted Wyatt as a thief , pimp , crooked gambler , and murderer . Breakenridge wrote that the Earps and Doc Holliday aggressively mistreated the guiltless cowboys until they were forced into a fatal confrontation . His description of the 1881 O.K. Corral gun fight stated that the Clanton and McLaury brothers were merely cowboys who had been unarmed and surrendered but the Earp brothers had shot them in cold blood . Wyatt and Josie protested that the book 's contents was biased and more fiction than fact . Earp complained about the book until his death in 1929 , and his wife continued in the same vein afterward . 
 = = = Edwin Burkholder = = = 
 Edwin V. Burkholder , who specialized in stories about the Old West , published an article about Wyatt in 1955 in Argosy Magazine . He called Wyatt Earp a coward and murderer , and manufactured evidence to support his allegations . He also wrote , using the pseudonyms " George Carleton Mays " and " J. S. <unk> " , for the Western magazine Real West . His stores were filled with sensational claims about Wyatt Earp 's villainy , and he made up fake letters to the editor from supposed " old @-@ timers " to corroborate this story . 
 = = = Frank Waters = = = 
 Frank Waters interviewed Virgil Earp 's widow , Allie Sullivan Earp , to write The Earp Brothers of Tombstone . The book was so contentious and disputed that he waited until 13 years after her death to publish the book . In it he condemned the Earp brothers ' character and called them names . The book " further embroidered upon Frank Waters 's imaginings about Wyatt 's adulterous affair " with Josephine . It was described by one reviewer as " a smear campaign levied against the Earp brothers " . 
 Waters used Allie Earp 's anecdotes as a frame for adding a narrative and " building a case , essentially piling quote upon quote to prove that Wyatt Earp was a con man , thief , robber , and eventually murderer " . Waters vociferously berated Wyatt : 
 Wyatt was an itinerant saloonkeeper , <unk> , gunman , bigamist , church deacon , policeman , <unk> artist , and a supreme confidence man . A lifelong exhibitionist ridiculed alike by members of his own family , neighbors , contemporaries , and the public press , he lived his last years in poverty , still vainly trying to find someone to publicize his life , and died two years before his fictitious biography recast him in the role of America 's most famous frontier marshal . 
 Allie Earp was so upset by the way Waters distorted and manipulated her words that she threatened to shoot him . 
 S.J. <unk> , author of Travesty : Frank Waters Earp Agenda Exposed , spent nearly a decade searching for Water 's original manuscript , researching him , his background , and his bias against the Earps . In doing so , the author discovered that the story Waters presented against the Earps was primarily fictitious . " Nothing is documented , " she wrote . " There are no notes nor sourcing . There is only the original Tombstone Travesty manuscript and the final Earp Brothers of Tombstone . Because of his later reputation , few writers , even today , dare question Waters ' motives . They also do not bother fact checking the Earp Brothers of Tombstone , which is so inaccurate it should be considered fiction , rather than fact . " 
 Anti @-@ Earp writers and researchers use Frank Waters ' Earp Brothers of Tombstone , as their primary source for material that presents Wyatt Earp as something of a villainous monster , aided and abetted by his brothers who were almost brutes . Waters detested the Earps so badly that he presented a book that was terribly flawed , poorly edited , and brimming with prevarications . In his other work , Waters is poetic . In the Earp Brothers of Tombstone , he is little more than a tabloid hack , trying to slander someone he dislikes . To date , no reason has been uncovered for the bias Frank Waters exhibited against Wyatt Earp and his brothers . 
 = = = Ed Bartholomew = = = 
 In 1963 , Ed Bartholomew published Wyatt Earp , The Untold Story followed by Wyatt Earp : Man and Myth in 1964 . His books were strongly anti @-@ Earp and attacked Wyatt Earp 's image as a hero . Bartholomew went about this by reciting snippets of accumulated anti @-@ Earp facts , rumors , gossip , and innuendo . Bartholomew 's books started a trend of debunking Earp , and the academic community followed his lead , pursuing the image of Earp as a " fighting pimp " . 
 = = = Allen Barra = = = 
 In reviewing Allen Barra 's Inventing Wyatt Earp . His Life and Many Legends , William Urban , a Professor of History at Monmouth College in Warren County , Illinois , pointed out a number of factual inaccuracies in the book . One inconsistency by Barra pointed out by another reviewer includes a description of the poker game the night before the shootout . Ike Clanton 's account of the game ( the only one that exists ) gives the participants as John Behan , Virgil Earp , Ike Clanton , Tom McLaury , and a fifth man Ike did not recognize , while Barra wrote the Holliday had attended the game . 
 = = Fame = = 
 Earp was dismayed about the controversy that continually followed him . He wrote a letter to John Hays Hammond on May 21 , 1925 , telling him " notoriety had been the bane of my life . I detest it , and I never have put forth any effort to check the tales that have been published in which my brothers and I are supposed to have been the principal participants . Not one of them is correct . " 
 Finally attempting to counter negative accounts in newspapers and books , Earp tried to persuade his good friend , well @-@ known cowboy movie star William S. Hart , to make a movie about his life . " If the story were exploited on the screen by you , " he wrote Hart , " It would do much toward setting me right before a public which has always been fed lies about me . " Hart encouraged Earp to first find an author to pen his story . 
 = = = Flood manuscript = = = 
 After Earp failed to get his story told in a way that he approved , he began working in 1925 with former mining engineer John H. Flood , Jr. to get his life story committed to paper . Flood volunteered his time and attempted to write an authorized biography of Earp 's life , based on Earp 's recollections . But Flood 's writing was " stilted , corny and one @-@ dimensional , " and the manuscript , completed some time in early 1926 , never found a publisher . In February 1927 , editor Anne Johnston of Bobbs Merrill wrote back and was highly critical of the " stilted , florid and diffuse " writing . She wrote , " Now one forgets what it 's all about in the clutter of unimportant details that impedes its pace , and the pompous manner of its telling . " 
 Hart tried to help . In February 1926 he wrote The Saturday Evening Post and encouraged them to publish Flood 's biography so " that ... the rising generation may know the real from the unreal " , but Flood was a horrendous writer , and publisher after publisher rejected the manuscript . 
 A number of copies were made and sold in 1981 , and the original carbon copy of the typed manuscript , found among Josephine Earp 's papers , was given by Glenn Boyer to the Ford County Historical Society . 
 = = = Lake 's biography = = = 
 Unlike most legendary lawmen of the American West , Earp was relatively unknown until Stuart Lake published the first biography of Wyatt Earp , Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal in 1931 , two years after Earp died . Lake portrayed Earp as a " Western superhero " who single @-@ handedly cleaned up a town full of cowboy criminals . In fact Earp had been a stagecoach guard for Wells Fargo , a full @-@ time gambler , a regular associate of prostitutes , and , occasionally , a lawman . 
 Lake wrote the book with Earp 's input , but was only able to interview him eight times before Earp died , during which Earp sketched out the " barest facts " of his life . Despite having received very little information from Earp , Lake wrote the biography in the first person . 
 Lake initially sought Earp out hoping to write a magazine article about him . Earp was also seeking a biographer at about the same time . Earp , who was 80 , was concerned that his vantage point on the Tombstone story may be lost , and may have been financially motivated as he had little income in his last years of life . 
 During the interviews and in later correspondence , Josephine and Wyatt went to great lengths to keep her name out of Lake 's book . Lake wrote Earp that he planned to send portions of the book to his New York agent , but Earp objected because he wanted to read it first . After Earp 's death on January 13 , 1929 , Josephine continued to try to persuade Lake to leave her and Earp 's former wife , Mattie Blaylock , out of the book , even threatening legal action . Lake finally published Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal in 1931 , two years after Earp 's death . 
 Lake 's creative biography portrays Earp as a " Western superhero " , " gallant white knight " and entirely avoided mentioning Josephine Earp . A number of Hollywood movies have been directly and indirectly influence by Earp 's role as a western lawman . The book drew considerable positive attention and established Lake as a western screenwriter for years to come . It also established the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral in the public consciousness and Earp as a fearless lawman in the American Old West . 
 The book " is now regarded more as fiction than fact " , " an imaginative hoax , a fabrication mixed with just enough fact to give it credibility " . 
 = = = Reputation as a teetotaler = = = 
 Earp 's image is that of a teetotaler , but as a saloon owner and gambler , he drank occasionally as well . When Flood and Lake wrote their biographies , Prohibition was in force . Among the other facts Josephine wanted scrubbed from Earp 's history , she persuaded biographers Flood , Lake and Burns to write that Earp was a non @-@ drinker . A good friend of Earp 's , Charlie Welsh , was known to disappear for days at a time " to see property " , the family euphemism for a drinking binge , and Earp was his regular partner . Director John Ford said that whenever Josephine left town for religious conventions , Earp would come into town , play poker , and get drunk with the cowboy actors . 
 = = = " Buntline Special " = = = 
 In his book , Lake wrote about the Colt Buntline Special , a variant of long @-@ barreled Colt Single Action Army revolver . According to Lake 's biography , dime novelist Ned Buntline had five Buntline Specials commissioned . Lake described them as extra @-@ long , 12 inches ( 300 mm ) -long barrel Colt Single Action Army revolvers . Buntline was supposed to have presented them to lawmen in thanks for their help with contributing " local color " to his western yarns . According to Lake , the pistol was equipped with a detachable metal shoulder stock . Lake wrote that Earp and four other well @-@ known western lawmen — Bat Masterson , Bill Tilghman , Charlie Bassett and Neal Brown — each received a Buntline Special . However , neither Tilghman nor Brown were lawmen then . 
 Researchers have never found any record of an order received by the Colt company , and Ned Buntline 's alleged connections to Earp 's have been largely discredited . 
 After the publication of Lake 's book , various Colt revolvers with long ( 10 " or 16 " ) barrels were referred to as " Colt <unk> " . Colt re @-@ introduced the revolvers in its second generation revolvers produced after 1956 . The Buntline Special was further popularized by The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp television series . 
 = = = Dubious claims by Earp = = = 
 Earp 's reputation has been confused by inaccurate , conflicting , and false stories told about him by others , and by his own claims that cannot be corroborated . For example , in an interview with a reporter in Denver in 1896 , he denied that he had killed Johnny Ringo . He then flipped his story , claiming he had killed Ringo . In 1888 , he was interviewed by an agent of California historian Hubert H. Bancroft , and Earp claimed that he had killed " over a dozen stage robbers , murderers , and cattle thieves " . In about 1918 he told <unk> Hooker , who wrote an unpublished manuscript , and then Frank Lockwood , who wrote Pioneer Days in Arizona in 1932 , that he was the one who killed Johnny Ringo as he left Arizona in 1882 . However , Earp included details that do not match what is known about Ringo 's death . Earp repeated that claim to at least three other people . 
 At the hearing following the Tombstone shootout , Earp said he had been marshal in Dodge City , a claim he repeated in an August 16 , 1896 , interview that appeared in the San Francisco Examiner . But Earp had only been an assistant city marshal there . 
 During an interview with his future biographer Stuart Lake during the late 1920s , Earp said that he arrested notorious gunslinger Ben Thompson in Ellsworth , Kansas , on August 15 , 1873 , when news accounts and Thompson 's own contemporary account about the episode do not mention his presence . He also told Lake that he had hunted buffalo during 1871 and 1872 , but Earp was arrested three times in the Peoria area during that period for " Keeping and being found in a house of ill @-@ fame . " He was arrested and jailed on a horse theft charge on April 6 , 1871 . However he was not convicted of the last charge and was released . 
 In the same interview , Earp claimed that George Hoyt had intended to kill him , although newspaper accounts from that time report differently . He also said he and Bat Masterson had confronted Clay Allison when he was sent to Dodge City to finish George Hoyt 's job , and that they had forced him to back down . Two other accounts contradicted Earp , crediting cattleman Dick McNulty and Long Branch Saloon owner Chalk Beeson with convincing Allison and his cowboys to surrender their guns . Cowboy Charlie <unk> witnessed the incident and left a written account . 
 = = Modern image = = 
 Wyatt outlived his brothers , and due to the fame Wyatt gained from Lake 's biography and later adaptations of it , he is often mistakenly viewed as the central character and hero of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral . In fact , Virgil Earp , as Deputy U.S. Marshal and Tombstone City Marshal , actually held the legal authority in Tombstone the day of the shootout . Virgil had considerably more experience with weapons and combat as a Union soldier in the Civil War , and in law enforcement as a sheriff , constable , and marshal than did Wyatt . As city marshal , Virgil made the decision to enforce a city ordinance prohibiting carrying weapons in town and to disarm the Cowboys . Wyatt was only a temporary assistant marshal to his brother . 
 = = = Cultural image as Western lawman = = = 
 Earp 's modern @-@ day reputation is that of the Old West 's " toughest and deadliest gunman of his day " . He is " a cultural icon , a man of law and order , a mythic figure of a West where social control and order were notably absent " . Due to Lake 's fanciful biography and because Wyatt outlived all of his brothers , his name became famous and he is the source of many movies , TV shows , biographies and works of fiction . 
 Western historian and author John <unk> describes Earp as an " enigmatic figure ... He always lived on the outer fringe of respectable society , and his closest companions were gamblers and sporting men ... Wyatt never set down roots in any one place ; when the money stopped coming in or his problems became too great , he would pull up stakes and move on to the next boomtown ... For his entire life was a gamble , an effort to make money without working hard for it , to succeed quickly without ever settling in for the long haul . 
 = = = Josephine Earp memoir = = = 
 One of the most well known and for many years respected books about Wyatt Earp was the book I Married Wyatt Earp , originally credited as a factual memoir by Josephine Marcus Earp . Published in 1976 , it was edited by amateur historian Glenn Boyer , and published by the respected University of Arizona Press . It was immensely popular for many years , capturing the imagination of people with an interest in western history , studied in classrooms , cited by scholars , and relied upon as factual by filmmakers . 
 In 1998 , writer Tony Ortega wrote a lengthy investigative article for the Phoenix New Times for which he interviewed Boyer . Boyer said that he was uninterested in what others think of the accuracy of what he has written . " This is an artistic effort . I don 't have to adhere to the kind of jacket that these people are putting on me . I am not a historian . I 'm a storyteller . " Boyer admitted that the book is " 100 percent Boyer " . He said the book was not really a first @-@ person account , that he had interpreted Wyatt Earp in Josephine 's voice , and admitted that he could not produce any documents to vindicate his methods . 
 Boyer and the University Press ' credibility was severely damaged . In 2000 the University referred all questions to university lawyers who investigated some of the allegations about Boyer 's work . Later that year the Press removed the book from their catalog . The book has been discredited as a fraud and a hoax that cannot be relied on . 
 As a result , other works by Boyer were subsequently questioned . His book , Wyatt Earp 's Tombstone Vendetta , published in 1993 , was according to Boyer based on an account written by a previously unknown Tombstone journalist that he named " Theodore Ten Eyck " , but whose identity could not be independently verified . Boyer claimed that the manuscript was " clearly authentic " and that it contained " fascinating revelations ( if they are true ) and would make an ace movie " . Boyer later said the character was in fact a blend of " scores of accounts " , but could not provide any sources . 
 History Professor William Urban also described " the questionable scholarship of Glenn Boyer , the dominant figure in <unk> for the past several decades , who has apparently invented a manuscript and then cited it as a major source in his publications . This does not surprise this reviewer , who has personal experience with Boyer 's pretentious exaggeration of his acquaintance with Warren County records . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 When a post office was established in 1930 in the unincorporated settlement of Drennan , near the site of some of his mining claims , it was renamed Earp , California in his honor . 
 = = = Ship Wyatt Earp = = = 
 Arctic explorer Lincoln Ellsworth became fascinated with the Earp legend . Ellsworth completed four expeditions to Antarctica between 1933 and 1939 , using a former Norwegian herring boat as his aircraft transporter and base that he named Wyatt Earp after his hero . 
 Ellsworth befriended Earp 's widow , Josephine Earp . After Wyatt 's death , she wrote him that she was sending him Wyatt 's handgun , a shotgun , pipe , and wedding ring . She said she was sending him a .41 @-@ caliber Colt revolver , which she said Wyatt referred to affectionately as his " baby pony . " However , Ellsworth actually received a .45 @-@ caliber Colt revolver with a 7 ½ " barrel . Its serial number indicates it was originally shipped from the Colt factory on January 30 , 1883 . The shotgun was a 16 gauge double @-@ barreled hunting shotgun and case belonging to Wyatt . Ellsworth 's widow donated this pistol to the Arizona Historical Society in 1988 . 
 = = = Earp weapons auctioned = = = 
 On April 17 , 2014 , the family of deceased Earp amateur historian Glenn Boyer put much of his Earp collection and many artifacts up for auction . Among the 32 boxes of documentation , files , pictures and memorabilia for sale was a Colt .45 caliber said by Earp descendants to have been owned by Wyatt Earp . Also included in the auction was a Winchester lever @-@ action shotgun belonging to Wyatt Earp . 
 Earp was known to carry a .45 caliber pistol , as he did on the night of the Fitzimmons @-@ Sharkey fight in 1896 . Historians have credible evidence that Wyatt used a .44 caliber 1869 American model Smith & Wesson during the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral . This weapon was given by Earp to John Flood , who left it to Earp historian John D. Gilchriese . 
 Descendants of Wyatt Earp 's cousins assert that Earp carried the pistol featured in the auction and while in Tombstone , although the grips , barrel , and cylinder have been replaced . Only the frame is original , and its serial number has been filed off . But X @-@ ray testing showed an original serial number , <unk> , which matches a batch of revolvers purchased by the U.S. Army in 1874 . 
 The history of the items is controversial because they belonged to Boyer . John <unk> , a respected author of numerous articles on the American Old West and a collector of American Old West guns and memorabilia , said that it would be " impossible to separate the authenticity of the auction items from Boyer 's own troubled history . " This is particularly true because the provenance of the weapons is based on letters written by or given to Boyer . The authenticity of the revolver displayed at the auction is attested to by a typewritten letter dictated by Bill Miller to his daughter <unk> Griffin . Miller was married to Estelle Edwards , the daughter of Adelia Earp Edwards , Wyatt 's sister . Before his death , Boyer completed a sworn affidavit attesting that the Colt .45 belonged to Earp . The affidavit is included with the revolver along with other expert findings . Critics challenge the authenticity of the letter because Boyer signed an affidavit in 1994 and stated again in 1999 , long after Bill Miller 's death , that he did not have any documentation from Miller . LeRoy Merz , the owner of Merz Antique Firearms , is the nation 's largest dealer in antique Winchesters in the United States . Despite Boyer 's affidavit , he said the missing serial number is a " kiss of death , " he says . " No serious collector will want that . " 
 The Wyatt revolver from Boyer 's estate was expected to fetch from $ 100 @,@ 000 and $ 150 @,@ 000 . On the day of the auction , more than 6 @,@ 400 online bidders and over 400 collectors from 49 countries took part in the auction . The revolver attributed to Wyatt Earp was sold to an unnamed phone bidder from New Mexico for $ 225 @,@ 000 . The Winchester lever @-@ action shotgun also said to be Wyatt Earp 's sold for $ 50 @,@ 000 , below the high value estimate of $ 125 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Gunfight sketch sold at auction = = = 
 John H. Flood Jr . , Wyatt Earp 's secretary , who he regarded like a son , drew a sketch of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral in 1926 under Wyatt 's supervision . The drawing placed participants and selected witnesses on Fremont Street in Tombstone , and Earp annotated it with lines indicating how the participants moved during the 30 @-@ second shootout . It was sold at auction by Alexander Autographs in early October 2010 , for $ 380 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = First depiction in film = = = 
 Earp 's good friend William Hart produced and wrote the first movie to depict Wyatt Earp , the seven @-@ reel epic Wild Bill Hickok released by Paramount in 1923 . Hart played Wild Bill Hickok and Bert Lindley played Earp . Earp served as a technical adviser on the film . This was the first movie that depicted Wyatt Earp , and the only movie that included his character before he died in 1929 . The role of Earp 's character in the movie was small . Bert Lindley is not listed on some descriptions of the movie and this portrayal of Earp is often overlooked . Alan Barra , author of Inventing Wyatt Earp : His Life and Many Legends , overlooked this movie in his biography . 
 In the film , Earp joined Calamity Jane , Bat Masterson , Doc Holliday , Charlie Bassett , Luke Short and Bill Tilghman in cleaning up a wild <unk> . Promotional copy for the film prominently mentioned Earp : " Back in the days when the West was young and wild , ' Wild Bill ' fought and loved and adventured with such famous frontiersmen as Bat Masterson and Wyatt Earp . " Earp was described in the promotional copy as " Deputy Sheriff to Bat Masterson of Dodge City , known as one of the three greatest gun @-@ men that ever lived , along with Bat Masterson and ' Wild Bill ' Hickok " . In reality , Earp was a virtually unknown assistant marshal in Dodge City when Wild Bill Hickok was murdered in 1876 . 
 = = = Depiction of Old West lawmen = = = 
 Wyatt Earp both directly and indirectly influenced the way movies depict lawmen in the American Old West . While living in Los Angeles , Earp met several well @-@ known and soon @-@ to @-@ be famous actors on the sets of various movies . He became good friends with Western actors William S. Hart , and Tom Mix . Stuart Lake 's book Wyatt Earp : Frontier Marshal was the basis for how Earp has been depicted as a fearless Western hero in a large number of films and books . The book was first adapted into a movie for Frontier Marshal in 1934 . Josephine Earp successfully pressured the producers to remove Wyatt 's name from the film , and the protagonist was renamed " Michael Wyatt " . The film was made again in 1939 . Josephine sued 20th Century Fox for $ 50 @,@ 000 , but with the provision that Wyatt 's name be removed from the title , and after she received $ 5 @,@ 000 , the movie was released as Frontier Marshal starring Randolph Scott playing Wyatt Earp . Sol M. Wurtzel produced both films . 
 Lake wrote another book about Wyatt Earp titled My Darling Clementine in 1946 that Director John Ford developed into the movie My Darling Clementine , which further boosted Wyatt 's reputation . The book later inspired a number of stories , movies and television programs about outlaws and lawmen in Dodge City and Tombstone . Lake wrote a number of screenplays for these movies and twelve scripts for the 1955 – 61 television series The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp starring Hugh O 'Brian as Earp . 
 The popular movie Gunfight at the O.K. Corral released in 1957 starring Burt Lancaster as Earp cemented his place in Western history as a hero lawman . The movie also altered the public 's perception of cowboys , who in Earp 's time and locale were outlaws , but in the movies were reinvented as good guys assisting the lawmen in their fight against the outlaws . 
 Director John Ford said that when he was a prop boy in the early days of silent pictures , Earp would visit pals he knew from his Tombstone days on the sets . " I used to give him a chair and a cup of coffee , and he told me about the fight at the O.K. Corral . So in My Darling Clementine , we did it exactly the way it had been . " When Ford was working on his last silent feature Hangman 's House in 1928 , which included the first credited screen appearances by John Wayne , Earp used to visit the set . John Wayne later told Hugh O 'Brian that he based his Western lawman walk , talk and persona to his acquaintance with Wyatt Earp , who was good friends with Mix . " I knew him ... I often thought of Wyatt Earp when I played a film character . There 's a guy that actually did what I 'm trying to do . " Wyatt Earp 's character has been the central figure in 10 films and featured in many more . Among the best @-@ known actors who have portrayed him are Randolph Scott , Guy Madison , Henry Fonda , Joel McCrea , Burt Lancaster , James Garner , Jimmy Stewart , Hugh O 'Brian , Kurt Russell and Kevin Costner . 
 With the emergence of television in the 1950s , producers spun out a large number of western @-@ oriented shows . At the height of their popularity in 1959 , there were more than two dozen " cowboy " programs on each week . At least six of them were connected to some extent with Wyatt Earp : The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp , Bat Masterson , Tombstone Territory , Broken Arrow , Johnny Ringo , and Gunsmoke . 
 = = = Earp legend in film and television = = = 
 Frontier Marshal ( 1934 ) – The first film adaptation of Stuart N. Lake 's novel . George O 'Brien plays " Michael Wyatt " . 
 Frontier Marshal ( 1939 ) – Randolph Scott as Wyatt Earp . 
 Tombstone , the Town Too Tough to Die ( 1942 ) – Stars Richard Dix . 
 My Darling Clementine ( 1946 ) – Stars Henry Fonda and directed by John Ford . 
 Wichita ( 1955 ) – Stars Joel McCrea . 
 The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp TV series ( 1955 – 1961 ) – Starring Hugh O 'Brian as Wyatt Earp . 
 Gunfight at the O.K. Corral ( 1957 ) – Stars Burt Lancaster . 
 Hour of the Gun ( 1967 ) – Stars James Garner in the first of two movies with Garner as Earp . 
 Doc ( 1971 ) – Gunfight of the O.K. Corral from Doc Holliday 's point of view . Stacy Keach as Doc and Harris Yulin as Wyatt . 
 Tombstone ( 1993 ) – Stars Kurt Russell . 
 Wyatt Earp : Return to Tombstone ( 1994 ) – Film combines colorized footage of The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp with new scenes filmed in Tombstone . 
 Wyatt Earp ( 1994 ) – Stars Kevin Costner . 
 Wyatt Earp 's Revenge ( 2012 ) – Stars Val Kilmer . 
 = = = Earp as a character or adaptation of the legend = = = 
 Law and Order ( 1932 ) – Walter Huston as Frame Johnson , inspired by Wyatt Earp . 
 Dodge City ( 1939 ) – Errol Flynn as Wade Hatton , inspired by Wyatt Earp . 
 Winchester ' 73 ( 1950 ) – James Stewart wins a rare Winchester rifle that is stolen . Will Geer portrays Wyatt Earp . 
 Gun Belt ( 1953 ) – Outlaw Billy Ringo tries to go straight . 
 Masterson of Kansas ( 1954 ) – Bat Masterson is assisted by Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday . 
 Badman 's Country ( 1958 ) – Pat Garrett catches up to Butch Cassidy 's gang and calls in Wyatt Earp . 
 Alias Jesse James ( 1959 ) – Bob Hope stars and Hugh O 'Brian briefly appears as Wyatt Earp . 
 The Secret World of Eddie Hodges ( 1960 ) – TV musical starring Jackie Gleason and Hugh O 'Brian as Wyatt Earp . 
 Cheyenne Autumn ( 1964 ) James Stewart as Wyatt Earp and Arthur Kennedy as Doc Holliday . 
 Desafío en Rio Bravo ( 1965 ) – Guy Madison as Wyatt Earp . 
 " The Gunfighters " ( 1966 ) , an episode of Doctor Who – The TARDIS materializes in Tombstone prior to the gunfight . 
 Hour of the Gun ( 1967 ) James Garner as Wyatt Earp . 
 " Spectre of the Gun " ( 1968 ) , an episode of Star Trek : The Original Series – Officers of the USS Enterprise are cast as the Cowboys . Ron <unk> plays Wyatt Earp . 
 Alias Smith and Jones – Cameron Mitchell as Wyatt Earp and Bill Fletcher plays Doc Holliday . 
 I Married Wyatt Earp ( 1983 ) – Based on the supposed memoir . Marie Osmond as Josephine Earp . 
 Sunset ( 1988 ) – Bruce Willis as Tom Mix and James Garner as Wyatt Earp . 
 Deadwood ( 2006 ) – Gale Harold as Wyatt Earp . 
 Hannah 's Law ( 2012 ) – <unk> Holt as Wyatt Earp . 
 Wynonna Earp ( TV Series ) ( 2016 ) – Ryan Northcott as Wyatt Earp and Tim <unk> as Doc Holliday . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 = Desert Strike = 
 Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf , commonly known as Desert Strike , is a shoot ' em up video game released by Electronic Arts ( EA ) in February 1992 for the Sega Genesis . The game was later released on several other formats such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , including a much upgraded version for the Amiga home computer . The game was inspired by the Gulf War and depicts a conflict between an insane Middle Eastern dictator , General Kilbaba , and the United States . The player controls a lone Apache helicopter and attempts to destroy enemy weapons and installations , rescue hostages and capture enemy personnel , while managing supplies of fuel and ammunition . 
 The lead designer , Mike Posehn , had no video game experience prior to developing Desert Strike . Inspired by Choplifter , he aimed to create a nonlinear game with smoothly animated vehicles . Posehn , a PhD in Mechanical Engineering , developed a camera system with momentum to mimic realistic helicopter movements . Three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) modeling was used to generate the vehicle sprites , which were later touched up on the pixel level with color . 
 Desert Strike was a strong commercial success : it was a chart @-@ topping best seller and at the time Electronics Arts ' highest ever selling game . The game also received a favourable critical response , with several magazines awarding scores of over 90 % . Reviewers praised the game 's enjoyability , mix of action and strategy , graphics and sound . There was some controversy regarding the game 's subject matter , with commentators criticising it as in poor taste due the proximity of its release to the recently ended Gulf War . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Desert Strike is a shoot ' em up game in which the player pilots an AH @-@ 64 Apache helicopter . The game is less frantic than typical shoot ' em ups , with the addition of greater strategic elements . The action takes place on open , multi @-@ directional scrolling levels viewed from an isometric perspective . The player views the action from outside the helicopter , rather than from within the cockpit . 
 Levels consist of several missions , which are based around the destruction of enemy weapons and installations , as well as rescuing hostages or prisoners of war , or capturing enemy personnel . The Apache is armed with a machine gun , more powerful Hydra rockets and yet more deadly Hellfire missiles . The more powerful the weapon , the fewer can be carried : the player must choose an appropriate weapon for each situation . Enemy weapons range from soldiers with small arms , to anti @-@ aircraft missiles to tanks and armoured cars . 
 The player 's craft has a limited amount of armour , which is depleted as the helicopter is hit by enemy fire . Should the armour reach zero , the craft will be destroyed , costing the player a life . The player must outmanoeuvre enemies to avoid damage , but can replenish armour by means of power @-@ ups or by airlifting rescued friendlies or captives to a landing zone . The helicopter has a finite amount of fuel which is steadily depleted over time . Should the fuel run out the Apache will crash , again costing the player a life . The craft can refuel by collecting fuel barrels : the player must therefore plan mission routes carefully in order to maximise efficiency . The helicopter also carries limited ammunition , which must be replenished by means of ammo crates . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game opens with a self @-@ proclaimed general named Kilbaba ( <unk> in the Super NES version ) seizing control of an unnamed , fictional Gulf state . Installing himself as dictator , Kilbaba quickly begins fortifying his position with military weapons and installations , including nuclear facilities with which to build bombs . The United States decides to send in a single helicopter , piloted by the player 's unnamed character and aided by a co @-@ pilot , to infiltrate and destroy Kilbaba 's forces in a series of swift strikes . In the final level , Kilbaba attempts to escape in a bomber plane armed with nuclear bombs , but the player destroys him and his plane before it leaves the runway . In the ending , the player and co @-@ pilot are seen at the White House , where they are commended by President Bill Clinton for their heroism . 
 The game 's plot was felt by commentators to be a thinly disguised reference to the Gulf War , while comparisons were drawn between Kilbaba and Saddam Hussein , and between the game 's unnamed desert setting and Iraq . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was developed by a team headed by Mike Posehn . In the 1980s , Posehn had previously worked for EA as a software developer . Soon after leaving EA , he obtained a publishing deal with the company for Video Deluxe . The success of the software spurred Posehn to branch out and experiment with a flight simulator titled Fly for the IBM Personal Computer ; however , International Business Machines cancelled the project . Posehn later met with EA president Trip Hawkins who suggested that Posehn develop a game for the Genesis , which was soon to be released . He also recommended that Posehn create a game similar to the Apple II game Choplifter ; Hawkins felt flying a helicopter and rescuing people was " cool " . 
 Desert Strike underwent few changes from the plans outlined in the original design documents . The initial concept involved smoothly animated vehicles on an isometric playing field . The developers also aimed to include cinematic scenes , similar to The Revenge of Shinobi { { } } s introduction sequence . The game began development some time before any discussion of an American invasion of Iraq , originally based on the Lebanese Civil War and titled Beirut Breakout ; this was later changed to the Persian Gulf region . A special point system intended to punish players was omitted ; the system would have deducted points from the player 's score if they destroyed objects that resulted in negative economic and political results . The control scheme was not well received at internal reviews of the game 's early versions , and Posehn had to alter his original design to obtain approval for further development . 
 John Manley , an EA employee , assisted writing the game 's program . He and Posehn collaborated to create the game 's sandbox format , which they nicknamed " SNAFU " . Posehn wanted the game to have nonlinear gameplay , and Manley felt having a storyline and puzzles would help the player progress . Posehn disliked common gameplay elements like series of bosses and power @-@ ups . As a compromise , the developers only included power @-@ ups to replenish ammunition , armour , and other helicopter resources . To provide the player with options , the SNAFU system was designed to allow players to complete side missions in addition to main objectives . If the player alters the game scenario so that the objectives cannot be completed , the game instructs the player to reset the mission by returning to base . 
 Inspired by Matchbox toys he played with as a child , Posehn decided to make the size of the game sprites resemble toys . Posehn contacted his friend , Tim Calvin , to assist with designing and creating the vehicle sprites . Though Calvin was a practising dentist at the time , he also had experience with 3D modelling . He rendered 3D models on a computer and reduced them to the desired size . Different views were obtained by rotating the models along a single axis . Calvin added colour to the sprites to meet the production staff 's specifications ; most required black , white , red , and blue , as well as four shades of colours like green and brown . Calvin eventually felt the rendering process was a waste of resources and attempted to create sprites on the pixel level himself without 3D models . The developers , however , preferred the sprites created from the models over Calvin 's freestyle ones . 
 Posehn had a difficult time working within the Genesis 's output resolution of 320 × 240 . He wanted to show as much of the playing field as possible without losing the details of the sprites ; he felt a lack of graphical detail would make them less interesting . Posehn developed a dynamic camera system to help maintain what he felt was the right balance between the size of the field in view and the size of the game objects . The camera travels on an elliptic curve as the helicopter rotates to change the direction it travels ; this puts whatever is in front of the helicopter more in view on screen . Posehn also integrated momentum to the camera movements to smooth transitions . He spent several months working on the physics for the screen and helicopter to ensure realistic movement . Instead of using completely accurate physics , Posehn chose to model movement that he believed players would assume a helicopter would have . He believed players would be put off by physics that didn 't match their perceived movement . 
 After the success of the Genesis / Mega Drive version , work began on a conversion for the Amiga , with Gary Roberts ( known for a John Madden Amiga conversion ) and David <unk> ( responsible for Myth ) in charge of development . The developers retouched and redrew the graphics and added additional sound effects taken from military training videos . Conversions for other systems include the Atari Lynx , Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Master System , Game Gear and Game Boy . The game was also ported to the Game Boy Advance , ten years later in 2002 , as Desert Strike Advance , and was re @-@ released in 2006 for the PlayStation Portable as part of a budget compilation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Commentators have felt the game was an attempt to capitalize on then @-@ recent , extensive news coverage of the Gulf War , which had focused on the use of advanced , impersonal weapons ( such as aircraft and guided missiles ) to destroy enemy weapons and installations . Some commentators considered the game 's subject matter in bad taste , with one magazine reporting an incident of veterans burning copies of the game . 
 Desert Strike was an immediate commercial success , going straight to the top of sales charts . The game remained a top @-@ 10 best seller for months after its release , and was at the time Electronic Arts ' highest selling game ever . 
 Mean Machines praised the sophistication and tactical freedom found in the game , as well as its longevity and graphics . The magazine deemed it one of the best shooters on the Mega Drive thus far , as well as the best game released for the console that month . Computer and Video Games felt the game 's subject matter was somewhat in bad taste , but praised its depth , soundtrack and sound effects . The magazine felt the game was " essential " for Mega Drive owners . ACE praised the balance of action and strategy , as well as the variety of missions . The magazine felt some of the graphics , particularly the explosions , were a little weak and complained that the fact that the helicopter is not fully rearmed and refuelled after the loss of a life was unduly frustrating . MegaTech magazine praised the graphics and gameplay , and said it was " one of the best shoot ' em ups on the Megadrive " . Retro Gamer included this " thinking man 's shoot- ' em @-@ up " among top ten Mega Drive games . 
 Amiga Action felt the game was not particularly innovative , but praised its open @-@ ended gameplay , graphics and sound . The reviewer claimed the Amiga version of the game ran more slowly than the Mega Drive version but overall felt the port was " a more than satisfactory translation " . Amiga Computing noted the improved graphics and sound over the Mega Drive version and praised the game as " EA 's finest moment since Populous " . The reviewer also acclaimed the game 's " brilliant playability " . Amiga Format commended the " Successful cross between a shoot ' em up and a flight simulator " , graphics , sound , varied missions and " tremendous fun " of the game , although the reviewer noted some " occasional glitches " occurring in the sound and graphics . CU Amiga praised the Amiga version 's improved graphics and sound , particularly the explosions , though the reviewer derided friendly units ' invincibility as unrealistic and complained of poor enemy artificial intelligence . The magazine however said that " All things considered , Desert Strike couldn 't be a better game " , praising the " fast and frantic " action and " just @-@ one @-@ more @-@ go appeal " . The One praised the mix of action and strategy as well as opining that the Amiga version was a strong improvement over the Mega Drive game . The magazine said the game " plays like a dream " and was " one of the best shoot ' em ups available for any games machine " . 
 The four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly gave varying praise to the Lynx version 's controls and graphics , but concurred that on the smaller portable screen Desert Strike loses much of its impact and playability , as it is difficult to identify enemies or even see the bullets the player character fires . 
 GamePro gave the Game Boy version a positive review , saying it " has almost everything that made the original title great . " They particularly praised the graphics and extensive , realistic sound effects , remarking that they were very impressive given the limitations of Game Boy cartridges . Mike Weigand of Electronic Gaming Monthly likewise deemed it " A fairly faithful portable version of the 16 @-@ Bit military classic . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Desert Strike was followed by four sequels Jungle Strike , Urban Strike , Soviet Strike , and Nuclear Strike that expanded on the basic gameplay it established . The design staff made efforts to retain game mechanics they felt embodied the core of the original . They believed removing those elements would result in a loss of focus of what attracted fans . As the series moved to more advanced consoles , Posehn became less involved in the programming side of development . Jungle Strike and Urban Strike , both released for the Genesis , featured additional vehicles and locations . Soviet Strike , released for the original PlayStation and the Sega Saturn in 1996 , featured 3D graphics , as did Nuclear Strike , released on PC and PlayStation in 1997 and the Nintendo 64 in 1999 . A fifth sequel provisionally titled Future Strike was planned , but the game was eventually released as Future Cop : LAPD , a mech @-@ based shooter game . 
 = The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour = 
 The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour ( also known as the Prohibited Tour ) was a comedy tour by American comedian and talk show host Conan O 'Brien . Its title is a reference to the 2010 Tonight Show host and timeslot conflict , which resulted in O 'Brien resigning from his position as host of The Tonight Show in January 2010 . O 'Brien reached a settlement with NBC that barred him from appearing on television until September 2010 , but it did not bar him from performing before a live audience in a concert setting . From April through June 2010 , O 'Brien performed 42 shows in the United States and Canada . 
 O 'Brien announced on March 11 , 2010 via his Twitter account that he would embark on a 30 @-@ city live tour beginning April 12 . Even with the unconventional marketing campaign of a single Twitter announcement , many locations sold out within hours of the tweet and additional shows were added on to meet demand . During the tour , O 'Brien announced that his new show , Conan , would debut on TBS in November 2010 . A documentary following O 'Brien during the tour , Conan O 'Brien Can 't Stop , was released in June 2011 . 
 = = Background and announcement = = 
 In January 2010 , late @-@ night talk show hosts Conan O 'Brien and Jay Leno engaged in a public relations conflict over who should host The Tonight Show . Due to low ratings for The Jay Leno Show and The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien , NBC announced a schedule change , moving Leno from 10 : 00 pm to 11 : 30 pm , and O 'Brien from 11 : 30 pm to 12 : 00 am . This change resulted in a public outcry and public demonstrations largely in support of O 'Brien . O 'Brien indicated that he would quit his show and leave the network if NBC were to implement it , citing the " destruction " of the venerable franchise which had aired at or around 11 : 30 pm for over 60 years . 
 As part of the deal between O 'Brien and NBC , O 'Brien was legally prohibited from appearing on television prior to September 1 , 2010 . He began to utilize social media to remain engaged with his fan base . O 'Brien started a Twitter account on February 24 , 2010 . After about one hour , O 'Brien 's subscriber list had reached over 30 @,@ 000 members and , approximately 30 minutes later , he was on the brink of passing 50 @,@ 000 followers . After 24 hours , O 'Brien had well over 300 @,@ 000 followers . In late May 2010 , he surpassed the one million mark for number of Twitter followers . 
 O 'Brien announced via his Twitter account that he would embark on a 30 @-@ city live tour on March 11 , 2010 , beginning on April 12 , 2010 . On the same day , <unk> , an official website , was launched . According to TMZ , O 'Brien decided not to keep any of the proceeds from the tour , in order to employ his show 's staff members . 
 = = Format = = 
 Several members of O 'Brien 's staff joined him for the tour , including sidekick Andy Richter , and the former Tonight Show Band , temporarily renamed " The Legally Prohibited Band " . Max Weinberg , the band leader , was unable to participate in the tour due to his recent heart surgery , although he did appear at one of the New York City shows . 
 Signs at each venue encouraged audience members using Twitter during the show to use a unique hashtag . Reggie Watts served as the tour 's opening act . In the video introduction to the show , Conan appeared as an obese and bearded version of himself struggling to cope with the loss of his talk show while Eric Carmen 's " All By Myself " plays . He then transforms back into his thin self during his exercise montage ( by merely pulling off his body suit ) after getting the call to go on tour . 
 The tour differed from his television shows in that there was no desk or celebrity interviews , but presented as more of a variety show than a stand @-@ up routine . Many elements from TV were incorporated into the show , including video bits , musical and comic performers , and cameo appearances by celebrities . Classic sketches were also revived for the tour , albeit under different names due to legal issues over the ownership rights . The <unk> Bear , for example , made a brief appearance before being transformed into the Self @-@ <unk> Panda . Also , the " Walker , Texas Ranger lever " was retitled the " Chuck Norris Rural Policeman Handle " . Triumph the Insult Comic Dog mocked the city the tour was appearing in as himself in a prerecorded bit that inserts information about the city by dubbing over the original audio . O 'Brien also introduced a giant inflatable bat he claimed to have purchased during Meat Loaf 's Bat Out of Hell tour and at one point walked onstage wearing a replica of Eddie Murphy 's purple suit from his comedy special Eddie Murphy Raw . In addition , O 'Brien performed music throughout the show , including the disco hit " I Will Survive " and a personal parody of " On the Road Again " . 
 = = Opening act = = 
 Reggie Watts ( select dates ) 
 = = Special guests = = 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 Festivals and other miscellaneous performances 
 This concert is a part of the " Bonnaroo Music Festival " 
 = = = Box office score data = = = 
 = = Response = = 
 Just hours before the first show of the tour , O 'Brien announced that he would host a new show on cable station TBS , titled Conan , which debuted in November 2010 . In addition to the announcement of the television series , TBS also announced a one @-@ hour TBS Special , featuring several writers for Conan , as well Watts . 
 Even with ticket prices starting at $ 40 , The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour sold out . Footage of O 'Brien 's tour has been uploaded onto YouTube by fans in attendance and immediately went viral . A clip of O 'Brien 's performance of " I Will Survive " , for example , has received more than 320 @,@ 000 views . 
 Conan O 'Brien Can 't Stop , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary film shot during the tour , was released in June 2011 . It focuses on the production of the tour , O 'Brien 's interactions with fans and his crew , and O 'Brien 's thoughts on the Tonight Show conflict and legal injunction that inspired the tour . The movie was filmed , directed and produced by director Rodman Flender , a college friend of O 'Brien . 
 = 1952 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1952 Atlantic hurricane season was a near normal Atlantic hurricane season , although it was the least active since 1946 . The season officially started on June 15 ; however , a pre @-@ season unnamed storm formed on Groundhog Day , becoming the only storm on record in the month of February . The other six tropical cyclones were named using the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet , the first of which formed on August 18 . The final storm of the season dissipated on October 28 , two and a half weeks before the season officially ended on November 15 . 
 Four of the tropical cyclones made landfall during the season , the first being the February tropical storm that crossed southern Florida . The first hurricane , named Able , struck South Carolina with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , causing heavy damage near the coast and widespread power outages . It moved up most of the East Coast of the United States , leaving 3 deaths and widespread damage . As a developing tropical cyclone , Hurricane Charlie caused damaging flooding and landslides in southwest Puerto Rico . The final and strongest of the season , Hurricane Fox , struck Cuba with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) ; it killed 40 people and left heavy damage , particularly to the sugar crop , reaching $ 10 million ( 1952 USD , $ 89 @.@ 1 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 On February 2 , a non @-@ frontal low formed in the western Caribbean Sea two months after the end of the hurricane season . It moved quickly north @-@ northwestward and acquired gale @-@ force winds as it brushed the northern coast of Cuba . Early on February 3 , the storm struck Cape Sable , Florida and quickly crossed the state . The Miami National Weather Service office recorded a wind gust of 68 mph ( 110 km / h ) during its passage . The winds damaged windows and power lines , catching residents and tourists off @-@ guard . The cyclone also dropped 2 – 4 inches ( 50 – 100 mm ) of precipitation along its path , causing crop damage in Miami @-@ Dade County . 
 After leaving Florida , the storm continued rapidly northeastward and transitioned into a tropical storm during the afternoon of February 3 . While off the coast of the Southeastern United States , it attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . On February 4 it evolved into an extratropical cyclone off the coast of North Carolina . Later that day , it passed over Cape Cod , and early on February 5 dissipated after crossing into Maine . The storm caused scattered power outages and gusty winds across New England . The cyclone remains the only tropical or subtropical storm on record during the month of February . 
 = = = Hurricane Able = = = 
 Over six months after the previous storm dissipated , a tropical depression developed just off the west coast of Africa on August 18 . It moved generally west- to west @-@ northwestward for much of its duration , intensifying into a tropical storm on August 24 east of the Lesser Antilles . The next day , Hurricane Hunters confirmed the presence of Tropical Storm Able . Passing north of the islands , the storm attained hurricane status on August 27 . On August 30 , Able turned to the north @-@ northwest due to an approaching cold front , and the next day made landfall near Beaufort , South Carolina as a Category 2 hurricane with peak winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The town was heavily damaged , and was briefly isolated after winds downed power and telephone lines . Across South Carolina , the hurricane caused two indirect deaths , as well as moderate damage totaling $ 2 @.@ 2 million ( 1952 USD , $ 19 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . 
 As Able turned north and northeastward over land , the winds quickly weakened to tropical storm force , although it retained gale force winds through North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland ; this was due to remaining over the flat terrain east of the Appalachian Mountains , as well as retaining a plume of tropical moisture from its south . It left light damage in North Carolina , some of it due to a tornado . In Maryland , heavy rainfall caused widespread flooding , which washed out the tracks of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad near Baltimore . In Ellicott City , Maryland , the rains flooded several houses , forcing families to evacuate . Two tornadoes were also reported in the region , and damage in the Washington , D.C. area reached $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1952 USD , $ 4 @.@ 46 million 2016 USD ) . Further northeast , the storm continued to produce heavy rainfall , causing flooding , as well as one indirect death in Pennsylvania . After moving through New England , Able dissipated on September 2 near Portland , Maine . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 A cold front was located north of the Bahamas on August 26 , with a broad area of cyclonic turning located east of northern Florida . Atmospheric pressures were falling in the region , and gale force winds were recorded by 12 : 00 UTC on August 27 . Based on the structure , it is estimated that the frontal low developed into a tropical storm by 18 : 00 UTC that day . Ship reports in the region suggested peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . There was very dry air on the west side of the system , unusual for August , and the radius of maximum winds was around 115 mi ( 185 km ) , suggesting that the structure could have been akin to a subtropical cyclone . The storm continued to the northwest , making landfall very near Myrtle Beach , South Carolina at 02 : 00 UTC on August 28 . It spread rainfall across the Carolinas , later enhanced by Hurricane Able just days later , while cities reported winds of around 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The storm weakened over land and dissipated late on August 28 over eastern Kentucky . 
 = = = Hurricane Baker = = = 
 The third tropical cyclone of the season developed on August 31 a short distance east of the northern Lesser Antilles . Its presence was reported by a ship the next day that encountered rough seas and gale force winds . As a result , the Weather Bureau sent the Hurricane Hunters to investigate the system , which reported a strengthening hurricane moving northwestward . Given the name Baker , the hurricane passed north of the Lesser Antilles , reaching peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) late on September 3 . For several days , the Hurricane Hunters reported similar winds , along with gusts up to 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . 
 With a large anticyclone located over the Ohio Valley , Baker turned to the northeast on September 5 , passing about halfway between Bermuda and North Carolina . The hurricane slowly weakened as it moved through the north Atlantic Ocean , just missing Newfoundland while maintaining winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Wind gusts on Avalon Peninsula reached 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , and heavy fishing damage was reported in Lower Island Cove . After affecting the island , Baker transitioned into an extratropical storm , which lasted another day before dissipating south of Greenland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 A dissipating cold front stalled across the northeastern Atlantic Ocean on September 7 , northeast of the Azores . That day , a closed circulation developed and quickly became independent of the front . Based on a uniform thermal structure , as well as ship reports in the region of gale @-@ force winds near the center , it is estimated that the system became a tropical storm early on September 8 . That day , the system moved west @-@ southwestward , atypical for cyclones in that region during September . On September 9 , the storm turned to the southeast , reaching estimated peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , based on ship observations . Moving slowly through the northern Azores , the storm produced winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) along Terceira Island . It slowly weakened , and by late on September 10 the system degraded into a tropical depression . By the next day , the system was interacting with an approaching cold front , indicating that the depression had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Around 20 : 00 UTC , the storm moved ashore the southwestern tip of Portugal with gale @-@ force winds . The storm turned to the northwest through the Iberian Peninsula , dissipating on September 14 over southwestern France . 
 = = = Hurricane Charlie = = = 
 On September 22 , a tropical wave moved into the eastern Caribbean Sea , spawning a tropical depression near Hispaniola early on September 24 . As it tracked west @-@ northwestward , the low dropped heavy rainfall , peaking at 4 @.@ 42 in ( 112 mm ) in Christiansted , United States Virgin Islands , as well as 11 @.@ 9 in ( 300 mm ) in <unk> , Puerto Rico . In Puerto Rico , the rains caused and landslides that affected seven towns , notably Ponce , the island 's second @-@ largest city . There , at least 14 buildings were destroyed . The floods left more than 1 @,@ 000 people homeless , 300 of whom took refuge in a Red Cross shelter . Overall , the flooding on the island killed four people and left moderate damage of around $ 1 million ( 1952 USD , $ 8 @.@ 91 million 2016 USD ) . 
 After affecting Puerto Rico , the low continued to organize , and subsequently struck the Dominican Republic on September 23 . The circulation became disrupted while crossing Hispaniola , although it reorganized near the Turks and Caicos Islands and became Tropical Storm Charlie before reaching those islands . On September 25 , Charlie attained hurricane status , , and due to its continued northwest motion , the Weather Bureau advised small craft to remain at port in the southeastern United States coast . However , the hurricane turned to the north and northeast on September 26 , during which the Hurricane Hunters recorded peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . It briefly threatened Bermuda , prompting the United States Air Force to evacuate its fleet of airplanes from Kindley Air Force Base . Charlie ultimately northwest of Bermuda , and later began weakening . On September 29 it turned eastward , and later that day transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants lasted two more days before dissipating 400 mi ( 640 km ) southeast of Newfoundland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dog = = = 
 On September 25 , a tropical wave spawned a tropical storm about 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Given the name Dog , the storm moved northwestward for its entire duration . On September 26 , Hurricane Hunters observed winds of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) , which indicated that Dog strengthened to just below hurricane intensity . The plane also estimated winds of around 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , although they were unable to locate a closed center of circulation . After approaching hurricane status , , Dog began a marked weakening trend , with winds of only 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) by September 27 . Continuing to weaken , the storm dissipated on September 29 . The Weather Bureau advised ships to avoid the storm , but overall Dog did not affect land . As the Hurricane Hunters did not reported a well @-@ defined circulation , there was a possibility Dog was not a tropical cyclone ; the report of the 1952 season assessed that Dog remained a tropical wave . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 On September 24 , a tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa . It is estimated that a closed circulation developed on the next day , suggesting the formation of a tropical depression . On September 26 , Santiago island within Cape Verde recorded winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) as the system was passing to the southwest . A minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) and ship reports of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) winds indicate that the system reached peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , or a minimal tropical storm . It turned to the north on September 27 and likely weakened , although observations were sparse . By September 30 , the system lost its circulation and degenerated into an open trough . 
 = = = Hurricane Easy = = = 
 On October 6 , a tropical depression formed about 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) east of Antigua , near where the previous hurricane developed . The depression proceeded northward , and was detected by the Hurricane Hunters on October 7 . The next day , a plane flew into Easy and reported peak winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) , indicating the storm had rapidly intensified . By the time it reached peak intensity , the hurricane had turned sharply to the east , and later began to move toward the south . As quickly as it strengthened , Easy began to weaken , and an aircraft reported winds of only 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) on October 9 . The storm headed southwest , ultimately dissipating on October 11 about 155 mi ( 249 km ) southwest of where it formed . Easy never affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Fox = = = 
 The strongest tropical cyclone of the season formed on October 20 in the Caribbean Sea off the northwest coast of Colombia , believed to have been from the Intertropical Convergence Zone . It moved northwestward , intensifying into a tropical storm on October 21 and a hurricane the following day . Fox subsequently turned to the north , intensifying to a major hurricane as it passed west of the Cayman Islands . Late on October 24 , the cyclone struck the small island of Cayo Guano del Estes in the Archipelago de los <unk> , south of Cienfuegos , Cuba . It struck the island with peak winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) , and the island reported a minimum pressure of 934 mbar ( 27 @.@ 59 inHg ) . Shortly thereafter , Fox crossed the mainland coast of Cuba west of Cienfuegos , and it weakened while crossing the island . 
 Hurricane Fox crossed Cuba in a rural area dominated by sugar plantations , with heavy damage reported to 36 mills . In one town , the hurricane destroyed about 600 homes and damaged over 1 @,@ 000 more . Across the island , the strongest winds downed large trees and washed a large freighter ashore . Heavy rainfall affected all but the extreme eastern and western end of the island , with a peak of 6 @.@ 84 in ( 174 mm ) near Havana . The rains flooded low @-@ lying areas and caused rivers to exceed their banks . Throughout Cuba , Hurricane Fox injured 70 people , killed 40 , and heavy damage totaling $ 10 million ( 1952 USD , $ 89 @.@ 1 million 2016 USD ) . Fox was among the strongest hurricanes to strike the country . 
 After crossing Cuba , Fox emerged into the Atlantic Ocean with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , crossing central Andros and turning eastward though the Bahamas . On New Providence , the hurricane dropped 13 @.@ 27 in ( 337 mm ) of rainfall , Strong winds caused severe crop damage , leaving 30 % of the tomato crop destroyed . After briefly restrengthening to a major hurricane , Fox began a steady weakening trend . It turned abruptly to the north @-@ northwest , followed by another turn to the northeast . On October 28 , Fox was absorbed by a cold front west @-@ southwest of Bermuda . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eleven = = = 
 A cold front stalled north of the Virgin Islands on November 23 , spawning an extratropical storm the next day . The system strengthened while moving northward , attaining gale force winds on November 25 . It was a large system , and a ship in the vicinity reported a pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . The observation , within a warm environment and in concurrence with gale force winds , suggested that the system became a tropical storm on November 26 , although the system likely was a subtropical cyclone due to the structure . Turning to the west @-@ northwest along a dissipating cold front , the storm reached peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on November 27 . Another front in the region steered the storm to the south and east in a counterclockwise circle . Weakening slightly , the system briefly transitioned into an extratropical storm on November 30 before dissipating later that day within the front . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 These names were used to name storms during the 1952 season , the third and final time storm names were taken from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . Names that were not used to designate tropical cyclones are marked in gray . 
 = A Very Supernatural Christmas = 
 " A Very Supernatural Christmas " is the eighth episode of the paranormal drama television series Supernatural 's third season . It was first broadcast on The CW on December 13 , 2007 . The narrative follows series protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they confront a pair of pagan gods ( Spencer Garrett and <unk> Gann ) who annually take human sacrifices . 
 Written by Jeremy Carver and directed by J. Miller Tobin , the episode was intended to be " the most violent Christmas special in the history of television " . Flashbacks were added to the plot when the main storyline came up short , allowing the writers to expand upon the childhoods of a young Sam ( Colin Ford ) and Dean ( Ridge Canipe ) . 
 While critics universally praised the flashback sequences and the performances of Ford and Canipe , they had differing opinions of the main storyline . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the episode opens , a man visits his grandson for Christmas in Seattle , Washington . He dresses up as Santa Claus , but is pulled up the chimney and slaughtered by a mysterious figure . One year later , Sam ( Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Ackles ) pose as FBI agents to investigate a disappearance in Ypsilanti , Michigan . The discovery of a bloody tooth in the fireplace leads Sam to suspect that an evil version of Santa — many world lores tell of those who punish the wicked during Christmas — is at work . As the brothers search the town and debate about whether to celebrate Christmas that year — Dean insists while Sam refuses — another man is taken by a Santa @-@ dressed being . Upon investigation the following day , Sam notices that both families have the same wreath over their fireplaces . The wreath is found to be made of meadowsweet , an herb often used in pagan rituals to lure gods to a human sacrifice , which leads Sam to believe that they are dealing with Hold <unk> , the god of the winter solstice . Dean later admits that he wants to celebrate Christmas since it will be his last chance to — his demonic pact with a demon in " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part Two " only left him with one year to live . Sam responds that he cannot sit around celebrating and pretending that everything is okay while knowing that Dean will not be alive the next Christmas . 
 Further investigation and research lead the brothers to Edward ( Garrett ) and Madge Carrigan ( Gann ) , an apparently perfect couple whom Dean later refers to as " Ozzie and Harriet " ; the makers of the meadowsweet wreaths , the Carrigans lived in Seattle a year prior . Realizing that the couple are actually pagan gods , Sam and Dean break into their home , finding human remains in the basement . However , they are captured by the Carrigans and tied to chairs in the kitchen . The gods reveal that they have been attempting to blend into human society , reducing their annual sacrifices to only a few . They begin preparing Sam and Dean to be sacrificed , but are interrupted by a neighbor at the front door . When the Carrigans return , they find that the brothers have broken free . Knowing that the gods can be killed by evergreen wood , Sam and Dean stab them to death with branches of the Christmas tree . Later on , Dean is surprised to find that Sam has decorated their motel room with Christmas paraphernalia . They exchange gifts , all which were bought from the local gas station , and happily watch a football game on TV . 
 Throughout the episode , flashbacks depict a young Sam ( Ford ) and Dean ( Canipe ) on Christmas Eve of 1991 ; with their father out on a hunt , the brothers are staying alone in a motel room until he returns . As Sam wraps an object he obtained from Bobby Singer as a present for his father , he begins to question Dean about what their father is doing . Although Dean brushes him off , Sam reveals that he has read their father 's hunting journal . Dean acquiesces , and confirms that their father hunts monsters . This revelation terrifies Sam , who is afraid that the monsters will come after them . Later that night , Dean wakes Sam up and claims that their father briefly returned and left presents . When Sam 's gifts end up being a Barbie doll and a sparkly baton , Dean admits that he stole them from a nearby house . Despite this , Sam appreciates what Dean tried to do for him , and gives him the gift meant for their father — the amulet necklace that Dean has worn ever since . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 A fan of Christmas television specials growing up , series creator Eric Kripke desired to make " the most violent Christmas special in the history of television " . The myth of the anti @-@ Claus — an evil antithesis of Santa who " stuffs his victims in sacks and takes them off to eat them " — became the episode 's inspiration . However , the writers were hesitant to establish the creature as an anti @-@ Claus because it would implicate the existence of an actual Santa Claus . To remedy the dilemma , they incorporated the mythology of the pagan god Hold <unk> , who generally is believed to be the precedent of Santa . Kripke proudly noted that the lore is " one of [ their ] most accurate " since most Christmas traditions have pagan origins . 
 Though the episode itself was penned by Jeremy Carver , the writing staff contributed their ideas to the storyline . Within five minutes of brainstorming , they envisioned three scenes they had to do : the teaser , where a grandfather pretending to be Santa is pulled up the chimney and slaughtered ; a boy witnessing the Santa @-@ dressed villain brutally killing his father and then eating one of the cookies for Santa ; and the Winchesters killing someone with a Christmas tree . 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 The initial draft of the script focused solely on the brothers ' attempts to kill the pagan gods ; when the episode came up short , Edlund suggested the addition of flashbacks to Sam and Dean 's childhood . The narrative device provided two revelations : the origins of Dean 's necklace , and the " beginning of Sam 's estrangement from his father and his indoctrination into the supernatural world " . Kripke noted that the staff loves to delve into the Winchesters ' childhoods , and deemed it " too good an opportunity to pass up " to be able to depict how Sam " lost his innocence " . Child actor Ridge Canipe reprised his role as a young Dean , while Colin Ford made his debut as a young Sam . Ford had not viewed the series prior to his audition , but watched the first season to research his character . 
 = = = Christmas theme = = = 
 Principal filming took place in Vancouver , British Columbia , and many visuals were influenced by the holiday theme . The " very festive , warm Christmas tones " of the Carrigans ' home were intended by set designer Jerry Wanek to create a contrast with the brothers ' " little coal @-@ burning old motel " . Diane Widas created the costumes , and had fun making the Carrigans ' Christmas sweaters " very campy " ; Edward 's sweater was originally going to be " over @-@ the @-@ top " with 3D snowmen . Because Santa and his elves worked in a " very tired little theme park " , the elves were given " ill @-@ fitting " costumes ; though new , they were altered to look " shabby " . The Santa 's " grungy " appearance reflected his drunken state . 
 Despite the dark storyline , Kripke found it important to maintain the " trappings of ... a really cheery , traditional Christmas special " . The spinning " A Special Presentation " title at the beginning of the episode was used by CBS in the 1980s , and Kripke was adamant on including it . Though it was very difficult to find who created and scored it , they eventually received permission . Keeping to the holiday theme , the episode shied away from the usual rock @-@ heavy soundtrack , and instead featured Christmas songs remade in different styles by composer Jay Gruska . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Visual effects shots often are produced but ultimately unused , and the episode was no exception . After Madge is killed , the script describes Edward as screaming her name " in all his godlike glory " . The visual effects department interpreted this literally , and had him transforming into a tree creature , " all wooden and gnarled " . However , it was deemed " a little too on the nose " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its initial broadcast , the episode was watched by 3 @.@ 02 million viewers . It received mixed reviews from critics . Julie Pyle of Airlock Alpha " really enjoyed " the " well directed , well written " episode , and " [ giggled ] with glee in anticipation of each ghastly Christmas nightmare " . Although she continued her criticism of the third season 's brighter lighting , she deemed it overall " another Christmas tradition to watch every year with our Charlie Brown Christmas DVDs " . Tina Charles of TV Guide enjoyed the monster of the week , but was " hooked " on the brothers ' storylines . She noted that Ford 's casting as a young Sam was " perfect " , and felt that Canipe 's performance as a young Dean had improved since his previous appearance in the first season . Likewise , Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune called it one of the " gems " of the third season . However , Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune disagreed , and gave the episode a C- . While she enjoyed the flashback sequences and praised Canipe and Ford for their " fierce little performances " , Peterson posited that the main storyline " seemed slapped together " and the pacing " felt sluggish " . Overall , she found it to be " your basic TV fruitcake — a dense combination of half @-@ baked dialogue and stale storytelling studded with chewy bits of sentimentality " . 
 = Shelly Martinez = 
 Shelly Leonor Martinez ( born February 9 , 1980 ) is an American model , actress , professional wrestler and valet . She is known for her work with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) on its ECW brand under the ring name Ariel and for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) under the ring name Salinas as valet to The Latin American Xchange ( LAX ) . 
 Martinez entered professional wrestling in December 2000 . She worked mainly on the independent circuit in Southern California , using the name Desire , competing for promotions , including Revolution Pro Wrestling , Ultimate Pro Wrestling and the Empire Wrestling Federation ( EWF ) . In July 2002 , she teamed with Threat to win the EWF Tag Team Championship . In April 2005 , she signed a contract with WWE , and was assigned to their developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) . While in OVW she used the ring name Shelly , and managed several wrestlers , including Aaron Stevens , Paul Burchill and Seth Skyfire . She moved to the ECW brand in mid @-@ 2006 , and using a gimmick of a tarot reader , managed Kevin Thorn while known as Ariel . In mid @-@ 2007 , she was released from her WWE contract . Later that year , she signed with TNA , and began working as Salinas . She was associated with LAX , and managed both members of the team , Homicide and Hernandez . She left TNA in September 2008 , and has since appeared for several independent promotions . 
 Aside from wrestling , Martinez is also known for her acting and modelling work . She was a contestant on the reality television show , The Search for the Next Elvira , and has also appeared in films . She starred in The Notorious Jewel De 'Nyle & Shelly Martinez , a softcore pornography video alongside Jewel De 'Nyle , and has also posed nude on several occasions . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Martinez began working as a model in order to further her professional wrestling career . She also worked as an actress , and after being cast in an independent film about wrestling , she was introduced to a wrestling promoter and trainer . She trained at his school for two and a half years . Martinez first wrestled in Southern California under the ring name Desire , appearing in several independent promotions such as Revolution Pro Wrestling , Empire Wrestling Federation ( EWF ) and Ultimate Pro Wrestling ( UPW ) , where she worked as the storyline sister of Kyra . While in UPW , she also competed under the name Halloween Barbie . She also had a run in Women 's Extreme Wrestling , where she played the storyline cousin of Mercedes Martinez . On July 19 , 2002 , Martinez , under the name Desire , teamed with Threat to win the vacant EWF Tag Team Championship in a battle royal . They held the championship for 28 days , before losing it to PHAT ( Eric Matlock and Devon Willis ) on August 16 . In December 2004 , Martinez trained at World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) ' s developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) for a few weeks . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In April 2005 , Martinez signed a developmental contract with WWE . By July of that year she had begun training and wrestling in their primary developmental territory OVW , using simply " Shelly " as a ring name . Her first role there had her , along with Beth Phoenix , acting as co @-@ manager for Aaron Stevens . As part of her affiliation with Phoenix and Stevens , Shelly had an erotic gimmick , with a relationship between all three being implied . She was involved in a scripted rivalry with Alexis Laree , with Shelly and Phoenix attacking her on several occasions and the pair wrestled her in handicap matches . In her first singles match in OVW Shelly defeated Laree on October 29 . Shelly and Phoenix also appeared together on the January 27 , 2006 episode of Heat as part of The Heart Throbs ( Romeo Roselli and Antonio Thomas ) " Throb @-@ o @-@ Meter " section , dancing in the ring with the team and teasing a kiss , before being interrupted by Trevor Murdoch . 
 In February 2006 , Shelly began a gimmick of being obsessed with Paul Burchill , who was using a pirate gimmick on SmackDown ! . It began at the television tapings on February 1 , when Burchill had picked her up to perform a piledriver , but instead carried her backstage after looking at her underwear . This obsession provoked a feud with Phoenix , when Shelly attacked Phoenix who was attempting to stop Shelly from attacking Cherry during a match between Burchill and Deuce Shade . As part of the feud , Shelly and Phoenix competed against each other in several matches , including a street fight at the television tapings on April 19 . On the May 6 , 2006 episode of Velocity , Shelly appeared as Burchill 's valet for his match against Road Warrior Animal , and was referred to as his " buxom wench " . Returning to OVW , she became involved in Seth Skyfire 's ongoing feud with Mike " The Miz " Mizanin and Roni Jonah . Upon her debut on the ECW brand in mid @-@ 2006 , Martinez began using the ring name Ariel in OVW as well . In November 2006 , Ariel unsuccessfully challenged Beth Phoenix for the OVW Women 's Championship . Her final appearance in OVW came on January 25 , 2007 , when she and Jon Bolen defeated Stevens and Phoenix . 
 = = = = ECW ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2006 , Martinez joined the ECW brand as Ariel , a tarot reading fortune teller . Originally , Martinez was to be part of a ' vampire ' faction with Gangrel and Kevin Thorn ; however , the faction did not materialise on television . Instead , Ariel and Thorn began appearing in vignettes together , and on July 25 , Thorn made his in @-@ ring debut with Ariel acting as his valet . 
 Ariel then increased her ringside presence during Thorn 's matches , often interfering in his matches , and Thorn began a scripted feud with Balls Mahoney . In order to counteract Ariel 's interference , Mahoney began bringing in Francine as an equalizer . Ariel made her ECW in @-@ ring debut against Francine on September 26 in an " Extreme Catfight " , which ended as a no contest due to interference from both Thorn and Mahoney . The two teams feuded until early October , until Francine was released by WWE . During a match between Thorn and CM Punk , Kelly Kelly interfered in order to help Punk . As a result , Punk won the match , and Ariel and Thorn attacked Kelly after the match . At the December to Dismember pay @-@ per @-@ view , Thorn and Ariel defeated Kelly and Kelly 's on @-@ screen boyfriend Mike Knox in a mixed tag team match , after Knox walked out on Kelly . The next week on ECW , Ariel lost to Kelly in a singles match , when Kelly utilized a schoolgirl for the victory . 
 On February 6 , 2007 , Ariel and Thorn joined Elijah Burke , Matt Striker , and Marcus Cor Von in forming the New Breed stable . Ariel began accompanying the New Breed to the ring during their matches , and appeared at WrestleMania 23 , managing the New Breed during their match against the ECW Originals . Shortly afterward , Burke announced a match between Thorn and CM Punk , after Punk had betrayed the New Breed , but Thorn lost . After the match , Thorn quit the New Breed , as none of the other members interfered during the match to help him . A few weeks later , on May 18 , Martinez was released from her WWE contract . In a 2013 interview , Martinez blamed her release on a confrontation with Dave Batista . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2007 – 2008 , 2016 ) = = = 
 At the Bound for Glory pay @-@ per @-@ view in October 2007 , Martinez participated in a Knockout Gauntlet battle royal to crown the first TNA Knockout Champion , which was won by Gail Kim . Shortly afterward , a masked member of The Latin American Xchange ( LAX ) began interfering in LAX 's matches to help them gain victories and attacking The Rock ' n Rave Infection 's valet , Christy Hemme . At the Final Resolution pay @-@ per @-@ view in January 2008 , the mystery masked wrestler was unveiled as Martinez after attacking Hemme again . On the following episode of Impact ! , Homicide and Hernandez gave her the name " Salinas " . Salinas then began accompanying Homicide and Hernandez to the ring as their valet . 
 She made her in @-@ ring debut for TNA in a singles against Awesome Kong , and was quickly defeated . She then began competing more frequently in matches , including intergender tag team matches alongside Homicide and Hernandez . Salinas participated at Lockdown in the first ever " Queen of the Cage " match , which was won by Roxxi Laveaux . After a Knockouts " Makeover Battle Royal " was announced for the Sacrifice pay @-@ per @-@ view , where one Knockout would get their head shaved , Salinas competed in a match to gain immunity from the head shaving on the May 8 episode of Impact ! , but was unsuccessful . At Sacrifice , the " Makeover Battle Royal " was won by Gail Kim , and Roxxi Laveaux had her head shaved . The same night , Salinas and Hector Guerrero were in the corner of LAX as they won the TNA World Tag Team Championship . As part of LAX 's feud with Beer Money , Inc . , Salinas wrestled their manager Jackie Moore on Impact ! in June 2008 , but lost by submission . She participated in a gauntlet battle royal match for the number one contendership to the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship , but was unsuccessful , and a few weeks later lost a three @-@ on @-@ one handicap match to Awesome Kong and The Beautiful People ( Velvet Sky and Angelina Love ) . After Beer Money , Inc. won the TNA World Tag Team Championship from LAX , the two teams began feuding , and at No Surrender in September , Salinas was attacked off camera by their manager Jackie Moore . This storyline was put in place as a way to take Martinez off television , as she had quit TNA to film an Italian thriller movie . 
 In 2016 , Martinez appeared on TNA 's One Night Only : Knockouts Knockdown 4 , where she fought Rebel in a losing effort . 
 = = = Other promotions = = = 
 Martinez has since wrestled under her real name for the Perros del Mal promotion in Mexico . Martinez is part of both World Independent Ladies Division and World Wrestling Fan Xperience in the Philippines . Martinez has also appeared as a valet for Dragon Gate USA . 
 Beginning in 2010 , Martinez began appearing for Championship Wrestling From Hollywood . She defeated Lucky O 'Shea in her debut match for the promotion in August 2010 . In 2013 , she was briefly associated with Todd Chandler , before switching her affections to Ricky Mandel , appearing as his storyline girlfriend . 
 On May 10 , 2014 , Martinez and JT Dunn competed in the 2014 WSU Queen and King of the Ring tournament , losing to the team of Candice <unk> and Joey Ryan . 
 = = Other media = = 
 She also starred in a pin @-@ up film titled American <unk> Vol . 2 . Martinez collaborated with Jewel De 'Nyle on an all @-@ female spanking and soft @-@ core bondage video entitled The Notorious Jewel De 'Nyle & Shelly Martinez . In October 2009 , Martinez posed nude for a contest called " THE 1 Contest " . In November 2012 Martinez appeared on the fourth season of the Bad Girls Club spin @-@ off Love Games : Bad Girls Need Love Too . 
 During her time on the Love Games she appeared in Episode 6 as Jamin 's ex and competed in the <unk> Challenge . She was a part of the question therapy after the challenge . 
 She starred in the independent supernatural horror movie Dead Things . In addition , she was a contestant on the reality show The Search for the Next Elvira , which debuted October 13 , 2007 , on the Fox Reality Channel . Martinez appears in the beginning of the Mötley Crüe music video for " Saints of Los Angeles " . In May 2011 , Martinez , Raven , and Cheerleader Melissa filmed the music video for the Smashing Pumpkins ' song " <unk> " . 
 As of late 2011 , Martinez has been the official Hollywood event correspondent and hostess for the horror news website <unk> 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Martinez is an advocate of medical marijuana as well as an animal rights activist . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 FTS ( Fun Time Shelly ) ( <unk> STO ) 
 The Shelly @-@ shock ( Sitout facebuster ) 
 Signature moves 
 666 Forearm ( Multiple forearm smashes ) 
 Big boot 
 <unk> Bulldog ( Wheelbarrow bulldog ) 
 Corner foot choke 
 Camel clutch 
 Double choke 
 Diving crossbody 
 Drop toe @-@ hold 
 Elbow drop , with theatrics 
 Tornado DDT 
 Thesz press , followed by multiple punches 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Aaron Stevens 
 Paul Burchill 
 Seth Skyfire 
 Kevin Thorn 
 Elijah Burke 
 Marcus Cor Von 
 Matt Striker 
 Homicide 
 Hernandez 
 Entrance Themes 
 " Mi <unk> " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; 2006 @-@ 2007 ) 
 " To Live and Die In LAX ( Instrumental ) " by Dale Oliver and Serg Salinas ( TNA ; 2007 @-@ 2008 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Empire Wrestling Federation 
 EWF Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Threat 
 = Cesc Fàbregas = 
 Francesc " Cesc " Fàbregas Soler ( Catalan : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 4 May 1987 ) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays as a central midfielder for English club Chelsea and the Spain national team . 
 Fàbregas came through La Masia , Barcelona 's youth academy , leaving at 16 when he was signed by English Premier League side Arsenal in September 2003 . Following injuries to key midfielders in the early part of the 2004 – 05 season , he went on establish himself in the team . He broke several of the club 's records in the process , earning a reputation as one of the best players in his position , and won the FA Cup in 2005 . After a protracted transfer saga Fàbregas left London on 15 August 2011 to return to Barcelona in a deal worth up to £ 35 million . During his three @-@ year spell at the Camp Nou , Fàbregas played in alongside Xavi and Andrés Iniesta and won a La Liga title , the Copa del Rey , the FIFA Club World Cup , the UEFA Super Cup and two Spanish Super Cups . He returned to London in June 2014 to Arsenal 's cross @-@ town rivals Chelsea for a fee of £ 30 million , and in his first year there he helped to secure League Cup and Premier League triumphs . 
 Internationally , Fàbregas made his debut for the Spanish national team in March 2006 . He represented his country in the 2006 FIFA World Cup , UEFA Euro 2008 , 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup , 2010 World Cup , Euro 2012 , 2013 Confederations Cup , the 2014 World Cup and Euro 2016 . He was a key figure in Spain 's European Championship victories in 2008 and 2012 and their 2010 World Cup triumph in which he supplied the pass for Andrés Iniesta 's winning goal in the final . On 12 October 2015 , Fàbregas earned his 100th cap for Spain . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Arenys de Mar , Barcelona , Catalonia , to Francesc Fàbregas Sr. , who runs a property company , and <unk> Soler , the owner of a pastry company , Fàbregas has supported FC Barcelona since childhood and went to his first match when he was nine months old with his grandfather . He began his club football career with CE Mataró before being signed for Barcelona 's La Masia youth academy aged ten in 1997 . His first coach , Señor <unk> , reportedly did not select Fàbregas for matches against Barcelona in an attempt to hide him from their scouts . This tactic , however , was unable to withstand Barcelona for long , and Mataró gave in and allowed Fàbregas to train with Barcelona one day per week . Eventually Fàbregas joined Barcelona 's academy full @-@ time . His initial training was as a defensive midfielder playing alongside notable names such as Gerard Piqué and Lionel Messi . Although he was a prolific scorer , sometimes scoring even more than 30 goals in a season for the club 's youth teams , he did not manage to play a first team game at the Camp Nou . During his time at Barcelona 's youth academy , Fàbregas idolised Barcelona 's then @-@ captain and number four Pep Guardiola , who would later give Fàbregas his shirt as consolation when Fàbregas ' parents divorced . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 = = = = Adapting to England = = = = 
 Sensing that he would have limited opportunities at Barcelona , Fàbregas joined Arsenal in their Academy , signing for the London club on 11 September 2003 . Initially , he found life difficult in England 's capital but soon struck a friendship with Spanish @-@ speaking teammate Philippe Senderos , who helped him settle down . As a 16 @-@ year @-@ old , Fàbregas did not contemplate breaking into the first team immediately but looked up to senior players like Patrick Vieira and Gilberto Silva , while concentrating on training and learning the English language . He nevertheless made his debut for Arsenal not long after , on 28 October 2003 , in a League Cup tie at home to Rotherham United . In doing so , he became Arsenal 's youngest @-@ ever first team player , aged 16 years and 177 days . He then became the youngest goalscorer in Arsenal 's history in a later round of the League Cup , scoring in a 5 – 1 victory against Wolverhampton Wanderers . Although Arsenal went on to win the league unbeaten in the 2003 – 04 season , Fàbregas was not awarded a winner 's medal because he did not play a single league game . 
 It was not until the start of the 2004 – 05 season that the Spaniard started making first team appearances in matches outside the League Cup . His first match of the season was against Manchester United in the FA Community Shield . Following an injury to Vieira , Fàbregas stepped in and made four consecutive Premier League starts . He was praised for his performances in those games , even claiming a goal against Blackburn Rovers in a 3 – 0 victory , and becoming Arsenal 's youngest @-@ ever goalscorer in a league game . With further injuries to Edu and Gilberto Silva , he received more playing time in all competitions . He signed his first professional contract with Arsenal in September 2004 , which committed his long @-@ term future to the club . In October 2004 , Arsenal lost 2 – 0 to Manchester United , ending their 49 @-@ match unbeaten run in the Premier League . The match was dubbed the " Battle of the Buffet " after pizza was thrown at Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson at the end of the match in the players ' tunnel by a then @-@ unknown Arsenal player . Speculation that the player was Fàbregas was confirmed in November 2011 by former Arsenal player Martin Keown on a phone @-@ in show on BBC Radio 5 Live . In the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League , he became the second @-@ youngest goalscorer in the competition 's history after scoring the third goal against Rosenborg in a 5 – 1 win . He concluded his season by winning his first honours with Arsenal when he was in the starting eleven that defeated Manchester United on penalties in the 2005 FA Cup Final . 
 = = = = Making the starting eleven = = = = 
 After the departure of Patrick Vieira to Juventus , Fàbregas was given the Frenchman 's number 4 shirt and featured regularly in the Arsenal central midfield alongside Gilberto Silva . He made 49 appearances in all competitions during the 2005 – 06 season . Despite his young age , his performances came under greater scrutiny due to his increased involvement in the first team . Further , as Fàbregas possessed a smaller frame and played with less aggression than Vieira , there were initially doubts over his ability to fill in the void left by the Frenchman . Nevertheless , Fàbregas asserted his own style of play and impressed pundits in the Champions League against Real Madrid and Juventus . In the latter , he scored Arsenal 's first goal and set up Thierry Henry for the second , at the same time proving that he could compete against tough , hard @-@ tackling midfielders like Vieira . He then played in the Final against his former club Barcelona , but Arsenal were defeated 2 – 1 , completing a trophyless 2005 – 06 campaign for Arsenal . 
 Fàbregas ' increase in exposure drew transfer speculation during the summer ; Real Madrid expressed a desire to sign the Spaniard despite his long @-@ term contract with Arsenal , but Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger stated that Arsenal would not listen to any offers . In September 2006 , with six years left on his deal , Arsenal offered a new five @-@ year deal ( with an option to extend by a further three years ) to the midfielder , which he signed on 19 October 2006 . While the contract was unusually long , Fàbregas cited Arsenal 's playing style and Wenger as reasons for his long @-@ term commitment to the club . 
 The 2006 – 07 season was a learning experience for the young Arsenal squad and Fàbregas . The club again failed to secure any major honours and were defeated by city rivals Chelsea in the League Cup Final . Fàbregas , however , emerged as one of the key creative players for the team , playing in every single league game . He kick @-@ started Arsenal 's 2006 – 07 UEFA Champions League campaign when he scored a brace in a 3 – 0 win over Dinamo Zagreb in a qualifier match . In the Premier League , he notched up 13 assists , which was the second @-@ highest total in the league . He ended the season with several individual honours , including the Golden Boy award , presented by the Italian paper <unk> , based on a poll of leading writers across Europe . He was also named in the 2006 UEFA Team of the Year , and named FA Premier League Player of the Month for January 2007 . Additionally , he was nominated for both PFA Players ' Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year , although both awards went to Manchester United 's Cristiano Ronaldo . In June 2007 , he was named Arsenal 's Player of the Season , taking in 60 % of the votes . 
 The 2007 – 08 season began with much uncertainty for Arsenal . First , David Dein , the club 's vice @-@ chairman , left amidst allegations of internal strife , followed by the departure of the club 's all @-@ time top goalscorer and captain , Thierry Henry , who signed for Barcelona . There was also speculation over Wenger 's future with the club . Fàbregas knew that he would become the most important player for Arsenal , but stated he was ready for the challenge . He started the season well , chalking up goals and assists , and website <unk> attributed the early success of Arsenal to the young Spaniard . His start to the season also earned him the O2 Player of the Month award from Arsenal fans for August , September and October , as well as the Premier League Player of the Month for September . With Arsenal leading the league table until March , Fàbregas was equally instrumental in the club 's 2007 – 08 Champions League campaign ; in the return leg against Milan , the midfielder scored late in the game to send Arsenal into the quarter @-@ finals . Though Arsenal ended the season trophyless , Fàbregas amassed several personal awards . On 11 April 2008 , Fàbregas was nominated for the PFA Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year awards for the second year running ; he was later crowned the winner of the latter , and named in the PFA Team of the Year . He was also named the 2007 – 08 <unk> Player of the Season . 
 = = = = Captaincy = = = = 
 On 24 November 2008 , 14 league games into the 2008 – 09 season , Fàbregas was named as the successor to William Gallas as club captain . However , just as Arsenal were getting back into the title race after a poor start to the season , the Spaniard was ruled out for four months after sustaining a knee injury against Liverpool . The Gunners eventually finished the season without any silverware , coming in fourth in the league and being knocked out at the semi @-@ finals of the 2008 – 09 Champions League campaign . In tandem with Arsenal 's policy to groom its young players , the team that Fàbregas led into the new season consisted mostly of the same young nucleus as before , with the likes of Nicklas Bendtner , Gaël Clichy , Abou Diaby , Denílson , Samir Nasri , Alex Song and Theo Walcott in tow . 
 In the opening league game of 2009 – 10 season , Fàbregas scored a brace and managed two assists in Arsenal 's 6 – 1 away win against Everton . Arsenal went on to secure qualification for the 2009 – 10 Champions League campaign by beating Celtic over two legs , but their early momentum to the season was disrupted by consecutive league game losses to Manchester United and Manchester City . The team bounced back strongly after this setback , and with Fàbregas being prolific in scoring and setting up his teammates , it went unbeaten in the next 13 games . Despite suffering four league losses even before mid @-@ season approached , Arsenal managed to lead the league standings after 22 games . On 31 March 2010 , in the Champions League first leg of the quarter @-@ final against Barcelona , Fàbregas suffered a leg fracture before scoring the equalising goal in the game which ended 2 – 2 . Arsenal , who were four points behind league leaders Manchester United , were deprived of their captain for the remaining six league games of the season ; they were subsequently eliminated by Barcelona in the Champions League , and fell out of the league title race . Fàbregas was later named to the PFA Team of the Year . 
 Before the start of the 2010 – 11 season , there was once again intense media speculation about the Spaniard 's future , and in June 2010 , a € 35 million bid from Barcelona was rejected . The 2010 – 11 season turned out to be an extremely competitive one in the Premier League ; even though Arsenal had lost five games before mid @-@ season , they were jostling for pole position with Manchester United and Manchester City . Going into late February , Arsenal were still in contention for the quadruple , but within a span of two weeks they lost in the League Cup final , were eliminated by Barcelona in the Round of 16 of the Champions League , and defeated in the FA Cup quarter @-@ final . Although Fàbregas did not play in the League Cup Final , it was his misplaced backheel pass during the second leg of the Champions League game against Barcelona that allowed them to level the aggregate score . Arsenal remained in contention for the league title until a series of draws in the final third of the season caused them to fall too far behind league leaders Manchester United ; they ended the season fourth . The following season was once again marked by uncertainty . Barcelona made several bids for Fàbregas , while Nasri , Arsenal 's star performer the previous campaign , was courted by Manchester City . 
 = = = Barcelona = = = 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 On 15 August 2011 , Barcelona signed Fàbregas for an initial fee of € 29 million with a further € 5 million in variables , plus Fàbregas would pay Arsenal € 1 million a year from his wage for five years. ending one of the most protracted transfer sagas in recent times . Statistics show that in the five years prior to Fàbregas 's departure from Arsenal , Fàbregas created 466 goal @-@ scoring chances , made 86 assists and scored 48 goals , all three statistics topping those of new teammates Xavi and Andrés Iniesta , despite both having made more appearances in the same period . 
 Fàbregas joined a team that had won three La Liga titles in a row and two Champions League titles in three years , and one that featured the likes of Lionel Messi , Xavi Hernández , Andrés Iniesta and David Villa . He made his debut in the second leg of the Supercopa de España , coming on as a substitute against Real Madrid . Barcelona won the tie 3 – 2 and 5 – 4 on aggregate . He scored his first goal in a 2 – 0 win against Porto as Barcelona won the 2011 UEFA Super Cup , and his first league goal on his league debut against Villarreal . He went on to score three more league goals in the month of September , including a late equaliser in the 2 – 2 away draw to Valencia . 
 Fàbregas then spent the majority of October sidelined with a hamstring injury picked up on international duty . He made his return , and scored , in a 4 – 0 away victory to Viktoria Plzeň in the Champions League . He then made his league return in the 2 – 2 draw away to Athletic Bilbao , scoring a goal in the same match . Fàbregas then went on to score a brace in a 5 – 0 home victory against Levante before netting in a 3 – 1 away victory against Real Madrid . Fàbregas later scored against Brazilian club Santos to help Barcelona to a 4 – 0 victory in the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup final . 
 Fàbregas got another brace in a 4 – 0 victory against CA Osasuna in the Copa del Rey . He also scored in the semi @-@ final of the competition against Valencia to help Barcelona to the final with a 3 – 1 win on aggregate . He kept a regular run in the Barcelona side for the rest of the season , including appearances in both semi @-@ final legs of the 3 – 2 aggregate defeat to Chelsea in the Champions League , and a substitute appearance in the 3 – 0 victory against Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final . 
 Fàbregas ended his first season at Barcelona by winning the 2011 – 12 Copa del Rey , 2011 Supercopa de España , 2011 UEFA Super Cup and the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup , notching 15 goals and 20 assists in 48 appearances and four best midfielder awards . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 Fàbregas ended his long goal drought for his club when he scored his first league goals of the season with a brace against Sevilla in a 3 – 2 away victory . He then scored three goals in October , coming in the league , Champions League and the Copa del Rey . He scored again on 25 November in a 4 – 0 win away to Levante . On 13 January 2013 , Fàbregas scored in a 3 – 1 win away to Málaga . Fàbregas scored his first hat @-@ trick of his career against Mallorca in a 5 – 0 victory on 6 April 2013 . He ended his second season at Barcelona by winning the first league title of his career , with a record 100 points . Barcelona were eliminated , however , in the semi @-@ finals of both the Copa del Rey , to rivals Real Madrid , and the Champions League , to winners Bayern Munich . Fàbregas ended the season with 14 goals and 12 assists in 48 appearances in all competitions . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 Barcelona began the season by winning the Supercopa de España . In the opening game of the league season on 18 August , Fàbregas provided five assists in a 7 – 0 win over Levante . He scored 8 goals in 36 league matches , including braces in away wins over Granada on 10 November and Getafe on 22 December , the latter including a penalty kick . He also scored the only goal of the game on 1 October as Barcelona won away at Celtic in the group stage of the Champions League , heading in Alexis Sánchez 's cross in the 73rd minute . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 On 12 June 2014 , English Premier League team Chelsea signed Fàbregas on a five @-@ year contract for a fee in the region of € 33 million . Following his transfer he took the number 4 shirt , previously worn by David Luiz . Fàbregas spoke of his transfer , saying , " I asked Barcelona to find a way for me to leave the club , The president tried to stop the sale , but I already had my mind made up . " He went on to say , " If I didn 't think that I 'd be happy at Chelsea , I would 've never made this decision . Above all , I want to be happy both professionally and personally . " 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 Fàbregas made his competitive debut for Chelsea on 18 August as the team began their league season away to Burnley ; he played the full 90 minutes of a 3 – 1 victory , providing two assists . He was a nominee for the Premier League Player of the Month in August 2014 , with the accolade going instead to another new Chelsea signing , Diego Costa . On 13 September 2014 , after providing two assists in Chelsea 's 4 – 2 victory over Swansea City , Fàbregas became the first player ever in Premier League history to record at least one assist in six successive games ; four under Chelsea and two under Arsenal during the 2010 – 11 season . Four days later , he scored his first goal for the club , opening a 1 – 1 draw at home against Schalke 04 in Chelsea 's first match of the Champions League group stage . 
 His first league goal for Chelsea gave them a 2 – 1 win at Crystal Palace on 18 October , capping off a 19 @-@ pass move . Fàbregas also completed 123 passes , the most by any player on either side . On 10 December , with Chelsea already through to the knockout stage as group winners , Fàbregas scored an eighth @-@ minute penalty to open a 3 – 1 Champions League victory over Sporting CP . Twelve days later he scored a second league goal , set up by Eden Hazard and concluding a 2 – 0 win away to Stoke . 
 Fàbregas was fitted with a protective mask after breaking his nose in a collision with Charlie Adam during the reverse fixture on 4 April . Eight days later , he scored the only goal of the game in the 88th minute in a victory over Queens Park Rangers at Loftus Road . On 3 May , the day before his 28th birthday , he won his first Premier League title at the ninth attempt , following a 1 – 0 home win over Crystal Palace . During the penultimate game of the season , away at The Hawthorns against West Bromwich Albion , Fàbregas was shown the red card and booed off by fans for deliberately kicking the ball at Chris Brunt 's head while players were speaking to referee Mike Jones . On appeal , the suspension for this red card was cut from three matches to one . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 Fàbregas scored his first goal of the season on 16 September , as Chelsea defeated Maccabi Tel Aviv 4 – 0 in the Champions League . He , Costa and Oscar were jeered by the crowd in December after the dismissal of Mourinho , with the supporters believing that the trio 's conduct and poor performances were more culpable for the team 's poor form . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth team = = = 
 Although he features regularly for the Spain national football team , Fàbregas ' international career began at youth level . At the 2003 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Championship held in Finland , he finished as top scorer of the tournament despite playing in midfield , and was voted Player of the Tournament . Spain finished runners @-@ up in the tournament to Brazil . Fàbregas was next involved in the 2004 UEFA U @-@ 17 European Championship , where Spain also finished runners @-@ up . He was named the Golden Player of the tournament by FIFA . 
 = = = Senior team = = = 
 After emerging as one of Arsenal 's key players in only his second season at the club , it did not take long for Fàbregas to be called up to the senior squad . Noting his impressive performances in Arsenal 's 2006 Champions League campaign , Spain coach Luis Aragonés named the teenager in the team for a friendly against Ivory Coast . In that game , Fàbregas became the youngest player capped for Spain in 70 years , beating Sergio Ramos ' record . He received favourable reviews for his début , and was involved in the build @-@ up to Spain 's first goal in the 3 – 2 victory over the Ivorians . 
 = = = = 2006 World Cup = = = = 
 On 15 May 2006 , Fàbregas was selected for the Spanish 2006 FIFA World Cup squad . During the tournament , he came on as a second @-@ half substitute in Spain 's first two group matches , contributing an assist to striker Fernando Torres in their 3 – 1 victory against Tunisia . He then started alongside Spain 's reserve players ( including then @-@ Arsenal teammate José Antonio Reyes ) in Spain 's third group match against Saudi Arabia . He earned a starting role in Spain 's first knockout @-@ stage match against France , in place of Marcos Senna , but Spain lost 3 – 1 . Fàbregas also became the youngest player in Spanish football history to participate in a World Cup when he came on as a substitute for Luis García after 77 minutes in the 4 – 0 victory against Ukraine on 13 June 2006 ; he was then 19 years and 41 days old . He was later nominated for the Gillette Young Player of the World Cup , but Germany 's Lukas Podolski won the award . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2008 = = = = 
 In UEFA Euro 2008 , Fàbregas was handed the squad number 10 , rather than 18 which he had previously held . Despite featuring mostly as a substitute , the midfielder made a considerable impact in Spain 's campaign . He scored his first international goal in that competition in Spain 's 4 – 1 win over Russia and also had an assist in that game . Spain won all three of their group games and met Italy in the quarter @-@ finals . In that match , Fàbregas scored the winning penalty in the penalty shoot @-@ out after the teams remained deadlocked 0 – 0 after extra time . In the semi @-@ finals , Spain defeated Russia 3 – 0 with Fàbregas providing two assists . The midfielder made the starting eleven in the Final against Germany where Spain prevailed 1 – 0 ; this was Spain 's first major title since 1964 . For his efforts , Fàbregas was named in the Team of the Tournament , a 23 @-@ man squad selected by the UEFA Technical Team . 
 = = = = 2009 Confederations Cup = = = = 
 After missing out for several months due to his injury , Fàbregas regained his place as a regular in Vicente del Bosque 's squad . In June , he was named in the team for the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup . He scored his second international goal in a 5 – 0 win against New Zealand in the competition 's group stage . In the semi @-@ finals against the United States ( which Fàbregas started ) , Spain suffered a shock 2 – 0 loss , and its 15 @-@ game winning streak came to an end . 
 = = = = 2010 World Cup = = = = 
 Fàbregas was selected as a part of del Bosque 's 23 @-@ man squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . With del Bosque preferring a starting midfield of Sergio Busquets , Xabi Alonso , Xavi and Andrés Iniesta , Fàbregas did not start in any of Spain 's games in the competition . He featured as a substitute in four of their seven matches , in which Spain lost their opening game before winning the next six en route to the final . In the Final itself , Fàbregas set up the extra @-@ time winner for Iniesta to win Spain the World Cup for the first time in their history . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2012 = = = = 
 Fàbregas was selected as a part of del Bosque 's 23 @-@ man squad for UEFA Euro 2012 . Fàbregas started in the front three of a 4 – 3 – 3 formation against Italy in Spain 's opening Group C match . In the 64th minute he scored the equaliser after Italy had taken the lead in the 61st minute ; the game finished in a 1 – 1 draw . He then scored his second goal of the tournament in the group stage match against Ireland . When Spain faced Portugal in the semi @-@ finals and the game remained scoreless at the end of extra time , Fàbregas scored the winning penalty of the shootout as Spain prevailed 4 – 2 . In the final against Italy , Fàbregas started and provided the assist to David Silva for the game 's opening goal , en route to a 4 – 0 Spain victory . 
 = = = = 2013 Confederations Cup = = = = 
 Fàbregas was named in the provisional squad in the lead up to the 2013 Confederations Cup by del Bosque . He made two starts in the competition and one substitute appearance , all during the group stage of the competition , and assisting a goal in Spain 's opening group match against Uruguay , which Spain won 2 – 1 . Spain won all their group matches , only conceding a goal and scoring 15 . Spain advanced to the final of the competition for the first time , after a lengthy and difficult semi @-@ final clash in a re @-@ match against their opponents of the European Championship Final of the previous year , Italy . The match ended 0 – 0 after extra time and Spain won 7 – 6 in the resulting penalty shoot @-@ out , but were eventually defeated 3 – 0 in the final by hosts and defending champions Brazil . 
 = = = = 2014 World Cup = = = = 
 Fàbregas was named in Spain 's 30 @-@ man provisional squad for the World Cup , and was also included in the final list for the tournament . He made his debut in the tournament in the opening 1 – 5 defeat to the Netherlands , replacing David Silva for the last 12 minutes . With Spain already eliminated , he played 22 minutes of 3 – 0 win against Australia in the last group game , this time in place of Santi Cazorla . 
 = = = = UEFA Euro 2016 = = = = 
 On 31 March 2015 , Fàbregas captained Spain for the first time , in their 0 – 2 friendly defeat to the Netherlands at the Amsterdam Arena . He earned his 100th cap on 12 October 2015 , becoming the tenth Spaniard to do so , in a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying match against Ukraine with Spain already qualified . In his milestone match at the Olympic Stadium in Kiev , he won a first @-@ half penalty when fouled by Oleksandr <unk> , but his spot kick was saved by Andriy <unk> . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 = = = Arsenal and Chelsea = = = 
 Originally brought to Arsenal as a youth to slowly develop via the League Cup , Fàbregas was unexpectedly deployed as Arsenal 's starting central midfielder following injuries to fellow midfielders Patrick Vieira , Gilberto Silva and Edu during the 2004 – 05 season . While defensive midfielder Vieira served as his role model and mentor , he styled his game after his childhood hero and compatriot Pep Guardiola , whose shirt number 4 he would inherit in his subsequent move to Barcelona in 2011 . Because he was of a different mould from his Arsenal predecessors who played in the same position , this led to criticisms of his lightweight frame and less aggressive style of play , due to his development in the Barcelona Youth Academy , with former teammate Ashley Cole criticising the Spaniard as " an unproven featherweight " in his autobiography . 
 However , it did not take long for Fàbregas to become one of the most coveted and celebrated young talents in the game with his success at Arsenal . Functioning mostly as a playmaker and renowned for his passing range , he was described as the general of Arsenal 's first team , bringing vision , creativity , and an innate understanding of timing and space to Arsenal 's intricate passing game , displaying maturity that belied his age . He was the main creative force when he was at Arsenal , as exemplified by his 16 assists in all competitions in the 2006 – 07 season . Between 2006 – 07 and 2010 – 11 , Fàbregas created the most chances in the top @-@ division leagues of England , Spain , Italy , Germany and France . 
 At Arsenal , Fàbregas also often assumed responsibility for set pieces , taking corners , free kicks and penalties . By his own admission , scoring was a weaker part of his game in his first few seasons at Arsenal ; wasteful finishing also being symptomatic of the larger problem surrounding Arsenal in the 2005 – 06 and 2006 – 07 seasons . This changed initially in the 2007 – 08 season when he scored 11 goals in his first 16 games , and Arsenal manager Wenger claimed that the Spaniard 's previous inability to score was down to a mental state , and even compared the Spaniard to Michel Platini , a French midfielder renowned for scoring . There were also concerns raised over the large number of games Fàbregas was playing for club and country at such a young age , but while he initially avoided long spells on the sidelines , he played significantly fewer games due to injury in his last three seasons with Arsenal . 
 At Chelsea , Fàbregas played a similar playmaking role in midfield , using his technique , ball control , vision , and passing ability to dictate the tempo of his team 's play , while he was supported by defensive midfielders , in order to give him more space and time on the ball . In this deeper creative role , he excelled in Chelsea 's new style of play under Mourinho , where he proved to be an effective assist @-@ provider . 
 = = = Barcelona and Spain = = = 
 At Barcelona , Fàbregas continued to play a prominent midfield and playmaking role , although he was moved into a more offensive position than that which he had occupied at Arsenal . His new role with Barcelona was comparable to that which he had played with the Spanish national team . He effortlessly fit into Pep Guardiola 's 4 – 3 – 3 formation , participating in the midfield 's trademark " tiki @-@ taka " patient , attacking , build @-@ up style of play , also associated with the Spanish national squad under Luis Aragonés and Vicente del Bosque . Fàbregas was used in a variety of different roles under Guardiola , scoring several goals and providing many assists . Due to the presence of Xavi , Sergio Busquets and Andrés Iniesta in the three man midfield , as well as the emerging Thiago , Fàbregas was often employed out of position as a winger , or even as a supporting forward under Guardiola . He regularly performed in the role that Lionel Messi had often occupied during the previous season , functioning as a false @-@ 9 in a 4 – 6 – 0 formation ( a role which he would also play for Spain at Euro 2012 under Del Bosque ) , whilst Messi would play as a right winger or second forward . Fàbregas was , however , still used in deeper roles on occasion , as an attacking , deep @-@ lying or central playmaking midfielder , in particular under Guardiola 's immediate successors , Tito Vilanova and Gerardo Martino . 
 = = Outside football = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Fàbregas and his partner Daniella <unk> have two daughters , Lia ( born 2013 ) and Capri ( born 2015 ) . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 In 2011 , Fàbregas signed a sponsorship deal with German sportswear and equipment supplier , Puma . He appeared in an advert for the new Puma PowerCat 1 @.@ 12 in September 2011 and was one of the flagship wearers of Puma 's PowerCat range of football boots . When the PowerCat was succeeded by the <unk> , again Fàbregas was the forefront of Puma 's marketing campaign . In January 2014 , the brand launched a C4 <unk> boot , specifically designed for just Fàbregas to wear . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 Fàbregas starred in his own one @-@ time only television programme , called " The Cesc Fàbregas Show : Nike Live " , that aired on 19 May 2008 . The programme was sponsored by Nike and was shown on Sky Sports . The show featured Fàbregas in several sketches with then Arsenal teammates like Philippe Senderos and Nicklas Bendtner , as well as coach Arsène Wenger , Fàbregas ' parents and Little Britain star Matt Lucas . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Statistics accurate as of 2 May 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics accurate as of 1 June 2016 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 As of match played 1 June 2016 . Spain score listed first , score column indicates score after each Fábregas goal . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Arsenal 
 FA Cup : 2004 – 05 
 FA Community Shield : 2004 
 UEFA Champions League : Runners @-@ up 2005 – 06 
 Barcelona 
 La Liga : 2012 – 13 
 Copa del Rey : 2011 – 12 
 Supercopa de España : 2011 , 2013 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2011 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2011 
 Chelsea 
 Premier League : 2014 – 15 
 Football League Cup : 2014 – 15 
 = = = International = = = 
 Spain 
 FIFA World Cup : 2010 
 UEFA European Championship : 2008 , 2012 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Championship Golden Ball : 2003 
 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Championship Golden Shoe : 2003 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship Golden Player : 2004 
 Bravo Award : 2006 
 Golden Boy : 2006 
 UEFA Team of the Year ( 2 ) : 2006 , 2008 
 Premier League Player of the Month ( 2 ) : January 2007 , September 2007 
 PFA Young Player of the Year : 2007 – 08 
 PFA Team of the Year ( 2 ) : 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 
 UEFA Euro Team of the Tournament ( 2 ) : 2008 , 2012 
 ESM Team of the Year ( 3 ) : 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 , 2014 – 15 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 Prince of Asturias Awards : 2010 
 Gold Medal of the Royal Order of Sporting Merit : 2011 
 = S.S.C. Napoli = 
 Società Sportiva Calcio Napoli , commonly referred to as Napoli ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) , is a professional Italian football club based in Naples , Campania . The club plays in Serie A , the top flight of Italian football where it is currently competing in the 2015 – 16 season . One of the more successful clubs in Italian football , they have won 12 domestic trophies ; the Serie A twice , in 1986 – 87 and 1989 – 90 and runners up 6 times , they also have won the Coppa Italia five times and been runners up 4 times , and the Supercoppa Italiana twice . On the European stage they have won the UEFA Cup in 1988 – 89 . 
 Napoli is also the most successful football club in Southern Italy and the 4th most supported football club in Italy after Juventus and the two Milanese clubs Internazionale and Milan . The club is ranked as the 5th most valuable football club in Serie A behind Internazionale , Roma , Milan and Juventus in terms of annual revenue , generating € 125 @.@ 5 million during the 2015 financial year . 
 Napoli is also one of the associate members of the European Club Association , an organisation that replaced the previous G @-@ 14 which consists of major football clubs in Europe . According to Deloitte Football Money League , as of 2014 , Napoli is ranked as the 15th richest football club in the world . 
 Napoli is also ranked the 8th best club in European Football and the 2nd best club in Italy according to UEFA rankings as of January 2016 passing clubs like Chelsea and Paris Saint @-@ Germain which is a huge improvement from the 2010 @-@ 2011 season , when Napoli was only ranked the 106th best club in Europe . 
 The club has one of the highest incomes and largest fanbases in the world . Napoli was named the seventeenth most valuable association football club in the world by Forbes , valued at $ 353 million , in 2015 and one of only 7 of the top 20 most valuable clubs in the world to have no debt . As of 2015 Napoli had an annual turnover of $ 224 million which would be the 3rd highest in Serie A and the 16th highest turnover in the world for a football club . 
 The club is famous around the world for being the club where Diego Maradona played his football and became one of the greatest footballers of all time . Napoli is also the club where Ballon d 'Or and World Cup winner Fabio Cannavaro started his career and has been home to many other great players , including Gianfranco Zola . 
 The official anthem of the club is " ' O <unk> ' <unk> " . 
 = = History = = 
 The first club was founded as Naples Foot @-@ Ball & Cricket Club in 1904 by English sailor William <unk> and his associate Hector M. Bayon . Neapolitans such as <unk> , <unk> and Amedeo <unk> were also involved , the latter of whom was the club 's first president . The original kit of the club was a sky blue and navy blue striped shirt , with black shorts . Naples ' first match was a 3 – 2 win against the English crew of the boat <unk> with goals from MacPherson , <unk> and Chaudoir . The name of the club was shortened to Naples Foot @-@ Ball Club in 1906 . 
 Early into its existence , the Italian Football Championship was limited to just Northern clubs , so Southern clubs competed against sailors or in cups such as Thomas Lipton 's Lipton Challenge Cup . In the cup competed between Naples and Palermo FBC , Naples won three finals . The foreign contingent at the club broke off in 1912 to form Internazionale Napoli , in time for both club 's debut in the Italian Championship of 1912 – 13 . Though the sides had a keen rivalry in the Campania section , they were not as successful outside of it and a few years after World War I , they merged as Foot @-@ Ball Club Internazionale @-@ Naples , also known as FBC <unk> . 
 = = = Associazione Calcio Napoli = = = 
 Under the presidency of Giorgio Ascarelli , the club changed its name to Associazione Calcio Napoli on 23 August 1926 . After a poor start , with a sole point in an entire championship , Napoli was readmitted to Serie A 's forerunner National Division by the Italian FA , and began to improve thanks in part to Paraguayan @-@ born Attila <unk> , who was the first fully fledged hero to the fans . He was a capable goal @-@ scorer and eventually set the all @-@ time goal @-@ scoring record for Napoli , which still stands today . 
 Napoli entered the Serie A @-@ era under the management of William Garbutt . During his six @-@ year stint , the club would be dramatically transformed , frequently finishing in the top half of the table . This included two third @-@ place finishes during the 1932 – 33 and 1933 – 34 seasons , with added notables such as Antonio Vojak , Arnaldo <unk> and Carlo Buscaglia . For the years leading up to World War II Napoli went into decline , surviving relegation in 1939 – 40 by goal average . 
 Napoli lost a closely contested relegation battle at the end of 1942 and were relegated to Serie B. They moved from Stadio Giorgio Ascarelli to Stadio Arturo <unk> and stayed in Serie B until after the war . When play continued , Napoli earned the right to compete in Serie A , but were relegated after two seasons for a bribery scandal . The club bounced back to ensure top flight football at the start of the 1950s . Napoli moved to their new home ground Stadio San Paolo in 1959 . Despite erratic league form with highs and lows during this period , including a further relegation and promotion , Napoli had some cup success when they beat SPAL to lift the Coppa Italia in 1962 , with goals from Gianni Corelli and Pierluigi <unk> . Their fourth relegation cut celebrations short the following season . 
 = = = Napoli on the rise : Maradona era = = = 
 As the club changed their name to Società Sportiva Calcio Napoli on 25 June 1964 they began to rise up again , gaining promotion in 1964 – 65 . Under the management of former player Bruno <unk> , they won the Coppa delle Alpi and were back amongst the elite in Serie A , with consistent top five finishes . Napoli came very close to winning the league in 1967 – 68 , finishing just behind AC Milan in second place . Some of the most popular players from this period were Dino Zoff , José Altafini , Omar <unk> , and hometown midfielder Antonio Juliano . Juliano would eventually break the appearance records , which still stands today . 
 The trend of Napoli performing well in the league continued into the 1970s , with third place spots in 1970 – 71 and 1973 – 74 . Under the coaching of former player Luís <unk> , this gained them entry into the early UEFA Cup competitions ; in 1974 – 75 they reached the third round knocking out Porto 2 – 0 on the way . During the same season , Napoli finished second in Serie A ; just two points behind champions Juventus . Solid performances from locally born players such as <unk> , Juliano and Esposito were relied upon during this period , coupled with goals from Giuseppe <unk> . 
 After beating Southampton 4 – 1 on aggregate to lift the Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup , Napoli were entered into the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup for 1976 – 77 , where they reached the semi @-@ finals , losing 2 – 1 on aggregate to Anderlecht . The club won their second Coppa Italia trophy in 1975 – 76 , knocking out Milan and Fiorentina en route , before beating rivals Verona 4 – 0 in the final . In terms of the Italian league , Napoli were still very much a consistent top six side for much of the late 1970s . Even into the earliest two seasons of the 1980s , the club were performing respectably with a third @-@ place finish in 1980 – 81 , however by 1983 they had slipped dramatically and were involved in relegation battles . Napoli broke the world transfer record fee , turning to Diego Maradona with a € 12 million deal from Barcelona on 30 June 1984 . The squad was gradually re @-@ built , with the likes of Ciro Ferrara , Salvatore Bagni , and Fernando De Napoli filling the ranks . The rise up the tables was gradual , by 1985 – 86 , they had a third @-@ place finish under their belts , but better was yet to come . The 1986 – 87 season was the landmark in Napoli 's history ; they won the double , securing the Serie A title by three points and then beating Atalanta 4 – 0 to lift the Coppa Italia . 
 Because a mainland Southern Italian team had never won the league before , this turned Diego Maradona into a cultural , social and borderline religious icon for Neapolitans , which stretched beyond the realms of just football . 
 The club were unsuccessful in the European Cup in the following season and finished runners @-@ up in Serie A. However , Napoli were entered into the UEFA Cup for 1988 – 89 and won their first major European title . Juventus , Bayern Munich , and PAOK were defeated on the way to the final , where Napoli beat Stuttgart 5 – 4 on aggregate , with two goals from <unk> and one each from Maradona , Ferrara and <unk> . 
 Napoli added their second Serie A title in 1989 – 90 , beating Milan by two points in the title race . However , this was surrounded by less auspicious circumstances as Napoli were awarded two points for a game , when in Bergamo , an Atalanta fan threw a £ 100 lira coin at <unk> 's head . A controversial set of events set off at the 1990 World Cup , when Maradona made comments pertaining to North @-@ South inequality in the country and the <unk> , asking Neapolitans to root for Argentina in the semi @-@ finals against Italy in Naples . 
 San Paolo was the only stadium during the competition where the Argentine National Anthem wasn 't jeered , Maradona bowed to the Napoli fans at the end and his country went on to reach the final . However , after the final the Italian Football Federation forced Maradona to take a doping test , which he failed testing positive for cocaine ; both Maradona and Napoli staff later claimed it was a revenge plot for events at the World Cup . Maradona was banned for 15 months and would never play for the club again . The club still managed to win the Supercoppa Italiana that year , with a record 5 – 1 victory against Juventus , but it would be their last major trophy for 22 years . In the European Cup however , they went out in the second round . 
 = = = Decline and rebirth = = = 
 Though the club finished fourth during the 1991 – 92 season , Napoli gradually went into decline after that season , both financially and on the field . Players such as Gianfranco Zola , Daniel Fonseca , Ciro Ferrara and <unk> had all departed by 1994 . Nonetheless , Napoli did manage to qualify for the 1994 – 95 UEFA Cup , reaching the third round and in 1996 – 97 , Napoli appeared at the Coppa Italia final , but lost 3 – 1 to Vicenza . Napoli 's league form had dropped lower , and relegation to Serie B came at the end of 1997 – 98 when they recorded only three wins all season . 
 The club returned to Serie A after gaining promotion in the 1999 – 2000 season , though after a closely contested relegation battle , they were relegated immediately back down the following season . They failed to gain promotion following this and slipped further down . The failed 2001 – 02 Serie B campaign was costly , the cost of production was € 70 @,@ 895 @,@ 838 , just about € 10 million fewer than in 2000 – 01 Serie A , heavily due to the high amortisation of the player asset ( € 33 @,@ 437 @,@ 075 ) . However value of production was just € 21 @,@ <unk> ( excluding player profit ) and the net loss was € 28 @,@ 856 @,@ 093 that season . Net asset on 30 June 2002 was € 2 @,@ 166 @,@ 997 , already including about € 20 million recapitalisation . The club once quoted the law " 21 February 2003 No.27 " to lower the amortisation expense by extending the amortisation period beyond the contract length of players to 10 @-@ year ( UEFA ruled the Italian special law was not lawful and all club should use IFRS standards , thus causing a re @-@ capitalization crisis in 2006 ) , which some players contract ( with a total residual accounting value of € 46 @,@ 601 @,@ 225 ) was <unk> in special way for € 4 @,@ 660 @,@ 123 only and the rest for € 1 @,@ 659 @,@ 088 in 2002 – 03 , however the cost of production was still exceed the value of production for € 19 @,@ 071 @,@ 218 in 2002 – 03 . By August 2004 , Napoli was declared bankrupt with debts estimated up to € 70 million . To secure football in the city , film producer Aurelio De Laurentiis refounded the club under the name Napoli Soccer , as they were not allowed to use their old name . FIGC placed Napoli in Serie C1 , where they missed out on promotion after losing 2 – 1 in play @-@ offs to local rivals Avellino in 2004 – 05 Serie C1 . 
 Despite the fact that Napoli were playing in such a low division , they retained higher average attendances than most of the Serie A clubs , breaking the Serie C attendance record with 51 @,@ 000 at one game . The following season , they secured promotion to Serie B and De Laurentiis bought back the club 's history , restoring its name to Società Sportiva Calcio Napoli in May 2006 . After just one season back in Serie B , they were promoted on the final day , along with fellow sleeping giants Genoa . Napoli finished the season placed eighth in the Serie A , enough to secure a place in the Intertoto Cup third round . 
 The 2008 – 09 season saw Napoli qualify for the UEFA Cup via the Intertoto Cup . The team was eliminated in the first round , however , by Portuguese team Benfica . At the domestic level , Napoli made a very impressive start , proposing as one of the main candidates for a Champions League spot ; results and performances , however , quickly declined in mid @-@ season , causing Napoli to fall down to 11th place in the league table , which led to the dismissal of manager Edy <unk> in March 2009 , with former Italy manager Roberto <unk> being appointed as his replacement . 
 Despite reinforcements in the summer transfer window , Napoli began the 2009 – 10 season with a number of poor results . After a 2 – 1 loss to Roma in October 2009 , <unk> was relieved of his duties and replaced by former Sampdoria manager Walter Mazzarri . Under Mazzarri , Napoli climbed up the table , finishing in sixth place to qualify for a Europa League spot . Napoli , under Mazzarri 's guide and reinforced by players such as Edinson Cavani , spent part of the 2010 – 11 season in the second place , finishing third and qualifying directly to the group phase of the 2011 – 12 UEFA Champions League . 
 In the 2011 – 12 season , Napoli ended in fifth place in Serie A , but managed to defeat unbeaten champions Juventus in the Stadio Olimpico to win the Coppa Italia for the fourth time in the club 's history , 25 years after their last cup win . Star striker Edinson Cavani scored from a penalty kick in the 63rd minute and Marek <unk> decided the game in the 83rd minute . Napoli also had a successful season in the Champions League , its first participation in the European Cup since the 1990 – 91 season . The team finished second in its group behind Bayern Munich , and ahead of Manchester City , progressing to the round of 16 , where it was knocked out by eventual winners Chelsea . 
 In 2012 – 13 , Napoli finished in second place in Serie A , the club 's best performance since winning the 1989 – 90 Scudetto . Edinson Cavani finished as top scorer in the division with 29 goals , which resulted in him being sold to Paris Saint @-@ Germain for a club record fee of £ 57 million . 
 In the 2013 close @-@ season , Walter Mazzarri left Napoli to become coach of Internazionale , and was replaced by Spaniard Rafael Benítez , who became the club 's first foreign coach since Zdeněk Zeman in 2000 . The money from selling Cavani went towards signing three Real Madrid players – Gonzalo Higuaín , Raúl <unk> and José Callejón – and other players including Dries Mertens and Pepe Reina . They finished the season by winning the 2014 Coppa Italia Final , their fifth title in the tournament , with a 3 – 1 win against Fiorentina with two goals from Lorenzo Insigne and another from Mertens , as well as qualifying for the Champions League by finishing 3rd in Serie A. According to the International Federation of Football History & Statistics ( IFFHS ) , Napoli was rated the third best club in the world in 2015 , despite failing to qualify for the 2014 @-@ 15 UEFA Champions League group stages . 
 On 1 December 2015 in the 2015 – 16 season , a 2 – 1 home win over league leaders Inter Milan sent Napoli to the top of Serie A for the first time in 25 years . 
 On 10 January 2016 an away 5 @-@ 1 victory against Frosinone made Napoli the champion of the first half of 2015 @-@ 16 Serie A season for the first time since the 1989 @-@ 90 season , thanks to <unk> 's 1 @-@ 0 win against Inter Milan in Giuseppe <unk> . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 As of 12 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Primavera squad = = 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 10 – Diego Armando Maradona , Second Striker , 1984 – 91 
 In the summer of 2000 Napoli retired the jersey number 10 belonged to former club legend Diego Armando Maradona who played for the club from 1984 to 1991 , as a tribute to his class and to the significant contribution made in the seven seasons with the shirt of Napoli . In order , the last players to wear number 10 were Fausto Pizzi ( 1995 – 1996 ) , Beto ( in 1996 – 1997 ) , Igor <unk> in 1997 – 1998 was the last player to play and score a goal with the number 10 shirt in Serie A and Claudio Bellucci in 1998 – 1999 and 1999 – 2000 in Serie B. However , for regulatory reasons , the number was reissued on blue shirts 2004 to 2006 Serie C1 , a tournament where there is the old numbering from 1 to 11 . The last player to wear a sign and goals with this shirt in an official match was Mariano <unk> in the home match of 18 May 2006 against Spezia , valid for the final leg of the Supercoppa di Lega Serie C1 ; primacy belongs to him also for last appearance in the championship , 12 May 2006 at the home race of <unk> . As regards exclusively the championship , however , goes to the Argentine footballer Roberto Sosa the distinction of being the last to wear the 10 at the San Paolo and at the same time to score in the match against Frosinone on 30 April 2006 . 
 = = = Notable players = = = 
 = = Current coaching , technical and administrative staff = = 
 Last updated : 24 August 2015 
 Source : it : SSC Napoli 
 = = Presidents = = 
 Below is the official presidential history of Napoli , from when Giorgio Ascarelli took over at the club in 1926 , until the present day . Napoli has had many managers and trainers , some seasons they have had co @-@ managers running the team . Here is a chronological list of them from 1926 onwards : 
 = = Managers = = 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Giuseppe <unk> holds Napoli 's official appearance record , having made 511 over the course of 16 years from 1972 until 1988 . Antonio Juliano holds the record for league appearances with 394 ( 355 in Serie A ) over the course of 16 years from 1962 until 1978 . 
 The all @-@ time leading goalscorer for Napoli is Diego Armando Maradona , with 115 league goals scored . He finished the season of Serie A as the league 's topscorer , known in Italy as the <unk> , in the 1987 – 88 season with 15 goals . The record for most goals in the league ( also including tournaments Divisione Nazionale ) belongs to Attila <unk> , with 106 goals , while the maximum scorer in Serie A is Antonio Vojak , with 102 goals . The record for most goals in a single tournament maximum number belongs to Gonzalo Higuaín , with 36 goals scored in the season 2015 – 2016 . 
 The biggest ever victory recorded by Napoli was 8 – 1 against Pro Patria , in the 1955 – 56 season of Serie A. Napoli 's heaviest championship defeat came during the 1927 – 28 season when eventual champions Torino beat them 11 – 0 . 
 On 26 July 2016 , Napoli player Gonzalo Higuaín became the third highest football transfer of all @-@ time and highest ever transfer for an Italian club , when he signed for € 90 million to Juventus . 
 Below are appearance and goalscoring records pertaining to Napoli players of all time . Still active players in bold : 
 As of 15 May 2016 
 = = Colours , badge and nicknames = = 
 As Naples is a coastal city , the colours of the club have always been derived from the blue waters of the Gulf of Naples . Originally while using the name Naples FBC , the colours of the club implemented two shades of blue . Since the 1920s however , a singular blue tone has been used in the form of azure ; as thus they share the nickname <unk> with the Italian national side . The shade of blue has been sky blue in many instances . 
 One of the nicknames of Napoli is I <unk> which means " the little donkeys " in the local dialect , they were given this name after a particularly poor performance during the 1926 – 27 season . It was originally meant to be derogatory , as the Neapolitan symbol is a rampant black horse , the club however adopted the donkey as a mascot called ' O <unk> , displaying it with pride . 
 The club badge Napoli are most famous for is a large N placed within a circle . This crest can be traced back to Internazionale Napoli , who used a similar design on their shirts . Since the club officially adopted the N badge as its representative , Napoli have altered it slightly at various times ; sometimes it features the club 's name around it , sometimes it does not . The main difference between each badge is the shade of blue used . Usually the N is white , although it has occasionally been gold . 
 <unk> is a popular nickname for the club and people from the city of Naples in general . It is derived from Greek mythology where the siren <unk> tried to enchant Odysseus from his ship to Capri . In the story Odysseus had his men tie him to the ship 's mast so he was able to resist the song of the siren ; as a result <unk> , unable to live with the rejection of her love , drowned herself and her body was washed up upon the shore of Naples . 
 = = Social commitment = = 
 Napoli is a company active in the social field , Napoli has stood out for its support provided to multiple charities . 
 Through the direct participation of its members , the blue club sponsored initiatives in support of the hospitals towns , as well as initiatives to raise awareness against violence in sport and child poverty . With the ' support association town <unk> , which operates in the juvenile prison of Nisida , Naples supports various projects aimed at the social reintegration of young offenders once granted their punishment . 
 Through fundraising supported directly and indirectly by its members , the Naples has provided its support to institutions such as the Robert F. Kennedy Foundation , Telethon , the Fondazione San Raffaele , the Stefano <unk> Foundation and Massimo Leone Foundation . 
 The Neapolitan club also undertook several initiatives in support of the victims of the earthquake of 2009 , from the transfer of the proceeds of the games to raise funds for the construction of a sports center in the capital of the Abruzzo . 
 = = = Sponsors and manufacturers = = = 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 Napoli is the fourth most supported football club in Italy with around 13 % of Italian football fans supporting the club . Like other top clubs in the country , Napoli 's fanbase goes beyond the Italian border ; it has been estimated by the club that there are around 6 million fans worldwide . Napoli is reputed to be one of the biggest clubs in Europe , with one of the highest average home attendance in Europe . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 The Napoli fans have always had bad relations especially with the teams from the North of Italy . One of the first historical rivalries was with Hellas Verona , and later on in the second half of the 1980s rivalry with Inter Milan , Juventus and AC Milan was born , as Napoli defied the " Triad of the North " for the title of Champions of Italy . 
 The hostility of the ultras of Napoli with the fans of Lazio comes from the old friendship that Napoli had in the eighties with Roma fans , Napoli fans used to call Roma fans " cousins " , friendship then broke after the umbrella gesture of Salvatore Bagni of 25 October 1987 and after that came a very strong rivalry with the Roma . 
 Also there still remain rivalries with Sampdoria , Reggina and also with the Atalanta , Avellino , Bari , Bologna , Brescia , Cagliari , Lecce , Salernitana , Vicenza and Udinese . Other minor rivalry with Foggia , Perugia , Pisa , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Unlike other Italian cities such as Genoa , Milan , Rome and Turin , Napoli is the only major football club in the city and therefore there is no derby in the strict sense of the term . Nevertheless , the fans of Napoli do co @-@ star in two particular derbies in Italy against other regional teams : 
 Derby della Campania generally refers to a rivalry with regional clubs , mainly Avellino and Salernitana . However , both teams have largely played in the lower divisions and meetings are largely limited to the Coppa Italia . 
 Derby of the Sun ( also called Derby of the South ) , at the height of its popularity in the seventies and eighties , starring Napoli and Roma . 
 = = = Friendships = = = 
 The twinning between supporters of the clubs Napoli and Genoa football club is one of the oldest in Italian football which started back on 16 May 1982 following a 2 – 2 draw in Naples between the two teams on the final day of the 1981 – 1982 Serie A season , a result that allowed the escape of Genoa from relegation and condemned AC Milan for the second time to relegation from Serie A to Serie B in its history . The history and friendship got even stronger for both teams when on the last day of the season in Serie B in the 2006 – 2007 season when both teams finished with a 0 – 0 draw at Genoa , ensuring both teams promotion to Serie A. Genoa ultras could be seen holding up banners saying " Benvenuto <unk> <unk> " , meaning " Welcome , Neapolitan brother " . The historic partnership between the two groups of supporters was also honoured and supported by marketing initiatives . 
 There is also a strong supporter of friendship with Ancona and there are good relations with the fans of Catania and Borussia Dortmund . 
 A sympathy and good friendship was born with supporters of the Romanian football team Universitatea Craiova following the elimination of rivals FC Steaua Bucureşti from the Europa League at the hands of Napoli . They have a long @-@ standing friendship with Bulgarian fans of Lokomotiv Plovdiv ; Napoli gave birth to the name <unk> Ultras Plovdiv and that is how the friendship arose . 
 = = S.S.C. Napoli as a company = = 
 S.S.C. Napoli was expelled from the professional league in 2004 . Thanks to Article 52 of <unk> , the sports title was transferred to Napoli Soccer ( later the new Napoli ) in the same year , while the old Napoli was liquidated . In the eve of bankruptcy , the club was in deep financial trouble to achieve positive operating income ( excluding windfall profit from players trading ) . At that time clubs using cash plus player swap to boost short term profit ( € 28 @,@ 329 @,@ 090 in 2000 – 01 ; € 17 @,@ 721 @,@ 534 in 2001 – 02 season ) , but also increased the long term cost ( as amortization ) by purchasing players . In the second last season before bankruptcy , the club was partially saved by the non @-@ standard accounting practice of <unk> it was due to Silvio Berlusconi , owner of Milan and prime minister of Italy , introduced Italian Law 91 / 1981 , Article 18B . Napoli was dramatically reduced the amortization from € 33 @,@ 437 @,@ 075 to € 1 @,@ 659 @,@ 088 + € 4 @,@ 660 @,@ 123 , due to € 46 @,@ 601 @,@ 225 of the intangible asset ( player contract ) , was deferred to <unk> in 10 @-@ year installments , instead of varying from 1 to 5 years by the length of player contract . However , the practice was unable to save the club from the financial aid from the sugar daddy , which the owner withdrew . 
 Since refound in 2004 , S.S.C. Napoli S.p.A. had a sustainable management strategy . The club has one of thee largest supporting group in Italy ( or fourth , behind Juventus and Milan teams ) which was the main source of income , in terms of gate revenue and TV rights . Except the first few seasons , Napoli made an aggregate profit in successive years : in 2004 – 05 and 2005 – 06 season the net loss were € 7 @,@ 061 @,@ 463 and € 9 @,@ 088 @,@ 780 . In 2006 – 07 Serie B , Napoli made its first profit of € 1 @,@ 416 @,@ 976 The first Serie A season made new born Napoli had a net profit of € 11 @,@ 911 @,@ 041 It followed by a net profit of € 10 @,@ 934 @,@ 520 , due to the income from European matches was offset by the increase in cost . In 2009 – 10 season , Napoli heavily invested on players , made that season had a net profit of just € 343 @,@ 686 . In 2010 – 11 Serie A , Napoli returned to the right track with € 4 @,@ 197 @,@ 829 net profit . It was due to the new collective TV rights of Serie A , as well as qualified to 2010 – 11 UEFA Europa League . 
 Napoli shareholder equity on 30 June 2005 was a negative of € 261 @,@ 466 , which the club started from € 3 million capital and re @-@ capitalized € 3 @.@ 8 million during 2004 – 05 Serie C1 . On 30 June 2006 the equity was increased to € 211 @,@ 220 , as the net loss was backup by a re @-@ capitalisation of € 9 @.@ 3 million + € 261 @,@ 466 for previous net loss . On 30 June 2007 the equity was increased to € 1 @,@ 961 @,@ 975 , due to the net profit and a re @-@ capitalised of € 288 @,@ 780 ( to make the share capital back to € 500 @,@ 000 ) . On 30 June 2008 the equity was increased to € 13 @,@ 829 @,@ 015 with a capital increase of just € 1 @,@ 000 . The net income contributed the increase in equity on 30 June 2009 , which was € 24 @,@ 763 @,@ 537 . On 30 June 2010 the equity was at € 25 @,@ 107 @,@ 223 . On 30 June 2011 the equity was increased to € 29 @,@ 305 @,@ 052 . Though less than € 17 million equity contribution in total from <unk> , Napoli achieved self @-@ sustainability by good management and its large fans base . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = National titles = = = 
 Serie A 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1986 – 87 , 1989 – 90 
 Coppa Italia 
 Winners ( 5 ) : 1961 – 62 , 1975 – 76 , 1986 – 87 , 2011 – 12 , 2013 – 14 
 Supercoppa Italiana 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1990 , 2014 
 = = = European titles = = = 
 UEFA Cup / UEFA Europa League 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1988 – 89 
 = = = Minor titles = = = 
 Serie B 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1945 – 46 ( Serie A @-@ B Southern Italy co @-@ champions with Bari ) , 1949 – 50 
 Runners @-@ up ( 4 ) : 1961 – 62 , 1964 – 65 , 1999 – 00 , 2006 – 07 
 Serie C1 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1976 
 Coppa delle Alpi 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1966 
 = Fairey Spearfish = 
 The Fairey Spearfish was a British carrier @-@ based , single @-@ engined , torpedo bomber / dive bomber that was ordered from Fairey Aviation for the Fleet Air Arm during World War II . Designed during the war , the prototype did not fly until July 1945 . Much larger than earlier naval bombers , it was designed for use aboard the large Malta @-@ class aircraft carriers that were cancelled after the war and was itself cancelled thereafter . Seven prototypes were ordered , but only five were built , of which four actually flew . They were mostly used for experimental work until the last aircraft was scrapped in 1952 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The Spearfish was designed by Fairey Aviation to Admiralty Specification <unk> / 43 as a replacement for the Fairey Barracuda in the torpedo / dive bomber role . In comparison to the Barracuda , the Spearfish had a much more powerful engine , an internal weapons bay and a retractable ASV <unk> surface @-@ search radar mounted behind the bomb bay . The Spearfish was half as large again as the Barracuda , as it was designed to be operated from the 45 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 46 @,@ 000 t ) Malta @-@ class aircraft carriers then under development . 
 In August 1943 , the company received an order for three prototypes to be built against Specification <unk> / 43 and the first prototype , serial number <unk> , was constructed at Fairey 's Hayes factory and first flew on 5 July 1945 from Heston Aerodrome ; the other two did not fly until 1947 . In November 1943 the company was ordered to build a dual @-@ control dive @-@ bombing trainer variant against Specification <unk> / 43 and this was built at the Heaton Chapel factory and assembled and flown at Ringway on 20 June 1946 . Three further development aircraft were ordered in May 1944 to be built at Heaton Chapel , with the last two to be fitted with a Rolls @-@ Royce Pennine engine ; only the first <unk> @-@ engined aircraft was built but never flew . 
 Production orders for 150 aircraft were placed to be built at Heaton Chapel ; the first ten aircraft were intended to use 2 @,@ 600 @-@ horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) Bristol Centaurus radial engine , Centaurus 59 engines on the next 22 , and Centaurus 60s of the remainder . In addition , the flaps were to be enlarged and lateral control was to be provided by spoilers with small " feeler " ailerons . With the cancellation of the Malta @-@ class carriers , the Fleet Air Arm no longer had a requirement for new torpedo bombers and the programme was cancelled . Work continued on the two other prototypes built at Hayes after the cancellation of the contract , albeit very slowly . 
 Test pilot and naval aviator Captain Eric Brown evaluated the first prototype and found " the controls in cruising flight were very heavy and , in fact , lateral control was so solid that I could barely move the ailerons with one hand at 130 knots ( 240 km / h ; 150 mph ) . " In bad weather a pilot circling a carrier while waiting to land would have been forced to fly such a wide circuit that he could not always keep the carrier in sight in bad weather . The later prototypes had ailerons boosted by hydraulic power and artificial feel to the stick from a spring , as an interim measure but Brown found " the second prototype was much less the pleasant aircraft to fly as the stick continually hunted either side of neutral and there was no build up of stick force with increase in speed . " The Spearfish lacked any sort of stall warning , which would have been a problem in operational use as the stall and approach speeds were fairly close . For the landing , the aircraft proved quite docile . 
 The first prototype was later used by Napier & Son at Luton for trials of the firm 's inflight de @-@ icing systems . It was then briefly used for ground @-@ training purposes beginning on 30 April 1952 , until scrapped shortly afterwards . The second prototype was used by the Royal Navy Carrier Trials Unit at RNAS Ford , Sussex , until it was sold for scrap on 15 September . The third prototype conducted ASV <unk> radar trials , but was damaged in a heavy landing on 1 September 1949 and sold for scrap on 22 August 1950 as uneconomical to repair . The fourth prototype never flew and was used as a source of spares . The sole Heaton Chapel @-@ built aircraft was the closest to the planned production configuration and it was used for engine @-@ cooling and power @-@ assisted flying @-@ control trials , until it was struck off charge on 24 July 1951 . 
 In a follow @-@ up , to meet Specification <unk> / 44 for a two @-@ seat strike fighter , the Spearfish was redesigned to accommodate a twin @-@ coupled Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin engine and contra @-@ rotating propellers . A variety of other engines were considered and although a production order was placed for three examples in 1944 , the programme was eventually shelved , remaining as an unfulfilled paper project . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Spearfish was a cantilever , mid @-@ wing monoplane , with an all @-@ metal , monocoque fuselage . The centre wing section was built integral with the fuselage and the outer wing panels could be hydraulically folded for carrier operations . A distinguishing feature of the wing was the large Fairey @-@ Youngman flaps that spanned 73 @.@ 5 % of the wing 's trailing edge . The Spearfish had an outward @-@ retracting conventional landing gear with a tailwheel . The wings housed a pair of 183 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 830 l ; 220 US gal ) fuel tanks , plus a 43 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 200 l ; 52 US gal ) tank in the leading edge of the starboard wing for a total of 409 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 860 l ; 491 US gal ) of fuel . The two @-@ man tandem cockpit had a hydraulically operated canopy . 
 The large internal weapons bay could alternatively carry up to four 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs , four depth charges , a torpedo , or a 180 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 820 l ; 220 US gal ) auxiliary fuel tank . The Spearfish was intended to carry four 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning machine guns , two in a remote @-@ controlled Fraser @-@ Nash FN 95 barbette behind the cockpit and two in the wings . The only external offensive armament was 16 RP @-@ 3 rockets that could be carried underneath the outer wing panels . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 Royal Navy , Fleet Air Arm 
 = = Specifications ( Spearfish ) = = 
 Data from Fairey Aircraft Since 1915 & The Spearfish ... A <unk> Welterweight 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : two 
 Length : 44 ft 7 in ( 13 @.@ 59 m ) 
 Wingspan : 60 ft 3 in ( 18 @.@ 36 m ) 
 Height : 13 ft 6 in ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) 
 Empty weight : 15 @,@ 200 lb ( 6 @,@ 895 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 21 @,@ 642 lb ( 9 @,@ 817 kg ) 
 Max takeoff weight : 22 @,@ 083 lb ( 10 @,@ 017 kg ) 
 Fuel capacity : 409 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 860 l ; 491 US gal ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Bristol Centaurus 57 18 @-@ cylinder radial engine , 2 @,@ 825 hp ( 2 @,@ 107 kW ) 
 Propellers : 5 @-@ bladed Rotol VH 65 , 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 292 mph ( 470 km / h ; 254 kn ) 
 Cruise speed : 196 mph ( 170 kn ; 315 km / h ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 036 mi ( 900 nmi ; 1 @,@ 667 km ) 
 Combat range : 349 mi ( 303 nmi ; 562 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 25 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 620 m ) 
 Time to altitude : 7 @.@ 75 minutes to 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 048 m ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 4 × .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning machine guns , two in the wings and two in a Frazer @-@ Nash <unk> remote @-@ controlled dorsal barbette 
