 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A large tropical wave accompanied by a broad area of low pressure moved off the coast of Africa on September 14 , 2003 . It initially tracked westward and remained disorganized due to unfavourable upper @-@ level wind shear . On September 20 , the convection around the system greatly increased during interaction with the circulation of a large upper @-@ level low , though unfavorable conditions caused the activity to remain disorganized . The system as a whole moved to the northwest around the upper @-@ level low and developed a mid @-@ level circulation . It interacted with a frontal zone , and became better organized on September 23 while located 450 mi ( 725 km ) south of Bermuda . Later that day , a low @-@ level circulation developed within the system , though its involvement with the proximate frontal zone prevented it from being classified a tropical depression . Deep convection increased near the centre on September 24 , and the system quickly developed banding features and distinct outflow . Based on the increase in organization , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified it as Tropical Depression Fifteen later that day while it was located about 345 miles ( 555 km ) southeast of Bermuda . Operationally , the agency did not initiate storm advisories until 27 hours after the time of its formation determined by post @-@ hurricane season analysis . 
 Initially , the depression possessed a combination of tropical and subtropical characteristics ; it remained attached to a nearby frontal zone , though the organization of the convection and a warm core within the system resulted in classification as a tropical cyclone . Forecasters had predicted the depression would only slowly strengthen and reach a peak intensity of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . However , the depression steadily organized and had strengthened into Tropical Storm Juan by early September 25 . Juan moved northwestward at around 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) in response to a developing subtropical ridge to its east . On September 26 , an eye feature developed , and very deep convection increased around the circulation . The cloud pattern continued to consolidate , and Juan attained hurricane status later on September 26 while located 165 mi ( 270 km ) southeast of Bermuda . The hurricane moved into an area of warm waters and light wind shear , allowing for additional strengthening ; by September 27 , Juan had attained a peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) while located 635 mi ( 1 @,@ 020 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia . At this peak strength , the eye of the hurricane was distinct and embedded within a well @-@ defined and round central dense overcast . 
 Hurricane Juan remained at peak intensity for over 24 hours . After moving northwestward for an extended period of time , it turned and accelerated to the north . The eye became less distinct on September 28 , and the hurricane weakened slightly . Due to its fast forward motion , Juan had little time to weaken over significantly colder waters before making landfall between Shad Bay and Prospect ( near Halifax ) on September 29 with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . It weakened quickly while rapidly moving across the southern Canadian Maritimes and crossing the Nova Scotia peninsula as a hurricane . Juan had diminished to a tropical storm as it moved over Prince Edward Island by early September 29 . Later that afternoon , the storm was absorbed by a large extratropical low over the northwestern Gulf of Saint Lawrence . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The first advisories were issued by the Canadian Hurricane Centre on September 26 , although at that time they broadly suggested the possibility existed for wind and rain across Atlantic Canada . As Juan approached on September 27 , warning broadcasts on local media in Atlantic Canada were changed accordingly . The public and emergency officials in the expected landfall area were told to make preparations for a potential disaster , after the CHC bulletins indicated the possibility existed for significant wind damage and flooding from both heavy rain and storm surges , as well as power outages . 
 On the morning of September 28 , reports indicated that Juan would make landfall either as a tropical storm or marginal Category 1 hurricane . Weather broadcasts up to that time gave every indication that the storm would weaken prior to landfall . By 6 p.m. ADT ( 2100 UTC ) , additional warnings had been issued since Juan was expected to make landfall as a strong Category 1 or weak Category 2 hurricane . Most businesses in the areas affected were closed on Sundays , which meant that preparations could not be made at the last minute . Although no large @-@ scale evacuations were made , local evacuations for low @-@ lying areas were issued on the evening of September 28 . In all , several hundred people were affected by these evacuations . Utility workers also stood on standby before the storm hit , preparing for large @-@ scale power outages . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Nova Scotia = = = 
 Hurricane Juan 's maximum sustained wind speed at landfall in Nova Scotia was measured at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The urban concentration surrounding Halifax Harbour bore the brunt of the highest sustained winds and strongest wind gusts during the storm ; some unofficial estimates have placed gusts as high as 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Wave @-@ rider weather buoys off the entrance of Halifax Harbour snapped their moorings after reportedly recording waves in excess of 65 ft ( 20 m ) . Significant erosion occurred on the populated shores of the harbour , particularly in the Bedford Basin where residential properties and railway tracks received most of the wave action . Storm surges of 5 to 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 m ) were reported in the harbour ; it was the highest surge ever recorded in Halifax Harbour . Rainfall was fairly light due to the fast movement and dry air on the southern side of the storm . There were no rainfall reports greater than 2 inches ( 52 mm ) . 
 Juan caused widespread structural and vegetation damage across the region , particularly in and around the Halifax Regional Municipality . Extensive damage to trees was reported , which blocked many streets and knocked down power lines . Many homes and businesses suffered property damage , particularly roof damage on structures , and some weaker structures were destroyed . HRM estimated that 31 % of residential homes suffered some degree of damage and 27 % of homes had enough damage to warrant an insurance claim . In downtown Halifax , erosion @-@ control boulders the size of garbage cans were hurled from Halifax Harbour onto boardwalks and parking lots and piers . The Victoria General Hospital experienced roof and water damage and was evacuated during the storm , as were numerous tall apartment buildings and other multi @-@ family residences . Billboards and signs were also destroyed , and dozens of vehicles were crushed by trees and other debris . The city 's cherished Point Pleasant Park and Public Gardens suffered massive loss of trees and remained closed for months . 
 Juan set an all @-@ time maximum wind gust speed record at the Halifax Stanfield International Airport ; during the peak of the storm , a gust reached 143 km / h , a record which still stands to this day . Another high windspeed occurred at the <unk> Island <unk> , which recorded a 2 @-@ minute sustained wind of 151 km / h , with gusts to 176 km / h . Hurricane @-@ force gusts extended as far east as Beaver Island , where gusts reached 132 km / h . The hurricane was strong enough to destroy the anemometers at Shannon Hill , <unk> Head and Sambro Island , even though the Sambro Island instrument had survived a 193 km / h storm some years earlier . 
 At the harbour entrance , on Sambro Island , a historic building beside the oldest lighthouse in North America was badly damaged and remains unrepaired in 2007 . The hurricane caused severe damage to shipping in Halifax Harbour . A visiting recreational schooner named <unk> was sunk at the wharf beside the Maritime Museum of the Atlantic and a harbour tour ketch Mar was driven ashore in Eastern Passage on the opposite side of Halifax Harbour . Another harbour tour vessel , the tern schooner Silva , broke from her moorings and caused extensive damage to the Cable Wharf on the Halifax Waterfront . Dozens of smaller yachts were also driven ashore ; extensive damage occurred to yacht clubs in the Bedford Basin and Northwest Arm . Dozens of containers were knocked off two container ships at the South End Container Terminal . Wharves on the Halifax and <unk> waterfront suffered large amounts of damage and several railcars were washed into the harbour at the Dartmouth railway yard ; one of the tracks for the double @-@ track main line was washed out in several places along the Bedford Basin near <unk> . Coastal flooding was also reported around Halifax Harbour as a result of the storm surge , although inland flooding was minor as rainfall was not heavy due to Juan 's fast forward movement . 
 Less severe property damage was recorded west of the storm 's track into St. <unk> Bay and Mahone Bay . In addition to Halifax Regional Municipality 's urban core , the town of Truro and all of rural Colchester County as well as the western part of Pictou County experienced property damage and power outages from falling trees ; numerous barns and other agricultural buildings were damaged east of the storm 's path , including a replica of the Hector in Pictou Harbour . The severity of property damage in the metropolitan areas of Halifax and Dartmouth of Halifax Regional Municipality initially led some forecasters to believe that Juan was likely a Category 3 hurricane ; however , the sustained wind reports did not justify that suggestion . Many of the deciduous trees in central Nova Scotia still had leaves , which magnified the effects of wind damage . Overall , the number of damaged trees was estimated to be in the millions . 
 Juan claimed six lives ( two directly ) in Nova Scotia . Both of the direct deaths were due to fallen trees ; one was a Halifax paramedic and the other was a motorist in Enfield . Three of the four indirect deaths were as a result of a house fire started by candles when electricity was cut , and the fourth was in relief work after the storm . 
 = = = Rest of Atlantic Canada = = = 
 When the storm tracked across Nova Scotia and into the Northumberland Strait , it was still a Category 1 hurricane , weakening to a tropical storm as it emerged into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . Wind gusts of 86 mph ( 139 km / h ) were reported in Charlottetown and 67 mph ( 107 km / h ) in the Iles de la Madeleine in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . 
 Damage was also reported in Prince Edward Island as a result of the storm , particularly around Charlottetown , where its waterfront sustained heavy wave damage to pleasure craft and sea walls , as well as significant damage to the older urban forest in that city 's downtown core . Extensive tree damage was also reported across the island , as well as structural damage to weaker buildings , such as barns and silos . The hurricane left portions of the island without power . The narrow path meant that damage was quite localized ; little damage was reported in New Brunswick or western Prince Edward Island . Voting in the PEI general election on September 29 was also disrupted , though more than 80 % of voters made it to polling stations . 
 Two deaths were reported in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence off the remote Anticosti Island in Quebec . They were fishermen from New Brunswick operating near Anticosti Island . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the hours following the storm a state of emergency was declared in Halifax Regional Municipality and parts of neighbouring East Hants Municipal District and Colchester County . The Government of Nova Scotia requested that the federal government deploy 600 Canadian Forces personnel to assist local authorities in HRM with cleanup in the urban area and to assist utility crews with electrical power restoration . Many utility workers , especially those employed by Nova Scotia Power and the dozens of crews from Maritime Electric and NB Power who responded under mutual assistance agreements , worked for almost three weeks without any considerable amount of rest . Many residents praised utility crews for their hard work in restoring the extensive damage . 
 The devastated Point Pleasant Park remained closed for cleanup after the storm before re @-@ opening in June 2004 , nine months after the storm hit , with a damaged shoreline and almost 85 % of its trees removed . A revitalization and reforestation program began in 2005 . 
 The Government of Nova Scotia pledged $ 10 million ( 2003 CAD ) in relief money after the hurricane hit , and private contributions were also made quickly after the storm hit . Prince Edward Island also pledged $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 2003 CAD ) immediately after the hurricane hit , and the federal government also announced their own package . The Mayor of Toronto at the time , Mel Lastman , also contributed $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 2003 CAD ) to replace damaged trees in Prince Edward Island . 
 Hurricane Juan alerted residents , governments , utilities , and emergency management agencies throughout Atlantic Canada to improve preparations for devastating events such as hurricanes , especially with climatological data pointing to possible increased frequency of major ocean storms and extratropical cyclones . In addition to Juan , three other storms — Fabian , Isabel and Kate — had a significant effect on land or offshore in Canada during the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 Preparations and planning have been underway since 2003 and were first tested when Hurricane Ophelia was forecast to brush near Nova Scotia in early September 2005 . Hurricane Juan has also resulted in several changes to the Meteorological Service of Canada 's Canadian Hurricane Centre , which has relocated from a vulnerable and exposed location in an office building in Dartmouth , Nova Scotia , to a more secure location that can withstand hurricane damage . CHC 's hurricane warning system has also been improved ; traditionally , CHC did not issue standard hurricane or tropical storm watches or warnings , just high wind and heavy rainfall warnings , which were often not heeded by local residents . Beginning in the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season , CHC began using standard hurricane warnings for storms potentially affecting Canada . Canada issued its first hurricane warning in 2008 in anticipation of Hurricane Kyle and in 2009 , issued its second hurricane watch in anticipation of Hurricane Bill . 
 Hurricane Juan lent its name to a severe blizzard that struck Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island a few months later in February 2004 which quickly became known as White Juan because the paralyzing effects of the massive snowfall evoked the recent hurricane . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Because of its effects in Canada , the name Juan was retired in April 2004 and will never be used again for an Atlantic hurricane . Environment Canada noted that its request for retirement was " in consideration of the lost and damaged lives , the impact to economy , and the widespread destruction of trees throughout two provinces " . It was the first time that the Meteorological Service of Canada had specifically requested a hurricane name be retired . The name was replaced by Joaquin for the 2009 season , however it was not used during that year . For the 2015 season , when the tenth storm developed , the name Joaquin was used for the first time . That name was also retired following the season and was replaced with Julian for the 2021 season . 
 = Mam Sonando = 
 Mam Sonando ( Khmer : ម <unk> ម <unk> ់ <unk> ; born February 13 , 1942 ) is a Cambodian radio journalist with French dual citizenship . He is the owner and director of Phnom Penh 's Beehive Radio , which the Committee to Protect Journalists ( CPJ ) described in 2012 as " one of Cambodia 's few independent news outlets " . He also acts as a political commentator for the station . 
 Sonando has been imprisoned three times on charges related to his reporting : a 2003 arrest for " inciting riots " , a 2005 arrest for defamation , and a 2012 arrest for insurrection . His twenty @-@ year prison sentence for the latter was protested by human rights groups , and US President Barack Obama expressed concerns about the case in a meeting with Prime Minister Hun Sen. The sentence was overturned by an appeals court in March 2013 , and Sonando was instead given a five @-@ year suspended sentence on charges of causing civil unrest . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Mam Sonando was born on February 13 , 1942 in a small district called Kampong Siem in Kampong Cham Province , Cambodia . His father , Mam Soth , was a lawyer . His mother <unk> Ouch was born in Battambang province . Sonando traveled to Paris in 1964 for school . He attended the Vaugirard State Technical College of Photography and Cinematography , in Paris , France , from 1969 to 1970 . In 1973 , he received a bachelor 's degree with major in sociology and cinematography and audio visuals , at the Paris XV University . 
 He left Cambodia again in 1975 to avoid the rule of the Khmer Rouge , remaining in France until 1993 . That year , he returned to Cambodia and acquired a broadcasting license for a new station which he named Beehive Radio . He used the station to advertise a new political party , the Beehive Democratic Society Party , and stood in the 1998 parliamentary election . According to the Asia Times , his campaign only won him " a reputation as an eccentric , spouting Buddhist philosophy , pleas for democracy and a personal campaign for attention . " After failing to be elected , Sonando dissolved his party , but continued broadcasting on Beehive Radio as an independent journalist . 
 Sonando is the owner and director of Beehive Radio . In 2012 , Human Rights Watch described Beehive Radio as " a key platform for promotion of human rights and democracy in Cambodia " . The station is one of the few to address controversial topics , including " Cambodian civil society , the fight against HIV / AIDS , maternal mortality and human trafficking , campaigns for women 's rights and gender equality , political and economic transparency , equitable and sustainable development , labor rights , environmental protection , the rule of law , and electoral education and election monitoring . " It also carries programming by Radio Free Asia , Voice of America , the Cambodian Center for Human Rights , and Radio France Internationale . 
 The station is funded by a combination of advertising and private donations . Some companies have declined to advertise with Beehive Radio due to its occasionally controversial reporting and political stances . Sonando also refuses to run advertisements for " vice " products , including cigarettes . 
 = = 2003 arrest = = 
 In January 2003 , riots broke out in Phnom Penh after a Cambodian newspaper incorrectly reported that a Thai actress had stated Angkor Wat properly belonged to Thailand . On 29 January , the Thai embassy was burned , and hundreds of Thai immigrants fled the country to avoid the violence . During the riots , a caller to Beehive Radio claimed incorrectly that Cambodian embassy officials were killed in Bangkok . On 31 January , Sonando was arrested and accused of " relaying false information " , " inciting discrimination " , and " inciting crime " . He stated to reporters , " They blame me for broadcasting an opinion of a listener which turned out to be untrue . But if I have to go to jail to allow people to express their opinion I am happy . " 
 Sonando was formally charged in court on 1 February ; ten days later , he was released on bail . The charges never came to trial . 
 = = 2005 arrest = = 
 Sonando was arrested again on 11 October 2005 after reporting on Prime Minister Hun Sen 's treaty with Vietnam settling the two nations ' border dispute ; the report included a discussion with a French @-@ based expert who criticized Hun Sen 's concessions . Sonando was charged with " criminal defamation " , " disseminating false information " , and " incitement " . On 3 November , he was denied bail . 
 Sonando 's arrest was criticized by the United Nations and the European Union . A coalition of 70 Cambodian civil society organizations also pushed for his release . CPJ condemned the arrest as part of a " broad crackdown on freedom of expression " , and Amnesty International named him a prisoner of conscience . 
 In late January 2006 , Sonando was granted bail ahead of a visit by US Assistant Secretary of State Christopher R. Hill . Hun Sen described the release as a " gift " to the visitor . The charges against Sonando were dropped before the end of the month . 
 = = 2012 arrest = = 
 In mid @-@ 2012 , Beehive Radio reported on an International Court of Justice complaint against Prime Minister Hun Sen blaming him for the 2010 Phnom Penh stampede , in which 347 people were killed . The report sparked a new series of disputes between Sonando and Hun Sen. On 26 June 2012 , Hun Sen called for Sonando 's arrest while Sonando was out of the country , accusing him of heading a separatist plot in Kratié Province to break it away from the rest of the nation . From 15 to 17 May , the province had been the site of a protest against evictions for a new rubber plant that residents accused of " land @-@ grabbing " . On the final day of the protests , soldiers opened fire on a crowd of families , killing a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl . Though Sonando returned during the 2012 ASEAN meeting , he was not arrested until 15 July , a few days after its end . 
 Hun Sen accused Sonando of attempting to create a " state within a state " , and Sonando was formally charged with " insurrection " and " inciting people to take up weapons against state " . The charges carried a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison . Secessionist charges were also brought against several community activists from the province . 
 According to Ou <unk> of the Cambodian Center for Human Rights , Sonando was then imprisoned in a cell shared with 17 other people , leaving him " half a square meter [ 5 square feet ] to sleep in " . On 22 July , he was moved to a prison hospital on account of illness . 
 Sonando 's arrest quickly generated domestic and international criticism . A coalition of 22 Cambodian rights groups , known as the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee , called on the government to free Sonando " to save the country 's reputation " . Members of Beehive Radio and the Association of Democrats protested in front of Phnom Penh 's royal palace on 23 July . 
 CPJ called for <unk> 's immediate release , stating that Hun Sen had " a well @-@ worn history of leveling unsubstantiated anti @-@ state charges against journalists to stifle criticism of the administration . " Human Rights Watch said that " Sonando 's arrest on the heels of [ US Secretary of State Hillary ] Clinton 's visit is a brazen signal that Hun Sen thinks that the US wants his cooperation on other matters so much that he isn 't afraid to lower the boom on his critics " . Amnesty International again named Sonando a prisoner of conscience , " held for the peaceful exercise of his right to freedom of expression " . The International Federation for Human Rights and the World Organisation Against Torture issued a joint statement noting that they were " gravely concerned " about the charges and calling for Sonando 's immediate release . Reporters Without Borders described the arrest as " like a parting slap to all those who attended last week 's ASEAN summit in Phnom Penh . As soon the diplomats leave , the authorities arrest dissidents . " The Ireland @-@ based NGO Front Line Defenders included him on the short list for its 2013 Human Rights Defender at Risk award . 
 On 1 October 2012 , Sonando was found guilty by a Phnom Penh court . He was sentenced to twenty years ' imprisonment and fined 10 million <unk> ( US $ 2 @,@ 500 ) . In November , US President Barack Obama raised concerns about the case during a meeting with Hun Sen. French Prime Minister Jean @-@ Marc Ayrault also called for Sonando to be released . 
 An appeals court overturned Sonando 's conviction on anti @-@ state charges on 14 March 2013 , finding that there had been no evidence to convict him . The court instead gave Sonando a five @-@ year suspended sentence on charges that he had been involved in the Kratié unrest . A crowd of hundreds of Sonando supporters gathered outside the courthouse to hear the verdict . Amnesty International called the ruling " a positive step for freedom of expression in the country " , but added that " Mam Sonando should never have been imprisoned in the first place , and the convictions that stand appear baseless . " Sonando was released from prison on 15 March , the day after the ruling . Following his release , Sonando stated his intention to clear his name of the remaining charges . 
 = = 2014 protest = = 
 In January 2014 , Mam Sonando organized a mass demonstration , which demanded the government to expand his radio reach and open a TV station . The Minister of Information Khieu <unk> denied the permission for the expansion but Mam Sonando told reporters the denial is unconstitutional . Protesters clashed with police on January 28 , injuring at least 9 of the demonstrators . In response to the violence , Human Rights Watch calls for the United Nations to pressure the Cambodian government . Reporters Without Borders and Freedom House have also condemned the violence . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sonando is married to Den <unk> . He is a devout Buddhist who constructed a Buddhist temple beside his radio station , and is an avid fan of jazz . 
 = John Bowker ( baseball ) = 
 John Brite Bowker ( born July 8 , 1983 ) is an American professional baseball outfielder and first baseman who is a free agent . He stands 6 feet 1 inch ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) tall and weighs 205 pounds ( 93 kg ) . He has played for the San Francisco Giants , Pittsburgh Pirates and Philadelphia Phillies of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) and the Yomiuri Giants and Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles of Nippon Professional Baseball ( NPB ) . He bats and throws left @-@ handed . 
 Bowker was drafted out of Long Beach State University in the third round of the 2004 MLB draft by the San Francisco Giants . He spent the next few years in their minor league system and ranked among the Eastern League leaders in several hitting categories in 2007 . He was called up by the Giants shortly after the 2008 season began , and he became the first San Francisco @-@ era Giant to hit a home run in his first two major league games . He was the Giants ' starting first baseman for much of the season and finished the year batting .255 with 10 home runs in 111 games . In 2009 , Bowker won the Pacific Coast League batting title with a .342 average . However , he batted .194 in 31 major league games . He began 2010 as the Giants ' right fielder but lost the job soon after the season started . He was optioned to Fresno in June and was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates at the trade deadline . Bowker was called up by the Pirates in September and finished the 2010 season batting .219 with 5 home runs in 67 games . He started the 2011 season as a reserve outfielder on the Pirates ' team but was designated for assignment and sent to the minors after April . He batted .306 with 15 home runs and 76 RBI in 106 games with their International League team before getting traded to the Philadelphia Phillies at the end of August . Used mainly as a pinch hitter , Bowker had no hits in 13 at @-@ bats with Philadelphia . Following the season , he was released so he could sign with the Yomiuri Giants in Japan . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bowker was born to Brite and Chris Bowker on July 8 , 1983 , in Sacramento , California . Growing up , he attended <unk> Elementary School , Arden Middle School , and Rio Americano High School . He began his baseball career playing for an Arden Park Little League team coached by his father , and he played baseball at Rio Americano , along with football and basketball . He decided to concentrate on baseball as a sophomore . He lettered three seasons in baseball , two seasons in football and one season in basketball in addition to being named all @-@ league in each of these sports . He set Rio Americano 's single @-@ season records for batting average ( .463 ) hits ( 41 ) , home runs ( 8 ) and runs batted in ( RBI ) ( 41 ) . 
 After graduating from Rio Americano , Bowker enrolled at Long Beach State University . In 2004 , he led the <unk> <unk> to the NCAA Super Regionals and was included on the 1st Team All @-@ Big West . After batting .323 in his first two years at Long Beach , he entered the 2004 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Draft and was selected in the third round by the San Francisco Giants . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 = = = = 2004 – 2007 = = = = 
 To begin his minor league career , Bowker was assigned to the rookie @-@ league Arizona League Giants . After batting .512 with 22 hits , 2 home runs , and 11 RBI in 10 games for the Giants , he was promoted to the Salem @-@ Keizer Volcanoes of the single @-@ A short season Northwest League . With Salem @-@ Keizer , he batted .323 with 41 hits , 4 home runs , and 16 RBI in 31 games . Between the <unk> Giants and Salem @-@ Keizer , he appeared in 41 games , batting .371 with 63 hits , 6 home runs , and 27 RBI in 41 games . 
 In 2005 , Bowker attended Giants ' spring training but was sent to the minors on March 2 . He spent the season with the single @-@ A advanced San Jose Giants . In 121 games , he had 124 hits , 27 doubles , 13 home runs , and 67 RBI while batting .267 . He batted .238 with a double , a home run , and 4 RBI in 5 playoff games as San Jose won the California League championship . 
 Bowker attended spring training with the Giants in 2006 , but he was sent to the minors on March 2 . He spent most of the season with San Jose , where he batted .284 with 131 hits , 6 triples , 7 home runs , and 66 RBI in 112 games . His 32 doubles ranked tenth overall in the league . In 5 playoff games , he batted .182 with 4 hits , 2 doubles , and 1 triple . He also appeared in two games for the triple @-@ A Fresno Grizzlies of the Pacific Coast League , where he had two hits in four at bats . 
 Bowker attended spring training with the Giants in 2007 but only appeared in two spring training games . He spent the entire season with the Connecticut Defenders , the Giants ' double @-@ A affiliate in the Eastern League . He set career highs with 139 games played , a .307 batting average , 160 hits , 22 home runs , 90 RBI , 35 doubles , and 6 triples . He ranked seventh in the league in batting average ( among qualifiers ) , first in games , second in hits ( to Jordan Brown ) , fifth in doubles ( tied with David Smith ) , fifth in triples ( tied with Clete Thomas and Michael <unk> ) , and third in RBI ( behind Jeff <unk> and Oscar Salazar ) . His 22 home runs were tied for fifth in the league ( with Salazar and Luis Jiménez ) and set a Connecticut franchise record . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Entering the 2008 season , Bowker was named the ninth best prospect in the Giants ' organization by Baseball America . He attended spring training again but was sent to Fresno on March 11 . On April 11 , Bowker was called up by the Giants , and he joined the team the next day after having only 3 hours of sleep the night before . In a 7 – 5 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals that day , he got his first hit ( a single ) and drove in three runs with his first home run , both against Todd Wellemeyer , as he became the eighth player in San Francisco Giants history to hit a home run in his debut . The next day , in the Giants ' 7 – 4 victory over the Cardinals , Bowker had four RBI and hit his second home run , against Joel Piñeiro , becoming the first player in San Francisco Giants history to hit a home run in each of his first two Major League games . He had seven RBI in his first two games , the most by any major leaguer in his first two games since Joe Cunningham had seven in 1954 . Bowker replaced Rich <unk> as the Giants ' starting first baseman on April 21 . On June 7 , he hit the first grand slam of his career , against Luis Ayala , in a 6 – 0 victory over the Washington Nationals . On July 2 , Bowker hit a two @-@ run " Splash Hit " home run into McCovey Cove against Ryan Dempster in a 6 – 5 loss to the Chicago Cubs . He was batting .274 before the All @-@ Star break , but after batting .152 with two RBI in 21 games after the break , he was optioned to Fresno on August 13 to make room on the roster for Travis Ishikawa , who replaced him as the Giants ' first baseman . He was recalled by the Giants on September 2 after rosters expanded . Used mainly as a pinch @-@ hitter in September , he batted .346 with 1 home run in 15 games to finish the season with a .255 batting average ( 10th among NL rookies ) , 83 hits ( 9th among NL rookies ) , 14 doubles , 3 triples ( tied for 4th among NL rookies ) , 10 home runs ( tied for 4th among NL rookies ) , and 43 RBI ( 6th among NL rookies ) in 111 games . At Fresno , he batted .237 with 22 hits , 3 doubles , 1 triple , 2 home runs , and 9 RBI in 23 games . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 On March 29 , 2009 , Bowker was optioned to Fresno . In June , Bowker was named the Pacific Coast League player of the week for two straight weeks ( May 24 – 31 and June 1 – 7 ) after batting .519 with five doubles , six home runs , 16 runs scored , and 18 RBI over that span . He was called up to the Giants on July 9 when Ryan Sadowski was optioned to Fresno . On July 19 , he had a game @-@ winning sacrifice fly against Zach Duke in the Giants ' 4 – 3 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates . Bowker split time in left field with Randy Winn and at first base with Ishikawa , but he was returned to Fresno on July 26 so the Giants could call up Eugenio Vélez after Bowker batted .156 with 4 RBI in 11 games . He was recalled at the beginning of August but was sent back to Fresno after appearing in two games . On August 16 , Bowker tied a Grizzlies ' record ( shared by Dante Powell ) by driving in seven runs in an 8 – 5 victory over the Nashville Sounds . He hit three @-@ run home runs against Tim Dillard and John Axford , and he was walked with the bases loaded by David Johnson . On September 1 , he was recalled when rosters expanded . He was used mainly as a pinch @-@ hitter until September 23 , when he took over left field after Vélez was moved from left field to second base to replace the injured Freddy Sanchez . In 31 games with the Giants that year , Bowker batted .194 with 13 hits , 2 doubles , 2 triples , 2 home runs , and 7 RBI in 67 at bats . In 104 games at Fresno , he batted .342 with 125 hits , 22 doubles , 4 triples , 21 home runs , and 83 RBI . He tied for ninth in the league in home runs ( with Prentice Redman ) and tied for eight in RBI ( with Allen Craig ) . He led the league in batting , becoming the first Fresno player to win the batting title since Brian Dallimore in 2003 . Bowker was named to the PCL 's regular @-@ season All @-@ Star team , post @-@ season All @-@ Star team , and All @-@ PCL team . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Although Nate Schierholtz was expected to be the Giants ' Opening Day right fielder in 2010 , Bowker won the position after hitting six home runs in spring training . On April 7 , Bowker hit a two @-@ run home run against Brett Myers in a 10 – 4 victory over the Houston Astros . After batting .214 with four RBI in his first 10 games , Bowker was replaced by Schierholtz as the starting right fielder on April 17 . On May 7 , Bowker hit a ninth @-@ inning game @-@ tying home run against Francisco Rodríguez in an eventual 6 – 4 loss to the New York Mets . After batting .207 with 17 hits , 3 doubles , 3 home runs , and 8 RBI in 41 games , Bowker was optioned to Fresno on June 2 to make room for Pat Burrell on the roster . He was named the PCL Player of the Week from June 14 to June 21 after he had a 13 @-@ game hitting streak and a 6 @-@ game RBI streak end that week . After batting .310 with 61 hits , 12 doubles , 14 home runs , and 36 RBI in 51 games with Fresno , Bowker and Joe Martinez were traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates on July 31 for Javier López . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = 
 Upon being acquired , Bowker was assigned by the Pirates to the Indianapolis Indians of the triple @-@ A International League , where he batted .319 in 25 games with 29 hits , 7 doubles , 2 triples , 4 home runs , and 10 RBI . He was called up to the Pittsburgh club on September 1 as rosters expanded . By September 13 , he had taken over from <unk> Milledge as the Pirates ' everyday right fielder . He hit a two @-@ run home run against Barry Enright and had three hits on September 18 in a 9 – 6 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks . Four days later , Bowker again had three hits and two RBI , including a solo home run against Kyle Lohse , in an 11 – 6 victory over the Cardinals . He had a pinch @-@ hit three @-@ run double against Mike MacDougal on September 28 in a 7 – 2 victory over the Cardinals . With the Pirates in 2010 , Bowker batted .232 with 16 hits , 5 doubles , 2 home runs , and 13 RBI in 26 games . His major league totals from 2010 were 33 hits , 5 doubles , 8 home runs , and 21 RBI in 67 games . 
 Bowker made the Pirates ' Opening Day roster in 2011 as a reserve <unk> . After he had 4 hits ( 1 double ) and 2 RBI in 17 at @-@ bats over 19 games , he was designated for assignment to make room on the roster for Xavier Paul on April 27 . On May 4 , he was assigned to Indianapolis after clearing waivers . In 106 games with Indianapolis , Bowker batted .306 with 129 hits , 27 doubles , 1 triple , 15 home runs , and 76 RBI ( ninth in the league ) . On August 30 , 2011 , Bowker was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies for a player to be named later or cash . 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = 
 Bowker was used almost exclusively as a pinch @-@ hitter with the Phillies . He had no hits in 13 at @-@ bats with the Phillies and was left off their postseason roster . With the Phillies and Pirates in 2011 , Bowker batted .133 with two RBI in 31 games . 
 = = = Yomiuri Giants = = = 
 On January 10 , 2012 , Bowker was released by the Phillies in order to pursue a career in Nippon Professional Baseball . Three days later , he signed a one @-@ year deal with the Yomiuri Giants . 
 He struggled in the regular season , having only .196 batting average , 3 home runs and 10 RBIs . But his performance in the Climax Series and Japan Series would be outstanding and were crucial to Giants ' both series ' Champion . Particularly in Japan Series , which included a near @-@ miss of a tie of Japan series record of 6 RBIs in a game ( which he had 5 ) and leading his Team with 7 RBI and 2 Home Runs . Despite losing to starting pitcher teammate Tetsuya Utsumi in Japan Series Most Valuable Player award , he was still awarded in Outstanding Player award . 
 = = = Second stint with the San Francisco Giants = = = 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 In January 2015 , Bowker signed a minor league contract with the Giants to return to playing baseball in America . Along with Ryan Vogelsong , who had played for the Orix Buffaloes , he is the second Giants draftee to return to the Giants after playing in NPB . 
 On June 11 , 2015 Bowker was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates organization for a PTBNL . He elected free agency on November 6 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Growing up , Bowker rooted for the San Francisco Giants , the team that drafted him . His uncle , Jeff Carmichael ( who coached him growing up ) , helps him train during the offseason . 
 = Action of 13 March 1806 = 
 The Action of 13 March 1806 was a naval engagement of the Napoleonic Wars , fought when a British and a French squadron met unexpectedly in the mid @-@ Atlantic . Neither force was aware of the presence of the other prior to the encounter and were participating in separate campaigns . The British squadron consisted of seven ships of the line accompanied by associated frigates , led by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren , were tasked with hunting down and destroying the French squadron of Contre @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez , which had departed Brest for raiding operations in the South Atlantic in December 1805 , at the start of the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . The French force consisted of one ship of the line and one frigate , all that remained of Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois ' squadron that had sailed for the Indian Ocean in March 1803 during the Peace of Amiens . Linois raided British shipping lanes and harbours across the region , achieving limited success against undefended merchant ships but repeatedly withdrawing in the face of determined opposition , most notably at the Battle of Pulo Aura in February 1804 . With his stores almost exhausted and the French ports east of the Cape of Good Hope that could have offered him replenishment eliminated , Linois decided to return to France in January 1806 , and by March was inadvertently sailing across the cruising ground of Warren 's squadron . 
 Linois had twice failed to capture , or even seriously engage , large and valuable British merchant convoys on his cruise . When he saw scattered sails in the distance at 03 : 00 on 13 March 1806 , he decided to investigate in his ship of the line Marengo , in the hope that the ships would again prove to be a merchant convoy . By the time he realised that the approaching ships were actually a powerful naval squadron , he was too close to outrun the lead ship , Warren 's flagship HMS London . As London engaged Marengo , the French frigate Belle Poule attempted to escape from the approaching squadron independently , but was also run down and brought to battle by the British frigate HMS Amazon . Both engagements lasted over three hours and were bloody , the French ships surrendering after three and a half hours and losing nearly 70 men between them . 
 The battle marked the end of Linois 's three @-@ year campaign against British trade and was the second British victory of the Atlantic campaign , following the Battle of San Domingo the previous month . Willaumez eventually returned to France , although without many of his squadron who were destroyed by British operations or Atlantic gales . Linois , despite the criticism levelled at him for his failures in the Indian Ocean , was considered to have fought hard and been unlucky to have encountered such an overwhelming force . Made a prisoner of war , Linois was not exchanged by Napoleon , who criticised his behaviour during the campaign and refused to employ him at sea again . 
 = = Background = = 
 By March 1806 , the French squadron under Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois had been operating against British trade in the Indian Ocean and elsewhere since the start of the Napoleonic Wars in 1803 . <unk> to India before war was declared , Linois left Brest in March 1803 , sailing to the South China Sea in an effort to intercept the China Fleet , a huge merchant convoy from Canton to Britain via Madras that carried goods worth in excess of £ 8 million . On 15 February 1804 , Linois encountered the China Fleet , which due to delays with the squadron in India had sailed without its Royal Navy escort . The loss of this undefended convoy could have devastated the British economy and been the highlight of Linois 's career , but instead the French admiral was fooled by a ruse of the convoy commander , Commodore Nathaniel Dance . Dance pretended that some of his East Indiaman merchant ships were disguised ships of the line and engaged Linois at long range , dissuading the French commander from pressing the attack . Dance 's merchant ships even pursued the fleeing French squadron for some distance , before resuming their original course . This affair , known as the Battle of Pulo Aura , was a humiliation for Linois and provoked Napoleon 's fury when the Emperor was informed of it by the governor of Île de France , Charles Decaen . 
 Six months later , Linois was operating off the Indian port of Vizagapatam when his squadron encountered the British warship HMS Centurion and two merchant ships under her protection . In the ensuing Battle of Vizagapatam , Centurion was badly damaged ; one of the merchant ships was captured and the other driven ashore . Rather than ensure the capture or destruction of Centurion , Linois refused further combat for fear of damaging his ships in shallow coastal waters and withdrew , again provoking censure from Napoleon . In August 1805 , Linois was engaged with another convoy of East Indiamen in the central Indian Ocean , but on this occasion was confronted by the ship of the line HMS Blenheim under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Thomas Troubridge . After some ineffectual skirmishing , Linois withdrew again , unwilling to risk taking fatal damage to his ships so far from a safe port . Although he had seized five Indiamen and a number of small ships that had been sailing individually during his three @-@ year cruise , he failed to make a significant impact on British trade in the region and ruined his reputation as a successful naval commander . Deciding to switch his operations to the Atlantic after discovering that a squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Edward Pellew was searching for him , Linois visited the Cape of Good Hope , where one of his frigates was wrecked . He subsequently cruised the coast of West Africa , capturing two small ships but again failing to make a significant impact on British trade in the region . Learning from an American ship that a British expeditionary force had captured Cape Town , Linois decided to return to France with his remaining ships , the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line flagship Marengo and the frigate Belle Poule , sailing northwards and crossing the equator on 17 February . 
 Unknown to Linois , he was sailing directly into the middle of a complex series of manoeuvres by British and French squadrons known as the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . On 13 December , two large French squadrons sailed from Brest under orders to operate against British Atlantic trade . The first , under Vice @-@ Admiral Corentin @-@ Urbain Leissegues , consisting of the 120 @-@ gun Impérial , four other ships of the line and three smaller vessels , sailed for the Caribbean . The second under Contre @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez , who commanded six ships of the line and four smaller vessels , sailed for the South Atlantic . These squadrons were able to escape due to the reduction in the size and diligence of the British continental blockade that had been relaxed in the aftermath of the Trafalgar campaign of 1805 , in which 13 French and 12 Spanish ships of the line had been captured or destroyed . These losses significantly reduced the ability of the French and their allies to operate in the Atlantic . However , all of these ships came from the Mediterranean fleets : the Brest fleet had failed to even leave port in support of the campaign and thus survived unscathed . When the blockade was relaxed , the squadrons were able to break out into the Atlantic without resistance , following their orders to avoid combat with significant British forces and to cruise British trade routes in search of lightly protected merchant convoys . In response , the British rapidly mustered three squadrons of their own in pursuit . The first , under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Richard Strachan , was ordered to the South Atlantic , to operate in the region of Saint Helena . The second under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren was sent to the mid @-@ Atlantic , based around Madeira , while the third under Sir John Thomas Duckworth was detached from the blockade of Cadiz . Duckworth pursued <unk> to the Caribbean and on 6 February annihilated his force at the Battle of San Domingo , but Willaumez avoided encountering any of the squadrons sent to intercept him . Anticipating Willaumez 's return to France , the remaining British squadrons took up station in the Mid @-@ Atlantic . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 13 March 1806 , Warren 's squadron was cruising in the Eastern Atlantic . Most of the squadron were grouped to the northwest , but HMS London under Captain Sir Harry Burrard @-@ Neale and the flagship HMS Foudroyant under Captain John Chambers White were sailing together some distance from the rest of the British force , in company with the frigate HMS Amazon under Captain William Parker . At 03 : 00 , sails were spotted to the north @-@ east by lookouts on London . <unk> in pursuit with the wind from the south @-@ west , Captain Neale signalled the location of the strange ships to Warren with blue lights , the admiral following with Amazon and the rest of the squadron trailing behind . To the north @-@ east , Linois had also sighted sails in the distance and turned Marengo south @-@ west in pursuit , anticipating a third encounter with a valuable merchant convoy . Captain Alain @-@ Adélaïde @-@ Marie Bruilhac of Belle Poule insisted that the sails were from British warships , but Linois over @-@ ruled him , arguing that any warships would be part of the convoy 's escort and could be avoided in the night . It was not until 05 : 30 , when London appeared from the gloom just ahead of Marengo that Linois realised his mistake . He attempted to escape , but his ships had been at sea for an extended period and were sluggish compared to the 98 @-@ gun London , which rapidly came alongside the French ship of the line and opened a heavy fire . 
 Linois returned London 's fire as best he could , but by 06 : 00 he realised that he was outmatched and swung away , issuing orders for Captain Bruilhac in Belle Poule to escape as best he could . The frigate however , which had been firing at London during the battle , continued engaging the larger ship to give Linois support as he attempted to pull away . At 06 : 15 , Bruilhac sighted Amazon bearing down and also withdrew , pulling ahead of Neale 's ship which continued to fire into Marengo . Both Marengo and London had suffered severe damage to their rigging , and neither were able to effectively manoeuvre : as a result , Linois was unable to avoid either Neale 's continued fire or shots from Amazon as Parker swept past in pursuit of Belle Poule . By 08 : 30 , Parker 's frigate was alongside Bruilhac 's and the ships exchanged fire over the next two hours , Amazon succeeding in damaging Belle Poule 's rigging to prevent her escape . Behind the battling frigates , Marengo had taken further battering from London and by 10 : 25 also came under fire from Foudroyant , and HMS Repulse under Captain Arthur Kaye Legge . HMS Ramillies under Captain Francis Pickmore was also rapidly coming into range . In the face of this overwhelming force , the French ship of the line had no option but to surrender , although by the time the tricolour was lowered at nearly 11 : 00 , both Linois and Captain Joseph @-@ Marie Vrignaud had been taken below with serious wounds . 
 Almost simultaneously with the surrender of Marengo , Captain Bruilhac surrendered Belle Poule , the damage inflicted by Amazon and the presence of Warren 's squadron persuading him that further resistance was hopeless . French losses in the engagement were severe , Marengo suffering extensive damage to her hull and rigging and losing 63 men killed and 83 wounded from a crew of 740 . The latter included both Linois and his son with serious wounds and Captain Vrignaud , who had to have an arm amputated . Losses on Belle Poule included six killed and 24 wounded from her complement of 330 . British losses were comparatively light , London suffering ten dead and 22 wounded and Amazon four killed and five wounded . London was the only British ship damaged , mainly in her rigging , which was hastily repaired in the aftermath of the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 23 April , a heavy storm swept the Eastern Atlantic , striking Warren 's squadron and their prizes . Marengo was seriously damaged , losing all three masts and taking on a large quantity of water that had to be pumped overboard by the understrength crew working in shifts . Five men were drowned . <unk> also suffered in the high winds , losing almost all her masts and rolling for some hours , completely out of control . It was only when the storm had abated that jury masts could be raised and the scattered ships could rejoin the squadron for its journey back to Britain , arriving at Spithead . Willaumez eventually returned to the North Atlantic in the early summer , passing through the Caribbean before being dispersed in a hurricane , his ships scattered across the Western Atlantic . Most eventually reached France , but the campaign had been another disaster for the French Navy , with less than half of the ships sent out returning to Brest . The loss of Marengo and Belle Poule formed a footnote to the campaign , but the defeat of Linois was widely celebrated in Britain , where both ships were commissioned into the Royal Navy under their French names . Linois was praised for his defence of his ship in the face of overwhelming British force , and historian William James , writing in 1827 , considered that had Linois faced London alone he might have had the advantage . Four decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants from London and Amazon still living in 1847 . 
 The engagement was not quite the end for Linois ' squadron : the last survivor , the frigate Sémillante had originally been ordered to sail for Mexico in March 1805 . This plan was foiled by an encounter with the British frigate HMS Phaeton in the Philippines , and Captain Léonard @-@ Bernard Motard returned to the Indian Ocean , operating for the next three years against British shipping from Île de France . Eventually the old frigate was assessed as worn out and sold from service in 1808 , operating as a privateer for a year before she was captured in 1809 . Napoleon refused to exchange Linois for a British prisoner , and the Emperor 's fury at the admiral 's failures in the Indian Ocean prevented any subsequent appointments . In 1814 , after Napoleon 's abdication , the new French regime made Linois governor of Martinique , but when the Hundred Days began , Linois declared for Napoleon and the British invaded and captured his island . His career over , Linois retired . He died some 34 years later , in 1848 . 
 = Interstate 590 = 
 Interstate 590 ( I @-@ 590 ) is a north – south auxiliary Interstate Highway that serves the immediate southeastern suburbs of the city of Rochester , New York , in the United States . It extends for 5 @.@ 07 miles ( 8 @.@ 16 km ) from an interchange with I @-@ 390 in Brighton to the Can of Worms , a complex interchange connecting I @-@ 590 to I @-@ 490 ( the Eastern Expressway ) just inside the Rochester city line . I @-@ 590 makes up the southeast quadrant of the Rochester Outer Loop , which continues west on I @-@ 390 and north past the Can of Worms on New York State Route 590 ( NY 590 ) . The highway is a spur route of I @-@ 90 ; the connection between the two is made via both I @-@ 390 and I @-@ 490 . 
 The portion of I @-@ 590 between Winton Road and the Can of Worms was originally constructed in the 1960s and designated as part of NY 47 from Elmwood Avenue northward . In the late 1970s , I @-@ 590 was proposed as a designation for the entire southern half of the Outer Loop . Ultimately , it was cut back to its current western terminus at the then @-@ proposed I @-@ 390 . I @-@ 590 was officially assigned in 1980 following the elimination of NY 47 , and the last segment of the freeway between Winton Road and I @-@ 390 was completed by the following year . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 590 begins at a semi @-@ directional T interchange with I @-@ 390 in the town of Brighton , a southern suburb of the city of Rochester . The route heads east from the junction , passing under South Clinton Avenue ( which passes through the east half of the interchange but does not connect to either freeway ) and traveling east through open fields to its first interchange ( a diverging diamond interchange ) at South Winton Road . Here , the surroundings rapidly change from fields to densely populated residential areas as it passes through a more developed section of Brighton . As it approaches NY 31 ( Monroe Avenue ) at exit 2 , I @-@ 590 turns a full 90 degrees to the north . Past NY 31 , I @-@ 590 runs through the former Erie Canal and Rochester Subway bed . 
 The freeway travels due north along this stretch , flanked on both sides by residential neighborhoods separated from I @-@ 590 only by sound barriers . Not far to the north of the intersection with NY 31 is exit 3 , a partial diamond interchange for Elmwood Avenue permitting access from I @-@ 590 south and to I @-@ 590 north . Prior to 1980 , NY 47 entered the freeway at this point and followed both I @-@ 590 and NY 590 north to Sea Breeze . Another partial interchange with Highland Avenue follows at exit 4 — making the two connections that exit 3 omits — before I @-@ 590 enters the Can of Worms , a complex interchange connecting I @-@ 590 to I @-@ 490 . North of the ramps leading to I @-@ 490 , I @-@ 590 descends northeastward into a cut and passes below both I @-@ 490 and NY 96 as it becomes NY 590 , which continues onward toward Sea Breeze . 
 = = History = = 
 I @-@ 590 appeared on maps of the Rochester area as early as 1977 as a designation for the portion of the Rochester Outer Loop south of I @-@ 490 . At the time , only two portions of the loop — from I @-@ 490 in Gates southeast to NY 383 in Chili and from Winton Road in Brighton to I @-@ 490 in Rochester — were complete and open to traffic . The western portion was constructed c . 1965 and designated as part of NY 47 . The eastern section , which opened from Monroe Avenue ( NY 31 ) to the Can of Worms c . 1965 and from NY 31 west to Winton Road by 1968 , was part of NY 47 between Elmwood Avenue and I @-@ 490 . South of Elmwood Avenue , the expressway had no signed number as the Federal Highway Administration had yet to assign the I @-@ 590 designation . Construction on the missing section of the Outer Loop 's southern half began in the late 1970s . 
 Around the same time , the state of New York began to look into the possibility of changing the designations that were assigned to the Outer Loop . In one proposal submitted to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials in the late 1970s , I @-@ 590 would be truncated to begin at the then @-@ proposed junction with I @-@ 390 in Brighton but also extended northward along the Sea Breeze Expressway to NY 104 in Irondequoit . The rest of the loop south of I @-@ 490 , meanwhile , would become part of an extended I @-@ 390 . NY 47 , the then @-@ current designation for much of the Outer Loop , would be eliminated entirely . Most of the plans went into effect when the NY 47 designation was eliminated on March 18 , 1980 . The southern half of the Outer Loop was signed as planned ; however , I @-@ 390 and I @-@ 590 were modified to end at their junctions with I @-@ 490 . The section of I @-@ 590 from Winton Road to I @-@ 390 — as well as the interchange connecting the two — was completed c . 1981 . 
 In 2012 , a diverging diamond interchange was added at the intersection of I @-@ 590 and Winton Road in the Brighton suburb of Rochester . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = Glass fiber = 
 Glass fiber ( or glass fibre ) is a material consisting of numerous extremely fine fibers of glass . 
 <unk> throughout history have experimented with glass fibers , but mass manufacture of glass fiber was only made possible with the invention of finer machine tooling . In 1893 , Edward Drummond Libbey exhibited a dress at the World 's Columbian Exposition incorporating glass fibers with the diameter and texture of silk fibers . This was first worn by the popular stage actress of the time Georgia <unk> . Glass fibers can also occur naturally , as Pele 's hair . 
 Glass wool , which is one product called " fiberglass " today , was invented in 1932 – 1933 by Russell Games <unk> of Owens @-@ Corning , as a material to be used as thermal building insulation . It is marketed under the trade name <unk> , which has become a genericized trademark . Glass fiber when used as a thermal insulating material , is specially manufactured with a bonding agent to trap many small air cells , resulting in the characteristically air @-@ filled low @-@ density " glass wool " family of products . 
 Glass fiber has roughly comparable mechanical properties to other fibers such as polymers and carbon fiber . Although not as strong or as rigid as carbon fiber , it is much cheaper and significantly less brittle when used in composites . Glass fibers are therefore used as a reinforcing agent for many polymer products ; to form a very strong and relatively lightweight fiber @-@ reinforced polymer ( FRP ) composite material called glass @-@ reinforced plastic ( GRP ) , also popularly known as " fiberglass " . This structural material product contains little or no air or gas , is more dense , and is a much poorer thermal insulator than is glass wool . 
 = = Fiber formation = = 
 Glass fiber is formed when thin strands of silica @-@ based or other formulation glass are extruded into many fibers with small diameters suitable for textile processing . The technique of heating and drawing glass into fine fibers has been known for millennia ; however , the use of these fibers for textile applications is more recent . Until this time , all glass fiber had been manufactured as staple ( that is , clusters of short lengths of fiber ) . 
 The modern method for producing glass wool is the invention of Games <unk> working at the Owens @-@ Illinois Glass Co . ( Toledo , Ohio ) . He first applied for a patent for a new process to make glass wool in 1933 . The first commercial production of glass fiber was in 1936 . In 1938 Owens @-@ Illinois Glass Company and Corning Glass Works joined to form the Owens @-@ Corning <unk> Corporation . When the two companies joined to produce and promote glass fiber , they introduced continuous filament glass fibers . Owens @-@ Corning is still the major glass @-@ fiber producer in the market today . 
 Composition . The most common types of glass fiber used in fiberglass is E @-@ glass , which is alumino @-@ borosilicate glass with less than 1 % w / w alkali oxides , mainly used for glass @-@ reinforced plastics . Other types of glass used are A @-@ glass ( Alkali @-@ lime glass with little or no boron oxide ) , E @-@ CR @-@ glass ( Electrical / Chemical Resistance ; alumino @-@ lime silicate with less than 1 % w / w alkali oxides , with high acid resistance ) , C @-@ glass ( alkali @-@ lime glass with high boron oxide content , used for glass staple fibers and insulation ) , D @-@ glass ( borosilicate glass , named for its low Dielectric constant ) , R @-@ glass ( alumino silicate glass without MgO and CaO with high mechanical requirements as reinforcement ) , and S @-@ glass ( alumino silicate glass without CaO but with high MgO content with high tensile strength ) . 
 Naming and use . Pure silica ( silicon dioxide ) , when cooled as fused quartz into a glass with no true melting point , can be used as a glass fiber for fiberglass , but has the drawback that it must be worked at very high temperatures . In order to lower the necessary work temperature , other materials are introduced as " fluxing agents " ( i.e. , components to lower the melting point ) . Ordinary A @-@ glass ( " A " for " alkali @-@ lime " ) or soda lime glass , crushed and ready to be remelted , as so @-@ called cullet glass , was the first type of glass used for fiberglass . E @-@ glass ( " E " because of initial electrical application ) , is alkali free , and was the first glass formulation used for continuous filament formation . It now makes up most of the fiberglass production in the world , and also is the single largest consumer of boron minerals globally . It is susceptible to chloride ion attack and is a poor choice for marine applications . S @-@ glass ( " S " for " Strength " ) is used when high tensile strength ( modulus ) is important , and is thus an important building and aircraft epoxy composite . The same substance is known as R @-@ glass ( " R " for " reinforcement " ) in Europe ) . C @-@ glass ( " C " for " chemical resistance " ) and T @-@ glass ( " T " is for " thermal insulator " – a North American variant of C @-@ glass ) are resistant to chemical attack ; both are often found in insulation @-@ grades of blown fiberglass . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The basis of textile @-@ grade glass fibers is silica , SiO2 . In its pure form it exists as a polymer , ( SiO2 ) n . It has no true melting point but softens up to 1200 ° C , where it starts to degrade . At 1713 ° C , most of the molecules can move about freely . If the glass is extruded and cooled quickly at this temperature , it will be unable to form an ordered structure . In the polymer it forms SiO4 groups which are configured as a tetrahedron with the silicon atom at the center , and four oxygen atoms at the corners . These atoms then form a network bonded at the corners by sharing the oxygen atoms . 
 The vitreous and crystalline states of silica ( glass and quartz ) have similar energy levels on a molecular basis , also implying that the glassy form is extremely stable . In order to induce crystallization , it must be heated to temperatures above 1200 ° C for long periods of time . 
 Although pure silica is a perfectly viable glass and glass fiber , it must be worked with at very high temperatures , which is a drawback unless its specific chemical properties are needed . It is usual to introduce impurities into the glass in the form of other materials to lower its working temperature . These materials also impart various other properties to the glass that may be beneficial in different applications . The first type of glass used for fiber was soda lime glass or A @-@ glass ( " A " for the alkali it contains ) . It is not very resistant to alkali . A new type , E @-@ glass , was formed ; this is an alumino @-@ borosilicate glass that is alkali @-@ free ( < 2 % ) . This was the first glass formulation used for continuous filament formation . E @-@ glass still makes up most of the glass fiber production in the world . Its particular components may differ slightly in percentage , but must fall within a specific range . The letter E is used because it was originally for electrical applications . S @-@ glass ( S for " stiff " ) is a high @-@ strength formulation for use when tensile strength is the most important property . C @-@ glass was developed to resist attack from chemicals , mostly acids that destroy E @-@ glass . T @-@ glass is a North American variant of C @-@ glass . A @-@ glass is an industry term for cullet glass , often bottles , made into fiber . AR @-@ glass is alkali @-@ resistant glass . Most glass fibers have limited solubility in water but are very dependent on pH . Chloride ions will also attack and dissolve E @-@ glass surfaces . 
 E @-@ glass does not actually melt , but softens instead , the softening point being " the temperature at which a 0 @.@ 55 – 0 @.@ 77 mm diameter fiber 235 mm long , elongates under its own weight at 1 mm / min when suspended vertically and heated at the rate of 5 ° C per minute " . The strain point is reached when the glass has a viscosity of 1014 @.@ 5 poise . The annealing point , which is the temperature where the internal stresses are reduced to an acceptable commercial limit in 15 minutes , is marked by a viscosity of 1013 poise . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Thermal = = = 
 Glass fibers are useful thermal insulators because of their high ratio of surface area to weight . However , the increased surface area makes them much more susceptible to chemical attack . By trapping air within them , blocks of glass fiber make good thermal insulation , with a thermal conductivity of the order of 0 @.@ 05 W / ( m · K ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The strength of glass is usually tested and reported for " virgin " or pristine fibers — those that have just been manufactured . The freshest , thinnest fibers are the strongest because the thinner fibers are more ductile . The more the surface is scratched , the less the resulting tenacity . Because glass has an amorphous structure , its properties are the same along the fiber and across the fiber . Humidity is an important factor in the tensile strength . Moisture is easily adsorbed and can worsen microscopic cracks and surface defects , and lessen tenacity . 
 In contrast to carbon fiber , glass can undergo more elongation before it breaks . There is a correlation between bending diameter of the filament and the filament diameter . The viscosity of the molten glass is very important for manufacturing success . During drawing ( pulling of the glass to reduce fiber circumference ) , the viscosity must be relatively low . If it is too high , the fiber will break during drawing . However , if it is too low , the glass will form droplets rather than drawing out into fiber . 
 = = Manufacturing processes = = 
 = = = Melting = = = 
 There are two main types of glass fiber manufacture and two main types of glass fiber product . First , fiber is made either from a direct melt process or a marble <unk> process . Both start with the raw materials in solid form . The materials are mixed together and melted in a furnace . Then , for the marble process , the molten material is sheared and rolled into marbles which are cooled and packaged . The marbles are taken to the fiber manufacturing facility where they are inserted into a can and remelted . The molten glass is extruded to the bushing to be formed into fiber . In the direct melt process , the molten glass in the furnace goes directly to the bushing for formation . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The bushing plate is the most important part of the machinery for making the fiber . This is a small metal furnace containing nozzles for the fiber to be formed through . It is almost always made of platinum alloyed with rhodium for durability . Platinum is used because the glass melt has a natural affinity for wetting it . When bushings were first used they were 100 % platinum , and the glass wetted the bushing so easily that it ran under the plate after exiting the nozzle and accumulated on the underside . Also , due to its cost and the tendency to wear , the platinum was alloyed with rhodium . In the direct melt process , the bushing serves as a collector for the molten glass . It is heated slightly to keep the glass at the correct temperature for fiber formation . In the marble melt process , the bushing acts more like a furnace as it melts more of the material . 
 <unk> are the major expense in fiber glass production . The nozzle design is also critical . The number of nozzles ranges from 200 to 4000 in multiples of 200 . The important part of the nozzle in continuous filament manufacture is the thickness of its walls in the exit region . It was found that inserting a <unk> here reduced wetting . Today , the nozzles are designed to have a minimum thickness at the exit . As glass flows through the nozzle , it forms a drop which is suspended from the end . As it falls , it leaves a thread attached by the meniscus to the nozzle as long as the viscosity is in the correct range for fiber formation . The smaller the annular ring of the nozzle and the thinner the wall at exit , the faster the drop will form and fall away , and the lower its tendency to wet the vertical part of the nozzle . The surface tension of the glass is what influences the formation of the meniscus . For E @-@ glass it should be around 400 mN / m . 
 The attenuation ( drawing ) speed is important in the nozzle design . Although slowing this speed down can make coarser fiber , it is uneconomic to run at speeds for which the nozzles were not designed . 
 = = = Continuous filament process = = = 
 In the continuous filament process , after the fiber is drawn , a size is applied . This size helps protect the fiber as it is wound onto a bobbin . The particular size applied relates to end @-@ use . While some sizes are processing aids , others make the fiber have an affinity for a certain resin , if the fiber is to be used in a composite . Size is usually added at 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 0 % by weight . Winding then takes place at around 1000 m / min . 
 = = = Staple fiber process = = = 
 For staple fiber production , there are a number of ways to manufacture the fiber . The glass can be blown or blasted with heat or steam after exiting the formation machine . Usually these fibers are made into some sort of mat . The most common process used is the rotary process . Here , the glass enters a rotating spinner , and due to centrifugal force is thrown out horizontally . The air jets push it down vertically , and binder is applied . Then the mat is <unk> to a screen and the binder is cured in the oven . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Glass fiber has increased in popularity since the discovery that asbestos causes cancer and its subsequent removal from most products . However , the safety of glass fiber is also being called into question , as research shows that the composition of this material ( asbestos and glass fiber are both silicate fibers ) can cause similar toxicity as asbestos . 
 1970s studies on rats found that fibrous glass of less than 3 micrometers in diameter and greater than 20 micrometers in length is a " potent carcinogen " . Likewise , the International Agency for Research on Cancer found it " may reasonably be anticipated to be a carcinogen " in 1990 . The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists , on the other hand , says that there is insufficient evidence , and that glass fiber is in group A4 : " Not classifiable as a human carcinogen " . 
 The North American Insulation Manufacturers Association ( <unk> ) claims that glass fiber is fundamentally different from asbestos , since it is man @-@ made instead of naturally @-@ occurring . They claim that glass fiber " dissolves in the lungs " , while asbestos remains in the body for life . Although both glass fiber and asbestos are made from silica filaments , <unk> claims that asbestos is more dangerous because of its crystalline structure , which causes it to cleave into smaller , more dangerous pieces , citing the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services : 
 Synthetic vitreous fibers [ fiber glass ] differ from asbestos in two ways that may provide at least partial explanations for their lower toxicity . Because most synthetic vitreous fibers are not crystalline like asbestos , they do not split longitudinally to form thinner fibers . They also generally have markedly less biopersistence in biological tissues than asbestos fibers because they can undergo dissolution and transverse breakage . 
 A 1998 study using rats found that the biopersistence of synthetic fibers after one year was 0 @.@ 04 – 10 % , but 27 % for <unk> asbestos . Fibers that persisted longer were found to be more carcinogenic . 
 = = Glass @-@ reinforced plastic ( fiberglass ) = = 
 Glass @-@ reinforced plastic ( GRP ) is a composite material or fiber @-@ reinforced plastic made of a plastic reinforced by fine glass fibers . Like graphite @-@ reinforced plastic , the composite material is commonly referred to as fiberglass . The glass can be in the form of a chopped strand mat ( CSM ) or a woven fabric . 
 As with many other composite materials ( such as reinforced concrete ) , the two materials act together , each overcoming the deficits of the other . Whereas the plastic resins are strong in compressive loading and relatively weak in tensile strength , the glass fibers are very strong in tension but tend not to resist compression . By combining the two materials , GRP becomes a material that resists both compressive and tensile forces well . The two materials may be used uniformly or the glass may be specifically placed in those portions of the structure that will experience tensile loads . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Uses for regular glass fiber include mats and fabrics for thermal insulation , electrical insulation , sound insulation , high @-@ strength fabrics or heat- and corrosion @-@ resistant fabrics . It is also used to reinforce various materials , such as tent poles , pole vault poles , arrows , bows and crossbows , translucent roofing panels , automobile bodies , hockey sticks , surfboards , boat hulls , and paper honeycomb . It has been used for medical purposes in casts . Glass fiber is extensively used for making FRP tanks and vessels . 
 Open @-@ weave glass fiber grids are used to reinforce asphalt pavement . Non @-@ woven glass fiber / polymer blend mats are used saturated with asphalt emulsion and overlaid with asphalt , producing a waterproof , crack @-@ resistant membrane . Use of glass @-@ fiber reinforced polymer rebar instead of steel rebar shows promise in areas where avoidance of steel corrosion is desired . 
 = = Role of recycling in glass fiber manufacturing = = 
 Manufacturers of glass @-@ fiber insulation can use recycled glass . Recycled glass fiber has up to a 40 % recycled glass . 
 = Ayscoghe Boucherett = 
 Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Ayscoghe Boucherett , JP DL ( 16 April 1755 – 15 September 1815 ) was a British landowner , businessman and Member of Parliament for Great Grimsby from 1796 to 1803 . 
 Born into a family of the Lincolnshire landed gentry , Boucherett became involved in local politics in Lincolnshire , and ( owing mainly to his marriage ) with artistic and mercantile circles in London . He was the chairman of the Grimsby Haven Company , which oversaw the reopening and expansion of Grimsby 's first dock . He was a friend of the artist Sir Thomas Lawrence and the proprietor of Willingham , Lincolnshire , where he constructed his country seat , Willingham House , in 1790 . For his investment in the Haven Company , he received the support of Lord Yarborough , one of its main investors and a principal land @-@ owner in Grimsby ; owing largely to Lord Yarborough 's patronage , Boucherett was returned as the Member of Parliament for that borough at the 1796 election . He was not a frequent voter , but used his position to further the interests of his corporation . Nonetheless , the company met with financial difficulties after it opened the Harbour in 1800 . In 1803 , Boucherett resigned his seat in favour of Yarborough 's heir and pursued a quieter political life . He died in a carriage accident in 1815 . 
 = = Early life and family connections = = 
 Boucherett was born on 16 April 1755 , the son of Ayscoghe Boucherett of Willingham and <unk> , Lincolnshire , and his wife , Mary White . The elder Boucherett had been the High Sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1754 , and was a landed gentleman in Lincolnshire , whose family was descended from Huguenot merchants ; they married into the Ayscoghe family and inherited the Willingham estate through this marriage . The elder Boucherett 's daughter , Mary , had married Michael Barne of <unk> , Suffolk , an army officer and a member of parliament for Dunwich . 
 The younger Boucherett was admitted at Queen 's College , Cambridge , in 1773 , aged 18 , but did not take a degree . He married , on 17 March 1789 , Emelia <unk> , daughter of Charles <unk> , a merchant , of London and of <unk> Hall , Essex , and his wife , Anna <unk> , who married , when widowed , the insurance broker and art connoisseur John Julius Angerstein . This union helped the younger Boucherett to garner connexions in London merchant circles . Emilia Boucherett died on 5 February 1837 , aged 75 . The <unk> had one son and three daughters : 
 Emilia Mary Boucherett ( 7 August 1790 – 29 November 1870 ) . Died unmarried . 
 Ayscoghe Boucherett , J.P. , D.L. ( 24 September 1791 – 1857 ) , he was High Sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1820 . He married , on 11 May 1816 , Louisa Pigou , daughter of Frederick John Pigou of Dartford , Kent , and his wife Louisa , née Minchin . They had : Ayscoghe Boucherett ( 1817 – 32 ) , Henry Robert Boucherett , J.P. ( 1818 – 77 ) , who was High Sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1866 , Hugo Boucherett ( 1819 – c . 1839 ) , Louisa Boucherett ( 1821 – 95 ) , and Emilia Jessie Boucherett ( 1825 – 1905 ) , who was a noted women 's rights campaigner . 
 Maria Boucherett ( born 30 October 1795 ) . She married , on 15 August 1815 , Charles Parker Newdigate Newdegate of Harefield , Middlesex ; their only child was the Conservative politician and Member of Parliament for North Warwickshire , Charles Newdigate Newdegate . 
 Juliana Boucherett ( bapt . 27 April 1798 ) . Died unmarried . 
 Boucherett paid for the construction of a new family seat in 1790 ; Willingham House was a larger and grander mansion than the family 's previous seat closer to Willingham , and was constructed in the neoclassical style , most likely by Robert Mitchell , two miles west of the earlier house . 
 = = Friendship with Sir Thomas Lawrence = = 
 The family 's connection with the art connoisseur John Julius Angerstein led to them becoming acquainted with certain artistic circles in the late eighteenth century ; most notably , they established a close friendship with the portrait painter Sir Thomas Lawrence , who would go on to be President of the Royal Academy . He visited Willingham House , the Boucherett family 's country home , composing a number of studies in pastel of Boucherett 's young children , beginning in 1793 . The Boucherett family were also painted several times by Lawrence ; he painted a group portrait of Emilia Boucherett , and her two eldest children , Ayscoghe and Emilia Maria , alongside Mrs Boucherett 's half @-@ sister , Juliana Angerstein ; another group portrait , The Children of Ayscoghe Boucherett , depicting the four children of Boucherett and his wife , ( painted in 1808 and now held in the Louvre Museum ) , has been described as " one of Lawrence 's most celebrated group portraits " . A separate study of the three daughters , Emilia Mary , Maria and Juliana , was sold by the auction house Christie 's in 2012 for £ 121 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Member of Parliament and public service = = 
 In the 1790s , Boucherett began to rise through Lincolnshire 's civic and mercantile circles , especially in the north of the County , where the family had their seat ; his connexions helped him to become involved with a group of businessmen planning to reopen and expand Grimsby 's harbour . His rise is charted in his appointments to several civic posts : to be High Steward of Grimsby from 1794 ( he remained as such until his death ) , succeeding Christopher Clayton , and to be High Sheriff of Lincolnshire for 1795 – 6 . As these plans for the harbour came to fruition , he was appointed chairman of the company tasked with performing the required work ; it was the Grimsby Haven Company , which was created by an Act of Parliament in 1796 ( 36 Geo III , chap . 98 ) for the express purpose of building the dock and repairing the Haven . He secured the friendship and patronage of Charles Anderson Pelham , 1st Baron Yarborough , a prominent local land @-@ owner involved in the Haven Company , and was returned as the Member of Parliament for Great Grimsby in 1796 owing to this friendship . 
 Yarborough , Boucherett 's patron , was an opponent of the administration of William Pitt the Younger and supported the Duke of Portland during the 1790s . Boucherett was an infrequent voter , but he told the diarist Joseph Farington that , when he did vote , he tended to do so with Charles James Fox , rather than Pitt the Younger , although , he later became " disgusted " at Fox 's style of opposition ; he is also known to have voted against the Ferrol Expedition in 1801 . The seat did allow for him to further the interests of the Haven Company , with him proposing a bill to grant more funds in 1799 . He found , though , that his funds and the financial success of the company were both in decline by 1801 . Although re @-@ elected in 1802 , the following year he resigned in favour of Lord Yarborough 's eldest son and heir , the Hon. Charles Anderson Pelham , later 1st Earl and 2nd Baron Yarborough . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Although opened in 1800 at the cost of £ 100 @,@ 000 , the new harbour at Grimsby failed to attract the levels of trade the company had projected , caused largely by a lack of inland transport networks . The financial problems facing the Grimsby Haven Company led to factions and difficulty in its running and put strain on Boucherett 's relations with Yarborough ; having invested much money and time in the now failing company , Boucherett also found it draining of him financially . 
 Aside from Parliamentary and business commitments , he served as a Deputy Lieutenant for Lincolnshire and a Justice of the Peace . Boucherett was also an officer in the Yeoman volunteers , being a Captain the Market Raisin Yeomanry in 1798 and then a Lieutenant @-@ Colonel in and Commandant of the North Lincolnshire Yeomanry from 1814 until his death . He died in a carriage accident on 15 September 1815 . At his death , his assets barely covered the debts he had accrued in his lifetime . He was succeeded as the High Steward of Grimsby by the Hon. George Anderson Pelham , the second son of the first Lord Yarborough . 
 = NBN Television = 
 NBN Television , ( commonly known as NBN ) is an Australian television station based in Newcastle , Australia . The station was inaugurated on 4 March 1962 as the first regional commercial television station in New South Wales , and has since expanded to 39 transmitters throughout the northern half of New South Wales and parts of South East Queensland , including Tamworth , Tweed Heads , Lismore , Coffs Harbour , Hunter Region , Central Coast and the Gold Coast . It is owned by the Nine Network , with its schedule closely following those of metropolitan counterparts TCN in Sydney and QTQ in Brisbane . 
 The station callsign , NBN , is an acronym for Newcastle Broadcasting New South Wales . NBN is the only regional station in Australia to produce a one @-@ hour news bulletin seven days a week . Since 2007 , it has been owned by Nine 's parent company Nine Entertainment Co . ( formerly PBL Media ) , making it a sister station to its metropolitan counterparts . Prior to 1 July 2016 , NBN operated as an independent regional station , and not as part of the main network . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 NBN 's original owner , the Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation ( NBTC ) was founded in May 1958 to begin preparations for the upcoming television licence allocations . The main shareholders in NBTC were United Broadcasting Company ( owned by the Lamb family , owners of radio station <unk> ) , <unk> Broadcasting Company ( owners of local radio station 2HD ) , and the Newcastle Morning Herald and Miners Advocate ( to be bought out by John Fairfax and Sons Ltd . ) . In accordance with the Australian Broadcasting Control Board regulations , at least 50 % of the company had to be locally owned . 750 @,@ 000 shares were made available by the NBTC ( at 10 shillings , equivalent to A $ 1 each ) . Approximately 2000 people bought shares . 
 The Australian Broadcasting Control Board awarded the commercial television licence for the Newcastle and Hunter Valley area to the NBTC on 1 August 1961 . NBN @-@ 3 would transmit on VHF channel 3 , from a transmitter atop Mount Sugarloaf near Newcastle . Council approval for the transmitter was issued on 17 July that year . 
 The call @-@ letters , NBN , were derived from the company 's name , Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation , with the second N representing New South Wales , as required by law . Unofficially , it stood for Newcastle Broadcasting Network . 
 Construction began in November 1961 , supervised by engineers from RCA in the United States . It was a step backwards for RCA , building a new station transmitting in black and white while colour television was fast becoming the norm in the United States . Ninety per cent of the original equipment was imported from the United States , and held in bond until they were due to be installed . Equipment was purchased with colour production and transmission in mind , so that only 20 % modification would be required when colour came to NBN . Studios were to be built on a 3 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) block at <unk> Crescent , near the city centre . 
 Work on the 142 m ( 466 ft ) transmitter was delayed by a combination of weather , the conditions for the road leading to Mount Sugarloaf , and excited sightseers blocking work trucks during the weekends . During that time , the technical team stayed at the top of the mountain . The construction took 8 months at a cost of A $ 1 @.@ 5 million , and required staff to work seven days a week ( except on Christmas Day ) to make the deadline . 
 Test transmissions took place in early 1962 , and could be seen as far away as Muswellbrook , Avalon , Katoomba , Lithgow , Gloucester and around Port Kembla . 
 = = = = Opening night = = = = 
 NBN Television commenced transmission on 4 March 1962 . The first programme on launch night began at 6pm , a taped welcome by the then @-@ Postmaster General Charles Davidson . Following that was a guided tour around the NBN studios by the original production manager , Matthew Tapp . 
 Murray Finlay began one of the longest newsreading careers in Australia with NBN 's first news bulletin at 6.30pm. This was followed by The Phil Silvers Show at 7pm , and the 1937 movie Green Light starring Errol Flynn at 7 @.@ 30 ; the George Sanders Theatre series followed at 9pm , with opening episode , The Man in the Elevator , followed by the first episode from the Halls of Ivy , then the first Mystery Theatre program , The Missing Head at 10 pm . Anglican Bishop James <unk> gave the first evening meditation at 10.30pm , marking the end of the first night of transmission for NBN @-@ 3 in Newcastle . Commercials on the first night included Rothmans Cigarettes , Streets Ice Cream , <unk> , Commonwealth Bank , Shell , and W.D. & H.O. Wills , amongst others . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the opening night , the station promised at least two movies a week , as well as men 's interest programs each Saturday afternoon between 3pm and 4pm – a commitment successfully met , along with female @-@ targeted programming in the early afternoon , and children 's programming from 4.30pm to 6.30pm weekdays and mature programming thirty minutes before <unk> each night . NBN Television broadcast fifty @-@ six hours in its first week of transmission , setting the Australian television record for the most time spent on air in a week for a new television station . 
 = = = 1960s to the 1970s = = = 
 Soon after launch night , NBN extended television coverage from <unk> to Broken Bay and as far west as Aberdeen . The station only operated eight hours per day , however several programs were produced locally including Home at Three , Let 's Cook With Gas , Tempo , Focus , as well as nightly news bulletins at 6.30pm. 
 In 1963 , Australian Consolidated Press and News Limited bought 200 @,@ 000 shares in the Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation . Shortly after , United Broadcasting Company sold its shares to <unk> Investments Limited in Adelaide , and Australian United Investments in Melbourne , with each company purchasing 100 @,@ 000 shares . Time Enterprises , purchased Australian United Investments 's shares in November 1967 . 
 During the period between 1968 and 1969 , NBN secured a relay from the Postmaster @-@ General to enhance their news service . In 1970 , NBN began upgrading its studios in preparation for the commencement of colour television at a cost of A $ 360 @,@ 000 . The improvements included an enlarged film department ; a film editing and cleaning equipment ; a larger master control with four video transfer machines ; a new telecine room with caption scanner and slide drums ; as well as an expansion of the administration and staff offices which also included new offices and a boardroom . 
 In 1972 , NBN was granted a licence to operate a translator in the Upper Hunter from <unk> Lookout near Aberdeen , on VHF channel 10 . Concurrently in April 1972 , NBN expanded its nightly news service to one hour , becoming the first television station in Australia to have a one @-@ hour news bulletin . As a part of earlier preparations for colour production , between 1972 and 1973 , orders were placed with Rank <unk> and the EMI Group in the United Kingdom and Ampex in the United States for new colour equipment , in time for colour transmission tests on 7 October 1974 . On 1 March 1975 , the station began regular colour transmissions , whilst transmission was expanded to <unk> Downs , <unk> , Mount Helen , and <unk> at a cost of A $ 180 @,@ 000 . In 1978 , the Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation made a bid for local station ( and former owner ) 2HD , however was disallowed by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal . Also during the same year more extensions were added to the studios , which included a new car park , and was officially opened on 17 November 1978 . 
 On 22 November 1979 the Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation officially became NBN Limited , and the station itself renamed from Channel Three to NBN Television . By the late 1970s , NBN was producing twenty hours a week of local and networked programming from its studios , which in turn led the station to purchase a Bell Jet Ranger helicopter for news coverage purposes . 
 = = = 1980s to the 1990s = = = 
 In early 1980 , NBN purchased Southern Television Corporation Limited , owners of NWS @-@ 9 in Adelaide , for A $ 19 million . During the same year , NBN began a teletext service and also purchased the free local newspaper , the Newcastle Star . In 1981 , <unk> Pty . Ltd . , a subsidiary of Parry 's Esplanade Limited ( later Parry Corporation ) , purchased 19 @.@ 88 % of NBN Limited for A $ 6 @.@ 7 million . 
 Parry had then attempted to buy Michael Wansey 's stake in NBN , but was blocked by the Supreme Court of New South Wales . It was later revealed that the Lambs had opposed NBN 's purchase of the Star newspaper ( created and owned by Wansey ) and the attempt to buy 2HD . The company also faced possible suspension from the Australian Stock Exchange if a decision was not made soon . To resolve the tension , NBN sold NWS @-@ 9 to the Lambs in exchange for the majority stake in NBN in 1982 . With the buy @-@ out of community shares in NBN , the station ceased to be what Hunter residents considered to be " their own ' . It came at a cost . Wansey mortgaged his shares to Parry who called in the debt . 
 On 16 March 1983 , <unk> finally completed the purchase of NBN , officially delisting the company . It had cost Parry A $ 6 @.@ 76 per share to acquire 1 @,@ 285 @,@ 289 shares . Michael Wansey resigned from the board at the end of the year as a result . In 1984 , plans for a second independent station in Newcastle had failed . During that time , NBN and ABC Newcastle were asked to leave the VHF band to accommodate FM radio . NBN would have been on UHF channel 51 , and ABC on UHF channel 48 , however this did not eventuate . A proposal to launch a radiated subscription television service with community broadcasting during the daytime hours had also failed that year . 
 In the late 1980s , NBN 's Perth @-@ based owner , Parry Corporation , spun off NBN Limited into a new company , NBN Enterprises , and took a 40 % stake in the new company , with Security Pacific Capital Corporation buying 60 % . Parry sold their stake soon after , holding onto Papua New Guinea television station <unk> , which NBN had helped to set up . Fulcrum Media 's move to later purchase the station was a source for confusion , as it was revealed that many companies , including the NSW State Superannuation Board and Westpac Banking Corporation , held substantial stakes in Fulcrum Media . Parry Corp 's new owner <unk> issued a court challenge to re @-@ acquire NBN , but it was revealed that <unk> was held by Hong Kong company Hung Lung Corporation , thereby violating foreign ownership laws . Following ownership changes , NBN Enterprises was sold to Washington H. Soul Pattinson for A $ 36 million . 
 NBN was one of many stations opposed to aggregation , and offered an alternative by opening up a second station which it would operate for a period of time before selling it . This proposal was however rejected , and aggregation occurred on 31 December 1991 , with NBN acquiring Nine Network affiliation . Following aggregation , the station 's coverage expanded to cover all of northern New South Wales , whilst concurrently programming extended to twenty @-@ four hours in a day , in stereophonic sound . In 1994 , NBN Television 's logo was updated to a pseudo @-@ Nine logo , similar to fellow affiliate WIN Television . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Throughout the 2000s , NBN was regarded as one of the leaders in digital broadcasting , not only being the first to produce a nightly regional news bulletin in full digital format , using a digital friendly news set , but also Australia 's first fully digital outside broadcast van . 
 In 2004 , Washington H. Soul Pattinson began moves to transfer control of the station to its publicly listed subsidiary , Soul Pattinson Telecommunications , which became SP <unk> as a result . 
 On 30 January 2006 , NBN adopted a new logo and on air graphics , in line with Nine 's new logo . However , the news department did not update its graphics until 15 March . During April 2007 , SP <unk> announced that it would consider selling NBN Television , and had received at least two bids , one each from WIN Corporation and PBL Media . On 9 May 2007 , PBL Media 's ( now Nine Entertainment Co . ) A $ 250 million bid became final , winning the sale . However , upon acquiring NBN , PBL did not fold it into the main Nine Network , but continued to operate it as a regional station . The purchase also secured permanent status of supplying Nine 's content to the station 's entire coverage area , sparing any future affiliation switches ( particularly the 2016 Australian television shakeup involving Southern Cross Austereo and WIN Corporation ) . 
 Following Nine 's relaunch of their high definition simulcast as " Nine HD " on 17 March 2008 , NBN launched their own HD simulcast in mid @-@ 2008 called " NBN HD " . 
 On 9 August 2009 , NBN began transmission of the new digital channel GO ! ( now 9Go ! ) on channel 88 . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In 2010 , it was announced that two of NBN 's inner Newcastle <unk> sites in Charlestown and Cooks Hill were selected to carry 3D broadcasts of the 2010 State of Origin series . 
 On 26 September 2010 , NBN began transmission of the HD digital channel GEM ( now 9Gem ) on channel 80 . 
 On 26 March 2012 , NBN began transmission of Nine 's metropolitan informercial channel Extra on channel 84 . 
 On 27 January 2014 , along with the Nine Network , NBN switched from the <unk> logo to Nine 's Closed Captioning logo . 
 After Nine revived 9HD and launched new lifestyle channel 9Life on 26 November 2015 , NBN made no announcements of its intent to follow Nine 's move in regional areas , instead continuing to broadcast 9Gem 's HD feed on channel 80 . NBN released a statement on its website days before the 9HD relaunch , saying that efforts are made to upgrade its stations across the region . On 10 February 2016 , Nine Entertainment Co. announced that NBN would receive both 9HD and 9Life in " coming months " , with further confirmation on 16 February that they would launch on 1 March 2016 . As a result , their channel listing was reshuffled to match to Nine 's metropolitan listing with 9Gem on channel 82 , 9Go ! on channel 83 , 9Life on channel 84 and Extra on channel 85 . 
 On 9 February 2016 , it was announced that Kylie Blucher , managing director of QTQ Brisbane , would be appointed managing director of NBN while retaining her position at QTQ , stating that she would " be splitting [ her ] time between Brisbane and Newcastle " . 
 Alongside the launch of 9HD and 9Life on 1 March 2016 , NBN 's unique branding began to be phased out in favour of Nine 's mainstream branding already in place on its metropolitan stations and its Darwin station . The mainstream logos for Nine and 9HD were used with " NBN " written alongside in a smaller font . On 1 July 2016 , coinciding with the media shakeup of WIN and Southern Cross , NBN 's unique branding was completely phased out . However , NBN News remains under its unique name and the small " NBN " on the Nine watermark is still used in areas where NBN 's signal overlaps with TCN Sydney and QTQ Brisbane to differentiate between the stations . 
 = = News = = 
 NBN News is the only regional mainland news service to produce a nightly bulletin seven nights a week . The news service employs 60 staff and produces over 20 @,@ 000 local news stories annually , of which is combined with news reports from the Nine Network , the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and ITN ; with local stories in all of its sub @-@ markets . Throughout its history , NBN News produced Good Morning News , Good Evening News , News Night , NBN Evening News , and NBN Late Edition News and currently running NBN News . 
 NBN 's local news is presented from the station 's news studios at <unk> Crescent in Newcastle , by Paul Lobb and Natasha <unk> on weekdays , with Jane Goldsmith on weekends . Mitchell Hughes and Gavin Morris present sport and weather respectively on weekdays , whilst weekend sport is presented by Chris White . 
 NBN was the first to launch an hour @-@ long news bulletin in April 1972 , and from launch night until the 1980s , Murray Finlay was the face of NBN 's news bulletins , and was one of Australia 's longest serving newsreaders . In 1975 , Finlay was joined by Ray <unk> at the news desk , who remained in that position until retirement in December 2010 . In 1979 , the news service received an award for its coverage of the Star Hotel riot . 
 On 1 March 1985 , Jim Sullivan began his career as news director for the service , which has ultimately led him to become Australia 's longest serving news director . 
 NBN News ' footage of the tragic events of the 1989 Newcastle earthquake was beamed throughout the world , with NBN 's reporters also being interviewed by international news services . 
 During the 1990s , the news service produced bulletins for the breakfast and late night timeslots , however this was later replaced by the Nine Network 's Nightline bulletin . Also , for a short period , the 4.30pm bulletin was broadcast coupled with introductions and weather reports produced by the station in Newcastle . 
 <unk> with NBN News director Jim Sullivan , NBN Late Edition News producer , Matt Carden secured a live feed through the Nine Network of ABC America enabling first pictures to be aired of the New York attacks within minutes . When NBN Late Edition News opened a short time later , newsreader Jodi McKay handed over to ABC News America 's coverage of events , anchored by Peter Jennings . The bulletin was extended until 1am when NBN handed over to TCN @-@ 9 for the start of almost five days of continuous national coverage . 
 NBN News is unique as it simulcasts live across all 6 markets . After the major national stories are presented , the program is split into six Local Window opt @-@ outs , featuring pre @-@ recorded local bulletins for each regional market and a live local news round @-@ up for Newcastle . After the first break , the bulletin continues as a live simulcast across the network with further Local Window opt @-@ outs for sport and weather . News , sport and weather presenters start early at NBN recording introductions to each of the local stories which will be inserted into the live broadcast at 6pm . Top Stories are produced by regional news bureaus at Port Macquarie , Coffs Harbour , Central Coast , Tamworth , Lismore and the Gold Coast . 
 In 2006 , NBN aired its 20,000th news bulletin during the week of 26 March ; commemorating the event , NBN News produced five news specials that summarised the prior 44 years of news production . 
 NBN also broadcasts Nine Network 's news content , including Nine 's Early Morning News , Today , Nine 's Morning News , Nine News Now , Nine 's Afternoon News , A Current Affair , and Nine News : First at Five . NBN , however , does not air Nine 's flagship 6PM Bulletin ( i.e. either Nine News Sydney or Nine News Queensland ) , since NBN News serves as the station 's flagship bulletin . 
 Paul Lobb took over as the network 's main male newsreader after Ray <unk> retired on 17 December 2010 . 
 Following the appointment of Kylie Blucher as the station 's managing director , NBN News opener and graphics were relaunched , aligning with Nine 's metropolitan and Darwin stations , yet retaining the well @-@ known theme music composed by Laurence <unk> . Although a " lite " version of the graphics were introduced in February 2014 , it did not became identical with Nine News until April 2016 . 
 = = Local programming = = 
 NBN has always produced some local programming , and had set a record for most local programming and transmission hours in its first week of operation . It was also a member of Australian Television Facilities , and had a hand in the production of drama series Silent Number . 
 In 1963 , NBN won the Logie Award for Enterprising Programming ( which was only for country stations ) , and another Outstanding Contribution by a Regional Station award in 1978 . NBN purchased the Romper Room franchise from Fremantle International in 1967 , which broadcast for over three decades . The original hostess was Miss Anne , followed by Miss Lyn , Miss Pauline and finally , Miss Kim who hosted the program until its demise due to ' political correctness ' . ( For example , a favourite feature called ' bounce @-@ the @-@ ball ' was deemed inappropriate because not all children could bounce a ball ) . At first the ' Miss 's ' were assisted by NBN 's station mascot , Buttons the Cat , who underwent a number of incarnations as its costume aged and became outdated . Later , Buttons was retired , being replaced by Humphrey B. Bear ( as NBN had gained the rights to the character through their purchase of Southern Television Corporation ) , A Local suited character was then determined to be more suitable for a regional Television Station and the concept of Big Dog was created , the character and suit were created in <unk> on the NSW Central Coast and Big Dog came into being . 
 Local travel agency <unk> presented their own travel show , Travel Time with <unk> , broadcast on Sunday nights for over 20 years , starting in 1962 . Also , every four years , NBN produces a live 24 @-@ hour telethon to raise money for local charities . 
 NBN premiered Today Extra in 1989 . The lifestyle program was broadcast three days per week as part of NBN 's day @-@ time line @-@ up . On 3 January 2007 , it was announced that NBN would axe Today Extra , claiming it was no longer economically viable , with a drop in ratings and a shrinking advertising base . The program 's axing ended the career for former weatherman Nat Jeffery , who presented the program for 18 years , and worked at the station for 28 years . 
 = = Community support = = 
 NBN has long been a supporter of many local events and groups in the northern New South Wales region . They are currently sponsors of the Newcastle <unk> in the Australian Ice Hockey League . The station has sponsored the Newcastle Knights NRL rugby league team for most of the 1990s and the 2000s , with the NBN logo visible on the team 's uniform . The former Hunter Pirates NBL basketball team ( and their predecessor , the Newcastle Falcons ) as well as the Newcastle United Jets soccer team ( and their predecessor , the Newcastle Breakers ) , have also both received sponsorship from NBN Television . 
 = = Logos = = 
 The original NBN logo , featuring the numeral three inside a ring was replaced by several others over the years . The three was used due to the station 's frequency allocation , being transmitted on VHF channel 3 from a transmitter atop Mount Sugarloaf near Newcastle . On 22 November 1979 the logo was updated with the letters NBN replacing the numeral three . The blue and green logo coincided with the renaming of the station from Channel Three to the current name , NBN Television , and its parent company renaming from the Newcastle Broadcasting and Television Corporation to NBN Limited . 
 Despite pressure from the Nine Network to adopt the nine dots , NBN Television retained its logo for a few years after aggregation . However , in 1994 , NBN added nine dots into a new logo designed similarly to the Nine Network 's , and also began using Nine 's on @-@ air promotion , with the NBN logo replacing Nine 's . In 1998 , the dots were changed to spheres . 
 Three @-@ dimensions were added to the letters NBN in 2002 , coinciding with a revamp of the station 's on @-@ air identity , concurrently with the Nine Network . On 30 January 2006 , the station relaunched its logo to coincide with the Nine Network 's fiftieth year of broadcasting . The new logo designed by Bruce Dunlop Associates saw the removal of the nine dots , with a blue square added to behind the letters NBN . However , in 2008 , the nine dots were reinstated into the logo and the dots are first 3D discs in 2008 , then 2D dots in January 2009 , then later spheres in September 2009 . 
 = Debian = 
 Debian ( / <unk> / ) is a Unix @-@ like computer operating system that is composed entirely of free software , most of which is under the GNU General Public License , and packaged by a group of individuals called the Debian Project . Three main branches are offered : Stable , Testing , and Unstable . 
 The Debian Stable Linux distribution is one of the most popular for personal computers and network servers , and has been used as a base for several other distributions . The Debian Testing and Unstable branches are rolling release and eventually become the Stable distribution after development and testing . Packages are first uploaded to Unstable , from which they migrate to Testing . When Testing is mature enough it becomes Stable . 
 Debian was first announced in 1993 by Ian Murdock , Debian 0 @.@ 01 was released in August 1993 , and the first stable release was made in 1996 . The development is carried out over the Internet by a team of volunteers guided by the Debian Project Leader and three foundational documents : the Debian Social Contract , the Debian Constitution , and the Debian Free Software Guidelines . New distributions are updated continually , and the next candidate is released after a time @-@ based freeze . 
 As one of the earliest Linux distributions , it was envisioned that Debian was to be developed openly in the spirit of the GNU Project . This vision drew the attention and support of the Free Software Foundation , which sponsored the project for one year from November 1994 to November 1995 . Upon the ending of the sponsorship , the Debian Project formed the non @-@ profit organisation Software in the Public Interest . 
 = = Features = = 
 Debian has access to online repositories that contain over 50 @,@ 000 software packages making it one of the largest software compilations . Debian officially contains only free software , but non @-@ free software can be downloaded from the Debian repositories and installed . Debian includes popular free programs such as <unk> , Firefox web browser , Evolution mail , <unk> disc burner , <unk> media player , <unk> image editor , and <unk> document viewer . Debian is a popular choice for web servers . 
 The cost of developing all of the packages included in Debian 5 @.@ 0 Lenny ( 323 million lines of code ) has been estimated to be about US $ 8 billion , using one method based on the <unk> model . As of 2016 , Black Duck Open Hub estimates that the current codebase ( 74 million lines of code ) would cost about US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion to develop , using a different method based on the same model . 
 The current stable release , Debian 8 @.@ 5 code @-@ named Jessie , is officially supported on ten architecture ports . Notable changes in this release include using <unk> as the default init system . 
 = = = Kernels = = = 
 Debian supports Linux officially , offered kFreeBSD for version 7 but not 8 , and GNU Hurd unofficially . GNU / kFreeBSD was released as a technology preview for IA @-@ 32 and x86 @-@ 64 architectures , and lacked the amount of software available in Debian 's Linux distribution . Official support for kFreeBSD was removed for version 8 , which did not provide a kFreeBSD @-@ based distribution . 
 Several flavors of the Linux kernel exist for each port . For example , the i386 port has flavors for IA @-@ 32 PCs supporting Physical Address Extension and real @-@ time computing , for older PCs , and for x86 @-@ 64 PCs . The Linux kernel does not officially contain firmware without sources , although such firmware is available in non @-@ free packages and alternative installation media . 
 = = = Installation and Live images = = = 
 Debian offers DVD and CD images for installation that can be downloaded using BitTorrent or <unk> . Physical disks can also be bought from retailers . The full sets are made up of several discs ( the amd64 port consists of 10 DVDs or 69 CDs ) , but only the first disc is required for installation , as the installer can retrieve software not contained in the first disc image from online repositories . 
 Debian offers different network installation methods . A minimal install of Debian is available via the <unk> CD , whereby Debian is installed with just a base and later added software can be downloaded from the Internet . Another option is to boot the installer from the network . 
 Installation images are hybrid on some architectures and can be used to create a bootable USB drive ( Live USB ) . 
 The default desktop may be chosen from the DVD boot menu among GNOME , KDE Software Compilation , Xfce and <unk> , and from special disc 1 CDs . 
 = = = Desktop environments = = = 
 Debian offers CD images specifically built for GNOME ( the default in Wheezy ) , KDE Software Compilation , Xfce and <unk> . <unk> is officially supported , while Cinnamon support was added with Debian 8 @.@ 0 Jessie . Less common window managers such as Enlightenment , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Window Maker and others are available . 
 The default desktop environment of version 7 @.@ 0 Wheezy was temporarily switched to Xfce , because GNOME 3 did not fit on the first CD of the set . The default for the version 8 @.@ 0 Jessie was changed again to Xfce in November 2013 , and back to GNOME in September 2014 . 
 = = = Debian Live = = = 
 Debian releases live install images for CDs , DVDs and USB thumb drives , for IA @-@ 32 and x86 @-@ 64 architectures , and with a choice of desktop environments . These Debian Live images allow users to boot from removable media and run Debian without affecting the contents of their computer . 
 A full install of Debian to the computer 's hard drive can be initiated from the live image environment . 
 <unk> images can be built with the live @-@ build tool for discs , USB drives and for network booting purposes . 
 = = = Package management = = = 
 Package management operations can be performed with different tools available on Debian , from the lowest level command dpkg to graphical front @-@ ends like Synaptic . The recommended standard for administering packages on a Debian system is the apt toolset . 
 dpkg provides the low @-@ level infrastructure for package management . The dpkg database contains the list of installed software on the current system . The dpkg command tool does not know about repositories . The command can work with local <unk> package files , and information from the dpkg database . 
 = = = = APT tools = = = = 
 An Advanced Packaging Tool ( APT ) tool allows administering an installed Debian system to retrieve and resolve package dependencies from repositories . APT tools share dependency information and cached packages . 
 Aptitude is a command line tool that also offers a text @-@ based user interface . The program comes with enhancements such as better search on package metadata . 
 apt @-@ get and apt @-@ cache are command tools of the standard apt <unk> apt @-@ get installs and removes packages , and apt @-@ cache is used for searching packages and displaying package information . 
 = = = = = GDebi and other front @-@ ends = = = = = 
 GDebi is an APT tool which can be used in command @-@ line and on the GUI . GDebi can install a local <unk> file via the command line like the dpkg command , but with access to repositories to resolve dependencies . Other graphical front @-@ ends for APT include Software Center , Synaptic and <unk> . 
 = = = Branches = = = 
 Three branches of Debian ( also called releases , distributions or suites ) are regularly maintained : 
 Stable is the current release and targets stable and well @-@ tested software needs . Stable is made by freezing Testing for a few months where bugs are fixed and packages with too many bugs are removed ; then the resulting system is released as Stable . It is updated only if major security or usability fixes are incorporated . This branch has an optional <unk> service that provides more recent versions of some software . Stable 's CDs and DVDs can be found in the Debian website . 
 Testing is the preview branch that will eventually become the next major release . The packages included in this branch have had some testing in Unstable but they may not be fit for release yet . It contains newer packages than Stable but older than Unstable . This branch is updated continually until it is frozen . Testing 's CDs and DVDs can be found on the Debian website . 
 Unstable , always codenamed Sid , is the trunk . Packages are accepted without checking the distribution as a whole . This branch is usually run by software developers who participate in a project and need the latest libraries available , and by those who prefer bleeding @-@ edge software . Debian does not provide Sid installation discs . This branch can be installed through a system upgrade from Testing . 
 Other branches in Debian : 
 Oldstable is the prior Stable release . It is supported by the Debian Security Team until one year after a new Stable is released , and since the release of Debian 6 , for another 2 years through the Long Term Support project . Eventually , Oldstable is moved to a repository for archived releases . 
 <unk> is the prior Oldstable release . It is supported by the Long Term Support community . Eventually , <unk> is moved to a repository for archived releases . 
 Experimental is a temporary staging area of highly experimental software that is likely to break the system . It is not a full distribution and missing dependencies are commonly found in Unstable , where new software without the damage chance is normally uploaded . 
 The snapshot archive provides older versions of the branches . They may be used to install a specific older version of some software . 
 = = = = Numbering scheme = = = = 
 Stable and Oldstable get minor updates , called point releases ; as of April 2016 , the Stable release is version 8 @.@ 5 , and the Oldstable release is version 7 @.@ 10 . 
 The numbering scheme for the point releases up to Debian 4 @.@ 0 was to include the letter r ( for revision ) after the main version number and then the number of the point release ; for example , the latest point release of version 4 @.@ 0 is <unk> This scheme was chosen because a new dotted version would make the old one look obsolete and vendors would have trouble selling their CDs . 
 From Debian 5 @.@ 0 , the numbering scheme of point releases was changed , conforming to the GNU version numbering standard ; the first point release of Debian 5 @.@ 0 was 5 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 instead of <unk> The numbering scheme was once again changed for the first Debian 7 update , which was version 7 @.@ 1 . The r scheme is no longer in use , but point release announcements include a note about not throwing away old CDs . 
 = = = = Code names = = = = 
 The code names of Debian releases are names of characters from the Toy Story films . Debian 8 was named Jessie , after the cowgirl in Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3 . The Testing branch is currently named Stretch , after the toy rubber octopus in Toy Story 3 . The Unstable trunk is permanently nicknamed Sid , after the emotionally unstable boy next door who regularly destroyed toys . 
 This naming tradition came about because Bruce Perens was involved in the early development of Debian while working at Pixar . 
 = = = = Blends = = = = 
 Debian Pure Blends are subsets of a Debian release configured out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ box for users with particular skills and interests . For example , Debian Jr. is made for children , while Debian Science is for researchers and scientists . The complete Debian distribution includes all available Debian Pure Blends . " Debian Blend " ( without " Pure " ) is a term for a Debian @-@ based distribution that strives to become part of mainstream Debian , and have its extra features included in future releases . 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 The Debian " swirl " logo was designed by Raul Silva in 1999 as part of a contest to replace the semi @-@ official logo that had been used . The winner of the contest received an @ <unk> email address , and a set of Debian 2 @.@ 1 install CDs for the architecture of their choice . There has been no official statement from the Debian project on the logo 's meaning , but at the time of the logo 's selection , it was suggested that the logo represented the magic smoke that made computers work . 
 One theory about the origin of the Debian logo is that Buzz Lightyear , the chosen character for the first named Debian release , has a swirl in his chin . Stefano <unk> also suggested that this swirl is the Debian one . 
 = = = Archive areas = = = 
 The Debian Free Software Guidelines ( DFSG ) define the distinctive meaning of the word " free " as in " free and open @-@ source software " . Packages which comply with these guidelines , usually under the GNU General Public License , Modified BSD License or Artistic License , are included inside the main area ; otherwise , they are included inside the non @-@ free and contrib areas . These last two areas are not distributed within the official installation media , but they can be adopted manually . 
 Non @-@ free includes packages which do not comply with the DFSG , such as documentation with invariant sections and proprietary software , and legally questionable packages . <unk> includes packages which do comply with the DFSG but fail other requirements . For example , they may depend on packages which are in non @-@ free or requires such for building them . 
 Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation have criticized the Debian project for hosting the non @-@ free repository and because the contrib and non @-@ free areas are easily accessible , an opinion echoed by some in Debian including the former project leader <unk> Akkerman . The internal dissent in the Debian project regarding the non @-@ free section has persisted , but the last time it came to a vote in 2004 , the majority decided to keep it . 
 = = = Multimedia support = = = 
 Multimedia support has been problematic in Debian regarding codecs threatened by possible patent infringements , without sources or under too restrictive licenses , and regarding technologies such as Adobe Flash . Even though packages with problems related to their distribution could go into the non @-@ free area , software such as <unk> is not hosted at Debian . 
 A notable third party repository exists , formerly named <unk> @-@ <unk> , providing software not present in Debian such as Windows codecs , <unk> and the Adobe Flash Player . Even though this repository is maintained by Christian Marillat , a Debian developer , it is not part of the project and is not hosted on a Debian server . The repository provides packages already included in Debian , interfering with the official maintenance . Eventually , project leader Stefano <unk> asked Marillat to either settle an agreement about the packaging or to stop using the " Debian " name . Marillat chose the latter and renamed the repository to <unk> @-@ <unk> The repository was so popular that the switchover was announced by the official blog of the Debian project . 
 = = = Hardware support = = = 
 = = = = Hardware requirements = = = = 
 Hardware requirements are at least those of the kernel and the GNU <unk> . Debian supports uniprocessor and symmetric multiprocessor systems . Debian 's recommended system requirements depend on the level of installation , which corresponds to increased numbers of installed components : 
 The real minimum memory requirements depend on the architecture and may be much less than the numbers listed in this table . It is possible to install Debian with 60 MB of RAM for x86 @-@ 64 ; the installer will run in low memory mode and it is recommended to create a swap partition . The installer for z / Architecture requires about 20 MB of RAM , but relies on network hardware . Similarly , disk space requirements , which depend on the packages to be installed , can be reduced by manually selecting the packages needed . As of August 2014 , no Pure Blend exists that would lower the hardware requirements easily . 
 It is possible to run graphical user interfaces on older or low @-@ end systems , but the installation of window managers instead of desktop environments is recommended , as desktop environments are more resource @-@ intensive . Requirements for individual software vary widely and must be considered , with those of the base operating environment . 
 = = = = Architecture ports = = = = 
 = = = = = Official ports = = = = = 
 As of the Jessie release , the official ports are : 
 amd64 : x86 @-@ 64 architecture with 64 @-@ bit userland and supporting 32 @-@ bit software 
 <unk> : <unk> @-@ A architecture 
 <unk> : Little @-@ endian ARM architecture ( <unk> instruction set ) on various embedded systems ( embedded application binary interface ( <unk> ) ) 
 <unk> : ARM hard @-@ float architecture ( <unk> instruction set ) requiring hardware with a floating @-@ point unit 
 i386 : IA @-@ 32 architecture with 32 @-@ bit userland , compatible with x86 @-@ 64 machines 
 <unk> : Big @-@ endian MIPS instruction set 
 <unk> : Little @-@ endian MIPS instruction set 
 <unk> : PowerPC architecture 
 <unk> : Little @-@ endian <unk> architecture supporting POWER7 + and <unk> CPUs 
 <unk> : z / Architecture with 64 @-@ bit userland , intended to replace <unk> 
 = = = = = Unofficial ports = = = = = 
 Unofficial ports are available as part of the Unstable distribution : 
 alpha : DEC Alpha architecture 
 <unk> : HP PA @-@ RISC architecture 
 <unk> @-@ i386 : GNU Hurd kernel on IA @-@ 32 architecture 
 <unk> @-@ amd64 : Kernel of FreeBSD on x86 @-@ 64 architecture 
 <unk> @-@ i386 : Kernel of FreeBSD on IA @-@ 32 architecture 
 m68k : Motorola 68k architecture on Amiga , Atari , Macintosh and various embedded VME systems 
 <unk> : Little @-@ endian 64 @-@ bit MIPS instruction set 
 <unk> : <unk> architecture , incompatible with PowerPC 
 <unk> : <unk> architecture supporting 64 @-@ bit PowerPC CPUs with VMX 
 <unk> : Hitachi SuperH architecture 
 <unk> : Sun SPARC architecture with 64 @-@ bit userland 
 <unk> : <unk> <unk> userland for x86 @-@ 64 
 = = = Embedded systems = = = 
 Debian supports a variety of ARM @-@ based NAS devices . The <unk> was supported by the installer in Debian 4 @.@ 0 and 5 @.@ 0 , and Martin <unk> is providing installation <unk> since version 6 @.@ 0 . Other supported NAS devices are the Buffalo <unk> Pro , <unk> Tank , <unk> <unk> and <unk> Turbo Stations . 
 Devices based on the Kirkwood system on a chip ( SoC ) are supported too , such as the <unk> plug computer and <unk> products . There are efforts to run Debian on mobile devices , but this is not a project goal yet since the Debian Linux kernel maintainers would not apply the needed patches . Nevertheless , there are packages for resource @-@ limited systems . 
 There are efforts to support Debian on wireless access points . Debian is known to run on set @-@ top boxes . Work is ongoing to support the <unk> processor , which is used in electronic point of service solutions . Debian may be customized to run on cash machines . 
 <unk> , a low @-@ power open @-@ source hardware single @-@ board computer ( made by Texas Instruments ) has switched to Debian Linux preloaded on its <unk> Black board 's flash . 
 = = = Support for communities = = = 
 = = = = Localization = = = = 
 Several parts of Debian are translated into languages other than American English , including package descriptions , configuration messages , documentation and the website . The level of software localization depends on the language , ranging from the highly supported German and French to the hardly translated Creek and Samoan . The installer is available in 73 languages . 
 = = = = Virtual communities = = = = 
 Debian provides packages made for virtual communities . The Facebook and Twitter application interfaces are available to programmers ; the Pidgin messaging client used a custom plugin for Facebook until the networking site added support for XMPP . Debian 5 @.@ 0 Lenny was the last release supporting Tencent QQ . Communication with Skype is possible using software in the contrib area . 
 = = Policies = = 
 Debian is known for its manifesto , social contract , and policies . Debian 's policies and team efforts focus on collaborative software development and testing processes . As a result of its policies , a new major release tends to occur every two years with revision releases that fix security issues and important problems . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 The Debian project is a volunteer organization with three foundational documents : 
 The Debian Social Contract defines a set of basic principles by which the project and its developers conduct affairs . 
 The Debian Free Software Guidelines define the criteria for " free software " and thus what software is permissible in the distribution . These guidelines have been adopted as the basis of the Open Source Definition . Although this document can be considered separate , it formally is part of the Social Contract . 
 The Debian Constitution describes the organizational structure for formal decision @-@ making within the project , and enumerates the powers and responsibilities of the Project Leader , the Secretary and other roles . 
 Debian developers are organized in a web of trust . There are at present about one thousand active Debian developers , but it is possible to contribute to the project without being an official developer . 
 The project maintains official mailing lists and conferences for communication and coordination between developers . For issues with single packages and other tasks , a public bug tracking system is used by developers and end users . Internet Relay Chat channels ( primarily on the Open and Free Technology Community ( <unk> ) and <unk> networks ) are also used for communication among developers and to provide real time help . 
 Debian is supported by donations made to organizations authorized by the leader . The largest supporter is Software in the Public Interest , the owner of the Debian trademark , manager of the monetary donations and umbrella organization for various other community free software projects . 
 A Project Leader is elected once per year by the developers . The leader has special powers , but they are not absolute , and appoints delegates to perform specialized tasks . Delegates make decisions as they think is best , taking into account technical criteria and consensus . By way of a General Resolution , the developers may recall the leader , reverse a decision made by the leader or a delegate , amend foundational documents and make other binding decisions . The voting method is based on the Schulze method ( <unk> Schwartz Sequential Dropping ) . 
 Project leadership is distributed occasionally . Branden Robinson was helped by the Project Scud , a team of developers that assisted the leader , but there were concerns that such leadership would split Debian into two developer classes . Anthony Towns created a supplemental position , Second In Charge ( 2IC ) , that shared some powers of the leader . Steve McIntyre was 2IC and had a 2IC himself . 
 One important role in Debian 's leadership is that of a release manager . The release team sets goals for the next release , supervises the processes and decides when to release . The team is led by the next release managers and stable release managers . Release assistants were introduced in 2003 . 
 = = = Developer recruitment , motivation , and resignation = = = 
 The Debian project has an influx of applicants wishing to become developers . These applicants must undergo a vetting process which establishes their identity , motivation , understanding of the project 's principles , and technical competence . This process has become much harder throughout the years . 
 Debian developers join the project for many reasons . Some that have been cited include : 
 Debian is their main operating system and they want to promote Debian 
 To improve the support for their favorite technology 
 They are involved with a Debian derivative 
 A desire to contribute back to the free @-@ software community 
 To make their Debian maintenance work easier 
 Debian developers may resign their positions at any time or , when deemed necessary , they can be expelled . Those who follow the retiring protocol are granted the " emeritus " status and they may regain their membership through a shortened new member process . 
 = = = Development procedures = = = 
 Each software package has a maintainer that may be either one person or a team of Debian developers and non @-@ developer maintainers . The maintainer keeps track of upstream releases , and ensures that the package coheres with the rest of the distribution and meets the standards of quality of Debian . Packages may include modifications introduced by Debian to achieve compliance with Debian Policy , even to fix non @-@ Debian specific bugs , although coordination with upstream developers is advised . 
 The maintainer releases a new version by uploading the package to the " incoming " system , which verifies the integrity of the packages and their digital signatures . If the package is found to be valid , it is installed in the package archive into an area called the " pool " and distributed every day to hundreds of mirrors worldwide . The upload must be signed using <unk> @-@ compatible software . All Debian developers have individual cryptographic key pairs . Developers are responsible for any package they upload even if the packaging was prepared by another contributor . 
 Initially , an accepted package is only available in the Unstable branch . For a package to become a candidate for the next release , it must migrate to the Testing branch by meeting the following : 
 It has been in Unstable for a certain length of time that depends on the urgency of the changes . 
 It does not have " release @-@ critical " bugs , except for the ones already present in Testing . Release @-@ critical bugs are those considered serious enough that they make the package unsuitable for release . 
 There are no outdated versions in Unstable for any release ports . 
 The migration does not break any packages in Testing . 
 Its dependencies can be satisfied by packages already in Testing or by packages being migrated at the same time . 
 The migration is not blocked by a freeze . 
 Thus , a release @-@ critical bug in a new version of a shared library on which many packages depend may prevent those packages from entering Testing , because the updated library must meet the requirements too . From the branch viewpoint , the migration process happens twice per day , rendering Testing in perpetual beta . 
 Periodically , the release team publishes guidelines to the developers in order to ready the release . A new release occurs after a freeze , when all important software is reasonably up @-@ to @-@ date in the Testing branch and any other significant issues are solved . At that time , all packages in the Testing branch become the new Stable branch . Although freeze dates are time @-@ based , release dates are not , which are announced by the release managers a couple of weeks beforehand . 
 A version of a package can belong to more than one branch , usually Testing and Unstable . It is possible for a package to keep the same version between stable releases and be part of Oldstable , Stable , Testing and Unstable at the same time . Each branch can be seen as a collection of pointers into the package " pool " mentioned above . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 The Debian project handles security through public disclosure rather than through obscurity . Debian security advisories are compatible with the Common <unk> and Exposures dictionary , are usually coordinated with other free software vendors and are published the same day a vulnerability is made public . There used to be a security audit project that focused on packages in the stable release looking for security bugs ; Steve Kemp , who started the project , retired in 2011 but resumed his activities and applied to rejoin in 2014 . 
 The Stable branch is supported by the Debian security team ; Oldstable is supported for one year . Although Squeeze is not officially supported , Debian is coordinating an effort to provide long @-@ term support until February 2016 , five years after the initial release , but only for the IA @-@ 32 and x86 @-@ 64 platforms . Testing is supported by the Testing security team , but does not receive updates in as timely a manner as Stable . Unstable 's security is left for the package maintainers . 
 The Debian project offers documentation and tools to harden a Debian installation both manually and automatically . Security @-@ Enhanced Linux and <unk> support is available but disabled by default . Debian provides an optional hardening wrapper , and does not harden all of its software by default using gcc features such as PIE and buffer overflow protection , unlike operating systems such as OpenBSD , but tries to build as many packages as possible with hardening flags . 
 = = = = 2008 OpenSSL vulnerability = = = = 
 In May 2008 , it was revealed that a Debian developer discovered that the OpenSSL package distributed with Debian and derivatives such as Ubuntu , made a variety of security keys vulnerable to a random number generator attack , since only 32 @,@ 767 different keys were generated . The security weakness was caused by changes made in 2006 by another Debian developer in response to memory debugger warnings . The complete resolution procedure was cumbersome because patching the security hole was not enough ; it involved regenerating all affected keys and certificates . 
 = = = Derivatives = = = 
 Debian is one of the most popular Linux distributions , and many other distributions have been created from the Debian codebase , including Ubuntu and <unk> . As of 2016 , <unk> lists 126 active Debian derivatives . The Debian project provides its derivatives with guidelines for best practices and encourages derivatives to merge their work back into Debian . A sign of cooperation with Ubuntu can be seen in the Debian package tracker . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Birth ( 1993 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Debian was first announced on August 16 , 1993 , by Ian Murdock , who initially called the system " the Debian Linux Release " . The word " Debian " was formed as a combination of the first name of his then @-@ girlfriend Debra Lynn and his own first name . Before Debian 's release , the <unk> Linux System ( SLS ) had been a popular Linux distribution and the basis for <unk> . The perceived poor maintenance and prevalence of bugs in SLS motivated Murdock to launch a new distribution . 
 Debian 0 @.@ 01 , released on August 1993 , was the first of several internal releases . Version 0 @.@ 91 was virtually the first public release , providing support through mailing lists hosted at Pixar . The release included the Debian Linux Manifesto , outlining Murdock 's view for the new operating system . In it he called for the creation of a distribution to be maintained openly , in the spirit of Linux and GNU . 
 The Debian project released the <unk> versions in 1994 and 1995 . During this time it was sponsored by the Free Software Foundation for one year . Ian Murdock delegated the base system , the core packages of Debian , to Bruce Perens and Murdock focused on the management of the growing project . The first ports to non @-@ IA @-@ 32 architectures began in 1995 , and Debian 1 @.@ 1 was released in 1996 . By that time and thanks to Ian Jackson , the dpkg package manager was already an essential part of Debian . 
 In 1996 , Bruce Perens assumed the project leadership . Perens was a controversial leader , regarded as authoritarian and strongly attached to Debian . He drafted a social contract and edited suggestions from a month @-@ long discussion into the Debian Social Contract and the Debian Free Software Guidelines . After the FSF withdrew their sponsorship in the midst of the free software vs. open source debate , Perens initiated the creation of the legal umbrella organization Software in the Public Interest instead of seeking renewed involvement with the FSF . He led the conversion of the project from <unk> to ELF . He created the <unk> program to make it possible to run a Debian installer on a single floppy , and wrote a new installer . By the time Debian 1 @.@ 2 was released , the project had grown to nearly two hundred volunteers . Perens left the project in 1998 . 
 Ian Jackson became the leader in 1998 . Debian 2 @.@ 0 introduced the second official port , m68k . During this time the first port to a non @-@ Linux kernel , Debian GNU / Hurd , was started . On December 2 , the first Debian Constitution was ratified . 
 = = = Leader election ( 1999 – 2005 ) = = = 
 From 1999 , the project leader was elected yearly . The Advanced Packaging Tool was deployed with Debian 2 @.@ 1 . The amount of applicants was overwhelming and the project established the new member process . The first Debian derivatives , namely <unk> , Corel Linux and <unk> 's Storm Linux , were started in 1999 . The 2 @.@ 2 release in 2000 was dedicated to Joel <unk> , a developer who died of Duchenne muscular dystrophy . 
 In late 2000 , the project reorganized the archive with new package " pools " and created the Testing distribution , made up of packages considered stable , to reduce the freeze for the next release . In the same year , developers began holding an annual conference called <unk> with talks and workshops for developers and technical users . In May 2001 , Hewlett @-@ Packard announced plans to base its Linux development on Debian . 
 In July 2002 , the project released version 3 @.@ 0 , code @-@ named Woody , the first release to include cryptographic software , a free licensed KDE and internationalization . During these last release cycles , the Debian project drew considerable criticism from the free software community because of the long time between stable releases . 
 Some events disturbed the project while working on Sarge , as Debian servers were attacked by fire and hackers . One of the most memorable was the Vancouver prospectus . After a meeting held in Vancouver , release manager Steve <unk> announced a plan to reduce the number of supported ports to four in order to shorten future release cycles . There was a large reaction because the proposal looked more like a decision and because such a drop would damage Debian 's aim to be " the universal operating system " . 
 = = = Sarge and later releases ( 2005 – 2015 ) = = = 
 The 3 @.@ 1 Sarge release was made in June 2005 . This release updated 73 % of the software and included over 9 @,@ 000 new packages . A new installer with a modular design , Debian @-@ <unk> , allowed installations with RAID , <unk> and <unk> support , improved hardware detection , made installations easier for novice users , and was translated into almost forty languages . An installation manual and release notes were in ten and fifteen languages respectively . The efforts of <unk> , Debian @-@ Med and Debian @-@ Accessibility raised the number of packages that were educational , had a medical affiliation , and ones made for people with disabilities . 
 In 2006 , as a result of a much @-@ publicized dispute , Mozilla software was rebranded in Debian , with Firefox becoming <unk> and Thunderbird becoming <unk> . The Mozilla Corporation stated that software with unapproved modifications could not be distributed under the Firefox trademark . Two reasons that Debian modifies the Firefox software are to change the non @-@ free artwork and to provide security patches . In February 2016 , it was announced that Mozilla and Debian had reached agreement and <unk> would revert to the name Firefox ; similar agreement was anticipated for <unk> / Thunderbird . 
 A fund @-@ raising experiment , Dunc @-@ Tank , was created to solve the release cycle problem and release managers were paid to work full @-@ time ; in response , unpaid developers slowed down their work and the release was delayed . Debian 4 @.@ 0 ( Etch ) was released in April 2007 , featuring the x86 @-@ 64 port and a graphical installer . Debian 5 @.@ 0 ( Lenny ) was released in February 2009 , supporting Marvell 's Orion platform and netbooks such as the Asus <unk> PC . The release was dedicated to <unk> <unk> , a developer who died in a car crash . 
 In July 2009 , the policy of time @-@ based development freezes on a two @-@ year cycle was announced . Time @-@ based freezes are intended to blend the predictability of time based releases with Debian 's policy of feature based releases , and to reduce overall freeze time . The Squeeze cycle was going to be especially short ; however , this initial schedule was abandoned . In September 2010 , the <unk> service became official , providing more recent versions of some software for the stable release . 
 Debian 6 @.@ 0 ( Squeeze ) was released in February 2011 , introduced Debian GNU / kFreeBSD as a technology preview , featured a dependency @-@ based boot system , and moved problematic firmware to the non @-@ free area . Debian 7 @.@ 0 ( Wheezy ) was released in May 2013 , featuring <unk> support and Debian 8 @.@ 0 ( Jessie ) was released in April 2015 , using <unk> as the new init system . At present , Debian is still in development and new packages are uploaded to Unstable every day . 
 Throughout Debian 's lifetime , both the Debian distribution and its website have won various awards from different organizations , including Server Distribution of the Year 2011 , The best Linux <unk> of 2011 , and a Best of the Net award for October 1998 . 
 On December 2 , 2015 , Microsoft announced that they would offer Debian GNU / Linux as an endorsed distribution on the Azure cloud platform . 
 = Deepika Padukone = 
 Deepika Padukone ( pronounced [ d ̪ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 5 January 1986 ) is an Indian film actress . She is one of the highest @-@ paid Indian celebrities and is cited in the media as one of the nation 's most popular and attractive personalities . Padukone has established a career in Hindi films , and is the recipient of several awards , including three Filmfare Awards . 
 Padukone , the daughter of the badminton player Prakash Padukone , was born in Copenhagen and raised in Bangalore . As a teenager she played badminton in national level championships , but left her career in sport to become a fashion model . She soon received offers for film roles , and made her acting debut in 2006 as the title character of the Kannada film Aishwarya . Padukone then played dual roles in her first Bollywood release — the 2007 blockbuster Om Shanti Om — and won a Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut . Padukone received praise for portraying the lead female roles in the romance Love Aaj Kal ( 2009 ) and the drama Lafangey Parindey ( 2010 ) , but her performances in the romance Bachna Ae Haseeno ( 2008 ) and the comedy Housefull ( 2010 ) met with negative reviews . 
 The 2012 box office hit Cocktail marked a turning point in Padukone 's career , earning her praise and Best Actress nominations at several award ceremonies . She rose to prominence with starring roles in the comedies Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani ( 2013 ) , Chennai Express ( 2013 ) , and Happy New Year ( 2014 ) , and the historical romance Bajirao Mastani ( 2015 ) , all of which rank among the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films . Padukone 's acclaimed portrayal of a character based on Juliet in the tragic romance Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela ( 2013 ) and a headstrong architect in the comedy @-@ drama Piku ( 2015 ) won her two Best Actress awards at Filmfare . 
 Alongside her acting career , Padukone participates in stage shows , has written columns for an Indian newspaper , is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products , and is vocal about issues such as feminism and depression . She has designed her own line of clothing for women and is the founder of The Live Love Laugh Foundation , which creates awareness on mental health in India . 
 = = Early life and modelling career = = 
 Deepika Padukone was born on 5 January 1986 in Copenhagen , Denmark , to Konkani @-@ speaking parents . Her father , Prakash , is a former badminton player of international repute , and her mother , <unk> , is a travel agent . Her younger sister , <unk> , is a golfer . Her paternal grandfather , Ramesh , was a secretary of the Mysore Badminton Association . The family relocated to Bangalore , India , when Padukone was a year old . She was educated at Bangalore 's Sophia High School , and completed her pre @-@ university education at Mount Carmel College . She subsequently enrolled at the Indira Gandhi National Open University for a Bachelor of Arts degree in sociology , but later quit it due to scheduling conflicts with her modelling career . 
 Padukone has admitted to being socially awkward as a child , and did not have many friends . The focus of her life was badminton , which she played competitively from a young age . Describing her daily routine in a 2012 interview , Padukone said , " I would wake up at five in the morning , go for physical training , go to school , again go for playing badminton , finish my homework and go to sleep . " Padukone continued to pursue a career in badminton throughout her school years , and played the sport in national level championships . She also played baseball in a few state level tournaments . While concentrating on her education and sporting career , Padukone also worked as a child model , first appearing in a couple of advertising campaigns at the age of eight . In the tenth grade , she changed focus and decided to become a fashion model . She later explained , " I realised that I was playing the game only because it ran in the family . So , I asked my father if I could give up the game and he wasn 't upset at all . " In 2004 , she began a full @-@ time career as a model under the tutelage of Prasad <unk> . 
 Early in her career , Padukone gained recognition with a television commercial for the soap <unk> , and modelled for various other brands and products . In 2005 , she made her runway debut at the Lakme Fashion Week for designer <unk> Varma , and won the " Model of the Year " award at the Kingfisher Fashion Awards . Padukone 's fame increased when she appeared in a highly popular print campaign for the 2006 Kingfisher Calendar ; the designer Wendell Rodricks commented , " Since Aishwarya Rai , we haven 't had a girl as beautiful and fresh . " Rodricks had spotted her at a Ganjam jewellery class he was teaching and signed her up with the Matrix agency . At the age of 21 , Padukone relocated to Mumbai and stayed at her aunt 's home . That year , she gained wider recognition by featuring in the music video for Himesh Reshammiya 's song " Naam Hai Tera . " 
 Padukone soon began to receive offers for film roles . Believing herself to be too inexperienced as an actor , she instead enrolled for a course at Anupam Kher 's film academy . Following much media speculation , the director Farah Khan , who had noticed her in Reshammiya 's music video , made the decision to cast her for a role in Happy New Year . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Film debut and breakthrough ( 2006 – 09 ) = = = 
 Padukone announced in 2006 that she would make her film debut with Aishwarya , a Kannada film directed by Indrajit <unk> . The romantic comedy was a remake of the Telugu film <unk> , and she was cast in the title role opposite the actor Upendra . The film proved a major commercial success . RG Vijayasarathy of Rediff.com was appreciative of Padukone 's screen presence but added that " she needs to work on her emotional scenes . " 
 By the end of 2006 , Farah Khan 's Happy New Year was shelved , and Khan had instead cast Padukone for the reincarnation melodrama Om Shanti Om ( 2007 ) . Set against the backdrop of the Hindi film industry , the film tells the story of a struggling actor in the 1970s who dies soon after witnessing the murder of the woman he loved , and is reincarnated to avenge her death . Shah Rukh Khan starred as the protagonist , and Padukone featured in dual roles — <unk> , a leading actress of the 1970s , and later as Sandy , an aspiring actress . She said , " I 've grown up watching [ Shah Rukh ] and always admired him so much . To get to work with him ... is quite wonderful . It was also fantastic that Farah showed faith in my talent and cast me opposite him . " In preparation for her role , Padukone watched several films of actresses Helen and Hema Malini to study their body language , which she felt " were more graceful " and " completely different from today 's actors . " However , her voice was dubbed by the voice artist Mona Ghosh Shetty . For one of the songs in the film , " Dhoom Taana , ” Padukone drew upon Indian classical dance , and according to Dorling Kindersley , " <unk> [ ed ] audiences " by using hasta mudras ( hand gestures ) . Om Shanti Om was a commercial success , and emerged as the highest @-@ grossing film of the year , with a global revenue of ₹ 1 @.@ 49 billion ( US $ 22 million ) . Taran Adarsh of the entertainment portal Bollywood Hungama reviewed , " Deepika has all it takes to be a top star — the personality , the looks and yes , she 's supremely talented too . Standing in the same frame as [ Shah Rukh ] and getting it right is no small achievement . She comes as a whiff of fresh air ! " At the annual Filmfare Awards ceremony , Padukone was awarded the Best Female Debut Award and received her first nomination in the Best Actress category . 
 Bollywood Hungama reported that the success of Om Shanti Om proved a breakthrough for Padukone . She followed this success with the role of Gayatri ( one of star Ranbir Kapoor 's love interests ) , a feisty student in Australia who moonlights as a cab driver in Yash Raj Films ' romantic comedy Bachna Ae Haseeno ( 2008 ) . The film was a financial success , but Namrata Joshi of Outlook wrote that Padukone 's performance was disappointing : " She is mannequin @-@ like and utterly lacks fire and zing . " 
 Padukone 's first release of 2009 came alongside Akshay Kumar in the Nikhil Advani @-@ directed kung fu comedy Chandni Chowk To China , in which she portrayed the dual roles of Indian @-@ Chinese twin sisters <unk> and Suzy . Produced by Warner Bros. , it had one of the widest international releases ever given to an Indian film . Padukone learned the Japanese martial art form of jujutsu , and performed her stunts without the use of a body double . Despite the hype , Chandni Chowk To China proved a major financial failure with worldwide earnings of ₹ 554 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 2 million ) on a budget of ₹ 800 million ( US $ 12 million ) . Film critics were generally disappointed with the picture and Padukone 's performance ; Justin Trout of Orlando Weekly noted that she " is so wasted in Chandni Chowk , my mind often wandered back to Om Shanti Om during her scenes , possibly as a defense mechanism . " 
 That same year , Padukone featured in an item number ( for a song called " Love Mera Hit Hit " ) in the drama Billu , following which she appeared alongside Saif Ali Khan in the romantic drama Love Aaj Kal from the writer @-@ director Imtiaz Ali . The film documented the changing value of relationships among the youth , and had Padukone play the part of Meera Pandit , a head @-@ strong career woman . With a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 2 billion ( US $ 18 million ) , Love Aaj Kal proved to be the third highest @-@ grossing film of 2009 . Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis said that Padukone " delivers the best of her four performances so far " and Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India mentioned her as " definitive and strong . " At the 55th Filmfare Awards Padukone received a nomination for Best Actress . 
 = = = Career struggles ( 2010 – 11 ) = = = 
 Padukone had five film releases in 2010 . Her first role was in Vijay Lalwani 's psychological thriller Karthik Calling Karthik , where Padukone was cast as the supportive girlfriend of a depressed man ( played by Farhan Akhtar ) who goes through a series of changes after receiving mysterious phone calls every morning . Derek Elley of Variety found the film to be " thinly plotted " but added that " the uncomplicated ingenuousness of Padukone ... helps make the tall tale convincing . " Commercially , the film performed poorly . Her most economically profitable film that year was Sajid Khan 's ₹ 1 @.@ 15 billion ( US $ 17 million ) <unk> comedy film Housefull in which she featured alongside an ensemble cast including Akshay Kumar , Ritesh Deshmukh , Lara Dutta , Arjun Rampal , <unk> Khan and Boman Irani . Raja Sen described the film as a " festival of bad acting " and attributed Padukone 's poor performance to her " <unk> expressions . " 
 Pradeep Sarkar 's drama Lafangey Parindey ( 2010 ) saw Padukone star opposite Neil Nitin Mukesh in the role of Pinky <unk> , a blind girl determined to win a skating competition . In preparation for her role , she observed the interactions of blind people and rehearsed scenes while blindfolded . Writing for The Hindu , Sudhish Kamath was particularly impressed by Padukone and wrote that she " exercises considerable restraint " in playing her part . Later that year , Hindustan Times published that the film helped change people 's perception of Padukone , with focus directed on her acting prowess rather than her appearance . Her next role was opposite Imran Khan in the Danish Aslam @-@ directed romantic comedy Break Ke Baad . CNN @-@ IBN 's Rajeev Masand found the film to be " reasonably engaging " and noted that it was " watchable largely for the performance of its leading lady . " Both Lafangey Parindey and Break Ke Baad underperformed at the box office . 
 Padukone 's final release of 2010 was Ashutosh Gowarikar 's period film <unk> Hum Jee Jaan Sey opposite Abhishek Bachchan . Based on the book Do and Die by Manini Chatterjee , the film is a retelling of the 1930 Chittagong armoury raid . Bachchan featured as the revolutionary leader Surya Sen and Padukone played Kalpana Dutta , his confidante . Padukone said that she did not research for the role as there were " hardly ... any reference points as to what Kalpana looked like other than a few photos , " and relied completely on Gowarikar 's direction . A review published in The Telegraph was appreciative of Padukone 's portrayal , and the film received a generally positive critical reception . Despite this , it proved a major commercial disappointment . 
 Padukone began 2011 with an item number in Rohan Sippy 's Dum <unk> Dum . The song was a remixed version of the iconic song " Dum Maro Dum , " from the 1971 film Hare Rama Hare Krishna , which featured Zeenat Aman . Padukone referred to it as " the wildest song any actress has done ; " the song 's " suggestive lyrics " and " raunchy moves " attracted controversy including a court case for indecency . Her next film was Prakash Jha 's socio @-@ political drama <unk> , co @-@ starring Amitabh Bachchan , Saif Ali Khan , Manoj Bajpayee and <unk> Babbar , which dealt with the political issue of caste @-@ based reservations in India . Trade journalists had high expectations for the film which ultimately flopped at the box office . Critical reaction was largely negative , though Pratim D. Gupta mentioned Padukone as the most " refreshing thing about [ the ] movie . " Her final appearance that year was in Rohit Dhawan 's comedy @-@ drama Desi Boyz alongside Akshay Kumar , John Abraham and Chitrangada Singh , a role that failed to propel her career forward . The series of poorly received films led critics to perceive that Padukone had " [ lost ] her sparkle . " 
 = = = Establishing with Cocktail ( 2012 – 14 ) = = = 
 In an interview for The Indian Express , Padukone said that her starring role in the 2012 Homi Adajania @-@ directed romantic comedy Cocktail marked a significant turning point in her career . Raja Sen of Rediff.com opined that she had successfully proved to be a " stunning girl who can also act . " Set in London , Cocktail tells the story of a software engineer ( played by Saif Ali Khan ) and his relationship with two temperamentally different women — an impulsive party girl ( Veronica , played by Padukone ) and a submissive girl next door ( Meera , played by Diana Penty ) . During the script narration , the producer Dinesh Vijan offered Padukone the choice of which woman to play ; she decided on Veronica to expand her horizons as an actress . Portraying the role was a creative and physical challenge for her , and to achieve the physical requirements of her character she exercised extensively and followed a rigorous diet . Critics were divided in their opinion of the film , but particularly praised Padukone 's performance ; Devesh Sharma of Filmfare credited her as the " soul of the film " and wrote that she " excels in every scene , whether as a material girl who enjoys sex , drugs and rock and roll or as the jealousy ridden girl out to destroy herself . " Cocktail earned Padukone Best Actress nominations at several award ceremonies , including Filmfare , Screen , and IIFA . The film proved a box office hit as well . 
 In 2013 , Padukone established herself as a leading actress of contemporary Hindi cinema by featuring in four of the top @-@ grossing productions of the year . She collaborated with Saif Ali Khan for the fourth time ( alongside John Abraham , Jacqueline Fernandez , Ameesha Patel , and Anil Kapoor ) in Abbas @-@ Mustan 's Race 2 , an ensemble action thriller that served as a sequel to the 2008 film Race . The film received predominantly negative reviews from critics , but with a total collection of ₹ 1 @.@ 62 billion ( US $ 24 million ) , it proved to be a commercial success . In a particularly scathing review , Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV wrote that both Padukone and Fernandez " strut around like wound @-@ up automatons that are all decked @-@ up but have nowhere to go . " 
 Ayan Mukerji 's romantic comedy Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani was Padukone 's next film release . Co @-@ starring alongside Ranbir Kapoor , Kalki Koechlin , and Aditya Roy Kapoor , she was cast as Naina Talwar , a " shy wallflower , " which marked a departure from the glamorous characters that she had a reputation for portraying . Film critics praised Padukone 's performance , though their response to the film was mixed . Raja Sen thought that the film " lacked a good story " but added that Padukone " acts within herself and eschews exaggeration , and the results are impressive ... This may be her most self @-@ aware performance so far " . The pairing of Padukone with her former boyfriend was highly anticipated , and the film proved a major success with a worldwide revenue of ₹ 3 @.@ 02 billion ( US $ 45 million ) . Her next appearance was opposite Shah Rukh Khan in Rohit Shetty 's action @-@ comedy film Chennai Express . She played <unk> Azhagusundaram , a Tamil girl on the run from her father ( a local don ) , which required that she adopt a Tamil accent . Critical opinion on her accent was mixed , but her performance received praise ; film critic Aseem Chhabra concluded , " Padukone is delightful in the film — beautiful , smiling , and often a lot more playful and funny than Khan . " Chennai Express was Padukone 's second consecutive release to earn over ₹ 3 billion ( US $ 45 million ) in worldwide ticket sales ; both Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani and Chennai Express rank among the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of all time . 
 Padukone next played opposite Ranveer Singh in Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela , an adaptation of the Shakespearean tragedy of Romeo and Juliet from director Sanjay Leela Bhansali . Her role was Leela , a Gujarati girl based on the character of Juliet . Initially titled Ram @-@ Leela , the film 's title was changed after a court case was registered against Bhansali , Padukone , and Singh for " offending the religious sentiments " of the Hindu community by showcasing sex and violence under a title that referred to the life of Lord Rama . Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela released among protests across several states in India , but was generally well received by critics . Meena Iyer of The Times of India mentioned Padukone as " breathtaking " , and writing for Deccan Chronicle , Khalid Mohamed concluded that " it ’ s Deepika Padukone whom the film belongs to . Looking drop dead gorgeous and going at her part with a wallop , she ’ s the prime asset of Ram @-@ Leela . " The film earned ₹ 2 @.@ 02 billion ( US $ 30 million ) worldwide , making it Padukone 's fourth consecutive box office hit of the year . Her performances in Chennai Express and Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela won her several awards , including the Screen Award for Best Actress for both films and the Filmfare Award for Best Actress for the latter . 
 In 2014 , Padukone featured opposite Rajinikanth in the Tamil film Kochadaiiyaan , a period drama that was shot using motion capture technology . In Homi Adajania 's widely praised satire Finding Fanny , Padukone played a young widow who takes a road trip with her dysfunctional friends ( played by Arjun Kapoor , Naseeruddin Shah , Dimple Kapadia and Pankaj Kapur ) in search of a woman named Fanny . The film was screened at the 19th Busan International Film Festival ; critic Anuj Kumar of The Hindu wrote that Padukone successfully " takes off the fineries of Bollywood and you can sense the freedom from baggage in her performance " . Later that year , she starred opposite Shah Rukh Khan for the third time in Farah Khan 's renewal of Happy New Year . She played a bar dancer who trains a group of underachievers for a dance competition . Sanjukta Sharma of Mint found her role to be of minimal importance that required her only to be " a pretty thing to be laughed at and pitied " , but the film became one of her most successful , earning over ₹ 3 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 51 million ) worldwide . 
 = = = Piku and beyond ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 Following an appearance in an online video on feminism , entitled My Choice , under the direction of Homi Adajania , Padukone took on the role of a headstrong Bengali architect who cares for her hypochondriac father ( played by Amitabh Bachchan ) in <unk> Sircar 's comedy @-@ drama Piku ( 2015 ) . Reviews for the film were positive ; <unk> Nanda of Business Standard praised the film 's feminist tone , and wrote that Padukone proves " what she is capable of when given something more to do than look pretty and be the crazy @-@ dance girl at parties " . NDTV 's Saibal Chatterjee opined that she " holds Piku together with a restrained star turn " . With a worldwide gross of over ₹ 1 @.@ 40 billion ( US $ 21 million ) , the film emerged as a box office hit , and garnered Padukone several awards , including second Best Actress awards at Filmfare and Screen . 
 Later that year , Padukone played the part of a businessperson who helps Ranbir Kapoor 's character overcome his conflicts in Imtiaz Ali 's romantic drama Tamasha . Despite poor financial returns , Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com named Padukone 's performance as the best by an actress that year , writing that she " is so potent in Tamasha , it ’ s almost as if you can hear her heartbeat across the screen " . In her final release of 2015 , Padukone reunited with Sanjay Leela Bhansali and Ranveer Singh in Bajirao Mastani , a historical drama about a tragic extramarital affair . Singh was cast as the <unk> general Bajirao I , while Priyanka Chopra and Padukone featured as his first and second wife , respectively . In preparation for the role of the warrior @-@ princess Mastani , Padukone learnt sword @-@ fighting , horse @-@ riding and <unk> . With a revenue of over ₹ 3 @.@ 3 billion ( US $ 49 million ) , Bajirao Mastani proved to be the fourth highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of the year . Anupama Chopra found Padukone " riveting " in the film , but Subhash K. Jha while praising her " grace and dignity " thought that she was " way too subtle and silken , and not steely enough as [ a ] firebrand warrior @-@ princess " . At the 61st Filmfare Awards , Bajirao Mastani was named Best Film and Padukone received her second Best Actress nomination in that year . 
 As of June 2016 , Padukone has completed filming for her first project in Hollywood — the action film <unk> : The Return of Xander Cage — in which she plays the lead female role opposite Vin Diesel . She has also filmed for an item number in Dinesh Vijan 's romance film <unk> . In addition , Padukone will collaborate with Bhansali and Singh for the third time in Padmavati , a historical drama based on the life of Rani Padmini . 
 = = Other work = = 
 In addition to acting , Padukone has written opinion columns and has been involved with women 's health and fitness magazines . She has also supported charitable organisations , and has performed for stage shows . In 2009 , she was hired by Hindustan Times to write weekly columns for their lifestyle section ; through these columns she interacted with her fans and passed details of her personal and professional life . That year , she participated in the World 10K Bangalore marathon , which raised ₹ 13 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 190 @,@ 000 ) in support of 81 NGOs . In 2010 , Padukone adopted the Maharashtrian village of <unk> as part of NDTV 's Greenathon Campaign , to provide the village with a regular supply of electricity . She visited Indian jawans ( troops ) in Jammu , for an Independence Day special episode of NDTV 's reality show Jai <unk> . 
 Padukone took part in the opening ceremony of the third season of the Indian Premier League at the DY Patil Stadium in Navi Mumbai . Three years later , she performed alongside Shah Rukh Khan , Katrina Kaif , and Pitbull for the sixth edition of the Indian Premier League . In 2014 , she participated in a concert tour across North America , entitled " SLAM ! The Tour " , in which she performed alongside her co @-@ stars from Happy New Year . Padukone has also been involved with the Olympic Gold Quest team , established by her father and Geet Sethi to support Indian athletes at the Olympic Games , along with sports personalities such as Leander Paes and Viswanathan Anand and several other actors . In 2013 , she launched her own line of clothing for women , in association with the retail chain Van Heusen . 
 Padukone has also been outspoken on issues such as feminism and has said , " New feminism isn 't about being aggressive ; it 's about reaching the top yet being soft . It 's about being you — feminine , strong and full of will power . ” In a 2015 interview , Padukone spoke about her personal experience of overcoming depression , and in October that year she formed a foundation to create awareness on mental health in India , named The Live Love Laugh Foundation . The following year , she launched a campaign named More Than Just Sad to assist general physicians in their treatment of patients suffering from depression or anxiety . Also in 2016 , the foundation teamed with Facebook and the <unk> organisation to launch multilingual tools and educational resources in Facebook 's networking site to support people with suicidal tendencies . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Padukone shares a close bond with her family , and visits them regularly in her hometown of Bangalore . She lives by herself in <unk> , a neighbourhood in Mumbai , and admits to missing the presence of her family there . She says , " I miss them , but luckily I have a life of my own , which keeps me from getting homesick . I wouldn ’ t want them to uproot their lives from Bengaluru just to be with me . " A practicing Hindu , Padukone considers religion to be an important aspect of her life and makes frequent visits to temples and other religious shrines . 
 While filming Bachna Ae Haseeno in 2008 , Padukone began a romantic relationship with co @-@ star Ranbir Kapoor . She spoke openly about the relationship and sported a tattoo of his initials on the nape of her neck . She has said that the relationship had a profound effect on her , transforming her into a more confident and social person . The Indian media speculated on an engagement , and reported that this had occurred in November 2008 , although Padukone had stated that she had no plans to marry within the next five years . The couple broke up a year later ; she professed in an interview to feeling " angry " and " betrayed " for a long time , but insisted that they remained on good terms . In a 2010 interview , Padukone made a comment that the media speculated was a reference to her break @-@ up with Kapoor : 
 The first time he cheated on me , I thought there was something wrong with me or the relationship , but when someone makes a habit of it , you know the problem lies with him . Yet I was foolish enough to give him a second chance because he begged and pleaded , despite the fact that everyone around me said he was still straying . I guess I really wanted to believe in him . Then I actually caught him red @-@ handed . It took me a while to get out . But having done that , nothing can make me go back . 
 Kapoor initially denied the allegations , but according to The Times of India , he later admitted to the infidelity . In 2013 , following the production of Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani , Padukone told Filmfare that she now " shares a great comfort level " with him . 
 In 2011 , a set of pictures showing Padukone kissing the actor Siddharth Mallya at an Indian Premier League match were made available on the web . This led to wide speculation in the media about the nature of their relationship , which Padukone declined to talk about publicly . The following year there were reports about a break @-@ up , to which she said : " Just because we are not seen together , it doesn 't mean that we are not friends anymore . " She has since denied reports of her link @-@ up to Ranveer Singh , stating that she is " not in a frame of mind to be in a relationship . " 
 = = In the media = = 
 The journalist Vir <unk> , in 2013 , described Padukone as " strong , someone who makes up her own mind , [ and ] has motivation within herself . " She is particularly known in the media as a professional , disciplined performer , whose " work takes precedence over everything else . " A reviewer for Rediff.com described her personality as " simple , " " grounded , " and " accessible , " and wrote , " She takes criticism in her stride , acknowledges her limitations and strives to work hard at getting better . She handles praise with equal composure . " Ayan Mukerji ( the director of Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani ) considers her to be " a woman who will flirt with you but you will love to take her home to meet your mom as well . " Padukone has maintained a Twitter account since 2010 , and launched an official Facebook page in 2013 . She is the most followed Indian actress on Twitter and most liked Indian actor on Facebook . 
 One of the highest @-@ paid actresses in Bollywood , Padukone is considered among the most popular and high @-@ profile celebrities in India . Analysing her career , Reuters published that after making a successful debut with Om Shanti Om , she featured in a series of films for which critics labelled her as " wooden " and " mocked her accent . " The Indian Express added , " Not too long ago after a few unwise script calls and the public blow up of her high profile relationship with Ranbir Kapoor , Deepika was written off . Credit to her much touted professionalism , dedication , discipline and perseverance that she bounced back . " Following the major success of Cocktail , Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani , and Chennai Express , several media publications began crediting her as the most successful contemporary actress in India . From 2012 – 15 , she has featured on the Indian edition of the Forbes ' " Celebrity 100 , " a list based on the income and popularity of India 's celebrities . She ranked among the top 25 each year , peaking at the eighth position in 2014 with an estimated annual earning of ₹ 672 million ( US $ 10 million ) . 
 Padukone is considered a sex symbol and style icon in India – the media cites her figure , height 1 @.@ 74 m ( 5 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) , smile , and eyes as her distinctive physical features . The actress ranks high on various listings of the most attractive Indian celebrities . In 2008 , she topped Indian Maxim 's " Hot 100 " list , and in 2012 , she was named " India 's Most Beautiful Woman " by the Indian edition of People magazine . Padukone was ranked first on The Times of India 's listing of the " Most Desirable Woman " in 2012 and 2013 , after being ranked third and fourth , respectively , for the preceding two years ; she was placed second in both 2014 and 2015 . In 2010 and 2014 , she was named the " World 's Sexiest Woman " by the Indian edition of FHM . She has additionally featured in the UK magazine Eastern Eye 's " World 's Sexiest Asian Women " list from 2009 to 2015 , ranking among the top ten each year . In 2013 , Filmfare declared her as the winner of the " Most Fashionable Star " poll , and credited her as one of the " few actresses who experiments with colours , cuts and silhouettes . " In the fitness book The Four @-@ Week Countdown Diet , the actress was cited by <unk> Jain as " the ultimate role model for a healthy , fit and active lifestyle . " 
 Padukone is an active celebrity endorser for several brands and products , including Tissot , Sony Cyber @-@ shot , <unk> , Vogue eyewear , Maybelline and Pepsi , among others . In 2012 , it was reported that Padukone had signed on for an endorsement deal with Garnier worth ₹ 60 million ( US $ 890 @,@ 000 ) , a record breaking remuneration for an Indian actress . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Padukone has been the recipient of three Filmfare Awards : Best Female Debut for Om Shanti Om ( 2007 ) , and two Best Actress awards for Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela ( 2013 ) and Piku ( 2015 ) . 
 = The Big Bang ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " The Big Bang " is the thirteenth and final episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , broadcast on 26 June 2010 on BBC One . It is the second part of the two @-@ part series finale started with " The Pandorica Opens " , written by Steven Moffat and directed by Toby Haynes . 
 Following the end of the previous episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) is trapped in a prison from which escape is impossible , the TARDIS has blown up with River Song ( Alex Kingston ) inside , and the Doctor 's companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) has been shot and killed by an Auton replica of her fiancé Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) . As the universe is collapsing , the Doctor uses time travel to solve these problems and ultimately reboot the universe . 
 The episode sees the climax of Amy 's character arc and the story arc of the series regarding the cracks in the universe , though Moffat chose to leave a few things unexplained . Taking place mainly in a museum , most scenes in the episode were shot at Brangwyn Hall in February 2010 . " The Big Bang " was seen by 6 @.@ 696 million viewers in the UK and received the highest Appreciation Index of the fifth series at 89 . It received mostly positive reviews from critics , though many commented on the complicated nature of the plot and whether some aspects made sense . The two @-@ part story won the 2011 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following on from " The Pandorica Opens " , the Doctor has been sealed in the Pandorica , a trap created by his greatest enemies ; River Song is trapped aboard the exploding TARDIS ; and an Auton version of Rory has shot and killed his fiancée Amy . The TARDIS 's explosion has caused the whole universe to have never existed , except for the Earth , its moon , and a sun @-@ like object , otherwise leaving a dark infinite void . Only stone versions of the Doctor 's foes surround the Pandorica . 
 As Rory is mourning over Amy , the Doctor appears using River 's vortex manipulator . He hands Rory his sonic screwdriver and explains how to use it to open the Pandorica and free his younger self . Following these instructions , Rory frees the Doctor , who then places Amy 's body inside the Pandorica . He explains that the Pandorica , being the " perfect prison " , will not allow its occupant to escape , not even by dying , and will restore her once given an imprint of her DNA . The Doctor then retrieves River 's manipulator and uses it to jump ahead nearly two millennia ; Rory , in his ageless Auton body , decides to stay with the Pandorica and guard it , creating the myth of " The Last Centurion " over the years , a myth that ends with him supposedly killed during the London Blitz . 
 In 1996 , seven @-@ year @-@ old Amelia Pond ( Caitlin Blackwood ) finds instructions from the Doctor leading her to the National Museum , where the Pandorica is on display . She touches the box , allowing it to revitalise Amy and release her . They are soon joined by the Doctor and Rory , now a museum guard who secretly survived the Blitz . After a tearful reunion , they are chased by a Dalek restored by the light of the Pandorica . The Doctor uses the vortex manipulator to go back and give Rory his screwdriver , as well as leave Amelia the clues to the museum . Amelia soon disappears : a sign , according to the Doctor , that the universe is collapsing rapidly . The injured body of a future version of the Doctor appears and whispers something to his earlier self . The Doctor takes off with Amy and Rory to the roof of the museum , where he discovers that the " sun " is the still @-@ exploding TARDIS . Rory hears a voice coming from the exploding TARDIS and the Doctor amplifies the voice and discovers it is River Song in a time @-@ loop , implemented by the TARDIS to keep her alive . The Doctor saves River , and as the quartet reunites , the Doctor is shot by the Dalek and sends himself backwards in time . Amy and Rory depart while River threatens the Dalek before shooting and destroying it . 
 Amy and Rory discover that the wounded Doctor had told his earlier self to create a diversion , allowing him to rig the Pandorica to fly into the TARDIS explosion . The Doctor postulates that enough of the original universe still exists in the Pandorica to completely restore it via the exploding TARDIS . After a tearful farewell to Amy , Rory , and River where he instructs Amy to focus on her family and Rory to restore them in the new universe , the Doctor engages the Pandorica and flies it into the exploding TARDIS . A second Big Bang occurs . The Doctor comes to consciousness and begins witnessing events in his life in reverse as the cracks in the universe close . The Doctor has to stay outside this new universe in order for that to happen . After a final goodbye to Amelia on the night they met , he enters the cracks and disappears . 
 Amy wakes on 26 June 2010 in her home to discover that her parents have been brought back into existence and she and Rory celebrate their wedding day . At the reception , River leaves her blank diary for Amy which prompts Amy to recall the Doctor and something he told her when she was seven during his rewind . She interrupts her father 's speech , imploring the " Raggedy " Doctor from her memories to come back . As she recites the old wedding proverb ( " something old , something new , something borrowed , and something blue " ) , relating that to what the Doctor had said about the TARDIS , the TARDIS and the Doctor appear . The Doctor comes out of the TARDIS and after a brief conversation with Amy , introduces himself by saying " Hello everyone ! I 'm Amy 's imaginary friend , but I came anyway ! " and joins the wedding festivities . Afterwards , he returns River 's diary and the vortex manipulator to her so she can return to her own time . She sadly tells him he will soon learn who she truly is and that it will change everything . Aboard the TARDIS , the Doctor explains to Amy and Rory that unanswered questions remain about the destruction of the TARDIS and the nature of " the silence " that will fall . The Doctor receives a telephone call alerting him to the presence of " an escaped Egyptian goddess on the Orient Express , in space " . He tells them that this will have to be goodbye . They agree that it is goodbye and Amy leans out of the TARDIS and yells " Goodbye ! " . The three then leave on their next adventure . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Aspects of " The Big Bang " were outlined by lead writer and executive producer Steven Moffat as he planned the arc of the series . Moffat stated he left room to improvise on the story and was pleased with the result , describing it as " mad " and " amazing " . Moffat stated that the title " The Big Bang " is his favourite dirty Doctor Who joke as it is a reference to the fact that Amy and Rory conceive their child on the TARDIS that night , as revealed in the next series in " A Good Man Goes to War " . Gillan described Rory 's vigil for Amy as the " ultimate romantic gesture " which showed how much he loved Amy , and was where Amy realised how much she loved him . Moffat thought that standing guard for two thousand years would make up for shooting her . Moffat had always intended for Amy and Rory to get married " from the off " . Moffat described the conclusion as the story of how Amy has been changed by the Doctor and the Doctor 's success at restoring her spirit to the girl he first met , believing that a man could drop out of the sky and " fix everything " . However , he did not return for her as he had promised and she grew believing that he was a liar and could not be trusted ; Amy returns to her original belief when she stands up at her wedding and proclaims that the Doctor is real and that he will arrive . Though the episode is the end of the series , Moffat left questions to be answered in the next series , including the mystery of River Song 's identity and the " Silence " which appeared to cause the TARDIS to blow up . 
 " The Big Bang " deliberately revisits several scenes from earlier in the series . The first scene in the episode mirrors the start of " The Eleventh Hour " . As the Doctor rewinds through his life , he sees events which relate to " The Lodger " , but which were not shown in that episode . His conversation with Amy during the events of " Flesh and Stone " , however , appeared in that episode . It was shot in extreme close @-@ up but the Doctor 's tweed jacket is still visible , which the present Doctor in that episode had previously lost to the Weeping Angels . 
 Moffat found it interesting that the Doctor regularly experienced time out of order and was used to a whole different kind of causality . He believed that the Doctor would attempt to cheat and break his own rules to save the universe from collapsing . The time travel used in the episode is compatible with the theory of time travel . As the episode features many " time @-@ jumps " when the Doctor travels back to do things seen in the opening credits , Moffat decided to make it less complicated by allowing the audience to figure things out before they occurred . He did this by calling attention to the future @-@ Doctor in the opening scenes by having him wearing a fez and holding a mop , and as the viewers saw the Doctor later acquire these items they would begin to connect the events . Moffat mentioned the fez to fellow executive producers Piers Wenger and Beth Willis ; they both were worried that Smith would become too attached to the hat and want to incorporate it into his costume , but Moffat assured him that he was planning on destroying the fez . Wenger later stated that Smith was " one of the few people who can pull off a fez " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The read @-@ through for " The Big Bang " took place on 13 January 2010 in the Upper Boat Studios . The episode was filmed in the sixth production block along with " The Pandorica Opens " . The Doctor visits previous episodes as he is being erased from history ; these scenes , taking place in " Flesh and Stone " and " The Lodger " , were filmed with their respective episodes . The first scenes filmed for " The Big Bang " were shot in the TARDIS set , including the very last scene . The beginning of the episode , in which the fez @-@ wearing Doctor from the future confronts Rory , was filmed on 5 February 2010 at Margam Country Park , Port Talbot . As it was filmed near the end of production of the series , " The Big Bang " had a smaller effects budget than other episodes , but this was compensated with cinematic lighting . The TARDIS appears in the time vortex during the ending credits , an idea of director Toby Haynes . 
 Brangwyn Hall in Swansea was used as the museum . Haynes wanted the museum to feel " massive and eerie " , and coached Blackwood to " live in the moment " . The opening sequence featuring young Amelia is filmed from her height , and was inspired by Steven Spielberg films in which people would look at things in awe . During this scene Haynes played appropriate music to help Blackwood get into the mood , as he had done during similar scenes when directing " The Pandorica Opens " . The set was filled with things that would seem like typical exhibits in the daytime , but appeared spooky at night . The exhibits also included historical anomalies which were the result of history collapsing , such as penguins on the Nile . Though Blackwood appeared as the seven @-@ year @-@ old version of Amy in " The Eleventh Hour " , the episode marked the first time Gillan and Blackwood — who are actually cousins — acted together . Gillan initially found this " weird " , but she commented that they quickly got used to it . The two versions of Amy were purposely dressed in similar colours . The cold open ends with Amy telling her younger self " Okay kid , this is where it gets complicated " after she has been revealed in the Pandorica . Moffat , after viewing the rushes , ordered the sequence to be reshot as Gillan had said " really complicated " , which conveyed a different meaning . As they had run out of time filming in the museum , all of the shots looking into the Pandorica were filmed three weeks later in the Pandorica chamber set . 
 During the scene in which the Doctor and Rory are talking after Rory has let him out of the Pandorica , one of the stone Daleks was originally supposed to move , operated by Haynes himself . However , the scene was cut from the final episode . A stunt performer for Smith performed the sequence in which a future version of the Doctor who had been shot by a Dalek fell down the museum stairs ; he did the stunt three times before Haynes captured the angles and shots he wanted . On the DVD commentary , Haynes stated that the shot in the episode is mostly the first take . River 's costume in the episode was intended to resemble both the costumes of Princess Leia and Han Solo in the Star Wars films , so she appeared like a " female Han Solo " . 
 Originally there was a scene after the four had been <unk> in the museum where Amy had a " meltdown " and Rory assured her it was okay ; this was cut due to pacing issues , which pleased Darvill as he disliked his performance in the scene . Gillan stated that the episode was the " most difficult " for her , as it was " a big climax for Amy and her story that 's been building through the series ... it just required a lot of kind of concentration and emotion . " In August 2011 she stated that the Doctor and Amy 's farewell was the most emotional scene for her to film . The scene in which the Doctor gives a final speech to young Amelia was not filmed with Smith and Blackwood on the same set . Smith 's dialogue was shot first in the bedroom set , while the corner with the bed was recreated and filmed with Blackwood as a pick @-@ up . Blackwood fell asleep during filming . Amy and Rory 's wedding reception was filmed at Miskin Manor . Gillan found wearing the dress strange , while Darvill felt as if he was gate @-@ crashing someone else 's wedding , as he did not know any of the extras there . Haynes wanted to first show the revelation that the TARDIS would appear at the reception in a small way with minor changes such as the glasses tinkling and chandelier shaking , and build it up from there . Moffat thought that Amy would want a big wedding with a lot of dancing . In the script it was written that the Doctor was a " terrible dancer " and danced like a " drunk giraffe " , and Smith additionally came up with his own routine . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Big Bang " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 26 June 2010 . The extended 55 minute episode lasted from 6 : 05 p.m. to 7 : 00 . Possibly due to the early start time , overnight ratings showed that the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 09 million viewers , with 4 @.@ 64 million on BBC One and 445 @,@ 000 on a simulcast on BBC HD . Final consolidated ratings calculated by BARB reported that the episode had been watched by a total of 6 @.@ 696 million viewers , with 6 @.@ 118 million on BBC One and 578 @,@ 000 on BBC HD . The episode also received an Appreciation Index of 89 , the highest of the series and the four main channels the day it was broadcast . 
 A Region 2 DVD and Blu @-@ ray containing this episode together with " Vincent and the Doctor " , " The Lodger " and " The Pandorica Opens " was released on 6 September 2010 . It was then re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Big Bang " met with mostly positive reviews from critics . Richard Edwards of SFX gave the episode five out of five stars and wrote " Steven Moffat pulls off the remarkable feat of making it feel like the logical denouement of last week 's outing . " While he noted that the " end of the world " scenario was very common , he said that it had never " been quite so pleasingly complex " and that " even if there are several plot holes , it 's difficult to get too worried about them when the story packs such a strong emotional wallop " . Den of Geek 's Simon Brew also gave the episode a positive review , writing " if you were awaiting a simple , easy @-@ to @-@ explain blockbuster of a Doctor Who series finale , you simply didn 't get it here . Instead , if you were looking for something really very ambitious , often quite confusing , yet ultimately far more satisfying , then ' The Big Bang ' absolutely hit the mark . " 
 IGN 's Matt Wales gave the episode a 10 out of 10 rating of " Masterful " , describing it as " wonderfully wide @-@ eyed , genuinely magical adventure " and adding that it " ended the series on an unquestionable high " . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave " The Big Bang " a B + , describing it as not " wholly successful ... the climactic action is a bit too rushed and the epilogue too relaxed " . While it was " still beyond @-@ <unk> and filled with great moments " , he thought it felt " like a letdown after last week 's superb ' Pandorica Opens ' " . Zap2it 's Sam McPherson gave it an A and described it as " a great conclusion to a great season " and while " the entire universe @-@ rescue plot was a little boring ... the characters made the episode one of the best ever " . However , he did wish that it kept more of the darker tone from " The Pandorica Opens " , labelling " The Big Bang " as " a bit of a tonal letdown " . 
 Dan Martin of The Guardian wrote that the " finale was brilliant – a classic modern fairytale unfolding before our eyes " . Gavin Fuller , writing for The Daily Telegraph , summarised the episode as " interesting and enjoyable , but not quite the spectacular conclusion you might hope for . " He particularly praised Matt Smith 's portrayal of the Doctor in the scenes of his sacrifice and rewinding of his timeline , and also described the presentation of the universe collapsing as " effective " . However , Fuller had some criticisms of the plot , seeing it as potentially confusing . He also expressed disappointment with the " easy " solutions to some of the problems facing the Doctor in this episode . Fuller also wrote that the episode 's solutions were " rather paradoxical in nature [ since the Doctor ] only escapes as Rory lets him out once given the means to do so by the Doctor travelling back in time once he 's escaped . " , though Martin in The Guardian excused this paradox due to the episode being set " in the eye of the storm as history collapses [ and so ] ... hardly working to the same rulebook " . 
 Along with " The Pandorica Opens " , " The Big Bang " was awarded the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , the fifth time Doctor Who has won the award , and the fourth time a Steven Moffat episode has won . In February 2013 , Moffat stated that " The Big Bang " was his personal favourite among the Doctor Who episodes he wrote . " I thought it was just a great , fun , funny , witty episode . I was proud of that . " 
 = Jerry Fodor = 
 Jerry Alan Fodor ( / <unk> / ; born 1935 ) is an American philosopher and cognitive scientist . He holds the position of State of New Jersey Professor of Philosophy , Emeritus , at Rutgers University and is the author of many works in the fields of philosophy of mind and cognitive science , in which he has laid the groundwork for the modularity of mind and the language of thought hypotheses , among other ideas . He is known for his provocative and sometimes polemical style of argumentation and as " one of the principal philosophers of mind of the late twentieth and early twenty @-@ first century . In addition to having exerted an enormous influence on virtually every portion of the philosophy of mind literature since 1960 , Fodor ’ s work has had a significant impact on the development of the cognitive sciences . " 
 Fodor argues that mental states , such as beliefs and desires , are relations between individuals and mental representations . He maintains that these representations can only be correctly explained in terms of a language of thought ( LOT ) in the mind . Furthermore , this language of thought itself is an actually existing thing that is codified in the brain and not just a useful explanatory tool . Fodor adheres to a species of functionalism , maintaining that thinking and other mental processes consist primarily of computations operating on the syntax of the representations that make up the language of thought . 
 For Fodor , significant parts of the mind , such as perceptual and linguistic processes , are structured in terms of modules , or " organs " , which he defines by their causal and functional roles . These modules are relatively independent of each other and of the " central processing " part of the mind , which has a more global and less " domain specific " character . Fodor suggests that the character of these modules permits the possibility of causal relations with external objects . This , in turn , makes it possible for mental states to have contents that are about things in the world . The central processing part , on the other hand , takes care of the logical relations between the various contents and inputs and outputs . 
 Although Fodor originally rejected the idea that mental states must have a causal , externally determined aspect , he has in recent years devoted much of his writing and study to the philosophy of language because of this problem of the meaning and reference of mental contents . His contributions in this area include the so @-@ called asymmetric causal theory of reference and his many arguments against semantic holism . Fodor strongly opposes reductive accounts of the mind . He argues that mental states are multiply realizable and that there is a hierarchy of explanatory levels in science such that the generalizations and laws of a higher @-@ level theory of psychology or linguistics , for example , cannot be captured by the low @-@ level explanations of the behavior of neurons and synapses . He has also emerged as a prominent critic of what he characterizes as the ill @-@ grounded Darwinian and neo @-@ Darwinian theory of natural selection . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Jerry Fodor was born in New York City in 1935 , of Jewish descent . He received his A.B. degree ( summa cum laude ) from Columbia University in 1956 , where he studied with Sydney <unk> , and a PhD in Philosophy from Princeton University in 1960 , under the direction of Hilary Putnam . From 1959 to 1986 Fodor was on the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge , Massachusetts . From 1986 to 1988 he was a full professor at the City University of New York ( CUNY ) . Since 1988 he has been State of New Jersey Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at Rutgers University in New Jersey . Besides his interest in philosophy , Fodor passionately follows opera and regularly writes popular columns for the London Review of Books on that and other topics . 
 Philosopher Colin McGinn , who taught with Fodor at Rutgers , described him in these words : 
 " Fodor ( who is now a close friend ) is a gentle man inside a burly body , and prone to an even <unk> style of arguing . He is shy and voluble at the same time ... a formidable polemicist burdened with a sensitive soul .... Disagreeing with Jerry on a philosophical issue , especially one dear to his heart can be a chastening experience .... His quickness of mind , inventiveness , and sharp wit are not to be tangled with before your first cup of coffee in the morning . Adding Jerry Fodor to the faculty at Rutgers [ University ] instantly put it on the map , Fodor being by common consent the leading philosopher of mind in the world today . I had met him in England in the seventies and ... found him to be the genuine article , intellectually speaking ( though we do not always see eye to eye ) . " 
 Fodor is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . He has received numerous awards and honors : New York State Regent 's Fellowship , Woodrow Wilson Fellowship ( Princeton University ) , Chancellor Greene Fellow ( Princeton University ) , Fulbright Fellowship ( Oxford University ) , Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences , and a Guggenheim Fellowship . He won the first Jean <unk> Prize for philosophy of mind and cognitive philosophy in 1993 . His lecture series for the Prize , later published as a book by MIT Press in 1995 , was titled The Elm and the Expert : Mentalese and Its Semantics . In 1996 – 1997 , Fodor delivered the prestigious John Locke Lectures at the University of Oxford , titled Concepts : Where Cognitive Science Went Wrong , which went on to become his 1998 Oxford University Press book of the same name . He has also delivered the Patrick <unk> Lecture on Philosophical Naturalism ( 2004 ) and the Royce Lecture on Philosophy of Mind ( 2002 ) to the American Philosophical Association , of whose Eastern Division he has served as Vice President ( 2004 – 2005 ) and President ( 2005 – 2006 ) . In 2005 , he won the Mind & Brain Prize . 
 He lives in New York with his wife , the linguist Janet Dean Fodor , and has two grown children . 
 = = Fodor and the nature of mental states = = 
 In his article " Propositional Attitudes " ( 1978 ) , Fodor introduced the idea that mental states are relations between individuals and mental representations . Despite the changes in many of his positions over the years , the idea that intentional attitudes are relational has remained unchanged from its original formulation up to the present time . 
 In that article , he attempted to show how mental representations , specifically sentences in the language of thought , are necessary to explain this relational nature of mental states . Fodor considers two alternative hypotheses . The first completely denies the relational character of mental states and the second considers mental states as two @-@ place relations . The latter position can be further subdivided into the <unk> view that such relations are between individuals and sentences of natural languages and the <unk> view that they are between individuals and the propositions expressed by such sentences . Fodor 's own position , instead , is that to properly account for the nature of intentional attitudes , it is necessary to employ a three @-@ place relation between individuals , representations and propositional contents . 
 Considering mental states as three @-@ place relations in this way , representative realism makes it possible to hold together all of the elements necessary to the solution of this problem . Further , mental representations are not only the objects of beliefs and desires , but are also the domain over which mental processes operate . They can be considered the ideal link between the syntactic notion of mental content and the computational notion of functional architecture . These notions are , according to Fodor , our best explanation of mental processes . 
 = = The functional architecture of the mind = = 
 Following in the path paved by linguist Noam Chomsky , Fodor developed a strong commitment to the idea of psychological nativism . <unk> postulates the <unk> of many cognitive functions and concepts . For Fodor , this position emerges naturally out of his criticism of <unk> and associationism . These criticisms also led him to the formulation of his hypothesis of the modularity of the mind . 
 Historically , questions about mental architecture have been divided into two contrasting theories about the nature of the faculties . The first can be described as a " horizontal " view because it sees mental processes as interactions between faculties which are not domain specific . For example , a judgment remains a judgment whether it is judgment about a perceptual experience or a judgment about the understanding of language . The second can be described as a " vertical " view because it claims that our mental faculties are domain specific , genetically determined , associated with distinct neurological structures , and so on . 
 The vertical vision can be traced back to the 19th century movement called phrenology and its founder Franz Joseph Gall . Gall claimed that mental faculties could be associated with specific physical areas of the brain . Hence , someone 's level of intelligence , for example , could be literally " read off " from the size of a particular bump on his posterior parietal lobe . This simplistic view of modularity has been disproved over the course of the last century . 
 Fodor revived the idea of modularity , without the notion of precise physical <unk> , in the 1980s , and became one of the most vocal proponents of it with the 1983 publication of his monograph Modularity of Mind . Two properties of modularity in particular , informational encapsulation and domain specificity , make it possible to tie together questions of functional architecture with those of mental content . The ability to elaborate information independently from the background beliefs of individuals that these two properties allow Fodor to give an atomistic and causal account of the notion of mental content . The main idea , in other words , is that the properties of the contents of mental states can depend , rather than exclusively on the internal relations of the system of which they are a part , also on their causal relations with the external world . 
 Fodor 's notions of mental modularity , informational encapsulation and domain specificity have been taken up and expanded , much to Fodor 's chagrin , by cognitive scientists such as Zenon <unk> and evolutionary psychologists such as Steven Pinker and Henry Plotkin , among many others . But Fodor complains that Pinker , Plotkin and other members of what he sarcastically calls " the New Synthesis " have taken modularity and similar ideas way too far . He insists that the mind is not " massively modular " and that , contrary to what these researchers would have us believe , the mind is still a very long way from having been explained by the computational , or any other , model . 
 = = Intentional realism = = 
 In A Theory of Content and Other Essays ( 1990 ) , Fodor takes up another of his central notions : the question of the reality of mental representations . Fodor needs to justify representational realism to justify the idea that the contents of mental states are expressed in symbolic structures such as those of the LOT . 
 = = = Fodor 's criticism of Dennett = = = 
 Fodor starts with some criticisms of so @-@ called standard realism . This view is characterized , according to Fodor , by two distinct assertions . One of these regards the internal structure of mental states and asserts that such states are non @-@ relational . The other concerns the semantic theory of mental content and asserts that there is an isomorphism between the causal roles of such contents and the inferential web of beliefs . Among modern philosophers of mind , the majority view seems to be that the first of these two assertions is false , but that the second is true . Fodor departs from this view in accepting the truth of the first thesis but rejecting strongly the truth of the second . 
 In particular , Fodor criticizes the <unk> of Daniel Dennett . Dennett maintains that it is possible to be realist with regard to intentional states without having to commit oneself to the reality of mental representations . Now , according to Fodor , if one remains at this level of analysis , then there is no possibility of explaining why the intentional strategy works : 
 " There is ... a standard objection to <unk> ... : it is difficult to explain why the psychology of beliefs / desires works so well , if the psychology of beliefs / desires is , in fact , false .... As Putnam , Boyd and others have emphasized , from the predictive successes of a theory to the truth of that theory there is surely a presumed inference ; and this is even more likely when ... we are dealing with the only theory in play which is <unk> crowned with success . It is not obvious ... why such a presumption should not militate in favour of a realist conception ... of the interpretations of beliefs / desires . " 
 = = = Productivity , systematicity and thought = = = 
 Fodor also has positive arguments in favour of the reality of mental representations in terms of the LOT . He maintains that if language is the expression of thoughts and language is systematic , then thoughts must also be systematic . Fodor draws on the work of Noam Chomsky to both model his theory of the mind and to refute alternative architectures such as connectionism . <unk> in natural languages was explained by Chomsky in terms of two more basic concepts : productivity and <unk> . 
 Productivity refers to a representational system 's unbounded ability to generate new representations from a given set of symbols . " John " , " loves " , and " Mary " allow for the construction of the sentences " John loves Mary " and " Mary loves John " . Fodor 's language of thought theorizes that representations are <unk> into constituent parts , and these decomposed representations are built into new strings . 
 More important than productivity is systematicity since it does not rely on questionable <unk> about human cognition . The argument states that a <unk> is able to understand some sentence in virtue of understanding another . For example , no one who understands " John loves Mary " is unable to understand " Mary loves John " , and no one who understands " P and Q " is unable to understand " P " . <unk> itself is rarely challenged as a property of natural languages and logics , but some challenge that thought is systematic in the same way languages are . Still others from the <unk> tradition have tried to build non @-@ classical networks that can account for the apparent systematicity of language . 
 The fact that systematicity and productivity depend on the compositional structure of language means that language has a combinatorial semantics . If thought also has such a combinatorial semantics , then there must be a language of thought . 
 The second argument that Fodor provides in favour of representational realism involves the processes of thought . This argument touches on the relation between the representational theory of mind and models of its architecture . If the sentences of Mentalese require unique processes of elaboration then they require a computational mechanism of a certain type . The syntactic notion of mental representations goes hand in hand with the idea that mental processes are calculations which act only on the form of the symbols which they elaborate . And this is the computational theory of the mind . Consequently , the defence of a model of architecture based on classic artificial intelligence passes inevitably through a defence of the reality of mental representations . 
 For Fodor , this formal notion of thought processes also has the advantage of highlighting the parallels between the causal role of symbols and the contents which they express . In his view , syntax plays the role of mediation between the causal role of the symbols and their contents . The semantic relations between symbols can be " imitated " by their syntactic relations . The inferential relations which connect the contents of two symbols can be imitated by the formal syntax rules which regulate the derivation of one symbol from another . 
 = = The nature of content = = 
 From the beginning of the 1980s , Fodor adhered to a causal notion of mental content and of meaning . This idea of content contrasts sharply with the inferential role semantics to which he subscribed earlier in his career . As of 2010 Fodor criticizes inferential role semantics ( IRS ) because its commitment to an extreme form of holism excludes the possibility of a true naturalization of the mental . But naturalization must include an explanation of content in atomistic and causal terms . 
 = = = Anti @-@ holism = = = 
 Fodor has made many and varied criticisms of holism . He identifies the central problem with all the different notions of holism as the idea that the determining factor in semantic evaluation is the notion of an " epistemic bond " . Briefly , P is an epistemic bond of Q if the meaning of P is considered by someone to be relevant for the determination of the meaning of Q. Meaning holism strongly depends on this notion . The identity of the content of a mental state , under holism , can only be determined by the totality of its epistemic bonds . And this makes the realism of mental states an impossibility : 
 " If people differ in an absolutely general way in their estimations of epistemic relevance , and if we follow the holism of meaning and <unk> intentional states by way of the totality of their epistemic bonds , the consequence will be that two people ( or , for that matter , two temporal sections of the same person ) will never be in the same intentional state . Therefore , two people can never be subsumed under the same intentional generalizations . And , therefore , intentional generalization can never be successful . And , therefore again , there is no hope for an intentional psychology . " 
 = = = The asymmetric causal theory = = = 
 Having criticized the idea that semantic evaluation concerns only the internal relations between the units of a symbolic system , Fodor can adopt an <unk> position with respect to mental content and meaning . For Fodor , in recent years , the problem of naturalization of the mental is tied to the possibility of giving " the sufficient conditions for which a piece of the world is relative to ( expresses , represents , is true of ) another piece " in non @-@ intentional and non @-@ semantic terms . If this goal is to be achieved within a representational theory of the mind , then the challenge is to devise a causal theory which can establish the interpretation of the primitive non @-@ logical symbols of the LOT . Fodor 's initial proposal is that what determines that the symbol for " water " in Mentalese expresses the property H2O is that the occurrences of that symbol are in certain causal relations with water . The intuitive version of this causal theory is what Fodor calls the " Crude Causal Theory . " According to this theory , the occurrences of symbols express the properties which are the causes of their occurrence . The term " horse " , for example , says of a horse that it is a horse . In order to do this , it is necessary and sufficient that certain properties of an occurrence of the symbol " horse " be in a law @-@ like relation with certain properties which determine that something is an occurrence of horse . 
 The main problem with this theory is that of erroneous representations . There are two unavoidable problems with the idea that " a symbol expresses a property if it is ... necessary that all and only the presences of such a property cause the occurrences . " The first is that not all horses cause occurrences of horse . The second is that not only horses cause occurrences of horse . Sometimes the A ( horses ) are caused by A ( horses ) , but at other times — when , for example , because of the distance or conditions of low visibility , one has confused a cow for a horse — the A ( horses ) are caused by B ( cows ) . In this case the symbol A doesn ’ t express just the property A , but the disjunction of properties A or B. The crude causal theory is therefore incapable of distinguishing the case in which the content of a symbol is disjunctive from the case in which it isn ’ t . This gives rise to what Fodor calls the " problem of disjunction " . 
 Fodor responds to this problem with what he defines as " a slightly less crude causal theory " . According to this approach , it is necessary to break the symmetry at the base of the crude causal theory . Fodor must find some criterion for distinguishing the occurrences of A caused by As ( true ) from those caused by Bs ( false ) . The point of departure , according to Fodor , is that while the false cases are ontologically dependent on the true cases , the reverse is not true . There is an asymmetry of dependence , in other words , between the true contents ( A 
 = A ) and the false ones ( A = 
 A or B ) . The first can subsist independently of the second , but the second can occur only because of the existence of the first : 
 From the point of view of semantics , errors must be accidents : if in the extension of " horse " there are no cows , then it cannot be required for the meaning of " horse " that cows be called horses . On the other hand , if " horse " did not mean that which it means , and if it were an error for horses , it would never be possible for a cow to be called " horse . " Putting the two things together , it can be seen that the possibility of falsely saying " this is a horse " presupposes the existence of a semantic basis for saying it truly , but not vice versa . If we put this in terms of the crude causal theory , the fact that cows cause one to say " horse " depends on the fact that horses cause one to say " horse " ; but the fact that horses cause one to say " horse " does not depend on the fact that cows cause one to say " horse " ... " 
 = = Functionalism = = 
 During the 1960s , various philosophers such as Donald Davidson , Hilary Putnam , and Fodor tried to resolve the puzzle of developing a way to preserve the explanatory efficacy of mental causation and so @-@ called " folk psychology " while adhering to a materialist vision of the world which did not violate the " generality of physics " . Their proposal was , first of all , to reject the then @-@ dominant theories in philosophy of mind : behaviorism and the type identity theory . The problem with logical behaviorism was that it failed to account for causation between mental states and such causation seems to be essential to psychological explanation , especially if one considers that behavior is not an effect of a single mental event / cause but is rather the effect of a chain of mental events / causes . The type @-@ identity theory , on the other hand , failed to explain the fact that radically different physical systems can find themselves in the identical mental state . Besides being deeply anthropocentric ( why should humans be the only thinking organisms in the universe ? ) , the identity @-@ type theory also failed to deal with accumulating evidence in the neurosciences that every single human brain is different from all the others . Hence , the impossibility of referring to common mental states in different physical systems manifests itself not only between different species but also between organisms of the same species . 
 One can solve these problems , according to Fodor , with functionalism , a hypothesis which was designed to overcome the failings of both dualism and reductionism . What is important is the function of a mental state regardless of the physical substrate which implements it . The foundation for this view lies in the principle of the multiple realizability of the mental . Under this view , for example , I and a computer can both <unk> ( " realize " ) the same functional state though we are made of completely different material stuff ( see graphic at right ) . On this basis functionalism can be classified as a form of token materialism . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Fodor has co @-@ written a book with the <unk> Massimo <unk> @-@ <unk> called What Darwin Got Wrong ( 2010 ) which describes neo @-@ Darwinists as being " distressingly uncritical " and says of Darwin 's theory of evolution that " it overestimates the contribution the environment makes in shaping the phenotype of a species and correspondingly underestimates the effects of endogenous variables . " Evolutionary biologist Jerry Coyne describes this book as " a profoundly misguided critique of natural selection " and " as biologically uninformed as it is strident . " Moral philosopher and anti @-@ scientism author Mary Midgley praises What Darwin Got Wrong as " an overdue and valuable onslaught on neo @-@ Darwinist simplicities " . The book also received positive review by mathematician and Intelligent Design Theorist William Dembski . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 A wide variety of philosophers of diverse orientations have challenged many of Fodor 's ideas . For example , the language of thought hypothesis has been accused of either falling prey to an infinite regress or of being superfluous . Specifically , Simon Blackburn suggested in an article in 1984 that since Fodor explains the learning of natural languages as a process of formation and confirmation of hypotheses in the LOT , this leaves him open to the question of why the LOT itself should not be considered as just such a language which requires yet another and more fundamental representational substrate in which to form and confirm hypotheses so that the LOT itself can be learned . If natural language learning requires some representational substrate ( the LOT ) in order for it to be learned , why shouldn 't the same be said for the LOT itself and then for the representational substrate of this representational substrate and so on , ad infinitum ? On the other hand , if such a representational substrate is not required for the LOT , then why should it be required for the learning of natural languages ? In this case , the LOT would be superfluous . Fodor , in response , argues that the LOT is unique in that it does not have to be learned via an antecedent language because it is innate . 
 In 1981 Daniel Dennett had formulated another argument against the LOT . Dennett suggested that it would seem , on the basis of the evidence of our behavior toward computers but also with regard to some of our own unconscious behavior , that explicit representation is not necessary for the explanation of propositional attitudes . During a game of chess with a computer program , we often attribute such attitudes to the computer , saying such things as " It thinks that the queen should be moved to the left " . We attribute propositional attitudes to the computer and this helps us to explain and predict its behavior in various contexts . Yet no one would suggest that the computer is actually thinking or believing somewhere inside its circuits the equivalent of the propositional attitude " I believe I can kick this guy 's butt " in Mentalese . The same is obviously true , suggests Dennett , of many of our everyday automatic behaviors such as " desiring to breathe clear air " in a stuffy environment . 
 Some linguists and philosophers of language have criticized Fodor 's self @-@ proclaimed " extreme " concept nativism . Kent Bach , for example , takes Fodor to task for his criticisms of lexical semantics and polysemy . Fodor claims that there is no lexical structure to such verbs as " keep " , " get " , " make " and " put " . He suggests that , alternatively , " keep " simply expresses the concept KEEP ( Fodor capitalizes concepts to distinguish them from properties , names or other such entities ) . If there is a straightforward one @-@ to @-@ one mapping between individual words and concepts , " keep your clothes on " , " keep your receipt " and " keep washing your hands " will all share the same concept of KEEP under Fodor 's theory . This concept presumably locks on to the unique external property of keeping . But , if this is true , then <unk> must pick out a different property in <unk> YOUR <unk> , since one can 't retain one 's clothes on or retain washing one 's hands . Fodor 's theory also has a problem explaining how the concept FAST contributes , differently , to the contents of FAST CAR , FAST <unk> , FAST TRACK , and FAST TIME . Whether or not the differing interpretations of " fast " in these sentences are specified in the semantics of English , or are the result of pragmatic inference , is a matter of debate . Fodor 's own response to this kind of criticism is expressed bluntly in Concepts : " People sometimes used to say that exist must be ambiguous because look at the difference between ' chairs exist ' and ' numbers exist ' . A familiar reply goes : the difference between the existence of chairs and the existence of numbers seems , on reflection , strikingly like the difference between numbers and chairs . Since you have the latter to explain the former , you don 't also need ' exist ' to be <unk> . " 
 Some critics find it difficult to accept Fodor 's insistence that a large , perhaps implausible , number of concepts are primitive and undefinable . For example , Fodor considers such concepts as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> to be all primitive , innate and <unk> because they all fall into the category of what he calls " lexical concepts " ( those for which our language has a single word ) . Against this view , Bach argues that the concept VIXEN is almost certainly composed out of the concepts <unk> and FOX , <unk> out of <unk> and <unk> , and so on . 
 = = Books = = 
 What Darwin Got Wrong , with Massimo <unk> @-@ <unk> , Farrar , Straus and Giroux , 2010 , ISBN 0 @-@ 374 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 LOT 2 : The Language of Thought Revisited , Oxford University Press , 2008 , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Hume Variations , Oxford University Press , 2003 , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 The <unk> Papers , with Ernie Lepore , Oxford University Press , 2002 , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 The Mind Doesn 't Work That Way : The Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology , MIT Press , 2000 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 In Critical Condition , MIT Press , 1998 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Concepts : Where Cognitive Science Went Wrong , The 1996 John Locke Lectures , Oxford University Press , 1998 , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 The Elm and the Expert : Mentalese and Its Semantics , The 1993 Jean <unk> Lectures , MIT Press , 1994 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Holism : A Consumer Update , with Ernie Lepore ( eds . ) , Grazer Philosophische Studien , Vol 46 . <unk> , Amsterdam , 1993 , ISBN 90 @-@ <unk> @-@ 713 @-@ 5 . 
 Holism : A Shopper 's Guide , with Ernie Lepore ( eds . ) , Blackwell , 1992 , ISBN 0 @-@ 631 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 A Theory of Content and Other Essays , MIT Press , 1990 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 <unk> : The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind , MIT Press , 1987 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 The Modularity of Mind : An Essay on Faculty Psychology , MIT Press , 1983 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ 56025 @-@ 9 . 
 Representations : Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of Cognitive Science , Harvard Press ( UK ) and MIT Press ( US ) , 1979 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 The Language of Thought , Harvard University Press , 1975 , ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 The Psychology of Language , with T. Bever and M. Garrett , McGraw Hill , 1974 , ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Psychological Explanation , Random House , 1968 , ISBN 0 @-@ 07 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 The Structure of Language , with Jerrold Katz ( eds . ) , Prentice Hall , 1964 , ISBN 0 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = Celebration ( Madonna song ) = 
 Celebration is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna for her third greatest hits album of the same name ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by Madonna , Paul Oakenfold and Ian Green , with additional writing from Ciaran Gribbin . The song was released digitally on July 31 , 2009 by Warner Bros. Records . Madonna collaborated with Oakenfold to develop a number of songs . Amongst all the songs developed by them , two were chosen for the greatest hits album with " Celebration " being released as the first single from it . It is a dance @-@ oriented song with influences of Madonna 's singles from the 1980s and 1990s , and consisting of a speak @-@ sing format bridge . The lyrics of the song invites one to come and join a party . 
 " Celebration " received mixed reviews from contemporary critics . It peaked at number one in Bulgaria , Finland , Israel , Italy , Slovakia and Sweden , while reaching the top five in other nations , including Canada , France , Germany , Japan and the United Kingdom where it debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart . It became Madonna 's 55th entry on the US Billboard Hot 100 , where it debuted and peaked at number 71 , and her 40th number @-@ one song on the dance chart . 
 The music video used the Benny Benassi remix of the song . It portrayed Madonna and her tour dancers solo dancing to the song . Cameo appearances were made by model Jesus Luz and in an alternative video by her daughter Lourdes . At the 2010 Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination in the Best Dance Recording category . The song was used as a closing for The MDNA Tour in which Madonna energetically danced in a glittery outfit , and at one point put on a pair of headphones and <unk> scratching records with colored cubes falling in the backdrop . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 2009 , Madonna 's representative Liz Rosenberg confirmed that Madonna wrote three new tracks for the compilation album , with Paul Oakenfold being confirmed as producer for two of the new songs . Attitude magazine reported in an interview with Oakenfold that the tracks he produced with Madonna are called " Broken ( I 'm Sorry ) " and " Celebrate " . He stated that the new music is " lyrically classic Madonna with an edgy modern sound . " The song " Celebrate " , later renamed as " Celebration " , has backing music composed by Ciaran Gribbin , Ian Green and Paul Oakenfold , with lyrics and vocal melody composed by Madonna . 
 According to Gribbin , Madonna approached Oakenfold , asking him what he was working on and whether he would be interested in sending her some material for which she could write lyrics . Oakenfold , along with Green and Gribbin had been working on new tracks for Oakenfold 's upcoming album . They sent fifteen of those tracks to Madonna . She chose " Broken " and " Celebration " from them . Then Oakenfold , Gribbin and Green developed the chord structure , arranged the backing track and added guitars , keyboards and drums . Madonna then wrote the lyrics and melody based on this backing track . 
 Warner Bros. Records announced " Celebration " as the lead single from the album . It was released to radio stations on August 3 , 2009 , with remixes having been released to dance clubs on July 24 , 2009 . A world premiere of the Paul Oakenfold 12 " Dub version was played on the Pete Tong BBC Radio 1 show on July 24 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Celebration " has been described as a sleek dance @-@ oriented track with influences of previous dance singles by Madonna from the early 90s such as , " Vogue " ( 1990 ) and " Deeper and Deeper " ( 1992 ) . It consists of a pumping , house style music in it . Paul Oakenfold described the composition as " lyrically classic Madonna with an edgy modern sound . " Influences of Europop are found in the song , but not to the extent of previous single , " Hung Up " ( 2005 ) . According to a writer from the Los Angeles Times , the song has a highly energetic synth @-@ pop groove while referencing 80s Madonna songs . The bridge is in a speak @-@ sing format , where Madonna 's voice , consisting of a little edge , declares that " I [ didn 't ] recognize you with your clothes on . " 
 " Celebration " is set in the time signature of common time with a dance beat tempo of 126 beats per minute . It is set in the key of B minor with Madonna 's voice spanning from F ♯ 3 to B4 . The song has a basic sequence of Em – F ♯ m – Bm – Bm as its chord progression . The lyrics call the listener to join in a party and celebrate . They are written in the form of an invitation , which asks one to come and join " the dance of life . " Stephen M. Deusner of Pitchfork Media explained that the song is " personality @-@ driven pop " , meaning that the lyrics and the melody becomes immaterial to the fact that Madonna is singing the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Todd Martens from the Los Angeles Times stated that " Celebration " works as a throwaway , midsummer dance pop number . However , he felt that the song had modest goals , " at least by Madonna 's standards . Even when it gets a bit risque [ ... ] silliness rules the day . She invites us ' to the dance of life , ' and coasts over the chorus . " He went on to add that the song " is an effective look back , a gliding , reassuring number that she [ Madonna ] hasn 't forgotten her beginning . But rather than instill a sense of nostalgia , everything feels a bit obligatory . The sound of an artist , hopefully , ready for the next chapter . " Michael Slezak from Entertainment Weekly called the song " unapologetically dance @-@ y " but felt " disappointed that lyrically , Madonna seems to be revisiting the ' Party ! Get on the floor ! ' theme for the umpteenth time without even the slightest bit of linguistic flair . " Chris Williams from Billboard said that " Madonna 's latest single won 't start any new trends , but it does return the singer to her dance @-@ floor roots . " It further added that " ' Celebration ' [ is ] a score for Madonna 's retro @-@ futuristic fan base and a nice bookend to her collection of chart glories . " 
 James Montogomery from MTV commented : " [ The song is ] all pulsing sirens , wobbly bass and four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor beat , with an expansive electro chorus that sounds like a truckload of Nintendo Entertainment Systems exploding in unison ( only sexier ) . " <unk> McAlpine from BBC gave the song three out five stars and said : " I can 't be the only person in the world who is slightly disappointed that this song isn 't a jaunty ' 80 syn @-@ disco rave up , in which Madge skips around in a big pink wig , like she used to in the olden days . " He went on to add that " Celebration " is a decent dance track for Madonna to play on her tours . Stephen M. Deusner of Pitchfork Media complimented the song , calling it " personality @-@ driven pop " in which Madonna has never sounded more convincing . Deusner added that the track sounds like " it 's conjuring several of Madonna 's younger selves " in its modest goal to just make people move . Sarah Crompton from The Daily Telegraph said that the song is infinitely forgettable . Popjustice named the song one of the best 100 singles of 2009 . Louis Virtel of The Backlot included the song at number sixty @-@ five on his list of " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs , " referring to the track as a " rollicking dance jam " that is a " perfect companion piece to [ Madonna 's ] other testament to celebration , Holiday . ” At the 52nd Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination in the Best Dance Recording category . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Celebration " debuted and peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 71 on the issue dated August 22 , 2009 . The song became Madonna 's 55th entry on the chart . It debuted on the Hot Dance Club Songs and Hot Dance Airplay charts at numbers 29 and seven , respectively . On the issue of September 26 , 2009 , " Celebration " became Madonna 's 40th number @-@ one song on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , the most for an artist . The song also debuted on the Adult Pop Songs chart at number 36 . " Celebration " has sold 192 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States as of April 2010 . In Canada , the song debuted at number 56 on the Canadian Hot 100 and reached a peak of five the next week , becoming the week 's airplay gainer . 
 It also debuted at 48 in Spain and made a top @-@ five debut at three in Finland . The next week , the song reached the top of the chart in Finland , where it remained for six non @-@ consecutive weeks , and was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry . Other debuts were in Ireland at 33 , and 31 in Sweden where it jumped to number @-@ one the next week . On August 30 , 2009 , " Celebration " debuted at number 40 on the Australian Singles Chart . The song also debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number three on the issue dated September 20 , 2009 , becoming her 60th top ten single . It also became the first ever number one in the Scottish singles chart , staying at the top spot for 2 weeks there . In Italy , the song debuted at the top of the chart and was certified platinum by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) for shipment of 60 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The song peaked at number four on the Danish Singles Chart and was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the single . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On Madonna 's official website , it was reported that a music video was filmed in Milan , Italy , where " die @-@ hard fans " showed up on July 18 , 2009 for the filming of segments showcasing fans dancing and " being themselves . " A similar shoot took place later in Barcelona . The video was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , who worked with Madonna in her videos for " Ray of Light " , " Music " , " American Life " and " Jump " . The Guardian reported that Madonna 's daughter Lourdes appeared in the video . Madonna 's official website , announced the premiere of the video to be on September 1 , 2009 . It was released simultaneously on music channels worldwide , and on iTunes . The video was available for free download on iTunes until Thursday , when it then went up to purchase only . It was made as free download , so that buyers are made aware of the pre @-@ order details of the Celebration album . 
 The music video was filmed in Milan , Italy between the dates of the 2009 leg of her Sticky & Sweet Tour . The concept of the video is in similarity to the title of the song ; celebration of Madonna 's career . According to MTV , the video is a throwback to Madonna 's Erotica era and encompasses a dark music image . The Benny Benassi remix of the song is used in the video . It starts with Madonna asking the line " Haven 't I seen you somewhere before ? " . The music starts and the scenes cut between Madonna and her dancers start dancing to the music of the song . Madonna wears a crystal embossed , shouldered Balmain dress with knee @-@ high Christian Louboutin boots . While she is present in almost every frame of the camera , she does not perform choreographed dance moves . Her dance is mostly confined to casual maneuvers . The dancers on the other hand , perform choreographed moves as a solo act . As the song progresses , more dancers are shown and they ultimately reach a club . The DJ in the club is portrayed by model Jesus Luz . Madonna indulges in sensual poses with him and removes his clothes in an attempt to recognize him , as the line " I guess I don 't recognize you with your clothes on " is played . The two of them brush their lips together , and Madonna moves away to the dance floor again . Lourdes makes an appearance near the end of the video . She appears in an eighties styled , polka @-@ dotted leotard and pants , and does a back arch on the ground . Madonna is then shown on the ground on all fours , or dancing while grabbing her groin . Both Madonna 's and her dancer 's moves are edited to appear in fast forward . Hip hop styled dancing is showcased towards the end of the video . The end shot of the video portrays Madonna sliding down on the ground . Teaser trailers for the video , show Oakenfold dancing to the song , but his scenes are not included in the final version . 
 Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone commented that " the Rock and Roll Hall of Famer [ Madonna ] prov [ es ] her dance moves are still razor @-@ sharp as she turns 51 . " James Montogomery from MTV complemented Madonna 's dance moves in the video , and said : " She is 51 , twice divorced , a mother of four and she is ( quite rightfully ) unashamed by any of this . Sexual politics , anyone ? " Olivia Smith of the New York Daily News commented that " Madge has her family – her daughter and her lover – at her latest party , in which she 's still at the hotblooded center of her life . " She also noted that the video exemplifies the fact that Madonna is an artist with a long musical past . However , the tone of the video explains that Madonna is ready to leave that past and move forward . According to Smith , although Madonna has toned down her appearance , " the 51 @-@ year @-@ old is still her pelvis @-@ swirling overtly sexual self in her new video . " 
 On September 17 , 2009 , an alternate edit of the music video ( " fan version " ) was released via Madonna 's MySpace . The video contains footage filmed in Barcelona , Spain and Milan , Italy and features fans , as well as cameo appearances by Madonna 's daughter Lourdes Leon , Paul Oakenfold , and the director himself . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Writer – Madonna , Paul Oakenfold , Ciaran Gribbin and Ian Green 
 Producer – Madonna and Paul Oakenfold 
 Additional productions – Ian Green 
 Background vocals – Ian Green 
 Record mixing – Demacio " Demo " Castellon for the Demolition Crew 
 Pro Tools – Ron Taylor 
 Assistant engineer – Nick Banns 
 Mastering – Chris Gehringer at Sterling Sound 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Utagawa Toyoharu = 
 Utagawa Toyoharu ( <unk> <unk> , c . 1735 – 1814 ) was a Japanese artist in the ukiyo @-@ e genre , known as the founder of the Utagawa school and for his uki @-@ e pictures that incorporated Western @-@ style geometrical perspective to create a sense of depth . 
 Born in <unk> in Tajima Province , Toyoharu first studied art in Kyoto , then in Edo ( modern Tokyo ) , where from 1768 he began to produce designs for ukiyo @-@ e woodblock prints . He soon became known for his uki @-@ e " floating pictures " of landscapes and famous sites , as well as copies of Western and Chinese perspective prints . Though his were not the first perspective prints in ukiyo @-@ e , they were the first to appear as full @-@ colour nishiki @-@ e , and they demonstrate a much greater mastery of perspective techniques than the works of his predecessors . Toyoharu was the first to make the landscape a subject of ukiyo @-@ e art , rather than just a background to figures and events . By the 1780s he had turned primarily to painting . The Utagawa school of art grew to dominate ukiyo @-@ e in the 19th century with artists such as Utamaro , Hiroshige , and Kuniyoshi . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Utagawa Toyoharu was born c . 1735 in <unk> in Tajima Province . He studied in Kyoto under <unk> <unk> of the Kanō school of painting . It may have been around 1763 that he moved to Edo ( modern Tokyo ) , where he studied under Toriyama Sekien . The Toyo ( <unk> ) in the art name Toyoharu ( <unk> ) is said to have come from Sekien 's personal name <unk> ( <unk> ) . Some sources hold he also studied under Ishikawa Toyonobu and Nishimura <unk> . Other art names Toyoharu went under include <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) . Tradition holds that the name Utagawa derives from <unk> @-@ chō , where Toyoharu lived in in the Shiba district in Edo . His common name was <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , and he also used the personal names Masaki ( <unk> ) and Shin <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Toyoharu 's work began to appear about 1768 . His earliest work includes woodblock prints in a refined , delicate style of beauties and actors . Soon he began to produce uki @-@ e " floating picture " perspective prints , a genre in which Toyoharu applied Western @-@ style one @-@ point perspective to create a realistic sense of depth . Most were of famous sites , including theatres , temples , and <unk> . Toyoharu 's were not the first uki @-@ e — Okumura Masanobu had made such works since the early 1740s , and claimed the genre 's origin for himself . Toyoharu 's were the first uki @-@ e in the full @-@ colour nishiki @-@ e genre that had developed in the 1760s . Several of his prints were based on imported prints from the West or China . 
 From the 1780s Toyoharu appears to have dedicated himself to painting , and also produced kabuki programs and billboards . He headed the painters involved in the restoration of <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> in 1796 . He died in 1814 and was buried in <unk> Temple in Ikebukuro under the Buddhist posthumous name Utagawa @-@ in Toyoharu <unk> Shinji ( <unk> ) . 
 Western influence on Toyoharu 
 = = Style = = 
 Toyoharu 's works have a gentle , calm , and unpretentious touch , and display the influence of ukiyo @-@ e masters such as Ishikawa Toyonobu and Suzuki Harunobu . Harunobu pioneered the full @-@ colour nishiki @-@ e print and was particularly popular and influential in the 1760s , when Toyoharu first began his career . 
 Toyoharu <unk> a number of <unk> , graceful bijin @-@ ga portraits of beauties in <unk> @-@ e pillar prints . Only about fifteen examples of his bijin @-@ ga are known , almost all from his earliest period . One of the better @-@ known examples of Toyoharu 's work in this style is a four @-@ sheet set depicting the Chinese ideal of the Four Arts . Toyoharu produced a small number of yakusha @-@ e actor prints that , in contrast to the works of the leading Katsukawa school , are executed in the learned style of an <unk> <unk> . 
 While Toyoharu trained in Kyoto he may have been exposed to the works of Maruyama <unk> , whose popular <unk> @-@ e were pictures in one @-@ point perspective meant to be viewed in a special box in the manner of the French <unk> d <unk> . Toyoharu may also have seen the Chinese <unk> d <unk> prints made in the 1750s that inspired <unk> 's work . 
 Early in his career , Toyoharu began producing the uki @-@ e for which he is best remembered . Books on geometrical perspective translated from Dutch and Chinese sources appeared in the 1730s , and soon after , ukiyo @-@ e prints displaying these techniques appeared first in the works of Torii <unk> and then of Okumura Masanobu . These early examples were inconsistent in their application of perspective techniques , and the results can be unconvincing ; Toyoharu 's were much more dextrous , though not strict — he manipulated it to allow the representation of figures and objects that otherwise would have been obscured . Toyoharu 's works helped pioneer the landscape as an ukiyo @-@ e subject , rather than merely a background for human figures or events , as in Masanobu 's works . Toyoharu 's earliest uki @-@ e cannot be reliably dated , but are assumed to have appeared before 1772 : early in that year the Great <unk> Fire in Edo destroyed the <unk> @-@ mon gate in Ueno , the subject of Toyoharu 's Famous Views of Edo : <unk> @-@ mon in Ueno . 
 Several of Toyoharu 's prints were imitations of imported prints of famed European locations , some of which were Western and others Chinese imitations of Western prints . The titles were often fictional : The Bell which <unk> for Ten Thousand Leagues in the Dutch Port of <unk> is an imitation of a print of the Grand Canal of Venice from 1742 by Antonio Visentini , itself based on a painting by Canaletto . Toyoharu titled another A Perspective View of French Churches in Holland , though he based it on a print of the Roman Forum . Toyoharu took licence with other details of foreign lands , such as having the Dutch swim in their canals . Japanese and Chinese mythology were also frequent subjects in Toyoharu 's uki @-@ e prints , the foreign perspective technique giving such prints an exotic feel . 
 In his <unk> paintings the influence of Toyonobu can seem strong , but in his seals on these paintings Toyoharu proclaims himself a pupil of Sekien . His efforts contributed to the development of the <unk> school . 
 ' ' The Four Arts ' ' by Toyoharu 
 Perspective prints by Toyoharu 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The popularity of Toyoharu 's work peaked in the 1770s . By the 19th century , Western @-@ style perspective techniques had ceased to be a novelty and had been absorbed into Japanese artistic culture , deployed by such artists as Hokusai and Hiroshige , two artists best remembered for their landscapes , a genre Toyoharu pioneered . 
 The Utagawa school that Toyoharu founded was to become one of the most influential , and produced works in a far greater variety of genres than any other school . His students included Toyokuni and Toyohiro ; Toyohiro worked in the style of his master , while Toyokuni , who headed the school from 1814 , became a prominent and prolific producer of yakusha @-@ e prints of kabuki actors . Other well @-@ known members of the school were Utamaro , Hiroshige , Kuniyoshi , and Kunisada . Though Japanese art schools , such as the Katsukawa in ukiyo @-@ e and the Kanō in painting , emphasized a uniformity of style , a general style in the Utagawa school is not easy to recognize aside from a concern with realism and facial <unk> . The school dominated ukiyo @-@ e production by the mid @-@ 19th century , and most of the artists — such as Kobayashi Kiyochika — who documented the modernization of Japan during the Meiji period during ukiyo @-@ e 's declining years belonged to the Utagawa school . 
 The Torii school lasted longer , but the Utagawa school had more adherents . It fostered closer master – student relations and more systematized training than in other schools . Excepting a few prominent examples , such as Hiroshige or Kuniyoshi , the later generations of artists tended to lack stylistic diversity , and their work has become emblematic of ukiyo @-@ e 's decline in the 19th century . 
 Toyoharu also taught painting . His most prominent student was Sakai <unk> . 
 As of 2014 , studies into Toyoharu 's work have not been carried out in depth . Cataloguing and analyzing his work and his and his publishers ' seals was still in its infancy . 
 Members of the Utagawa school 
 Paintings by Toyoharu and his followers 
 = Æsir – Vanir War = 
 In Norse mythology , the Æsir – Vanir War was a conflict between two groups of deities that ultimately resulted in the unification of the Æsir and the Vanir into a single pantheon . The war is an important event in Norse mythology , and the implications for the potential historicity surrounding accounts of the war are a matter of scholarly debate and discourse . 
 Fragmented information about the war appears in surviving sources , including Völuspá , a poem collected in the Poetic Edda in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources ; in the book Skáldskaparmál in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson ; and in euhemerized form in the Ynglinga saga from Heimskringla , also written by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 The following attestations provide information about the war : 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In two stanzas of Völuspá , the war is recounted by a völva ( who refers to herself here in the third person ) while the god Óðinn questions her . In the first of the two stanzas , the völva says that she remembers the first war in the world , when Gullveig was stabbed with spears and then burnt three times in one of Óðinn 's halls , yet that Gullveig was reborn three times . In the later stanza , the völva says that they called Gullveig Heiðr ( meaning " Bright One " or potentially " Gleaming " or " Honor " ) whenever she came to houses , that she was a wise völva , and that she cast spells . Heiðr performed seiðr where she could , did so in a trance , and was " always the favorite of wicked women . " 
 In a later stanza , the völva then tells Óðinn that all the powers went to the judgment seats and discussed whether the Æsir should pay a fine or if all of the gods should instead have tribute . Further in the poem , a stanza provides the last of the völva 's account of the events surrounding the war . She says : 
 Odin shot a spear , hurled it over the host ; 
 that was still the first war in the world , 
 the defense wall was broken of the Æsir 's stronghold ; 
 the Vanir , indomitable , were trampling the plain . 
 These stanzas are unclear , particularly the second half of stanza 23 , but the battle appears to have been precipitated by the entry of Gullveig / Heiðr among the Æsir . Stanza 23 relates a difficulty in reaching a truce which led to the all @-@ out war described in stanza 24 . However , the reference to " all the gods " could , in Lindow 's view , indicate a movement towards a community involving both the Æsir and the Vanir . Ursula <unk> points to extensive wordplay on all the meanings of the noun <unk> and the adjective <unk> to signal the core issue of whether the Æsir will surrender their monopoly on human tribute and join with the " all @-@ too @-@ popular " Vanir ; as their only alternative , they attack again . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál ( chapter 57 ) , the god Bragi explains the origin of poetry . Bragi says that it originated in the Æsir – Vanir War , when during the peace conference the Æsir and the Vanir formed a truce by all spitting into a vat . When they left , the gods decided that it should not be poured out , but rather kept as a symbol of their peace , and so from the contents made a man , Kvasir . Kvasir is later murdered , and from his blood is made the Mead of Poetry . 
 = = = Heimskringla = = = 
 In chapter 4 of Heimskringla , Snorri presents a euhemerized account of the war . Snorri states that Óðinn led a great army from Asia ( " <unk> " ) to attack the people of " Vanaland . " However , according to Snorri , the people of Vanaland were well prepared for the invasion ; they defended their land so well that victory was up for grabs from both sides , and both sides produced immense damage and ravaged the lands of one another . 
 Snorri states that the two sides eventually tired of the war and both agreed to meet to establish a truce . Snorri continues that the two sides did so and exchanged hostages . Vanaland are described as having sent to Asaland their best men : Njörðr — described as wealthy — and his son Freyr in exchange for Asaland 's Hœnir — described here as large , handsome , and thought of by the people of Vanaland well suited to be a chieftain . Additionally , Asaland sends Mímir — a man of great understanding — in exchange for Kvasir , who Snorri describes as the wisest man of Vanaland . 
 Snorri continues that , upon arrival in Vanaland , Hœnir was immediately made chief and Mímir often gave him good counsel . However , when Hœnir was at meetings and at the Thing without Mímir by his side , he would always answer the same way : " Let others decide . " Subsequently , the Vanaland folk suspected they had been cheated in the exchange by the Asaland folk , so they seized Mímir and beheaded him and sent the head to Asaland . Óðinn took the head of Mímir , embalmed it with herbs so that it would not rot , and spoke charms over it , which gave it the power to speak to him and reveal to him secrets . 
 According to Snorri , Óðinn then appointed Njörðr and Freyr to be priests of sacrificial customs and they became <unk> ( " Gods " ) of the people of Asaland . Freyja , described as daughter of Njörðr , was the priestess of these sacrifices , and here she is described as introducing seiðr to Asaland . 
 = = Theories = = 
 A number of theories surround the Æsir – Vanir War : 
 = = = Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European basis = = = 
 As the Vanir are often considered fertility gods , the Æsir – Vanir War has been proposed as a reflection of the invasion of local fertility cults somewhere in regions inhabited by the Germanic peoples by a more aggressive , warlike cult . This has been proposed as an analogy of the invasion of the Indo @-@ Europeans . Georges Dumézil stated that the war need not necessarily be understood in terms of historicity more than any other myth however . 
 Scholars have cited parallels between the Æsir – Vanir War , The Rape of the Sabine Women from Roman mythology , and the Mahabharata from Hindu mythology , providing support for a Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European " war of the functions . " Explaining these parallels , J. P. Mallory states : 
 Basically , the parallels concern the presence of first- ( magico @-@ juridical ) and second- ( warrior ) function representatives on the victorious side of a war that ultimately subdues and incorporates third function characters , for example , the Sabine women or the Norse Vanir . Indeed , the Iliad itself has also been examined in a similar light . The ultimate structure of the myth , then , is that the three estates of Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European society were fused only after a war between the first two against the third . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Many scholars consider the figures of Gullveig / Heiðr and Freyja the same . These conclusions have been made through comparisons between the figure of Gullveig / Heiðr 's use of seiðr in Völuspá and the mention of Freyja introducing seiðr to the Æsir from the Vanir in Heimskringla . This is at times taken further that their corruption of the Æsir led to the Æsir – Vanir War . 
 Lindow states that he feels that even if the two are not identical , the various accounts of the war seem to share the idea of a disruptive entry of persons into a people . Lindow compares the appearance of Gullveig / Heiðr into the Æsir to that of Hœnir and Mímir 's disruption amongst the Vanir in Heimskringla . Lindow further states that all three accounts share the notion of acquisition of tools for the conquest of wisdom ; the practice of seiðr in two accounts and the head of Mímir in one . 
 = Pokémon Colosseum = 
 Pokémon Colosseum ( <unk> , Pokemon <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Genius Sonority and published by Nintendo as part of the Pokémon series . It was released exclusively for the GameCube on November 21 , 2003 , in Japan ; March 22 , 2004 , in North America ; and May 14 , 2004 , in Europe . Unlike previous titles , the game does not feature random encounters with Pokémon ; instead , the player can steal ( " snag " ) the Pokémon of other Pokémon Trainers . The game also features several battle modes for single @-@ player and multiplayer gameplay . 
 The game is set in the <unk> region of Orre . The player protagonist is Wes , a former member of Team Snagem . Throughout the game , the player rescues " Shadow Pokémon " — Pokémon who have had their hearts darkened by Cipher , an antagonistic organization — via snagging . Rui , a non @-@ player girl , serves as Wes 's sidekick and identifies Shadow Pokémon . 
 Pokémon Colosseum was exhibited at E3 2003 . North American pre @-@ orders were packaged with a bonus disc that allows the player to download the Pokémon Jirachi . Upon release , the game was generally well @-@ received , with praise directed at its graphics and music . It was a commercial success , with 1 @.@ 5 million copies sold in the United States and 656 @,@ 270 in Japan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
