 Football League Trophy , Runners @-@ up : 2 
 1989 – 90 , 2006 – 07 
 Football League Third Division South Cup : 1 
 1934 – 35 
 Watney Cup : 1 
 1972 
 Gloucestershire Cup : 32 
 1888 – 89 , 1902 – 03 , 1904 – 05 , 1913 – 14 , 1924 – 25 , 1927 – 28 , 1934 – 35 , 1935 – 36 , 1937 – 38 , 1947 – 48 , 1948 – 49 , 1950 – 51 , 1953 – 54 , 1954 – 55 , 1955 – 56 , 1958 – 59 , 1962 – 63 , 1963 – 64 , 1964 – 65 , 1965 – 66 , 1967 – 68 , 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 , 1981 – 82 , 1982 – 83 , 1983 – 84 , 1984 – 85 , 1988 – 89 , 1989 – 90 , 1992 – 93 , 1993 – 94 , 1994 – 95 
 = = Records = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Biggest League Win : 7 – 0 ( v Brighton & Hove Albion , Division Three ( South ) , 29 November 1952 ) 
 7 – 0 ( v Swansea City , Division Two , 2 October 1954 ) 
 7 – 0 ( v Shrewsbury Town , Division Three , 21 March 1964 ) 
 7 – 0 ( v Alfreton Town , Conference Premier , 25 April 2015 ) 
 Biggest Cup Win : 
 Competition proper : 6 – 0 ( v Merthyr Tydfil , FA Cup Round 1 , 14 November 1987 ) 
 Qualifying : 15 – 1 ( v Weymouth , FA Cup Third Qualifying Round , 17 November 1900 ) 
 Biggest League Defeat : 0 – 12 ( v Luton Town , Division Three South , 13 April 1936 ) 
 = = = Players = = = 
 Most League Appearances : 546 – Stuart Taylor , 1966 – 1980 
 Most Goals for club : 242 – Geoff Bradford , 1949 – 1964 
 Most Goals in a season : 33 – Geoff Bradford , 1952 – 53 
 Highest Transfer Fee Paid : £ 375 @,@ 000 – Andy Tillson from Queens Park Rangers , November 1992 
 Highest Transfer Fee Received : £ 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 – Barry Hayles to Fulham , November 1998 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Record Home Attendance : 38 @,@ 472 ( v Preston North End , FA Cup , 30 January 1960 
 = Natural History ( Pliny ) = 
 The Natural History ( Latin : Naturalis Historia ) is an early encyclopedia in Latin by Pliny the Elder , who died in 79 AD . 
 It is one of the largest single works to have survived from the Roman Empire to the modern day and purports to cover all ancient knowledge . The work 's subject area is thus not limited to what is today understood by natural history ; Pliny himself defines his scope as " the natural world , or life " . 
 The work is divided into 37 books , organised into ten volumes . These cover topics including astronomy , mathematics , geography , ethnography , anthropology , human physiology , zoology , botany , agriculture , horticulture , pharmacology , mining , mineralogy , sculpture , painting , and precious stones . 
 The Natural History became a model for later encyclopedias and scholarly works as a result of its breadth of subject matter , its referencing of original authors , and its index . The work is dedicated to the emperor Titus , son of Pliny 's close friend , the emperor Vespasian , in the first year of Titus 's reign . It is the only work by Pliny to have survived and the last that he published . He began it in 77 , and had not made a final revision at the time of his death during the AD 79 eruption of Vesuvius . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Pliny 's Natural History was written alongside other substantial works ( which have since been lost ) . Pliny ( 23 – 79 ) combined his scholarly activities with a busy career as an imperial administrator for the emperor Vespasian . Much of his writing was done at night ; daytime hours were spent working for the emperor , as he explains in the dedicatory preface addressed to Vespasian 's elder son , the future emperor Titus , with whom he had served in the army . As for the nocturnal hours spent writing , these were seen , not as a loss of sleep , but as an addition to life : for , as he states in the preface , Vita <unk> est , " to be alive is to be watchful " , in a military metaphor of a sentry keeping watch in the night . Pliny claims to be the only Roman ever to have undertaken such a work , in his prayer for the blessing of the universal mother : 
 Hail to thee , Nature , thou parent of all things ! and do thou deign to show thy favour unto me , who , alone of all the citizens of Rome , have , in thy every department , thus made known thy praise . 
 The Natural History is encyclopaedic in scope , but its format is unlike a modern encyclopaedia . A modern reader will not find dedicated articles on the natural history of the chameleon , the medical uses of cabbage , or the effects of goat 's blood on diamond . The work does however have structure : Pliny uses Aristotle 's division of nature ( animal , vegetable , mineral ) to recreate the natural world in literary form . Rather than presenting compartmentalised , stand @-@ alone entries arranged alphabetically , Pliny 's ordered natural landscape is a coherent whole , offering the reader a guided tour : " a brief excursion under our direction among the whole of the works of nature ... " The work is unified but varied : " My subject is the world of nature ... or in other words , life , " he tells Titus . 
 Nature for Pliny was divine , a pantheistic concept inspired by the Stoic philosophy which underlies much of his thought . But the deity in question was a goddess whose main purpose was to serve the human race : " nature , that is life " is human life in a natural landscape . After an initial survey of cosmology and geography , Pliny starts his treatment of animals with the human race , " for whose sake great Nature appears to have created all other things " . This teleological view of nature was common in antiquity and is crucial to the understanding of the Natural History . The components of nature are not just described in and for themselves , but also with a view to their role in human life . Pliny devotes a number of the books to plants , with a focus on their medicinal value ; the books on minerals include descriptions of their uses in architecture , sculpture , painting and jewellery . If Pliny 's premise seems remote from modern ecological theories , the result is a compendium of an entire culture . 
 Pliny 's work frequently reflects Rome 's imperial expansion which brought new and exciting things to the capital : exotic eastern spices , strange animals to be put on display or herded into the arena , even the alleged phoenix sent to the emperor Claudius in AD 47 – although , as Pliny admits , this was generally acknowledged to be a fake . Pliny repeated Aristotle 's maxim that Africa was always producing something new . Nature 's variety and versatility were claimed to be infinite : " When I have observed nature she has always induced me to deem no statement about her incredible . " This led Pliny to recount rumours of strange peoples on the edges of the world . These monstrous races – the <unk> or Dog @-@ Heads , the <unk> , whose single foot could act as a sunshade , the <unk> <unk> , who lived on scents – were not strictly new . They had been mentioned by the Greek historian Herodotus in the 5th century BC , but Pliny made them better known . 
 " As full of variety as nature itself " , stated Pliny 's nephew , Pliny the Younger , and this verdict largely explains the appeal of the Natural History since Pliny 's death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79 . Pliny had gone to investigate the strange cloud – " shaped like an umbrella pine " , according to his nephew – rising from the mountain . 
 The Natural History was one of the first ancient European texts to be printed , in Venice in 1469 . Philemon Holland 's English translation of 1605 has influenced literature ever since . 
 = = Table of contents = = 
 The Natural History consists of 37 books . Pliny devised his own table of contents . The table below is a summary based on modern names for topics . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Purpose = = = 
 Pliny 's purpose in writing the Natural History was to cover all learning and art so far as they are connected with nature or draw their materials from nature . He says that 
 My subject is a barren one – the world of nature , or in other words life ; and that subject in its least elevated department , and employing either rustic terms or foreign , nay barbarian words that actually have to be introduced with an apology . Moreover , the path is not a beaten highway of authorship , nor one in which the mind is eager to range : there is not one of us who has made the same venture , nor yet one Roman who has tackled single @-@ handed all departments of the subject . 
 = = = Working method = = = 
 His nephew , Pliny the Younger , described the method that Pliny used to write the Natural History : 
 Does it surprise you that a busy man found time to finish so many volumes , many of which deal with such minute details ? ... He used to begin to study at night on the Festival of Vulcan , not for luck but from his love of study , long before dawn ; in winter he would commence at the seventh hour ... He could sleep at call , and it would come upon him and leave him in the middle of his work . Before daybreak he would go to Vespasian – for he too was a night @-@ worker – and then set about his official duties . On his return home he would again give to study any time that he had free . Often in summer after taking a meal , which with him , as in the old days , was always a simple and light one , he would lie in the sun if he had any time to spare , and a book would be read aloud , from which he would take notes and extracts . 
 Pliny the Younger told the following anecdote illustrating his uncle 's enthusiasm for study : 
 After dinner a book would be read aloud , and he would take notes in a cursory way . I remember that one of his friends , when the reader pronounced a word wrongly , checked him and made him read it again , and my uncle said to him , " Did you not catch the meaning ? " When his friend said " yes , " he remarked , " Why then did you make him turn back ? We have lost more than ten lines through your interruption . " So jealous was he of every moment lost . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Pliny 's writing style emulates that of Seneca . It aims less at clarity and vividness than at epigrammatic point . It contains many antitheses , questions , exclamations , tropes , metaphors , and other mannerisms of the Silver Age . His sentence structure is often loose and straggling . There is heavy use of the ablative absolute , and ablative phrases are often appended in a kind of vague " apposition " to express the author 's own opinion of an immediately previous statement , e.g. , 
 dixit ( Apelles ) ... uno se <unk> , quod <unk> de tabula <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 This might be translated " In one thing Apelles stood out , namely , knowing when he had put enough work into a painting . A salutary warning : too much effort can be counterproductive . " The whole of the second sentence represents the ablative phrase starting with " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = First publication = = = 
 Pliny wrote the first ten books in AD 77 , and was engaged on revising the rest during the two remaining years of his life . The work was probably published with little revision by the author 's nephew Pliny the Younger , who , when telling the story of a tame dolphin and describing the floating islands of the <unk> Lake thirty years later , has apparently forgotten that both are to be found in his uncle 's work . He describes the Naturalis Historia as a Naturae historia and characterises it as a " work that is learned and full of matter , and as varied as nature herself . " 
 The absence of the author 's final revision may explain many errors , including why the text is as John Healy writes " disjointed , discontinuous and not in a logical order " ; and as early as 1350 , Petrarch complained about the corrupt state of the text , referring to copying errors made between the ninth and eleventh centuries . 
 = = = Manuscripts = = = 
 About the middle of the 3rd century , an abstract of the geographical portions of Pliny 's work was produced by Solinus . Early in the 8th century , Bede , who admired Pliny 's work , had access to a partial manuscript which he used in his " De Rerum Natura " , especially the sections on meteorology and gems . However , Bede updated and corrected Pliny on the tides . 
 There are about 200 extant manuscripts , but the best of the more ancient manuscripts , that at Bamberg State Library , contains only books XXXII – XXXVII . In 1141 Robert of Cricklade wrote the Defloratio Historiae Naturalis Plinii Secundi consisting of nine books of selections taken from an ancient manuscript . 
 = = = Printed copies = = = 
 The work was one of the first classical manuscripts to be printed , at Venice in 1469 by Johann and <unk> of Speyer , but J.F. Healy described the translation as " distinctly imperfect " . A copy printed in 1472 by Nicolas Jenson of Venice is held in the library at Wells Cathedral . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 Philemon Holland made an influential translation of much of the work into English in 1601 . John Bostock and H. T. Riley made a complete translation in 1855 . 
 = = Topics = = 
 The Natural History is generally divided into the organic plants and animals and the inorganic matter , although there are frequent digressions in each section . The encyclopedia also notes the uses made of all of these by the Romans . Its description of metals and minerals is valued for its detail in the history of science , being the most extensive compilation still available from the ancient world . 
 Book I serves as Pliny 's preface , explaining his approach and providing a table of contents . 
 = = = Astronomy = = = 
 The first topic covered is Astronomy , in Book II . Pliny starts with the known universe , roundly criticising attempts at cosmology as madness , including the view that there are countless other worlds than the Earth . He doubts the four ( Aristotelian ) elements , fire , earth , air and water , but records the seven " planets " including the sun and moon . The earth is a sphere , suspended in the middle of space . He considers it a weakness to try to find the shape and form of God , or to suppose that such a being would care about human affairs . He mentions eclipses , but considers Hipparchus 's almanac grandiose for seeming to know how Nature works . He cites Posidonius 's estimate that the moon is 230 @,@ 000 miles away . He describes comets , noting that only Aristotle has recorded seeing more than one at once . 
 Book II continues with natural meteorological events lower in the sky , including the winds , weather , whirlwinds , lightning , and rainbows . He returns to astronomical facts such as the effect of longitude on time of sunrise and sunset , the variation of the sun 's elevation with latitude ( affecting <unk> by sundials ) , and the variation of day length with latitude . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 In Books III to VI , Pliny moves to the Earth itself . In Book III he covers the geography of Spain and Italy ; Book IV covers Europe including Britain ; Book V looks at Africa and Asia , while Book VI looks eastwards to the Black Sea , India and the Far East . 
 = = = Anthropology = = = 
 Book VII discusses the human race , covering anthropology and ethnography , aspects of human physiology and assorted matters such as the greatness of Julius Caesar , outstanding people such as Hippocrates and <unk> , happiness and fortune . 
 = = = Zoology = = = 
 Zoology is discussed in Books VIII to XI . The encyclopedia mentions different sources of purple dye , particularly the murex snail , the highly prized source of Tyrian purple . It describes the elephant and hippopotamus in detail , as well as the value and origin of the pearl and the invention of fish farming and oyster farming . The keeping of aquariums was a popular pastime of the rich , and Pliny provides anecdotes of the problems of owners becoming too closely attached to their fish . 
 Pliny correctly identifies the origin of amber as the fossilised resin of pine trees . Evidence cited includes the fact that some samples exhibit encapsulated insects , a feature readily explained by the presence of a viscous resin . Pliny refers to the way in which it exerts a charge when rubbed , a property well known to Theophrastus . He devotes considerable space to bees , which he admires for their industry , organisation , and honey , discussing the significance of the queen bee and the use of smoke by beekeepers at the hive to collect honeycomb . He praises the song of the nightingale . 
 = = = Botany = = = 
 Botany is handled in Books XII to XVIII , with Theophrastus as one of Pliny 's sources . The manufacture of papyrus and the various grades of papyrus available to Romans are described . Different types of trees and the properties of their wood are explained in Books XII to XIII . The vine , viticulture and varieties of grape are discussed in Book XIV , while Book XV covers the olive tree in detail , followed by other trees including the apple and pear , fig , cherry , myrtle and laurel , among others . 
 Pliny gives special attention to spices , such as pepper , ginger , and cane sugar . He mentions different varieties of pepper , whose values are comparable with that of gold and silver , while sugar is noted only for its medicinal value . 
 He is critical of perfumes : " Perfumes are the most pointless of luxuries , for pearls and jewels are at least passed on to one 's heirs , and clothes last for a time , but perfumes lose their fragrance and perish as soon as they are used . " He gives a summary of their ingredients , such as <unk> of roses , which he says is the most widely used base . Other substances added include myrrh , cinnamon , and balsam gum . 
 = = = Drugs , medicine and magic = = = 
 A major section of the Natural History , Books XX to XXIX , discusses matters related to medicine , especially plants that yield useful drugs . Pliny lists over 900 drugs , compared to 600 in Dioscorides 's De Materia Medica , 550 in Theophrastus , and 650 in Galen . The poppy and opium are mentioned ; Pliny notes that opium induces sleep and can be fatal . Diseases and their treatment are covered in book XXVI . 
 Pliny addresses magic in Book XXX . He is critical of the Magi , attacking astrology , and suggesting that magic originated in medicine , creeping in by pretending to offer health . He names Zoroaster of Ancient Persia as the source of magical ideas . He states that Pythagoras , Empedocles , Democritus and Plato all travelled abroad to learn magic , remarking that it was surprising anyone accepted the doctrines they brought back , and that medicine ( of Hippocrates ) and magic ( of Democritus ) should have flourished simultaneously at the time of the Peloponnesian War . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 The methods used to cultivate crops are described in Book XVIII . He praises Cato the Elder and his work De Agri Cultura , which he uses as a primary source . Pliny 's work includes discussion of all known cultivated crops and vegetables , as well as herbs and remedies derived from them . He describes machines used in cultivation and processing the crops . For example , he describes a simple mechanical reaper that cut the ears of wheat and barley without the straw and was pushed by oxen ( Book XVIII , chapter 72 ) . It is depicted on a bas @-@ relief found at Trier from the later Roman period . He also describes how grain is ground using a pestle , a hand @-@ mill , or a mill driven by water wheels , as found in Roman water mills across the Empire . 
 = = = Metallurgy = = = 
 Pliny extensively discusses metals starting with gold and silver ( Book XXXIII ) , and then the base metals copper , mercury , lead , tin and iron , as well as their many alloys such as electrum , bronze , pewter , and steel ( Book XXXIV ) . 
 He is critical of greed for gold , such as the absurdity of using the metal for coins in the early Republic . He gives examples of the way rulers proclaimed their prowess by exhibiting gold looted from their campaigns , such as that by Claudius after conquering Britain , and tells the stories of Midas and Croesus . He discusses why gold is unique in its malleability and ductility , far greater than any other metal . The examples given are its ability to be beaten into fine foil with just one ounce , producing 750 leaves four inches square . Fine gold wire can be woven into cloth , although imperial clothes usually combined it with natural fibres like wool . He once saw Agrippina the Younger , wife of Claudius , at a public show on the <unk> Lake involving a naval battle , wearing a military cloak made of gold . He rejects Herodotus 's claims of Indian gold obtained by ants or dug up by griffins in Scythia . 
 Silver , he writes , does not occur in native form and has to be mined , usually occurring with lead ores . Spain produced the most silver in his time , many of the mines having been started by Hannibal . One of the largest had galleries running up to two miles into the mountain , while men worked day and night draining the mine in shifts . Pliny is probably referring to the reverse overshot water @-@ wheels operated by treadmill and found in Roman mines . Britain , he says , is very rich in lead , which is found on the surface at many places , and thus very easy to extract ; production was so high that a law was passed attempting to restrict mining . 
 Fraud and forgery are described in detail ; in particular coin counterfeiting by mixing copper with silver , or even admixture with iron . Tests had been developed for counterfeit coins and proved very popular with the victims , mostly ordinary people . He deals with the liquid metal mercury , also found in silver mines . He records that it is toxic , and amalgamates with gold , so is used for refining and extracting that metal . He says mercury is used for gilding copper , while antimony is found in silver mines and is used as an eyebrow cosmetic . 
 The main ore of mercury is cinnabar , long used as a pigment by painters . He says that the colour is similar to <unk> , probably the kermes insect . The dust is very toxic , so workers handling the material wear face masks of bladder skin . Copper and bronze are , says Pliny , most famous for their use in statues including colossi , gigantic statues as tall as towers , the most famous being the Colossus of Rhodes . He personally saw the massive statue of Nero in Rome , which was removed after the emperor 's death . The face of the statue was modified shortly after Nero 's death during Vespasian 's reign , to make it a statue of Sol . Hadrian moved it , with the help of the architect <unk> and 24 elephants , to a position next to the Flavian Amphitheatre ( now called the Colosseum ) . 
 Pliny gives a special place to iron , distinguishing the hardness of steel from what is now called wrought iron , a softer grade . He is scathing about the use of iron in warfare . 
 = = = Mineralogy = = = 
 In the last two books of the work ( Books XXXVI and XXXVII ) , Pliny describes many different minerals and gemstones , building on works by Theophrastus and other authors . The topic concentrates on the most valuable gemstones , and he criticises the obsession with luxury products such as engraved gems and hardstone carvings . He provides a thorough discussion of the properties of fluorspar , noting that it is carved into vases and other decorative objects . The account of magnetism includes the myth of Magnes the shepherd . 
 Pliny moves into crystallography and mineralogy , describing the octahedral shape of the diamond and recording that diamond dust is used by gem engravers to cut and polish other gems , owing to its great hardness . He states that rock crystal is valuable for its transparency and hardness , and can be carved into vessels and implements . He relates the story of a woman who owned a ladle made of the mineral , paying the sum of 150 @,@ 000 sesterces for the item . Nero deliberately broke two crystal cups when he realised that he was about to be deposed , so denying their use to anyone else . 
 Pliny returns to the problem of fraud and the detection of false gems using several tests , including the scratch test , where counterfeit gems can be marked by a steel file , and genuine ones not . Perhaps it refers to glass imitations of jewellery gemstones . He refers to using one hard mineral to scratch another , presaging the Mohs hardness scale . Diamond sits at the top of the series because , Pliny says , it will scratch all other minerals . 
 = = = Art history = = = 
 Pliny 's chapters on Roman and Greek art are especially valuable because his work is virtually the only classical source of information on the subject . 
 In the history of art , the original Greek authorities are Duris of Samos , Xenocrates of Sicyon , and Antigonus of Carystus . The <unk> element has been ascribed to Duris ( XXXIV : 61 ) ; the notices of the successive developments of art and the list of workers in bronze and painters to Xenocrates ; and a large amount of miscellaneous information to Antigonus . Both Xenocrates and Antigonus are named in connection with <unk> ( XXXV : 68 ) , while Antigonus is named in the indexes of XXXIII – XXXIV as a writer on the art of embossing metal , or working it in ornamental relief or intaglio . 
 Greek epigrams contribute their share in Pliny 's descriptions of pictures and statues . One of the minor authorities for books XXXIV – XXXV is Heliodorus of Athens , the author of a work on the monuments of Athens . In the indices to XXXIII – XXXVI , an important place is assigned to <unk> of Naples , the author of a work in five volumes on famous works of art ( XXXVI : 40 ) , probably incorporating the substance of the earlier Greek treatises ; but Pliny 's indebtedness to <unk> is denied by <unk> , who holds that Pliny used the chronological work of Apollodorus of Athens , as well as a current catalogue of artists . Pliny 's knowledge of the Greek authorities was probably mainly due to Varro , whom he often quotes ( e.g. XXXIV : 56 , XXXV : 173 , 156 , XXXVI : 17 , 39 , 41 ) . 
 For a number of items relating to works of art near the coast of Asia Minor and in the adjacent islands , Pliny was indebted to the general , statesman , orator and historian Gaius Licinius Mucianus , who died before 77 . Pliny mentions the works of art collected by Vespasian in the Temple of Peace and in his other galleries ( XXXIV : 84 ) , but much of his information about the position of such works in Rome is from books , not personal observation . The main merit of his account of ancient art , the only classical work of its kind , is that it is a compilation ultimately founded on the lost textbooks of Xenocrates and on the biographies of Duris and Antigonus . 
 In several passages , he gives proof of independent observation ( XXXIV : 38 , 46 , 63 , XXXV : 17 , 20 , 116 seq . ) . He prefers the marble Laocoön and his Sons in the palace of Titus ( widely believed to be the statue that is now in the Vatican ) to all the pictures and bronzes in the world ( XXXVI : 37 ) . The statue is attributed by Pliny to three sculptors from the island of Rhodes : <unk> , <unk> ( possibly son of <unk> ) and <unk> . 
 In the temple near the <unk> Circus , Pliny admires the Ares and the Aphrodite of <unk> , " which would suffice to give renown to any other spot " . He adds : 
 At Rome indeed the works of art are legion ; besides , one <unk> another from the memory and , however beautiful they may be , we are distracted by the overpowering claims of duty and business ; for to admire art we need leisure and profound stillness ( XXXVI : 26 – 72 ) . 
 = = = Mining = = = 
 Pliny provides lucid descriptions of Roman mining . He describes gold mining in detail , with large @-@ scale use of water to scour alluvial gold deposits . The description probably refers to mining in Northern Spain , especially at the large Las <unk> site . Pliny describes methods of underground mining , including the use of fire @-@ setting to attack the gold @-@ bearing rock and so extract the ore . In another part of his work , Pliny describes the use of undermining to gain access to the veins . Pliny was scathing about the search for precious metals and gemstones : " <unk> or quartzite is considered the hardest of all things – except for the greed for gold , which is even more stubborn . " 
 Book XXXIV covers the base metals , their uses and their extraction . Copper mining is mentioned , using a variety of ores including copper <unk> and marcasite , some of the mining being underground , some on the surface . Iron mining is covered , followed by lead and tin . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The anonymous fourth @-@ century compilation Medicina Plinii contains more than 1 @,@ 100 pharmacological recipes , the vast majority of them from the Historia naturalis ; perhaps because Pliny 's name was attached to it , it enjoyed huge popularity in the Middle Ages . 
 Isidore of Seville 's <unk> ( The Etymologies , c . 600 – 625 ) quotes from Pliny 45 times in Book XII alone ; Books XII , XIII and XIV are all based largely on the Natural History . 
 Niccolò <unk> 's 1509 De <unk> Plinii ( " On Pliny 's Errors " ) attacked Pliny for lacking a proper scientific method , unlike Theophrastus or Dioscorides , and for lacking knowledge of philosophy or medicine . 
 Sir Thomas Browne expressed scepticism about Pliny 's dependability in his 1646 Pseudodoxia Epidemica : 
 Now what is very strange , there is scarce a popular error passant in our days , which is not either directly expressed , or <unk> contained in this Work ; which being in the hands of most men , hath proved a powerful occasion of their propagation . Wherein notwithstanding the credulity of the Reader is more condemnable then the curiosity of the Author : for commonly he <unk> the Authors from whom he received those accounts , and writes but as he reads , as in his Preface to Vespasian he <unk> . 
 Grundy Steiner of Northwestern University , in a 1955 judgement considered by Thomas R. <unk> to represent the collective opinion of Pliny 's critics , wrote of Pliny that " He was not an original , creative thinker , nor a pioneer of research to be compared either with Aristotle and Theophrastus or with any of the great moderns . He was , rather , the compiler of a secondary sourcebook . " 
 The Italian author Italo Calvino , in his 1991 book Why Read the Classics ? , wrote that while people often consult Pliny 's Natural History for facts and curiosities , he is an author who " deserves an extended read , for the measured movement of his prose , which is enlivened by his admiration for everything that exists and his respect for the infinite diversity of all phenomena " . Calvino notes that while Pliny is eclectic , he was not uncritical , though his evaluations of sources are inconsistent and unpredictable . Further , Calvino compares Pliny to Immanuel Kant , in that God is prevented by logic from conflicting with reason , even though ( in Calvino 's view ) Pliny makes a pantheistic identification of God as being immanent in nature . As for destiny , Calvino writes that 
 it is impossible to force that variable which is destiny into the natural history of man : this is the sense of the pages that Pliny devotes to the vicissitudes of fortune , to the unpredictability of the length of any life , to the pointlessness of astrology , to disease and death . " 
 The art historian Jacob <unk> writes in the introduction to his analysis of Pliny 's chapters on art in the Natural History that his intention is " to show how Pliny in his encyclopedic work – which is the result of adaptations from many earlier writers and according to Pliny himself was intended as a reference work – nevertheless throughout expresses a basic attitude to Man and his relationship with Nature ; how he understands Man 's role as an inventor ( ' scientist and artist ' ) ; and finally his attitude to the use and abuse of Nature 's and Man 's creations , to progress and decay . " More specifically , <unk> writes that " the guiding principle in Pliny 's treatment of Greek and Roman art is the function of art in society " , while Pliny " uses his art history to express opinions about the ideology of the state " . 
 Paula <unk> , writing in the Cambridge History of Science , asserts that " Natural history was an ancient form of scientific knowledge , most closely associated with the writings of the Roman encyclopedist Pliny the Elder ... His loquacious and witty Historia naturalis offered an expansive definition of this subject . [ It ] broadly described all entities found in nature , or derived from nature , that could be seen in the Roman world and read about in its books : art , artifacts , and peoples as well as animals , plants , and minerals were included in his project . " <unk> contrasts Pliny 's approach with that of his intellectual predecessors Aristotle and Theophrastus , who sought general causes of natural phenomena , while Pliny was more interested in cataloguing natural wonders , and his contemporary Dioscorides explored nature for its uses in Roman medicine in his great work De Materia Medica . 
 In the view of Mary <unk> , writing in The Classical Tradition in 2010 , " the Historia naturalis has regained its status to a greater extent than at any time since the advent of Humanism . Work by those with scientific as well as philological expertise has resulted in improvements both to Pliny 's text and to his reputation as a scientist . The essential coherence of his enterprise has also been rediscovered , and his ambitious portrayal , in all its manifestations , of ' nature , that is , life ' .. is recognized as a unique cultural record of its time . " 
 = = = Text = = = 
 Latin 
 Complete Latin text at <unk> 
 Complete Latin text with translation tools at Perseus Digital Library 
 version printed in Venice by Johannes de Spira before 18 September 1469 . Copy owned by the Earls of Pembroke , now held by Corning Museum of Glass . 
 English 
 First English translation , by Philemon Holland , 1601 
 Second English translation , by John Bostock and Henry Thomas Riley , 1855 ; complete , with index 
 The Natural History public domain audiobook at LibriVox 
 10 volume Harvard / Heinemann edition of 1949 – 1954 , translated by H. Rackham , <unk> Jones and D.E. <unk> 
 = = = Secondary material = = = 
 Article on Pliny by Jona <unk> , with detailed table of contents of the Natural History 
 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica : Pliny the Elder 
 = HMS Foxhound ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Foxhound was one of nine F @-@ class destroyers built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . Although she was assigned to the Home Fleet , the ship was detached as part of the Mediterranean Fleet to enforce the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides during the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . Several weeks after the start of the Second World War in September 1939 , Foxhound helped to sink a German submarine and participated in the Second Battle of Narvik during the Norwegian Campaign of April – June 1940 . The ship was sent to Gibraltar in mid @-@ 1940 and formed part of Force H where she participated in the attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir . Foxhound escorted the aircraft carriers of Force H as they flew off aircraft for Malta and covered convoys resupplying and reinforcing the island until late 1941 . During this time the ship helped to sink another German submarine . 
 In December , she was briefly transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet where she escorted several convoys to Malta from the Eastern Mediterranean . Foxhound was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in early 1942 and was then assigned to convoy escort duties off South Africa and then in West Africa until mid @-@ 1943 when she was converted into an escort destroyer . When the conversion was completed in early 1944 , the ship was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy and renamed HMCS Qu 'Appelle . She was assigned escort duties in the Western Approaches for several months before the ship was transferred to the English Channel to protect convoys during the Normandy landings . Qu 'Appelle engaged German surface ships several times before she was sent to Iceland for more convoy escort work in October . The ship received a lengthy refit in Canada at the end of the year that was not completed until mid @-@ 1945 . Qu 'Appelle then ferried Canadian troops back to Canada for several months before she became a training ship . She was placed in reserve in mid @-@ 1946 and was sold for scrap at the end of 1947 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The F @-@ class ships were repeats of the preceding E @-@ class . They displaced 1 @,@ 405 long tons ( 1 @,@ 428 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 940 long tons ( 1 @,@ 970 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet 3 inches ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . They were powered by two Brown @-@ Curtis geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The turbines developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . Foxhound barely exceeded her designed speed during her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 6 @,@ 350 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 760 km ; 7 @,@ 310 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ships ' complement was 145 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' in sequence from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . The F class was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rack and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the Second World War began . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 By October 1940 , Foxhound had her rear torpedo tube mount replaced by a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun . While the ship was under repair in late 1941 , her existing director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge was replaced by a new director with a Type 285 gunnery radar mounted on its roof . These fed target data to the new Fuze @-@ Keeping Clock , an analogue fire @-@ control system that calculated the gunnery information for the guns . The ship also received a HF / DF radio direction finder at the top of her foremast . Her short @-@ range AA armament was augmented by two 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon guns on the wings of the ship 's bridge , a pair on the enlarged searchlight platform and , probably , another pair were added on the quarterdeck . 
 When she was converted into an escort destroyer in late 1943 , ' B ' gun was replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar and stowage was increased for a total of 70 depth charges which meant that ' Y ' gun and the 12 @-@ pounder AA gun had to be removed to compensate for the weight . A Type 271 target @-@ indication radar replaced the director . It is likely that the Vickers guns were replaced by the Oerlikons from the quarterdeck at this time . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Foxhound , the seventh ship of that name in the Royal Navy , was laid down by John Brown & Company at their Clydebank shipyard on 15 August 1933 . She was launched on 12 October 1934 and completed on 21 June 1935 . The ship cost 247 @,@ 234 pounds , excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament . Foxhound was initially assigned to the 6th Destroyer Flotilla ( DF ) of the Home Fleet , but often detached to the Mediterranean Fleet to enforce the arms embargo imposed on both sides in the Spanish Civil War by the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . Between November 1936 and 13 February 1937 , the ship was based in Gibraltar except for a brief refit at Sheerness Dockyard in January . She patrolled the Spanish ports on the Bay of Biscay in May – June and August – October before returning home for a refit at Chatham Dockyard from 27 October to 30 December . Foxhound then returned to the Mediterranean to patrol the area between Gibraltar and Oran , French Algeria from January to March 1938 . On 22 September , the ship collided with the submarine Seahorse , damaging one of her propellers . She was repaired at Sheerness from 10 November to 12 December . Foxhound remained in home waters for the rest of 1938 – 39 . The 6th DF was renumbered the 8th Destroyer Flotilla in April 1939 , five months before the start of World War II . 
 In September 1939 , Foxhound was assigned to the Home Fleet and based at Scapa Flow . In the first month of hostilities she was part of an anti @-@ submarine hunting group centred on the aircraft carrier Ark Royal . On 14 September , the carrier was unsuccessfully attacked by the German submarine U @-@ 39 . Foxhound , in company with her sisters Faulknor and Firedrake , counter @-@ attacked and sank U @-@ 39 north @-@ west of Ireland . In February 1940 , she was one of the escorts for Convoy TC 3 carrying troops from Canada to the UK . Later that month the ship rescued the survivors of the torpedoed freighter SS <unk> on 11 February . 
 During the Second Battle of Narvik , Foxhound and the destroyers Icarus and Hero streamed their TSDS minesweeping gear in advance of the battleship Warspite and her escort as they steamed up the Vestfjord to engage the remaining German destroyers on 13 April . The ship and four other British destroyers pursued the remaining German ships into the Rombaksfjorden ( the easternmost branch of the Ofotfjord ) , east of Narvik , where the lack of ammunition had forced the German ships to retreat . During the battle , Foxhound rescued two officers and nine ratings from the destroyer Z12 Erich Giese . During May , she escorted troop convoys to Iceland as they occupied the island . In early June , the ship was escorting the battlecruiser Repulse and two cruisers as they searched for illusory German commerce raiders off Iceland ; they were recalled to Norwegian waters on 9 June after the Germans launched Operation Juno , an attack on the Allied convoys evacuating Norway , but the Germans had already returned to base by the time the ships arrived . Later , Foxhound escorted Ark Royal and the battlecruiser Hood , together with her sisters Faulknor and Fearless and the destroyer Escapade , from Scapa Flow to Gibraltar where they would form Force H. 
 = = = Force H , 1940 – 41 = = = 
 On the morning of 3 July , she ferried Captain Cedric Holland , the emissary of Admiral James Somerville , commander of Force H , to meet with Admiral Marcel @-@ Bruno Gensoul , commander of the Vichy French forces at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir , Algeria . Holland was to deliver an ultimatum regarding the disposition of the French ships there to ensure that they could not fall into the hands of the Germans . Gensoul initially refused to meet with such a low @-@ ranking envoy , but later relented and negotiations were underway that afternoon to disarm the French ships in place when the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , ordered the talks terminated to forestall the impending arrival of French reinforcements . The British opened fire a half @-@ hour later , including Foxhound . A month later the ship escorted Force H during Operation Hurry , a mission to fly off fighter aircraft for Malta and conduct an airstrike on Cagliari on 2 August . Shortly afterwards , she escorted Hood back home and began a refit at Sheerness that lasted until October . 
 Foxhound then returned to Gibraltar and escorted the aircraft carriers Argus and Ark Royal during Operations Coat and White in November . In between sorties into the Mediterranean , the ship escorted convoys between Gibraltar and West Africa . In early January 1941 , she was involved in Operation Excess . On 31 January , Force H , including Foxhound , departed Gibraltar to carry out Operation Picket , an unsuccessful night torpedo attack by eight of Ark Royal 's Fairey Swordfish on the Tirso Dam in Sardinia . The British ships returned to Gibraltar on 4 February and began preparing for Operation Grog , a naval bombardment of Genoa , that was successfully carried out five days later . On 7 April , Foxhound was escorting Convoy WS 7 off the coast of Sierra Leone , West Africa , when she rescued three seamen . They were survivors from the cargo liner <unk> , which had been sunk a week earlier . In mid @-@ May , she participated in Operation Splice , another mission in which the carriers Ark Royal and Furious flew off fighters for Malta . 
 Force H was ordered to join the escort of Convoy WS 8B in the North Atlantic on 24 May , a day after the Battle of the Denmark Strait , but they were directed to search for the German battleship Bismarck and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen on the 25th . Heavy seas increased fuel consumption for all of the escorts and Foxhound was forced to return to Gibraltar to refuel later that day before rejoining the capital ships of Force H on the 29th , after Bismarck had been tracked down and sunk . The destroyer screened another flying @-@ off mission to Malta on 14 June ; two days later , after German blockade runners reached France , Force H sortied into the Atlantic on a failed search for more blockade runners . Together with her sisters Faulknor , Fearless , Forester and Foresight , Foxhound helped to sink the German submarine U @-@ 138 on 18 June . Four days later , the 8th DF was tasked to intercept a German supply ship spotted heading towards the French coast . The next day they intercepted MS <unk> which was scuttled by her crew upon the approach of the British ships . They rescued 78 British POWs taken from ships sunk by German raiders and the crew . In late June , Foxhound screened Ark Royal and Furious as they flew off more fighters for Malta in Operation Railway . 
 During Operation Substance , Firedrake and Foxhound were each leading a column of the convoy , streaming their TSDS <unk> , through the Sicilian Narrows on 23 July when an Italian bomb near missed Firedrake and disabled her so that she had to be towed back to Gibraltar . The bulk of the convoy reached Malta the next day before the escorts rejoined Force H. A week later she screened the capital ships of Force H as they covered another Malta convoy ( Operation Style ) . Foxhound returned to the UK in August for a refit that lasted until November . The ship was briefly assigned to Escort Group <unk> in the North Atlantic for convoy escort duties later that month until she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in late December . 
 = = = 1942 – 46 = = = 
 Foxhound screened the light cruisers of Force B and the freighter Glengyle of Convoy MF 2 from Alexandria , Egypt , to Malta in early January 1942 . A week later , she escorted the cruisers covering Convoy MF 3 to Malta and was detached to escort the freighter MV Thermopylae to Benghazi , Libya , after she developed engine trouble on 18 January . En route the freighter was sunk by German aircraft and Foxhound arrived back at Alexandria on 20 January . By 29 March , the ship had been transferred to the Eastern Fleet and was assigned to the fast ships of Force A as Somerville organised his forces in anticipation of the Japanese invasion of the Indian Ocean . Shortly afterwards she was transferred to South Africa and the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla to escort convoys . Foxhound was then transferred to 4th Destroyer Flotilla at Freetown , Sierra Leone , in May – July 1943 . 
 Foxhound was converted to an escort destroyer from August 1943 and she was transferred to Canada on completion on 8 February 1944 . The ship was commissioned into the Royal Canadian Navy that same day as HMCS Qu 'Appelle . After working up at the Anti @-@ Submarine Training School at Tobermory on the Isle of Mull , she was assigned to the Western Approaches Command . Initially Qu 'Appelle was a part of the 6th Escort Group based at Londonderry Port , but she was transferred to the 12th Escort Group in May where she later patrolled the western entrance to the English Channel after the Normandy landings to protect shipping from German attacks . 
 Together with the destroyers Saskatchewan , Skeena , and Restigouche , Qu 'Appelle attacked three German patrol boats off Brest on the night of 5 – 6 July , with the German patrol boat <unk> being sunk and Qu 'Appelle lightly damaged . On 11 August , the ship , Restigouche , Skeena and the destroyer Assiniboine intercepted a small convoy south of Brest . While they sank two naval trawlers , Qu 'Appelle was accidentally rammed by Skeena during the engagement and was under repair until 5 September . The following month she joined the 11th Escort Group for patrols off Iceland until the end of November . The ship arrived at Halifax on 29 November to begin a refit at Pictou , Nova Scotia , that lasted from 5 December to 30 June 1945 . 
 Qu 'Appelle made four trips to the UK to ferry Canadian troops back to Canada by 25 September . The ship then became a stationary training ship for the Torpedo School at Halifax . She was placed in reserve on 27 May 1946 and then sold to German and Milne for scrap in December 1947 . 
 = Like Father , Like Clown = 
 " Like Father , Like Clown " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 24 , 1991 . In the episode , after recalling a traumatic memory , Krusty the Clown reveals to the Simpson family that he is of Jewish heritage , and that his father , Rabbi Hyman Krustofski , disowned him for pursuing a career in comedy . Krusty is emotionally upset and Bart and Lisa decide to try to reunite Krusty with his long @-@ estranged father . 
 " Like Father , Like Clown " was written by the duo of Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . Krusty 's religion had not been part of the original concept of the character , so Kogen and Wolodarsky decided to parody the 1927 film The Jazz Singer and establish that Krusty is Jewish . The episode was carefully researched and two rabbis , Lavi Meier and Harold M. Schulweis , were credited as " special technical consultants " . It was directed by Jeffrey Lynch and Brad Bird ; as it was Lynch 's first credit as a director , Bird was assigned to help him . Comedian Jackie Mason , who had once been an ordained rabbi , provided the voice of Rabbi Krustofski . The rabbi later became an infrequently recurring character voiced by Dan Castellaneta . Mason returned to voice the character in several later episodes . 
 In its original broadcast , " Like Father , Like Clown " finished 34th in ratings with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 . Jackie Mason won a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his performance as Rabbi Krustofski . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Although Krusty the Clown agrees to have dinner with the Simpson family as part of his repayment for Bart 's help in exonerating him in the episode " Krusty Gets Busted " , Krusty keeps canceling , much to Bart 's disappointment . An upset Bart writes a letter to Krusty saying he is no longer his fan . Krusty 's secretary is so moved by the letter that she angrily threatens to quit if Krusty does not keep his promise to Bart , finally persuading him to do so . Upon learning that Krusty is coming to the Simpson house for dinner , Milhouse comes along , to which Bart reluctantly allows . When asked to say grace , Krusty recites a Hebrew blessing . Realizing that Krusty is Jewish , Lisa speaks of his heritage , making Krusty break down in tears . After some convincing from the family to why he 's so depressed about it , Krusty tells the family his real name , Herschel Krustofski , and describes his upbringing in the Lower East Side of Springfield . 
 His father , Hyman Krustofski , was a rabbi and strongly opposed young Herschel 's wish to become a comedian ; he wanted the boy to go to yeshiva instead . Krusty did attend the school , where he said he made the other students laugh by doing funny impressions of his father . As a result , Krusty became a slapstick comedian behind his father 's back . One night , Krusty performed at a rabbi 's convention and a rabbi squirted seltzer on him , washing off his clown makeup . Rabbi Krustofski , who was in the audience , recognized him , was furious and disowned his son , and now it has been 25 years since they have seen or spoken to each other . 
 In the weeks following this admission , Krusty thinks about his father and becomes depressed , breaking down on live television after watching a father @-@ son related Itchy and Scratchy cartoon . Bart and Lisa decide to help reunite father and son , but the rabbi still refuses to accept Krusty 's career choice , explaining that Krusty " turned his back on their traditions , on their faith , and on him " . They decide to try to outsmart the rabbi , and Lisa does research and finds Judaic teachings that urge forgiveness , but Rabbi Krustofski has responses for each of them out of stubbornness . In a last @-@ ditch effort , Bart convinces the rabbi to realize his stubborn ways with a quote from Sammy Davis , Jr . , a Jewish entertainer just like Krusty , in which the entertainer makes a passionate speech about the struggles that the Jewish people have overcome . This quote finally convinces Rabbi Krustofski that entertainers have a place in Jewish heritage . A deeply depressed Krusty is glumly doing a live telecast of his show , when Rabbi Krustofski appears . The two joyously hug and reconcile in front of the audience of children , with Rabbi Krustofsky accepting a cream pie from Bart and throwing it in his son 's face . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Like Father , Like Clown " was written by the duo of Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . Krusty 's religion had not been part of the original concept of the character , so Kogen and Wolodarsky decided to parody The Jazz Singer and establish that Krusty is Jewish . They pitched the idea to co @-@ executive producer Sam Simon , who rejected it , but it was approved by James L. Brooks . Krusty 's last name , Krustofski , was established in this episode as pitched by Al Jean . The portion of the episode where characters quote the Bible in support or opposition of clowning were carefully researched . Cited passages from the Bible include Exodus 20 : 12 and Joshua 1 : 8 . The quotations from the Talmud were also researched , and two rabbis , Lavi Meier and Harold M. Schulweis , were credited as " special technical consultants " . Schulweis was asked to take a look at a draft of the script . While not a fan of the show , he felt " it was profound " and added some corrections . He later commented , " I thought it had a Jewish resonance to it . I was impressed by the underlying moral seriousness . " 
 The episode was co @-@ directed by Jeffrey Lynch and Brad Bird . It was Lynch 's first credit as a director , so Bird was assigned to help him out and " usher [ Lynch ] into the world of directing things quickly " . Krusty is one of Bird 's favorite characters , and he always tries to animate a scene in every Krusty episode . 
 Rabbi Krustofski was voiced by Jackie Mason , who had once been an ordained rabbi , but had resigned to become a comedian . Mason recorded his lines in New York City , and Dan Castellaneta , voice of Krusty , went there to record with him . In the script , Bart and Lisa try to trick Rabbi Krustofski into meeting with Krusty by arranging a lunch date between him and Saul Bellow , the " Nobel Prize @-@ winning Jewish novelist " . Originally , this was intended to be Isaac <unk> Singer , but the writers changed it when Singer died . Mason 's lines had to be re @-@ recorded in order to complete the change . Rabbi Krustofski became an infrequently recurring character , and his occasional speaking parts were voiced by Castellaneta . Mason later returned to voice the rabbi in " Today I Am a Clown " in the fifteenth season , " Once Upon a Time in Springfield " in the twenty @-@ first season , and " Clown in the Dumps " in the twenty @-@ sixth season , in which the character dies . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode is an homage to the film The Jazz Singer , about a son with a strict religious upbringing who defies his father to become an entertainer . The film is mentioned when Rabbi Krustofski states , " Oh , if you were a musician or a jazz singer , this I could forgive ! " Lisa tells Homer that there are many Jewish entertainers , including Lauren Bacall , Dinah Shore , William Shatner and Mel Brooks , the latter of which shocks Homer . In Krusty 's flashback , he and his father walk down the street in a parody of a scene from The Godfather Part II . In the Simpsons house , Krusty plays The Concert for Bangladesh . In Krusty 's studio , there are pictures of him with Alfred Hitchcock and The Beatles . At the end of the episode , Krusty and his father sing " O Mein Papa " , a 1952 song originally by Eddie Fisher . Bart quotes a passage from Sammy Davis , Jr . ' s 1965 autobiography Yes , I Can . When Rabbi Krustofski reads the menu at a restaurant , the sandwiches are named after Jewish comedians including Joey Bishop , Jackie Mason ( the voice of Rabbi Krustofski ) and Krusty the Clown himself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Like Father , Like Clown " finished 34th in ratings for the week of October 21 – 27 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 7 . It was the highest rated program on Fox that week . Mason won a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his performance as Rabbi Krustofski . He was one of six voice actors from The Simpsons to win the award in its inaugural year . He is one of three The Simpsons guest stars to win the award ; Marcia Wallace won in 1992 for voicing Edna Krabappel , and Kelsey Grammer won for voicing Sideshow Bob in 2006 . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called the episode , " a magnificent show , with Jackie Mason wonderfully over the top as Krusty 's long @-@ lost pa , and Lois <unk> giving Krusty a good talking to about Bart. " Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz of The Star @-@ Ledger listed " Like Father , Like Clown " as one of the ten episodes of The Simpsons that shows the " comic and emotional scope of the show . " They wrote , " Most Krusty the Klown episodes go heavy on celebrity cameos , while playing up the character 's misanthropic greed . This one gave him a heart , as Bart and Lisa try to reunite him with his estranged rabbi father ( voice of Jackie Mason ) , who has never forgiven his son for going into show biz . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote that the episode " lacks a surfeit of guffaws , but it manages to be sweet and heartfelt without becoming sappy . It 's more of a charming show than a <unk> , but it does the job . " 
 = Somerset Coalfield = 
 The Somerset Coalfield in northern Somerset , England is an area where coal was mined from the 15th century until 1973 . It is part of a larger coalfield which stretched into southern Gloucestershire . The Somerset coalfield stretched from <unk> in the north to the Mendip Hills in the south , and from Bath in the east to Nailsea in the west , a total area of about 240 square miles ( 622 km2 ) . Most of the pits on the coalfield were concentrated in the Cam Brook , Wellow Brook and Nettlebridge Valleys and around Radstock and Farrington Gurney . The pits were grouped geographically , with clusters of pits close together working the same coal seams often under the same ownership . Many pits shared the trackways and tramways which connected them to the Somerset Coal Canal or railways for distribution . 
 The early pits were adits where coal outcropped or bell pits where coal was close to the surface . These methods were abandoned when deep seams were mined . The deepest shaft on the coalfield was at the Strap mine at Nettlebridge which reached 1 @,@ 838 feet ( 560 m ) . Flooding and coal dust explosions in some mines required improved ventilation and pumping engines . Several pits closed in the 19th century as the coal was worked out . Those that survived until 1947 became part of the National Coal Board , but the expense of improving equipment and working conditions meant that these became uneconomical and the last pit closed in 1973 . There is still evidence of the mine workings , with the remains of buildings , spoil heaps and tramways in the area . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The Somerset Coalfield covers a total area of about 240 square miles ( 622 km2 ) . It consists of three synclines , informally referred to as ' coal basins ' . The Pensford Syncline in the north and the Radstock Syncline in the south are separated by the east @-@ west trending <unk> Fault Belt . Further to the west is the smaller Nailsea Syncline . The Radstock Syncline in particular is cut by a series of east @-@ west thrust faults and north @-@ south trending normal faults . 
 = = = Stratigraphy = = = 
 The Coal Measures are divided into a Lower , Middle and Upper with coal seams found within each of these divisions . Lower and Middle Coal Measures are found at depths between 500 and 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 152 @-@ 1 @,@ 525 m ) . Together the Lower and Middle Coal Measures are 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 610 – 762 m ) thick with the Middle Coal Measures averaging about 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 488 m ) and the Lower Coal Measures about 600 feet ( 183 m ) . 
 Only in the southern part of the Radstock Syncline have coals of the Lower and Middle Coal Measures been worked , mainly at the Newbury and Vobster collieries in the southeast and in the New Rock and Moorewood pits to the southwest . Only in the eastern part of Pensford Syncline have coals of the Lower and Middle Coal Measures been worked , at the Globe Pit in the Newton St Loe area in the 19th century . The Variscan orogeny involved lateral compression of the rock sequence resulting in the tight folding , fracturing and faulting of the sandstone and mudstone strata , and the associated Coal Measures . Along the Radstock Slide Fault the distance between the broken ends of a coal seam can be as much as 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 457 m ) . The complex geology and thin seams gained the field notoriety and three underground explosions , in 1893 , 1895 and 1908 were amongst the first attributable solely to airborne coal dust . 
 = = = William Smith = = = 
 Exploratory surveys of the local geology were carried out by William Smith , who became known as the " father of English geology " , building on work by John Strachey . Smith worked for the <unk> who owned Sutton Court , at one of their older mines , the Mearns Pit at High Littleton . As he observed the rock strata at the pit , he realised that they were arranged in a predictable pattern that the various strata could always be found in the same relative positions and each particular stratum could be identified by the fossils it contained and the same succession of fossil groups from older to younger rocks could be found in other parts of England . Smith noticed an easterly dip in the beds of rock- small near the surface ( about three degrees ) then greater after the Triassic rocks which led to him a testable hypothesis , which he termed the principle of faunal succession , and he began to determine if the relationships between the strata and their characteristics were consistent throughout the country . During work as a surveyor ( appointed by engineer John Rennie ) for the Somerset Coal Canal Company and subsequently , he mapped the locations of rock strata , and their vertical extent , and drew cross @-@ sections and tables of what he saw and earned the name " Strata Smith " . 
 = = = Coal seams = = = 
 The following coal seams are recognised within the coalfield . They are listed stratigraphically i.e. uppermost / youngest first . Note that not all seams are continuous across the coalfield and that correlation of some seams from one basin to another is uncertain . 
 = = History = = 
 It is believed that coal was mined in the area during Roman times and there is documentary evidence of coal being dug on the Mendips in 1305 and at Kilmersdon in 1437 . By the time of Henry VIII there were coal pits at Clutton , High Littleton and Stratton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Fosse . 
 During the early 17th century coal was largely obtained by excavating the outcrops and driving drifts which followed the seam into the ground . Only small amounts of coal could be obtained by these methods and bell pits were also dug . These were vertical pits , with a 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) diameter shaft up to 60 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) deep , which were opened out at the bottom . When all the coal that could safely be extracted from the pit had been recovered , another pit was sunk close by to intersect the seam and the waste from the second pit thrown into the first . 
 At the beginning of the 19th century there were about 4000 people employed on the coalfield . The Somerset Miners ' Association was founded in 1872 , later becoming an area of the National Union of Mineworkers . 
 The uses of coal were varied . Coal was used in <unk> to produce lime for mortar used in building and by farmers to improve the soil . From 1820 coal was used to produce gas for lighting and to power steam driven woollen mills in the area . Coke was used to dry malt for the brewing industry . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 The coalfield had a relatively low population density and did not have a major coal @-@ consuming industry nearby . Transporting coal to market was a key problem for the coalfield 's development . In the pre @-@ turnpike era , the roads serving the coalfield were unsuited to moving coal . <unk> notes " The problem ... was rendered far worse by the state of the roads in Somerset , which were notorious down to the middle of the 18th century . Parishes in the area sometimes neglected or refused to repair those roads which were heavily used by coal carts . Thus in 1617 the inhabitants of Stoke St Michael ... complained that " of late by reason of many coalmines ... the highways there are much in decay and grown very <unk> " . 
 In Somerset , turnpike roads began in 1707 with the establishment of the Bath Trust , but turnpikes did not reach the coalfield until the mid @-@ 1700s . The Bristol Trust , which passed close to the western boundary of the coalfield , established in 1727 was of little importance , as Bristol was never a significant market , having its own coalfield . Turnpikes facilitated the movement of coal , and John Billingsley enthused " Nothing so much contributes to the improvement of a county as good roads . Before the establishment of turnpikes , many parts of the county were scarcely accessible . .... coal was carried on horses ' backs to the distance of fifteen or twenty miles from the colliery ; each horse carried about two hundred and half weight . Now one horse with a light cart will draw four hundred weight or four times more than a horse could carry . Can an insignificant toll be put in competition with this saving ? " 
 Not all roads were improved , and in 1819 John Skinner observed roads " rendered bad " by the passage of coal wagons . Expansion of production was limited by access to market . Such a need implied a canal project , following Lord Middleton 's dictum " Water transport is what all coal owners must aim at " . There were large gains from being connected to a canal system , as stated by the Coal Commission : " At about this period ( 1800 ) the system of coal navigation was being rapidly extended , and the result was that coals were gradually finding their way into districts that could not be reached unless at great cost , by road " . 
 A scheme for an extension of the Avon Navigation was proposed in 1766 , but canals did not reach the coalfield for almost another 50 years . In 1794 coal proprietors formed a committee to construct the Somerset Coal Canal with two branches into the Cam Brook and Wellow Brook Valleys , and from a junction at Midford , to join the proposed Kennet and Avon Canal at the Dundas Aqueduct near Bath . Coal was transported by the Somerset Coal Canal and later by the Bristol and North Somerset Railway and Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway , which were accessed from the pits by a series of tramways . After 1854 , when the first railway line was opened , the tonnage carried by the coal canal declined rapidly . 
 = = = Decline and closure = = = 
 The total tonnage of coal produced by the coalfield increased throughout the 19th century , reaching a peak around 1901 , when there were 79 separate collieries and production was 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 tons per annum . The peak years for production were 1900 to 1920 . However decline took hold and the number of pits reduced from 30 at the beginning of the 20th century to 14 by the mid @-@ 1930s , 12 at nationalisation when the National Coal Board was created on 1 January 1947 , under the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1946 , 5 in 1959 and none after 1973 . Despite some investment in new infrastructure , particularly at Norton Hill , thin seams made production expensive , limiting profit and investment . The conversion of Portishead power station from coal to oil and reduced national demand together with competition from more economical coalfields led to the closure of the last two pits , Kilmersdon and Writhlington , in September 1973 . 
 = = = Area today = = = 
 Although there are still the remains of mines , disused or redeveloped buildings and a few spoil tips , most have been removed or landscaped , the area has returned to a largely rural nature between the Mendip Hills and the River Avon in north east Somerset . The towns and villages have some light industry but are often commuter towns for Bath and Bristol . There are several limestone quarries particularly in the Mendips . 
 The Colliers Way ( <unk> ) national cycle route passes landmarks associated with the coalfield , and other roads and footpaths follow tramways developed during the coal mining years . The cycleway runs from Dundas Aqueduct to Frome via Radstock , and is intended to provide part of a continuous cycle route to Southampton and Portsmouth . 
 Radstock Museum has exhibits which offer an insight into life in north Somerset since the 19th century . Exhibits relate to the coalfield and its geology . Artefacts and memorabilia from the Somerset Coal Canal , Somerset and Dorset and Great Western Railways are also on display . 
 = = Pensford coal basin = = 
 The Pensford coal basin is in the northern part of the coalfield around Bishop Sutton , Pensford , Stanton Drew , <unk> and <unk> . At least one pit was operating near Bishop Sutton before 1719 . Four bell pits in Bishop Sutton were marked on field tithe No 1409 , and four shaft pits on field tithe No 1428 , but were no longer working by 1824 . 
 The Old Pit at Bishop Sutton , which was also known as Sutton Top Pit or Upper Sutton Pit was dug before 1799 and owned by Lieutenant Henry Fisher , who sold it in 1821 to Robert <unk> Dowling . After Dowling 's death in 1852 the Old Pit was sold to Mr T.T. Hawkes , but he defaulted on the payments and it was sold in 1853 to William Rees @-@ Mogg ( ancestor of William Rees @-@ Mogg ) and his associates . The shaft reached a depth of 304 feet ( 93 m ) , but the pit went out of production by 1855 , when " New Pit " , which had been sunk in the early 19th century but then closed , was reopened and deepened to exploit deeper seams . New Pit had two shafts of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) diameter , one for winding and one for pumping . In 1896 it was owned by F. Spencer of New Rock Colliery , and in 1908 by Jesse Lovell and Sons . By 1921 the pit employed 150 men and boys and produced 10 @,@ 000 tins per annum . The pit finally closed in 1929 . 
 Pensford Colliery , which opened in 1909 , had the latest equipment at the time including coal cutters . It had a red brick winding house , pithead baths and a coal washery . Faulting made coal production expensive and it closed in 1958 . 
 = = Earl of Warwick 's Clutton Collieries = = 
 The Earl of Warwick 's estates included sawmills , quarries , brickworks and collieries in addition to agricultural holdings . Bell pits , around Clutton and High Littleton , were described in a survey of 1610 . All were closed by 1836 . The first deep mine in the parish of High Littleton was Mearns <unk> which began in 1783 . The Greyfield Coal Company did not start until 1833 and expanded after the opening of the Bristol and North Somerset Railway in 1847 . Greyfield Colliery closed in 1911 , and the railway in 1964 . Maynard Terrace in Clutton was built to house some of the miners . 
 = = Paulton Basin = = 
 Collieries in the Paulton basin were connected to the terminal basin of the northern branch of the Somerset Coal Canal which was the focus for tramroads that connected at least 15 collieries around Paulton , Timsbury and High Littleton . On the northern side of canal was the terminus for the tramroad which served Old Grove , Prior 's , <unk> and <unk> pits , with a branch line to Amesbury and Mearns pits . Parts of this line were still in use in 1873 , probably carrying horse @-@ drawn wagons of coal . The southern side of the canal basin was connected to the pits at Brittens , <unk> , Paulton Ham , Paulton Hill , Simons Hill by a tramway which terminated at Salisbury Colliery . In addition the Paulton Foundry used this line . The entire line was disused by 1871 as were the collieries it served . 
 The area has been designated as an ‘ area of special architectural or historic interest , the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance ’ under section 69 of the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . 
 = = Timsbury and Camerton = = 
 The first of the collieries around Timsbury village was sunk in 1791 and known as <unk> ( <unk> in old spellings ) . Camerton Old Pit opened in 1781 and the shaft went down to 921 feet ( 281 m ) . It closed around circa 1898 but the shaft was then used as an airway and escape route for the New Pit , until 1930 when it was closed and capped . The New Pit was half a mile east of the Old Pit and went down to 1 @,@ 818 feet ( 554 m ) . In 1928 it was joined underground to Braysdown Colliery and eventually closed in 1950 . 
 There is very little landscape evidence remaining of the previous mining activities around Clutton , Temple Cloud , High Littleton and Timsbury . There are small batches at Clutton , east of Radford Hill and at <unk> , High Littleton . 
 = = East of Camerton = = 
 East of Camerton the coal is buried beneath newer rock strata , which meant that mining in the area was more difficult . 
 The dominant features of the valleys of the Cam and Wellow Brooks are remnants of coal mining from the 18th @-@ 20th centuries . In both valleys there are frequent shafts and batches together with the remains of the railway and tram lines that connected the mines to the Avon Valley . Remains of the Somersetshire Coal Canal are also significant reminders of this coal mining history in this area . 
 = = Farrington Gurney = = 
 Mining around Farrington Gurney has been undertaken since the 17th century where , by 1780 the pits were known as Farrington Colliery . 
 The main geological feature south of Hallatrow consists of Supra @-@ Pennant Measures which include the upper coal measures and outcrops of sandstone . Relics of its industrial past are evident in the area , including the highly visible and distinct conical shaped Old Mills Batch with its generally unvegetated surface . The three disused colliery sites have been developed for light industry , a depot and a superstore . 
 = = Duchy Mines = = 
 The Duchy of Cornwall owned most of the mineral rights around Midsomer Norton and various small pits opened around 1750 to exploit these . 
 = = Earl Waldegrave 's Radstock Collieries = = 
 In 1763 coal was discovered in Radstock and mining began on land owned by the Waldegrave family , Lords of the Manor since the English Civil War . In 1896 the pits were owned by the Trustee of Frances , late Countess of Waldegrave . 
 Radstock was the terminus for the southern branch of the Somerset Coal Canal which was subsequently turned into a tramway and became the centre for railway development and coal depots , coal <unk> , workshops and a gas works . As part of the development of the Wiltshire , Somerset and Weymouth Railway , an 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) line from Radstock to Frome was built to carry coal . In the 1870s the broad @-@ gauge line was converted to standard gauge and connected to the Bristol and North Somerset Line connecting it to the Great Western Railway . The Radstock railway site comprises approximately 8 @.@ 8 hectares of land which has been subject to planning and development applications . 
 = = Writhlington Collieries = = 
 The Writhlington Collieries , close to the Waldegrave Collieries , were further east of Radstock and under different ownership . In 1896 they were owned by the Writhlington , Huish and Foxcote Colliery Co . , and in 1908 by the Writhlington Collieries Co . Ltd . The Upper and Lower Writhlington , Huish & Foxcote pits were merged into a single colliery . 
 The base of the Kilmersdon valley consists of alluvium deposits . Above these , on both sides of all of the valleys , is a band of shales and clays from the Penarth group from the Triassic period . Most of the upland in this area is Lias Limestone ( white and blue ) while the highest part , above 130 m , south of Haydon , is an outcrop of Inferior Oolitic Limestone , both are from the Jurassic period . The steepest slopes of both the Kilmersdon and Snail ’ s Bottom valleys have frequently slipped . Below these rocks are the coal bearing Carboniferous strata . Haydon is an outlying settlement of Radstock built to house miners from the local pit . The disused railway line and inclined railway at Haydon are important elements in the Kilmersdon valley east of Haydon . The modern landscape has a less maintained and ‘ rougher ’ character and texture than neighbouring agricultural areas caused mainly by the remnants of the coal industry and its infrastructure and changes in agricultural management . Disturbance caused by coal mining and the railways and the subsequent end of mining and abandonment of the railways has created valuable habitats for nature conservation . 
 The Writhlington spoil heap or " batch " is a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) because of the rich collection of fossils in the spoil . The Braysdown batch was planted with conifers , and is known as Braysdown Hill . The offices , blacksmith 's shop and stables at the Upper Writhlington Colliery were converted into dwellings . 
 = = Norton Hill Collieries = = 
 Norton Hill Collieries at Westfield were owned by members of the Beauchamp family such as Sir Frank Beauchamp and his brother Louis Beauchamp who owned other collieries and related works on the coalfield at various times . They were also known as the Beauchamp <unk> as they were the most productive mines in the whole coalfield . 
 In 1900 a railway linking the colliery to the main Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway was constructed , and sidings laid in 1905 and 1907 which were reconstructed in 1953 . 
 On 9 April 1908 an explosion approximately 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) underground killed 10 men and boys . As there were no mines rescue teams at that time , the manager and volunteers searched for survivors for 10 days . In 1911 , partly as a result of the Norton Hill explosion , Winston Churchill was instrumental in the passing of the Coal Mines Act 1911 . 
 After nationalisation after World War II the National Coal Board spent £ 500 @,@ 000 on modernising the mine 's infrastructure to give it the capability for annual production of 315 @,@ 000 tons , however manpower shortages and geological problems caused the pit to close in 1966 . 
 = = Nettlebridge Valley = = 
 There were numerous coal workings in the area from Gurney Slade east to Mells around the villages of Holcombe , <unk> and Stratton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Fosse . These included at least 52 bell pits , some with deeper shafts and 16 adits . Some coal may have been mined during Roman times and in the 13th century , making them the earliest coal mines in Somerset , but most development occurred in the 17th century . Most mining ended in the 19th century , however Strap Colliery was opened in 1953 as Mendip Colliery and worked until 1969 . 
 The Vobster Breach colliery had a unique system of long coking ovens which , along with the other buildings , have been designated as a Scheduled monument . The boiler chimney of Oxley 's Colliery near Buckland <unk> which operated for a few years in the 1880s is a Grade II listed building . 
 = HMS Campania ( 1914 ) = 
 HMS Campania was a seaplane tender and aircraft carrier , converted from an elderly ocean liner by the Royal Navy early in the First World War . After her conversion was completed in mid @-@ 1915 the ship spent her time conducting trials and exercises with the Grand Fleet . These revealed the need for a longer flight deck to allow larger aircraft to take off , and she was modified accordingly . Campania missed the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 , but made a number of patrols with elements of the Grand Fleet . She never saw combat and was soon relegated to a training role because of her elderly machinery . In November 1918 Campania was anchored with the capital ships of the Grand Fleet when a sudden storm caused her anchors to drag . She hit several of the ships and the collisions punctured her hull ; she slowly sank , with no loss of life . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Originally built as a passenger liner for Cunard Line 's service between Liverpool and New York in 1893 , RMS Campania was the holder of the Blue Riband award for speed early in her career . In October 1914 , she was sold to the shipbreakers T. W. Ward as she was wearing out . 
 = = Purchase and conversion = = 
 The Royal Navy purchased Campania from the shipbreakers on 27 November 1914 for £ 32 @,@ 500 , initially for conversion to an armed merchant cruiser equipped with eight quick @-@ firing 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) guns . The ship was converted by Cammell Laird to an aircraft carrier instead and the two forward 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns were deleted in favour of a 160 @-@ foot ( 48 @.@ 8 m ) flying @-@ off deck . Two derricks were fitted on each side to transfer seaplanes between the water and the two holds . The amidships hold had the capacity for seven large seaplanes . The forward hold , underneath the flight deck , could fit four small seaplanes , but the flight deck had to be lifted off the hold to access the airplanes . HMS Campania was commissioned on 17 April 1915 . 
 The first takeoff from the flight deck did not occur until 6 August 1915 when a Sopwith Schneider floatplane , mounted on a wheeled trolley , used 130 feet ( 39 @.@ 6 m ) of the flight deck while the ship was steaming into the wind at 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . The Sopwith aircraft was the lightest and highest @-@ powered aircraft in service with the Royal Naval Air Service , and the close call in a favourable wind demonstrated that heavier aircraft could not be launched from the flight deck . 
 By October 1915 Campania had exercised with the Grand Fleet seven times , but had only flown off aircraft three times as the North Sea was often too rough for her seaplanes to use . Her captain recommended that the flying @-@ off deck be lengthened and given a steeper slope to allow gravity to boost the aircraft 's acceleration and the ship was accordingly modified at Cammell Laird between November 1915 and early April 1916 . The forward funnel was split into two funnels and the flight deck was extended between them and over the bridge to a length of 245 feet ( 74 @.@ 7 m ) , so that aircraft from both holds could use the flight deck . A canvas windscreen was provided to allow the aircraft to unfold their wings out of the wind , and a kite balloon and all of its supporting equipment were added in the aft hold . Campania now carried seven Short Type 184 torpedo bombers and three or four smaller fighters or scouts ; a Type 184 made its first takeoff from the flight deck on 3 June 1916 , also using a wheeled trolley . This success prompted the Admiralty to order the world 's first aircraft designed for carrier operations , the Fairey Campania . The ship received the first of these aircraft in late 1917 where they joined smaller Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter scouts . At various times Campania also carried the Sopwith Baby and Sopwith Pup . 
 Campania failed to receive the signal to deploy when the Grand Fleet departed Scapa Flow on 30 May 1916 en route to the Battle of Jutland , but she sailed two hours and fifteen minutes later . Even though she was slowly overtaking the fleet early in the morning of 31 May , she was ordered to return to Scapa Flow as she lacked an escort and German submarines had been reported in the area . The ship participated in some anti @-@ submarine and anti @-@ Zeppelin patrols , but she was later declared unfit for fleet duty because of her defective machinery and became a seaplane training and balloon depot ship . In April 1918 Campania , along with the Grand Fleet , was transferred from Scapa Flow to Rosyth . 
 On the morning of 5 November 1918 , Campania was lying at anchor off Burntisland in the Firth of Forth . A sudden Force 10 squall caused the ship to drag anchor . She collided first with the bow of the nearby battleship Royal Oak , and then scraped along the side of the battlecruiser Glorious . Campania 's hull was breached by the initial collision with Royal Oak , flooding her engine room and shutting off all main electrical power . The ship then started to settle by the stern , and sank some five hours after breaking free . The ship 's crew were all rescued by neighbouring vessels . A Naval Board of Inquiry into the incident held Campania 's watch officer largely responsible for her loss , citing specifically the failure to drop a second anchor once the ship started to drift . 
 The wreck of HMS Campania was designated in 2001 under the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 as a site of historic importance , making it an offence to dive it without a licence . The remains of the four Campania aircraft and seven 1 ½ Strutters that she had on board when she sank are still entombed in her wreck . 
 = Red Tail Squadron = 
 The Red Tail Squadron , part of the non @-@ profit Commemorative Air Force ( CAF ) and until June 2011 , known as the Red Tail Project , maintains and flies a World War II era North American P @-@ 51C Mustang . The twice @-@ restored aircraft flies to create interest in the history and accomplishments of the members of the World War II @-@ era 332nd Fighter Group , also known as the Tuskegee Airmen , whose distinctive red markings on the tails of the P @-@ 51s they flew during that war , gave the organization its name . 
 The all African American <unk> Fighter Group originally flew 15 @,@ 550 sorties as bomber escorts in the Mustang ; eventually the Airmen , who were originally shunned in the white military , acquired the right to fly combat missions . In 1970 , the Commemorative Air Force acquired an original P @-@ 51 to include in their educational program . In 1980 , Don Hinz took charge of the aircraft 's restoration , and developed the idea of the Red Tail Project , named for the distinctive red paint on the Airmen 's aircraft . Originally conceived as a restoration project , Red Tail evolved into an education program . Although the P @-@ 51 was restored , mechanical failure caused a crash and the death of the pilot , a retired U.S. Navy commander ; the Tuskegee Airmen endorsed and encouraged the aircraft 's second restoration , and the newly restored P @-@ 51C made its debut at AirVenture 2009 in Oshkosh , Wisconsin . 
 Since the 1990s , the Red Tail Squadron has raised over $ 2 million ( US ) for the aircraft 's two restorations , its ongoing maintenance and associated educational programs . The Mustang has been featured in two documentary films : Red Tail Reborn , and Flight of the Red Tail . 
 = = The Tuskegee Airmen = = 
 The Tuskegee Airmen / <unk> / is the popular name of a group of African American pilots who fought in World War II as the 332nd Fighter Group of the US Army Air Corps . This was the first unit of African American military aviators in the United States armed forces . During World War II , in much of the United States , African Americans were still subjected to Jim Crow laws and the American military itself was racially segregated . Legal and social prejudice prevented the Airmen from flying combat missions . Despite their adversities , the Tuskegee Airmen flew with distinction : In 2007 , 350 Tuskegee Airmen and their widows received the Congressional Gold Medal , and the airfield where they trained has been designated as Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site . Although some sources claimed the Airmen had a perfect record in their 15 @,@ 000 missions as bomber escorts , recent research has revealed they lost 25 bombers . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 At the conclusion of World War II in 1945 , The United States Army sold off military surplus and for $ 1 ( $ 13 @.@ 1 today ) Montana State University in Bozeman , Montana bought a P @-@ 51C aircraft , which it parked on its campus in front of the engineering building . According to the Red Tail Reborn Internet Movie Database page , in a prank , drunken students taxied the aircraft around the campus in the late 1940s . Thereafter , the aircraft was secured to the ground with steel and concrete . Otherwise , the P @-@ 51C was essentially left alone in Montana , except for an occasional coat of silver paint . In 1965 , when the University wanted to add a parking lot , restorer Lloyd Creek bought it from the University for $ 1 , provided that he could remove it from the campus in 24 hours of notification in winning the bid . To move the P @-@ 51C promptly to Billings , Montana necessitated the removal of the wings , which were sawed off with a circular saw . When the aircraft arrived in Billings , the wings were reattached to the fuselage . 
 In 1970 , frustrated with restoration efforts , Creek donated the P @-@ 51C to the CAF , which disassembled the aircraft and shipped it to the organization 's home base in Texas . While awaiting restoration , the aircraft endured a hurricane described erroneously in the documentary as Hurricane Beulah , although that storm was an earlier , 1967 storm . Regardless , a hurricane exposed numerous parts of the aircraft to seawater damage . Several CAF volunteers attempted to rehab the aircraft in Minneapolis , Minnesota , Texas , Council Bluffs , Iowa , and finally in the late 1980s at the home of the Southern Minnesota wing of the CAF , which had just completed the restoration of the North American B @-@ 25 Mitchell bomber , Miss Mitchell . After noting the P @-@ 51C was in need of restoration , Don Hinz channeled his energy and talents into the emerging Red Tail project . The aircraft is now one of only four existing P @-@ 51C Mustangs in existence . As one of the four flying Mustangs , it is worth $ 2 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = History = = 
 The Commemorative Air Force , which has approximately 9 @,@ 000 members and a fleet of 156 aircraft , is an educational association with the purpose to pay tribute to American military aviation through flight , exhibition and remembrance . It has been collecting , restoring and flying vintage historical aircraft for more than half a century . In the 1990s , the CAF 's Minnesota Wing began restoring a P @-@ 51 that many branches of the CAF organization had attempted to restore but found the task beyond their capabilities . The P @-@ 51C once served Capt. Andrew " Jug " Turner . Pilot Don Hinz , a retired United States Navy commander based at Fleming Field in South St. Paul , Minnesota , heard of the project and enlisted some experts as well as named the effort " The Red Tail Project " . 
 Originally , the restoration was attempted at Fleming Field . After soliciting the assistance of outside contractors from North Dakota , the aircraft was airborne in May 2001 . The P @-@ 51C , which was named " Tuskegee Airmen " , was included in numerous air shows to tell the history of the pilot group . From May 2001 to May 2004 , the aircraft flew before more than an estimated three million people . By 2004 , Hinz envisioned an educational program around the restored aircraft . In a May 2004 show in Red Wing , Minnesota the camshaft drive of the Rolls Royce Merlin engine failed . Although Hinz successfully landed the aircraft between two houses in a residential suburb , both wings were ripped off and the body was badly damaged . A tree damaged in the crash fell on Hinz , causing head trauma from which he did not recover . 
 The Tuskegee Airmen decided to restore the aircraft . The five @-@ year restoration occurred at Tri @-@ State Aviation in Wahpeton , North Dakota . In 2007 , Gerry Beck , one of the primary restorers , was in a fatal collision of his P @-@ 51A and a P @-@ 51D during AirVenture 2007 . Beck was the owner of Tri @-@ State Aviation , but about a half dozen other CAF volunteer aviation mechanics contributed to the effort to pick up where he left off . The rebuilding continued with the mounting of the engine in 2008 and the mating of the wing in 2009 . On July 22 , 2009 , four days before AirVenture 2009 in Oshkosh , Wisconsin , the P @-@ 51C had its first flight . Then , it was flown to Wisconsin for its public debut . After the show it returned to Minnesota with a 6 AT @-@ 6 escort . The aircraft has also served a tribute via military flyovers for fallen Tuskegee Airmen . 
 In 2011 , the volunteer @-@ driven organization changed its name from the " Red Tail Project " to the " CAF Red Tail Squadron " and also completed construction of the RISE ABOVE Traveling Exhibit as an additional tool to help tell the story of these pilots and their support personnel ( who are also known as Tuskegee Airmen ) . The Mustang and the RISE ABOVE Traveling Exhibit appear together at air shows , and the Traveling Exhibit also goes to schools and other youth @-@ oriented venues . 
 = = Documentary = = 
 After the 2004 crash , the restoration became the impetus for a nationwide fund raising effort and attracted the attention of Adam White , an independent film maker who was , at the time , filming a documentary on vintage aircraft restoration called The Restorers . He was attracted to both the aircraft and the cause , and his 2007 historical documentary , Red Tail Reborn won Emmy Award recognition in his home state of Ohio , where it was first broadcast in February 2007 , and , subsequently released on DVD in March of that year . Narrated by Michael Dorn of Star Trek fame , himself a pilot and warbird owner , the film documents the difficulties of the restoration of the P @-@ 51C and the travails of the Tuskegee Airmen . The following year PBS picked up the film in its Black History Month programming . White also completed a sequel , Flight of the Red Tail , a 12 @-@ minute film released in 2009 . 
 The restoration , completed in 2009 , cost $ 1 million . In 2005 , the Red Tail Project , which is not for profit , sought to raise about $ 2 million to fund the initial restoration . The organization held several types of events to raise funds . Since then , community @-@ based organizations adopted the project . For example , in Wahpeton , North Dakota , where the aircraft was restored , each August , the " Red Tail Run " is held . This motorcycle and vehicle run , which starts at the Harry Stern Airport , raises money for the project . In 2008 , the organization hired Fund Raising Strategies , a fund raising specialist firm , to develop a direct mail fund raising program . 
 = = The RISE ABOVE Traveling Exhibit = = 
 The Red Tail Project <unk> to preserve the legacy of the airmen through aviation education . Going forward , the group made plans in 2009 , to add a mobile exhibition in the form of a semi @-@ trailer truck and a 53 @-@ foot ( 16 m ) semi @-@ trailer . The name of the educational traveling exhibition program is entitled " RISE ABOVE " . It is intended to precede the Red Tail Project P @-@ 51 exhibitions . 
 The " RISE ABOVE Traveling Exhibit " was introduced at EAA AirVenture 2011 . It consists of a 53 @-@ foot ( 16 @.@ 2 m ) long semi trailer and tractor . The trailer , which has colorful graphics on all four sides , has expandable sides and houses a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) long , curved IMAX movie screen plus comfortable seating for 30 guests ; it is also climate controlled . An original IMAX movie called RISE ABOVE , developed and filmed specifically for the Red Tail Squadron and the unique movie screen , is shown . The traveling exhibit goes to air shows with the Red Tail Project Mustang and spends 40 weeks per year at schools and places where young people congregate . The idea is to take the story of the Tuskegee Airmen , and how they overcame so many obstacles by setting goals and working to meet them , directly to the students who can benefit from hearing about the Airmen 's experiences . The RISE ABOVE Traveling Exhibit is sponsored by the Texas Flying Legends Museum . 
 = Sága and Sökkvabekkr = 
 In Norse mythology , Sága ( Old Norse : [ <unk> ] , possibly meaning " seeress " ) is a goddess associated with the wisdom Sökkvabekkr ( Old Norse : [ <unk> ] ; " sunken bank " , " sunken bench " , or " treasure bank " ) . At Sökkvabekkr , Sága and the god Odin merrily drink as cool waves flow . Both Sága and Sökkvabekkr are attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . Scholars have proposed theories about the implications of the goddess and her associated location , including that the location may be connected to the goddess Frigg 's fen residence Fensalir and that Sága may be another name for Frigg . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of the name Sága is generally held to be connected to the Old Norse verb <unk> , meaning " to see " ( from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> ) . This may mean that Sága is to be understood as a seeress . Since Frigg is referred to as a seeress in the poem Lokasenna , this etymology has led to theories connecting Sága to Frigg . Rudolf Simek says that this etymology raises vowel problems and that a link to saga and <unk> ( meaning " say , tell " ) is more likely , yet that this identification is also problematic . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , Sökkvabekkr is presented fourth among a series of stanzas describing the residences of various gods . In the poem , Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) tells the young Agnar that Odin and Sága happily drink there from golden cups while waves resound : 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Helgakviða Hundingsbana I , the hero Sinfjötli references Sága in the name of a location found in a stanza where Sinfjötli flyts with Guðmundr . The location name , nes <unk> , has been variously translated as " Saga 's Headland , " " Saga 's Cape , " and " Saga 's ness " Part of the stanza may be missing and , due to this , some editors have joined it with the stanza prior . 
 Sága is mentioned once in both the Prose Edda books Gylfaginning and Skáldskaparmál , while <unk> is only mentioned once , in Gylfaginning . In chapter 35 of Gylfaginning , High tells Gangleri ( described as king Gylfi in disguise ) about the ásynjur . High follows a description of Frigg and her dwelling Fensalir with " Second is Saga . She dwells in <unk> , and that is a big place . " In chapter 75 of the book Skáldskaparmál , Sága is present among a list of 27 ásynjur , but no information is provided about her there . 
 = = Theories = = 
 John Lindow says that due to similarity between Sökkvabekkr and Fensalir , " Odin 's open drinking with Sága " , and the potential etymological basis for Sága being a seeress has " led most scholars to understand Sága as another name for Frigg . " Stephan Grundy states that the words Sága and Sökkvabekkr may be by @-@ forms of Frigg and Fensalir , respectively , used for the purpose of composing alliterative verse . 
 Britt @-@ Mari Näsström theorizes that " Frigg 's role as a fertility goddess is revealed in the name of her abode , Fensalir [ ... ] " , that Frigg is the same as Sága , and that both the names Fensalir and Sökkvabekkr " imply a <unk> [ sic ] living in the water and recall the fertility goddess Nerthus " . Näsström adds that " Sökkvabekkr , the subterranean water , alludes to the well of Urd , hidden under the roots of Yggdrasil and the chthonic function , which is manifest in Freyja 's character . " 
 Rudolf Simek says that Sága should be considered " one of the not closer defined Asyniur " along with Hlín , <unk> , Snotra , Vár , and <unk> , and that they " should be seen as female protective goddesses . " Simek adds that " these goddesses were all responsible for specific areas of the private sphere , and yet clear differences were made between them so that they are in many ways similar to matrons . " 
 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm comments that " the gods share their power and influence with goddesses , the heroes and priests with wise women . " Grimm notes that Sökkvabekkr is " described as a place where cool waters rush " and that Odin and Sága " day to day drink gladly out of golden cups . " Grimm theorizes that the liquid from these cups is : 
 the drink of immortality , and at the same time of poesy . Saga may be taken as wife or as daughter of Oðinn ; in either case she is identical to him as god of poetry . With the Greeks the Musa was a daughter of Zeus , but often hear of three or nine Muses , who resemble our wise women , norns and <unk> ( <unk> of destiny ) , and dwell beside springs or wells . The cool flood well befits the <unk> , daughters of Wish . Saga can be no other than our sage ( saw , tale ) , the ' <unk> ' [ ... ] personified and deified . 
 = Stupid in Love = 
 " Stupid in Love " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . The song was written by Shaffer Smith , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , with production helmed by StarGate . Ne @-@ Yo served as the assistant producer . It was written two days before Rihanna and then boyfriend Chris Brown 's altercation on the night of the 2009 Grammy Awards , which occurred on February 8 , 2009 . The lyrical content , which describes an abusive relationship , led Ne @-@ Yo to describe the song as a " premonition " . 
 " Stupid in Love " is a R & B power ballad . Instrumentation is provided by finger snapping , minor piano keys and piano riffs . The lyrics of the song revolve around a female protagonist who realizes that she needs to escape an abusive and adulterous boyfriend . " Stupid in Love " received a mixed to positive response from music critics . Some critics praised Rihanna 's emotional delivery of the song whereas others criticized it as being overly dark . Upon the release of Rated R , the song peaked at number seven on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27 , 2009 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " Stupid in Love " was written by Shaffer Smith , under his stage name Ne @-@ Yo , and Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , under their production name StarGate . Ne @-@ Yo served as the assistant producer . The song was recorded in 2009 at Metropolis Studios , London . On February 8 , 2009 , Rihanna 's scheduled performance at the 2009 Grammy Awards was cancelled . Reports later surfaced regarding an alleged altercation with then boyfriend , singer Chris Brown , who was arrested on suspicion of making criminal threats . On March 5 , 2009 , Brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats . In the months that proceeded the altercation , both Rihanna and Brown kept low profiles and avoided media attention . 
 In an interview for MTV News , co @-@ writer of " Stupid in Love " Ne @-@ Yo , who had collaborated with Rihanna on her previous albums A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) and Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) , clarified that he would not write a song for Rihanna with regard to Brown as he found it unnecessary and because of his friendship with Brown . Producer Chuck Harmony concurred with Ne @-@ Yo 's statement , saying that no matter what song Rihanna released as the lead single people would immediately think that the song is about Brown . In an interview with USA Today , Ne @-@ Yo later revealed that the song was written two days before Rihanna and Brown 's altercation , citing it as " a premonition . " In an interview with Sway Calloway for MTV News at Rated R 's preview in New York City , Rihanna stated that the album represented her honesty and <unk> . During the preview , Calloway noted that " Stupid in Love " was the song most likely to receive comparisons to Brown , with emphasis on the lyric " I still love you , but I can 't do this / I may be dumb but I 'm not stupid . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Stupid in Love " is a R & B power ballad which lasts for 4 : 01 ( four minutes , one second ) . Instrumentation is provided by finger snapping , minor piano keys and piano riffs , a style of repeated chord progression . The lyrics of " Stupid in Love " revolve around a woman in an abusive and adulterous relationship , progressing to the female protagonist leaving her boyfriend . The song begins with the line " Let me tell you somethin ' / Never / Have I ever / Been a size 10 in my whole life . " Rihanna sings the line " This is stupid / I 'm not stupid / Don 't talk to me / Like I 'm stupid " during the chorus . The bridge consists of Rihanna singing " Trying to make this work / but you act like a jerk . " As noted by Rob Harvilla of The Village Voice , the bridge represents the moment when Rihanna realizes that it is not worth her while to stay in the relationship , writing " the dunce cap is off " . " Stupid in Love " contains a lyrical metaphor , " Blood on your hands . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Stupid in Love " garnered mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Leah Greenblatt for Entertainment Weekly praised Rihanna 's high level of emotional conviction on " Stupid in Love " , writing that it is a piece of " self @-@ lacerating balladry . " Neil McCormick for The Daily Telegraph thought that the song was a direct reference to Rihanna and Brown , writing " Rihanna notoriously received a black eye prior to the 2009 Grammy awards when she was attacked by her then boyfriend , R & B singer Chris Brown . Clearly , this is a potentially life @-@ changing incident , and we get some sense of the emotional aftermath on the ballad Stupid In Love . " Norman Mayers for Nu @-@ Soul Magazine concurred with McCormick , writing that Rihanna does not shy away from what happened between herself and Brown , rather , she confronts it directly on " Stupid in Love " . Alex Thornton for HipHopDX wrote that it is difficult to listen to the song without thinking of " you know who , " referring to Brown . 
 Michaelangelo Matos for The A.V. Club wrote that " Stupid in Love " sounded more like a therapy sessions than a song . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media was critical of the song , labeling it as " quite @-@ dim . " Emily Tartanella for Popmatters was not impressed by the song , writing " ' Stupid in Love ' might be aiming for something more , but they arrive at something less . " Chris Richards for The Washington Post wrote that " Stupid in Love " , along with the lead single released from the album " Russian Roulette " , consisted of " plodding beats " and " forgettable hooks " . Richards continued in his review to write that the song is about " <unk> confessions to the <unk> of melodies . " Eric Henderson for Slant Magazine was critical of the first six songs on Rated R ( " Mad House " , " Wait Your Turn " , " Hard " , " Stupid in Love " , " Rockstar 101 " and " Russian Roulette " ) were " grim and relentless . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Album version 
 " Stupid in Love " – 4 : 01 
 Remix version 
 " Stupid in Love " ( Chew Fu Small Room Fix ) – 5 : 32 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Metropolis Studios , London ; 
 Mixed at Chung King Studios , New York City 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rated R , Def Jam Recordings . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Rated R , " Stupid in Love " debuted at number eight on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27 , 2009 . The following week , it peaked at number seven for two consecutive weeks . 
 = Petrified Forest National Park = 
 Petrified Forest National Park is a United States national park in Navajo and Apache counties in northeastern Arizona . Named for its large deposits of petrified wood , the fee area of the park covers about 170 square miles ( 440 square kilometers ) , encompassing semi @-@ desert shrub steppe as well as highly eroded and colorful badlands . The park 's headquarters is about 26 miles ( 42 km ) east of Holbrook along Interstate 40 ( I @-@ 40 ) , which parallels the BNSF Railway 's Southern Transcon , the Puerco River , and historic U.S. Route 66 , all crossing the park roughly east – west . The site , the northern part of which extends into the Painted Desert , was declared a national monument in 1906 and a national park in 1962 . About 800 @,@ 000 people visit the park each year and take part in activities including sightseeing , photography , hiking , and backpacking . 
 Averaging about 5 @,@ 400 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) in elevation , the park has a dry windy climate with temperatures that vary from summer highs of about 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) to winter lows well below freezing . More than 400 species of plants , dominated by grasses such as bunchgrass , blue grama , and <unk> , are found in the park . Fauna include larger animals such as pronghorns , coyotes , and bobcats , many smaller animals , such as deer mice , snakes , lizards , seven kinds of amphibians , and more than 200 species of birds , some of which are permanent residents and many of which are migratory . About half of the park is designated wilderness . 
 The Petrified Forest is known for its fossils , especially fallen trees that lived in the Late Triassic Period , about 225 million years ago . The sediments containing the fossil logs are part of the widespread and colorful Chinle Formation , from which the Painted Desert gets its name . Beginning about 60 million years ago , the Colorado Plateau , of which the park is part , was pushed upward by tectonic forces and exposed to increased erosion . All of the park 's rock layers above the Chinle , except geologically recent ones found in parts of the park , have been removed by wind and water . In addition to petrified logs , fossils found in the park have included Late Triassic ferns , cycads , ginkgoes , and many other plants as well as fauna including giant reptiles called phytosaurs , large amphibians , and early dinosaurs . Paleontologists have been unearthing and studying the park 's fossils since the early 20th century . 
 The park 's earliest human inhabitants arrived at least 8 @,@ 000 years ago . By about 2 @,@ 000 years ago , they were growing corn in the area and shortly thereafter building pit houses in what would become the park . Later inhabitants built above @-@ ground dwellings called pueblos . Although a changing climate caused the last of the park 's pueblos to be abandoned by about 1400 CE , more than 600 archeological sites , including petroglyphs , have been discovered in the park . In the 16th century , Spanish explorers visited the area , and by the mid @-@ 19th century a U.S. team had surveyed an east – west route through the area where the park is now located and noted the petrified wood . Later , roads and a railway followed similar routes and gave rise to tourism and , before the park was protected , to large @-@ scale removal of fossils . Theft of petrified wood remains a problem in the 21st century . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Petrified Forest National Park straddles the border between Apache County and Navajo County in northeastern Arizona . The park is about 30 miles ( 48 km ) long from north to south , and its width varies from a maximum of about 12 miles ( 19 km ) in the north to a minimum of about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) along a narrow corridor between the north and south , where the park widens again to about 4 to 5 miles ( 6 to 8 km ) . 
 I @-@ 40 , former U.S. Route 66 , the BNSF Railway , and the Puerco River bisect the park generally east – west along a similar route . Adamana , a ghost town , is about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the park along the BNSF tracks . Holbrook , about 26 miles ( 42 km ) west of park headquarters along I @-@ 40 , is the nearest city . <unk> the park north – south is Park Road , which runs between I @-@ 40 near park headquarters on the north and U.S. Route 180 on the south . Historic Highway 180 , an earlier alignment of the modern route , crosses the southern edge of the park . Like Route 66 , it has deteriorated and is closed . Many unpaved maintenance roads , closed to the public , intersect Park Road at various points . 
 The fee area of the park covers about 170 square miles ( 440 km2 ) . The Navajo Nation borders the park on the north and northeast . State @-@ owned land , federal land controlled by the Bureau of Land Management , and private land , much of it used for cattle ranching , adjoin the other borders . The park ’ s elevation above sea level varies from a low of 5 @,@ 340 feet ( 1 @,@ 630 m ) along the Puerco River to a high of 6 @,@ 230 feet ( 1 @,@ 900 m ) at Pilot Rock ; the average elevation is about 5 @,@ 400 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) . The terrain varies from gentle hills and major petrified wood deposits in the south to eroded badlands in the north . Most of the park 's intermittent streams — including Lithodendron Wash , Dead Wash , Ninemile Wash , and Dry Wash — empty into the Puerco River . In the southern part of the park , Cottonwood Wash and Jim Camp Wash flow into the Little Colorado River . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Petrified Forest National Park is known for its fossils , especially of fallen trees that lived in the Late Triassic period of the Mesozoic era , about 225 million years ago . During this period , the region that is now the park was near the equator on the southwestern edge of the supercontinent Pangaea , and its climate was humid and sub @-@ tropical . What later became northeastern Arizona was a low plain flanked by mountains to the south and southeast and a sea to the west . Streams flowing across the plain from the highlands deposited inorganic sediment and organic matter , including trees as well as other plants and animals that had entered or fallen into the water . Although most organic matter decays rapidly or is eaten by other organisms , some is buried so quickly that it remains intact and may become fossilized . Within the park , the sediments containing the fossil logs for which the park is named are part of the Chinle Formation . 
 The colorful Chinle , which appears on the surface in many parts of the southwestern United States and from which the Painted Desert gets its name , is up to 800 feet ( 240 m ) thick in the park . It consists of a variety of sedimentary rocks including beds of soft , fine @-@ grained mudstone , siltstone , and claystone — much of which is bentonite — as well as harder sandstone and conglomerate , and limestone . Exposed to wind and water , the Chinle usually erodes differentially into badlands made up of cliffs , gullies , mesas , buttes , and rounded hills . Its bentonite clay , which swells when wet and shrinks while drying , causes surface movement and cracking that discourages plant growth . Lack of plant cover makes the Chinle especially susceptible to weathering . 
 About 60 million years ago , tectonic movements of Earth ’ s crust began to uplift the Colorado Plateau , of which the Painted Desert is part . Eventually parts of the plateau rose to 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) above sea level . This warping of Earth ’ s surface led to the gradual and continuing destruction of the plateau by erosion . An unconformity ( break in the rock record ) of about 200 million years occurs within the park , where erosion has removed all the rock layers above the Chinle except geologically recent ones . The Bidahochi Formation , laid down only 8 to 4 million years ago , rests directly atop the Chinle , and rocks laid down in the Jurassic , Cretaceous , and much of the Tertiary are absent . 
 During the period of the Bidahochi deposition , a large lake basin covered much of northeastern Arizona . The older ( lower ) layers of the formation consist of fluvial and lacustrine ( lake @-@ related ) deposits of silt , sand , and clay . The younger ( upper ) Bidahochi contains ash and lava from volcanoes that erupted nearby and as far away as southwestern Nevada . Although much of the Bidahochi has since eroded , a small part of it outcrops in the northern part of the park — on Pilot Rock in the park ’ s wilderness section and along the rim of the Painted Desert between Pintado and Tawa points . Exposed by erosion of the Bidahochi are volcanic landforms called maars ( flat @-@ bottomed , roughly circular volcanic craters of explosive origin ) . A <unk> vent can be seen from the Pintado Point lookout . 
 During the Quaternary Period ( 2 @.@ 6 million years ago up to today ) , deposits of windblown sand and alluvium covered much of the Chinle and Bidahochi . Older dunes range in age from 500 @,@ 000 years at higher elevations in the northern part of the park to about 10 @,@ 000 years in sandy drainage areas such as Lithodendron Wash . Stabilized by grasses and other vegetation , young dunes of about 1 @,@ 000 years old are found throughout the park . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 During the Late Triassic , downed trees accumulating in river channels in what became the park were buried periodically by sediment containing volcanic ash . Groundwater dissolved silica ( silicon dioxide ) from the ash and carried it into the logs , where it formed quartz crystals that gradually replaced the organic matter . Traces of iron oxide and other substances combined with the silica to create varied colors in the petrified wood . 
 In Petrified Forest National Park , most of the logs in the park retained their original external form during petrification but lost their internal structure . However , a small fraction of the logs and most of the park ’ s petrified animal bones have cells and other spaces that are mineral @-@ filled but still retain much of their original organic structure . With these permineralized fossils , it is possible to study the cellular make @-@ up of the original organisms with the aid of a microscope . Other organic matter — typically leaves , seeds , cones , pollen grains , spores , small stems , and fish , insect , and animal remains — have been preserved in the park as compression fossils , flattened by the weight of the sediments above until only a thin film remains in the rock . 
 Much of the park ’ s petrified wood is from <unk> <unk> trees , while some found in the northern part of the park is from <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> trees . At least nine species of fossil trees from the park have been identified ; all are extinct . The park has many other kinds of fossils besides trees . The Chinle , considered one of the richest Late Triassic fossil @-@ plant deposits in the world , contains more than 200 fossil plant taxa . Plant groups represented in the park include lycopods , ferns , cycads , conifers , ginkgoes , as well as unclassified forms . The park has also produced many fossil vertebrates — including giant crocodile @-@ like reptiles called phytosaurs , large salamander @-@ like amphibians called <unk> , and early dinosaurs — and invertebrates , including freshwater snails and clams . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Average summer daytime temperatures range in the mid- to high 90s Fahrenheit . Because the clear skies of the park allow for rapid cooling at night , summer lows are sometimes 40 ° F ( 22 ° C ) below the daily highs . July is the warmest month , with an average high of 92 ° F ( 33 ° C ) and an average low of 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) . January is the coldest month , when highs average 48 ° F ( 9 ° C ) and lows average 21 ° F ( − 6 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature was 107 ° F ( 42 ° C ) in 1998 , and the lowest was − 27 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) in 1971 . 
 Winter winds can reach 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . Summer breezes are lighter , but the 10 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 16 km / h ) average wind causes frequent sandstorms and dust devils , some of which reach altitudes of several thousand feet . 
 Rain is heaviest from July through September , when about half of the park 's annual average precipitation falls during short , violent thunderstorms . August is generally the wettest month . At an elevation of more than 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , Petrified Forest National Park has a chance of light snow from October through March , although snow cover rarely persists . The average relative humidity of the area is well below 50 percent and at times less than 15 percent . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ U.S. = = = 
 More than 600 archeological sites have been found inside the boundaries of Petrified Forest National Park . Evidence suggests that the earliest inhabitants of the park arrived at least 8 @,@ 000 years ago . Two Folsom @-@ type spear points , the earliest artifacts of Paleo @-@ Indians found in the park , are at least that old . Between 6000 BCE and 1 CE , the Archaic – Early Basketmaker Era , nomadic groups established seasonal camps in the Petrified Forest from which they hunted small game such as rabbits , pronghorn antelope , and deer and harvested seeds from Indian ricegrass and other wild plants . Around 150 BCE , they began to grow corn in the area . By 1 CE , as their farming techniques improved , some built houses in the Petrified Forest and began to stay there year @-@ round . 
 The early farmers from the Early Basketmaker II Era , lived in the Petrified Forest from about 1 CE to about 800 CE . They occupied pit houses at fewer than 100 sites , at first on mesas or other vantage points and later at the base of bluffs and in lowlands , where the soil was better . As climatic conditions worsened for farming between 750 and 900 CE , the settlements changed with the Pueblo I Era . Rather than below @-@ ground pits , the Pueblo Builders constructed above @-@ ground houses and storerooms that may have been capable of storing food for more than one year . At the same time , climatic conditions changed again , this time for the better , between 900 and 1275 CE . More than 200 pueblo @-@ builder sites have been identified in the park at a wide variety of locations — at the mouths of washes , near seeps , and on moisture @-@ holding sand dunes . 
 During the Pueblo I Era , most sites were single @-@ family homes , but as soils became exhausted many sites were abandoned by 1250 CE in favor of very large multi @-@ room pueblos close to more dependable sources of water . The Pueblo Builders constructed two of these large pueblos , one called Stone Axe , about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) east of the park , and the other at Puerco Pueblo , which overlooks the Puerco River near the middle of the park . There they built about 100 one @-@ story rooms around an open plaza . The rooms had no windows or doors but each could be entered by climbing a ladder and descending through a hole in the roof . At its peak , perhaps 200 people lived in this pueblo . Over time , however , a persistently dry climate led to out @-@ migration , and the last residents abandoned Puerco Pueblo in about 1380 CE . 
 At Puerco Pueblo and many other sites within the park , petroglyphs — images , symbols , or designs — have been scratched , pecked , carved , or incised on rock surfaces , often on a patina known as desert varnish . Most of the petroglyphs in Petrified Forest National Park are thought to be between 650 and 2 @,@ 000 years old . 
 From the 16th through the 18th centuries , explorers looking for routes between Spanish colonies along the Rio Grande to the southeast and other Spanish colonies on the Pacific coast to the west passed near or through the area , which they called El Desierto Pintado , the Painted Desert . However , the park 's oldest Spanish inscriptions , left by descendants of the region 's early Spanish colonists , date only to the late 19th century . 
 = = = U.S. = = = 
 After the Southwest became part of the U.S. , explorers continued to look for good east – west routes along the 35th parallel . In 1853 , a crew led by U.S. Army Lieutenant Amiel Whipple surveyed along a sandy wash in the northern part of the Petrified Forest . So impressed was Whipple by the petrified wood along the banks of the arroyo that he named it Lithodendron Creek ( Stone Tree Creek ) . Geologist Jules Marcou , a member of the Whipple expedition , observed that the petrified trees were from the Triassic . 
 A slightly later route along the parallel was a wagon road , built between 1857 and 1860 , that involved experimental use of camels as transport . In the late 19th century , settlers and private stagecoach companies followed similar east – west routes . <unk> who stayed in the area developed cattle ranches on the grasslands , and cattle grazed in the Petrified Forest until the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 Also close to the 35th parallel was the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad . Its opening in the early 1880s led to the founding of towns like Holbrook and Adamana . Visitors could stop at the Adamana train station , book a hotel room , and take a tour of what was then called the Chalcedony Forest . Over the years , the line changed hands , becoming the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway , and then the BNSF . More than 60 BNSF trains , mostly carrying freight , pass through the park every day . U.S. Route 66 , a former transcontinental auto highway developed in 1926 from part of the National Old Trails Road , ran parallel to the railroad tracks until it was decommissioned in 1985 . The park has preserved within its boundaries a small grassy section of the road . Interstate 40 , which crosses the park , replaced the older highway . 
 Increasing tourist and commercial interest in petrified wood during the late 19th century began to alarm residents of the region . In 1895 , the Arizona Territorial Legislature asked the U.S. Congress to create a petrified forest national park . Although this first attempt failed , in 1906 the Antiquities Act signed by President Theodore Roosevelt was used to create the Petrified Forest National Monument . Between 1934 and 1942 , the federal Civilian Conservation Corps built road , trails , and structures in the monument , and the government acquired additional land in the Painted Desert section . The monument became a national park in 1962 . Six years after the signing of the Wilderness Act in 1964 by President Lyndon B. Johnson , wilderness areas ( where human activity is limited ) , were designated in the park . In 2004 , President George W. Bush signed a bill authorizing the eventual expansion of the park from 93 @,@ 353 acres ( about 146 mi2 or 378 km2 ) to 218 @,@ 533 acres ( about 341 mi2 or 884 km2 ) . Theft of petrified wood is still a problem . Despite a guard force of seven National Park Service rangers , fences , warning signs , and the threat of a $ 325 fine , an estimated 12 short tons ( 11 @,@ 000 kg ) of the fossil wood is stolen from the Petrified Forest every year . 
 Jessee Walter Fewkes , the first archeologist to visit Puerco Ruin , predicted in the late 19th century that it would yield many artifacts . Conservationist John Muir conducted the first excavations of the ruin in 1905 – 06 . Although he did not publish his findings , he urged the federal government to preserve Petrified Forest . Professional archeological work in the park began in the early 20th century when Walter Hough conducted excavations at Puerco Ruin and other sites . In 1919 , a phytosaur skull was discovered near Blue Mesa in the Petrified Forest and sent to the Museum of Paleontology in Berkeley , California . In 1921 , Annie Alexander , founder of the museum , visited Blue Mesa to collect more of the phytosaur and other specimens ; this led to further excavations by paleontologist Charles Camp . Since then , more than 250 fossil sites have been documented in the park . In the 1930s , the Civil Works Administration funded research in the park by archeologists H.P. Mera and C.B. Cosgrove . A National Park Service resurvey of the Petrified Forest in the early 1940s identified most of the large sites with stone ruins , and subsequent surveys since 1978 have identified a total of more than 600 artifact sites , many of them small . Research in paleontology and archeology continues at the park in the 21st century . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 A 2005 survey found that 447 species of flora , of which 57 species are invasive , occur in the park . Although the park is known for its fossils and eroded badlands , its main environment is semi @-@ desert shrub steppe . Protected from development and overgrazing for many years , the park has some of the best grassland in northeastern Arizona . In the northern part of the park , the volcanic soils of the Bidahochi Formation support abundant plant life along the Painted Desert rim . In contrast to the relatively bare badlands below , the rim is covered with shrubs , small trees , grasses , and herbs . 
 The dominant plants in the park include more than 100 grass species , many native to the region . Growing among the grasses are flowering species such as evening primrose , mariposa lily , and blue flax , and shrubs such as sagebrush , saltbush , and rabbitbrush . Among the wide variety of grasses are native perennial bunchgrass , blue grama , <unk> , <unk> grama , bearded <unk> , and bush <unk> . Invasive species that crowd out slower @-@ spreading natives include annual <unk> and brome ( cheat grass ) . 
 Trees and shrubs grow in riparian zones along the park 's washes . Willows and cottonwoods are the larger plants , joined by rushes and sedges . Here the invasive Eurasian tamarisk , also known as saltcedar , threatens native plants by crowding , using most of the available water , and increasing soil salinity by exuding salt through its leaves . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Some of the larger animals roaming the grasslands include pronghorns , black @-@ tailed jackrabbits ( hares ) , Gunnison 's prairie dogs , coyotes , bobcats and foxes . <unk> , the fastest land animals in North America , are capable of 60 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 97 km / h ) sprints . The blood vessels in the huge , thin @-@ walled ears of the jackrabbits act as heat exchangers . These hares are known for their bursts of speed , long leaps , and zigzag routes , all of which protect them from being eaten by golden eagles and other predators . The prairie dogs live in large colonies or " towns " , near which many other species find food and shelter . Coyotes dine largely on rodents but also eat fruits , reptiles , insects , small mammals , birds , and carrion . 
 Bobcats and bullsnakes hunt smaller animals , such as deer mice and white @-@ tailed antelope squirrels in the park 's riparian zones . Western pipistrelle bats feast on insects , and pallid bats eat beetles , centipedes , cicadas , praying mantises , scorpions , and other arthropods . On the Painted Desert rim , small animals find food and shelter among the denser foliage , and mule deer sometimes frequent the area . 
 More than 16 kinds of lizards and snakes live in various habitats in the park and consume large quantities of insects , spiders , scorpions , other reptiles , and small mammals . The collared lizard , which occurs in every habitat , is the largest and most often seen . 
 Plateau striped whiptails , a species consisting entirely of females , prefer grasslands and developed areas . Side @-@ blotched lizards live in rocky areas of the park but are seldom seen . Gopher snakes , which sometimes imitate rattlesnakes when disturbed , are among the most common snakes in the park . The Western rattlesnake , the only venomous snake found in the park , prefers grasslands and shrub areas . 
 Seven kinds of amphibians , which drink no water but absorb it through their permeable skins , have been identified in Petrified Forest National Park . Tiger salamanders , found in grassland and near major drainages , are the only salamander species known in Arizona . Woodhouse ’ s toads , which are seldom seen , are the largest toads in the park . They like grasslands , riparian corridors , and developed areas . Red @-@ spotted toads , most active in the rainy season , July through September , are found in rocky areas near streams and in canyons . The Great Plains toad , the most common toad in the park , prefers grasslands . Resident spadefoot toads include the New Mexico , plains , and Couch 's varieties . 
 A survey conducted in 2006 identified 216 species of birds known to have occurred in Petrified Forest National Park since the park became a protected area in 1906 . Of those , 33 species breed within the park , 6 other species probably do , and 18 species live in the park year @-@ round . Thirty @-@ five species live in the park only during the summer and 11 species only during the winter . The greatest diversity of birds occurs during fall and winter migrations . 
 Raptors , songbirds , and ground birds are found in the park 's grassland , while the Puerco River 's riparian corridor is a good place for year @-@ round residents as well as migrants such as warblers , vireos , avocets , and <unk> . Developed areas around the visitor center and museum attract western tanagers , hermit warblers , house finches , and others . Occasional shorebirds and eastern birds also visit the park . 
 Birds commonly seen in the park include the common raven and the western meadowlark , known for its charming song . Anna 's hummingbird , which can hover and fly backwards as well as forwards , is among the smallest birds in the park . The largest is the golden eagle , with a wingspan of up to 7 feet ( 2 m ) . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The park is open every day except Christmas ( December 25 ) on a schedule that varies slightly with the seasons . In 2010 , it and its Painted Desert Visitor Center and Rainbow Forest Museum were open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. from May 9 through September 6 but opened as early as 8 a.m. and closed as late as 5 p.m. during other parts of the year . The Painted Desert Inn ( an historic museum and bookstore ) is open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. year @-@ round except Christmas . Park clocks are always set to Mountain Standard Time , as Arizona does not observe Daylight Saving Time . 
 The Painted Desert Visitor Center , designed by modernist architect Richard Neutra , is part of the Painted Desert Community Complex Historic District and is on the National Register of Historic Places . Eight other sites within the park are also on the National Register , including the Painted Desert Inn and associated cabins , the Agate House Pueblo , the Painted Desert Petroglyphs and Ruins Archeological District , Newspaper Rock Petroglyphs Archeological District , Puerco Ruins and Petroglyphs , the <unk> Site ( an archeological site ) , the Twin Buttes Archeological District , and the 35th Parallel Route ( also known as the Beale Camel Trail ) . The Painted Desert Inn was upgraded to a National Historic Landmark in 1987 . 
 The visitor center , which is near the north entrance to the park , offers visitor information and shows a 20 @-@ minute orientation movie , " Timeless Impressions " , once every half @-@ hour . It has a bookstore , exhibits , a restaurant open from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. , a gift shop , a gas station , a post office open from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. Monday through Friday , a postal drop box , and public restrooms . The Rainbow Forest Museum complex 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the park 's south entrance offers services including information and " Timeless Impressions " showings once every half @-@ hour . It has a bookstore , fossil exhibits , an interactive Triassic Virtual Tour , limited food service , a gift shop , and public restrooms . The Painted Desert Inn , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the Painted Desert Visitor Center , offers visitor information . It has a bookstore , museum exhibits ( including the building itself ) , and public restrooms . 
 No campgrounds or overnight lodging are available in the park , although nearby communities such as Holbrook offer motels and other accommodations . Overnight parking is not allowed except in the case of backpackers with wilderness hiking permits . Sightseeing is available by private automobile , motorcycle , commercial tour , bicycle , and hiking . The park road , parking lots , and turn @-@ outs are big enough to accommodate large recreational vehicles . Off @-@ road vehicle travel , including by mountain bike , is not allowed . With a few exceptions such as unpaved Old Highway 66 , bicycles must stay on paved roads such as the 28 @-@ mile ( 45 km ) main park road and stay off trails and unpaved surfaces . 
 The park 's seven maintained hiking trails , some paved , vary in length from less than 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to nearly 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . Pets are allowed on these trails if kept on a leash , but bicycles are not . These named trails are Painted Desert Rim , Puerco Pueblo , Blue Mesa , Crystal Forest , Giant Logs , Long Logs , and Agate House . Hikers and backpackers may also visit the park 's wilderness areas . Free permits are required for overnight stays ; they are issued from the Painted Desert Visitor Center , Painted Desert Inn , and Rainbow Forest Museum . Most backpackers enter the wilderness at the north end of the park , where parking and an access trail are available at Painted Desert Inn . Group camping is limited to eight people . Horseback riding is allowed in the wilderness areas ; water for horses is available at the service station near the Painted Desert Visitor Center . Riders and hikers are asked to travel along dry washes as much as possible to reduce the impact on fragile desert soils . 
 Rangers offer a variety of programs about the park . Regularly scheduled events include a Painted Desert Inn tour , a Triassic program at the Rainbow Forest Museum sunroom , a talk or walk along the Giant Logs Trail behind the museum , and a Puerco Pueblo guided walk . The park hosts special events related to Earth Science Week and National American Indian Heritage Month . On Saturdays from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day at the Painted Desert Inn , artisans from the region give cultural demonstrations related to ancient peoples , intertribal relationships , and European @-@ descent cultures . For students and teachers , the rangers offer educational materials and field @-@ trip talks . In some years during the summer months , artists @-@ in @-@ residence work in the park . 
 = Italian battleship Dante Alighieri = 
 Dante Alighieri was the first dreadnought battleship built for the Regia Marina ( Royal Italian Navy ) . Completed in 1913 , she was the first battleship built with her main armament in triple @-@ gun turrets . The ship served as a flagship during World War I , but saw very little action other than the Second Battle of Durazzo in 1918 where she did not engage enemy forces . She never fired her guns in anger during her career . Dante Alighieri was refitted in 1923 , stricken from the Navy List in 1928 and subsequently sold for scrap . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dante Alighieri was designed by Rear Admiral Engineer Edoardo Masdea , Chief Constructor of the Regia Marina , based on the ideas of General Vittorio Cuniberti who advocated a battleship with main guns of a single caliber and optimized for broadside fire . In addition , the ship 's superstructure and funnels were to be kept to a minimum . 
 The dreadnought was 158 @.@ 4 meters ( 519 ft 8 in ) long at the waterline , and 168 @.@ 1 meters ( 551 ft 6 in ) overall . The ship had a beam of 26 @.@ 6 meters ( 87 ft 3 in ) , and a draft of 8 @.@ 8 meters ( 28 ft 10 in ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 552 tonnes ( 19 @,@ 243 long tons ) at normal load , and 21 @,@ 600 tonnes ( 21 @,@ 300 long tons ) at deep load . Dante Alighieri had two rudders , one behind the other , and a crew of 31 officers and 950 enlisted men . 
 The ship was propelled by four propeller shafts driven by Parsons steam turbines . Steam for the turbines was provided by 23 Blechynden water @-@ tube boilers , seven of which burned oil and the remaining 16 burned a mixture of oil and coal . The boilers were widely separated in two compartments , each with two funnels , and the turbines were positioned between the two center turrets . Designed to reach a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) from 35 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 26 @,@ 000 kW ) , Dante Alighieri failed to reach this goal on her sea trials . The ship only made a maximum speed of 22 @.@ 83 knots ( 42 @.@ 28 km / h ; 26 @.@ 27 mph ) using 32 @,@ 190 shp ( 24 @,@ 000 kW ) . The ship could store a maximum of 3 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 000 long tons ) of coal and an unknown quantity of fuel oil that gave her a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , and 1 @,@ 000 nmi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) at 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Dante Alighieri 's main armament consisted of a dozen 46 @-@ caliber 305 @-@ millimeter ( 12 inch ) guns , in four triple @-@ gun turrets positioned on the ship 's centerline . None of the turrets were superfiring . While the later classes of battleships and battlecruisers designed for the Imperial Russian Navy shared the turret layout of the Dante Alighieri , all surviving evidence shows that the Russians decided on this layout for their own reasons . 
 Sources disagree regarding these guns ' performance , but naval historian Giorgio Giorgerini claims that they fired 452 @-@ kilogram ( 996 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles at the rate of one round per minute and that they had a muzzle velocity of 840 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) which gave a maximum range of 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 The ship 's secondary armament consisted of twenty 50 @-@ caliber 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns . Eight of these guns were fitted in twin @-@ gun turrets abreast the forward and aft main gun turrets while the remaining 12 guns were mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull . These guns could depress to − 10 <unk> and had a maximum elevation of + 15 degrees ; they had a rate of fire of six shots per minute . They could fire a 22 @.@ 1 @-@ kilogram ( 49 lb ) high @-@ explosive projectile with a muzzle velocity of 850 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . For defense against torpedo boats , Dante Alighieri carried thirteen 50 @-@ caliber 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns mounted on the turret tops . These guns had the same range of elevation as the secondary guns , although their rate of fire was higher at 10 rounds per minute . They fired a 6 @-@ kilogram ( 13 lb ) AP projectile with a muzzle velocity of 815 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 670 ft / s ) to a maximum distance of 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . The ship was also fitted with three submerged 45 @-@ centimeter ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside and the third in the stern . 
 Dante Alighieri had a complete waterline armor belt that had a maximum thickness of 254 millimeters ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) . The ship 's armored deck was 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick . The main turrets were protected by a maximum of 254 millimeters of armor while the secondary turrets and the casemates had 98 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of armor . The conning tower had walls 305 millimeters ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Dante Alighieri , named after the medieval Italian poet , was the only battleship ever named for a poet . She was laid down at the naval shipyard in Castellammare di Stabia on 6 June 1909 , launched on 20 August 1910 , and completed on 15 January 1913 . The ship was used to evaluate Curtiss floatplanes in 1913 – 14 . When Italy entered World War I in May 1915 , Dante Alighieri was the flagship of the 1st Battle Squadron based at Taranto and remained with the squadron through 1916 . For the rest of the war , the ship was assigned to the Southern Adriatic and Ionian Sea forces . Under the command of Vice Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the ship was positioned to intercept any Austro @-@ Hungarian ships based at Cattaro if they sortied to attack the Allied ships bombarding Durazzo on 2 October 1918 . The Austro @-@ Hungarians remained in harbor and Dante Alighieri did not fire her guns during the battle . 
 King Victor Emmanuel III entertained delegates to the Genoa Conference aboard Dante Alighieri in 1922 . The ship was refitted in 1923 with a tripod foremast , an aircraft flying @-@ off platform on Turret No. 3 , and her forward funnels was made taller to reduce smoke interference with the bridge . She tested a new fire @-@ control system in 1924 at ranges up to 26 @,@ 000 meters ( 28 @,@ 000 yd ) ; her new tripod mast was not sturdy enough for the weight of the system , but it was judged to be successful and subsequently installed in the Conte di Cavour @-@ class battleships . That same year , the ship transported Benito Mussolini to Palermo , Sicily . The Italian economy had been weakened by fighting World War I , and by the late 1920s , it could no longer afford to maintain a sizable fleet . As a result , Admiral Sechi decided to scrap Dante Alighieri and the salvaged battleship Leonardo da Vinci to reduce the naval budget . The ship was stricken on 1 July 1928 and was subsequently scrapped . 
 = My Sweet Lord = 
 " My Sweet Lord " is a song by English musician and former Beatle George Harrison that was released in November 1970 on his triple album All Things Must Pass . Also issued as a single , Harrison 's first as a solo artist , " My Sweet Lord " topped charts worldwide and was the biggest @-@ selling single of 1971 in the UK . In America and Britain , the song was the first number 1 single by an ex @-@ Beatle . Harrison originally gave the song to his fellow Apple Records artist Billy Preston to record ; this version , which Harrison co @-@ produced , appeared on Preston 's Encouraging Words album in September 1970 . 
 Harrison wrote " My Sweet Lord " in praise of the Hindu god Krishna , while at the same time intending the lyrics to serve as a call to abandon religious sectarianism through his deliberate blending of the Hebrew word hallelujah with chants of " Hare Krishna " and Vedic prayer . The recording features producer Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound treatment and heralded the arrival of Harrison 's much @-@ admired slide guitar technique , which one biographer described as being " musically as distinctive a signature as the mark of Zorro " . Preston , Ringo Starr , Eric Clapton and the group Badfinger are among the other musicians appearing on the recording . 
 Later in the 1970s , " My Sweet Lord " was at the centre of a heavily publicised copyright infringement suit , due to its similarity to the Ronnie Mack song " He 's So Fine " , a 1963 hit for the New York girl group the Chiffons . In 1976 , Harrison was found to have subconsciously plagiarised the earlier tune , a verdict that had repercussions throughout the music industry . He claimed to have used the out @-@ of @-@ copyright " Oh Happy Day " , a Christian hymn , as his inspiration for the song 's melody . 
 Harrison performed " My Sweet Lord " at the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 , and it remains the most popular composition from his post @-@ Beatles career . He reworked the song as " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " for inclusion as a bonus track on the 30th anniversary reissue of All Things Must Pass . Many artists have covered the song including Andy Williams , Peggy Lee , Edwin Starr , Johnny Mathis , Nina Simone , Julio Iglesias , Richie Havens , Megadeth , Boy George , Elton John , Jim James , Bonnie Bramlett and Elliott Smith . " My Sweet Lord " is ranked 460th on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of " the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . The song reached number 1 in Britain for a second time when re @-@ released in January 2002 , two months after Harrison 's death . 
 = = Background = = 
 George Harrison began writing " My Sweet Lord " in December 1969 , when he , Billy Preston and Eric Clapton were in Copenhagen , Denmark , as guest artists on Delaney & Bonnie 's European tour . By this time , Harrison had already written the gospel @-@ influenced " Hear Me Lord " and " Gopala Krishna " , and ( with Preston ) the African @-@ American spiritual " Sing One for the Lord " . He had also produced two religious @-@ themed hit singles on the Beatles ' Apple record label : Preston 's " That 's the Way God Planned It " and Radha Krishna Temple ( London ) ' s " Hare Krishna Mantra " . The latter was a musical adaptation of the 5000 @-@ year @-@ old Vaishnava Hindu mantra , performed by members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness ( ISKCON ) , colloquially known as " the Hare Krishna movement " . Harrison now wanted to fuse the messages of the Christian and Gaudiya Vaishnava faiths into what musical biographer Simon Leng terms " gospel incantation with a Vedic chant " . 
 The Copenhagen stopover marked the end of the Delaney & Bonnie tour , with a three @-@ night residency at the <unk> Theatre on 10 – 12 December . According to Harrison 's 1976 court testimony , " My Sweet Lord " was conceived while the band members were attending a backstage press conference and he had ducked out to an upstairs room at the theatre . Harrison recalled vamping chords on guitar and alternating between sung phrases of " hallelujah " and " Hare Krishna " . He later took the idea to the others , and the chorus vocals were developed further . Band leader Delaney Bramlett 's more recent version of events is that the idea originated from Harrison asking him how to go about writing a genuine gospel song , and that Bramlett demonstrated by scat singing the words " Oh my Lord " while wife Bonnie and singer Rita Coolidge added gospel " hallelujah " s in reply . British music journalist John Harris has questioned the accuracy of Bramlett 's account , however , comparing it to a fisherman 's " It was this big " -type bragging story . 
 Using as his inspiration the Edwin Hawkins Singers ' rendition of an eighteenth @-@ century Christian hymn , " Oh Happy Day " , Harrison continued working on the theme . He completed the song , with some help from Preston , once they had returned to London . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song 's lyrics reflect Harrison 's often @-@ stated desire for a direct relationship with God , expressed in simple words that all believers could affirm , regardless of their religion . Author Ian Inglis observes a degree of " understandable " impatience in the first verse 's line , " Really want to see you , Lord , but it takes so long , my Lord " . By the end of the song 's second verse , Harrison declares a wish to " know " God also and attempts to reconcile the impatience : 
 I really want to know you 
 Really want to go with you 
 Really want to show you , Lord , that it won 't take long , my Lord 
 Following this verse , in response to the main vocal 's repetition of the song title , Harrison devised a choral line singing the Hebrew word of praise , " hallelujah " , common in the Christian and Jewish religions . Later in the song , after an instrumental break , these voices return , now chanting the first twelve words of the Hare Krishna mantra , known more reverentially as the Maha mantra : 
 Hare Krishna , Hare Krishna 
 Krishna Krishna , Hare Hare 
 Hare Rama , Hare Rama 
 These Sanskrit words are the main mantra of the Hare Krishna faith , with which Harrison identified , although he did not belong to any spiritual organisation . In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison explained that he intended repeating and alternating " hallelujah " and " Hare Krishna " to show that the two terms meant " quite the same thing " , as well as to have listeners chanting the mantra " before they knew what was going on ! " 
 Following the Sanskrit lines , " hallelujah " is sung twice more before the mantra repeats , along with an ancient Vedic prayer . According to Hindu tradition , this prayer is dedicated to a devotee 's spiritual teacher , or guru , and equates the teacher to the divine Trimurti – Brahma , Vishnu and Shiva ( or Maheshvara ) – and to the Godhead , Brahman . 
 <unk> Brahmā , <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> devo <unk> 
 gurus <unk> , <unk> Brahma 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 Former Krishna devotee Joshua Greene translates the lines as follows : " I offer homage to my guru , who is as great as the creator Brahma , the maintainer Vishnu , the destroyer Shiva , and who is the very energy of God . " The prayer is the third verse of the Guru <unk> , a fourteen @-@ verse hymn in praise of Hindu spiritual teachers . 
 Some Christian fundamentalist anti @-@ rock activists objected that chanting " Hare Krishna " in " My Sweet Lord " was anti @-@ Christian or satanic , while some born @-@ again Christians adopted the song as an anthem . Several commentators cite the mantra and the simplicity of Harrison 's lyrics as central to the song 's universality . The " lyrics are not directed at a specific manifestation of a single faith 's deity , " Inglis writes , " but rather to the concept of one god whose essential nature is unaffected by particular interpretations and who pervades everything , is present everywhere , is all @-@ knowing and all @-@ powerful , and transcends time and space ... All of us – Christian , Hindu , Muslim , Jew , Buddhist – can address our gods in the same way , using the same phrase [ ' my sweet Lord ' ] . " 
 = = Billy Preston 's version = = 
 With the Beatles still together officially in December 1969 , Harrison had no plans to make a solo album of his own and reportedly intended to offer " My Sweet Lord " to Edwin Hawkins . Instead , following the Delaney & Bonnie tour , he decided to record it with Billy Preston , for whom Harrison was co @-@ producing a second Apple album , Encouraging Words . Recording took place at Olympic Studios in London , in January 1970 , with Preston as principal musician , supported by the guitarist , bass player and drummer from the Temptations ' backing band . The Edwin Hawkins Singers happened to be on tour in the UK as well , so Harrison invited them to participate ; Hawkins ' gospel group also overdubbed vocals onto the Harrison – Preston collaboration " Sing One for the Lord " at this time . 
 Preston 's version of " My Sweet Lord " differs from Harrison 's later reading in that the " hallelujah " refrain appears from the start of the song and , rather than the full mantra section , the words " Hare Krishna " are sung only twice throughout the whole track . With the Vedic prayer likewise absent , Simon Leng views this original recording as a possible " definitive ' roots ' take ' " of the song , thanks to its " pure gospel groove " and Hawkins ' participation . In his review of Encouraging Words , Bruce Eder of AllMusic describes " My Sweet Lord " and " All Things Must Pass " ( another Harrison composition originally given to Preston to record ) as " stunning gospel numbers ... that make the Harrison versions seem pallid " . 
 Preston 's " My Sweet Lord " was a minor hit in Europe when issued as a single there in September 1970 , but otherwise , Encouraging Words made little impression commercially . The album and single releases were delayed for at least two months in the United States , where " My Sweet Lord " would climb to number 90 on the Billboard Hot 100 by the end of February 1971 , helped by the enormous success of Harrison 's version . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Five months after the Olympic session , with the Beatles having now broken up , " My Sweet Lord " was one of 30 or more tracks that Harrison recorded for his All Things Must Pass triple album . It was a song he had been reluctant to record , for fear of committing himself publicly to such an overt religious message . " I was sticking my neck out on the chopping block because now I would have to live up to something , " Harrison explained in I Me Mine , " but at the same time I thought ' Nobody 's saying it ; I wish somebody else was doing it . ' " 
 With Phil Spector co @-@ producing the sessions at Abbey Road Studios , Preston again played on the track , along with Clapton , Ringo Starr , Jim Gordon and all four members of Badfinger . The identity of the remaining musicians has traditionally been open to question , with drummer Alan White once claiming he played on the song , with Carl Radle on bass , Starr on tambourine and John Lennon among the rhythm guitarists . The common view , following research by Simon Leng , is that Harrison and Spector chose from a number of rhythm tracks before selecting the master take , which featured , among others , Klaus Voormann on bass and Gary Wright on a second keyboard ; Bruce Spizer suggests that Peter Frampton may have added acoustic guitar after the main session . Harrison 's original vocal appears to have been acceptable , according to notes written by Spector in August , but the chorus vocals ( all sung by Harrison and credited to " the George O 'Hara @-@ Smith Singers " ) , his harmonised slide guitar parts , and John Barham 's orchestral arrangement were overdubbed during the next two months , partly at Trident Studios in central London . 
 Leng describes the recording as a " painstakingly crafted tableau " of sound , beginning with a bank of " chiming " acoustic guitars and the " flourish " of zither strings that introduces Harrison 's slide @-@ guitar motif . At close to the two @-@ minute mark , after the tension @-@ building bridge , a subtle two @-@ semitone shift in key ( from E major to the rarely used key of F @-@ sharp major , via a C # dominant seventh chord ) signals the song 's release from its extended introduction . This higher register is then complemented by Harrison 's " increasingly impassioned " vocal and the subsequent " timely reappearance " of his twin slide guitars , before the backing vocals " deftly " switch to the Sanskrit mantra and prayer . Leng also notes the Indian music aspects of the production , in the " swarmandal @-@ like " zithers , representing the sympathetic strings of a sitar , and the slide guitars ' evocation of sarangi , dilruba and other string instruments . In an interview for Martin Scorsese 's 2011 documentary on George Harrison , Spector recalls that he liked the results so much , he insisted that " My Sweet Lord " be the lead single from the album . 
 This later , rock version of the song was markedly different from the " Oh Happy Day " -inspired gospel arrangement in musical and structural terms , aligning Harrison 's composition with pop music conventions , but also drawing out the similarities of its melody line with that of the Chiffons ' 1963 hit " He 's So Fine " . Spizer suggests that this was due to Harrison being " so focused on the feel of his record " , while Record Collector editor Peter Doggett wrote in 2001 that , despite Harrison 's inspiration for " My Sweet Lord " having come from " Oh Happy Day " , " in the hands of producer and arranger Phil Spector , it came out as a carbon copy of the Chiffons ' [ song ] " . Chip Madinger and Mark Easter remark on the " sad " fact that Spector , as " master of all that was ' girl @-@ group ' during the early ' 60s " , failed to recognise the similarities . 
 = = Release = = 
 Before arriving in New York on 28 October to carry out mastering on All Things Must Pass , Harrison had announced that no single would be issued – so as not to " detract from the impact " of the triple album . Apple 's US executive , Allan Steckler , together with business manager Allen Klein and Spector all pushed for " My Sweet Lord " to be released immediately , however , even though Billy Preston 's version was already scheduled for release as a single in America the following month . Film director Howard Worth recalls a preliminary finance meeting for the Raga documentary ( for which Harrison would provide emergency funding through Apple Films ) that began with the ex @-@ Beatle asking him to listen to a selection of songs and pick his favourite , which was " My Sweet Lord " . 
 Harrison relented , and " My Sweet Lord " was issued as the album 's lead single around the world , but not in Britain ; the release date was 23 November 1970 in the United States . The mix of the song differed from that found on All Things Must Pass by featuring less echo and a slightly altered backing @-@ vocal track . Both sides of the North American picture sleeve consisted of a Barry Feinstein photo of Harrison taken through a window at his recently purchased Friar Park home , with some of the estate 's trees reflected in the glass . Released as a double A @-@ side with " Isn 't It a Pity " , with Apple catalogue number 2995 in America , both sides of the disc featured a full Apple label . 
 Public demand via constant airplay in Britain led to a belated UK release , on 15 January 1971 . There , as Apple R <unk> , the single was backed by " What Is Life " , a song that Apple soon released elsewhere internationally as the follow @-@ up to " My Sweet Lord " . 
 Harrison 's version of " My Sweet Lord " was an international number 1 hit by the end of 1970 and through the early months of 1971 – the first solo single by a Beatle to reach the top , and the biggest seller by any of the four throughout the 1970s . Without the support of any concert appearances or promotional interviews by Harrison , the single 's commercial success was due to its impact on radio , where , Harrison biographer Gary Tillery writes , the song " rolled across the airwaves like a juggernaut , with commanding presence , much the way Dylan 's ' Like a Rolling Stone ' had arrived in the mid @-@ sixties " . Elton John recalls first hearing " My Sweet Lord " in a taxi and names it as the last of the era 's great singles : " I thought , ' Oh my God , ' and I got chills . You know when a record starts on the radio , and it 's great , and you think , ' Oh , what is this , what is this , what is this ? ' The only other record I ever felt that way about [ afterwards ] was ' Brown Sugar ' ... " In his 40 @-@ page Harrison tribute article for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Mikal Gilmore credited " My Sweet Lord " as being " as pervasive on radio and in youth consciousness as anything the Beatles had produced " . 
 The single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on 14 December 1970 for sales of over 1 million copies . It reached number 1 on the US Billboard Hot 100 on 26 December , remaining on top for four weeks , three of which coincided with All Things Must Pass 's seven @-@ week reign atop the Billboard albums chart . In Britain , " My Sweet Lord " entered the charts at number 7 , before hitting number 1 on 30 January and staying there for five weeks . It was the biggest @-@ selling single of 1971 in the UK and performed similarly well around the world , particularly in France and Germany , where it held the top spot for nine and ten weeks , respectively . In his 2001 appraisal of Harrison 's Apple recordings , for Record Collector , Doggett described Harrison as " arguably the most successful rock star on the planet " over this period , adding : " ' My Sweet Lord ' and All Things Must Pass topped charts all over the world , easily outstripping other solo Beatles projects later in the year , such as Ram and Imagine . " 
 The single 's worldwide sales amounted to 5 million copies by 1978 , making it one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . By 2010 , according to Inglis , " My Sweet Lord " had sold over 10 million copies . The song returned to the number 1 position again in the UK when reissued in January 2002 , two months after Harrison 's death from cancer at the age of 58 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , has written of Harrison 's first solo single : " ' My Sweet Lord ' was everything that people wanted to hear in November 1970 : shimmering harmonies , lustrous acoustic guitars , a solid Ringo Starr backbeat , and an exquisite [ Harrison ] guitar solo . " Reviewing the single for Rolling Stone , Jon Landau called the track " sensational " . In an era when songs by Radha Krishna Temple and adaptations of the Christian hymns " Oh Happy Day " and " Amazing Grace " were all worldwide hits , Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone observed that the substituting of Harrison 's " Hare Krishna " refrain for the trivial " Doo @-@ lang , doo @-@ lang , doo @-@ lang " s of " He 's So Fine " was " a sign of the times " . ( As John Lennon famously told a reporter around this time , " Every time I put the radio on , it 's ' Oh my Lord ' – I 'm beginning to think there must be a God ! " ) In his December 1970 album review for NME , Alan Smith bemoaned the apparent lack of a UK single release for " My Sweet Lord " and noted that the song " seems to owe something " to " He 's So Fine " . To Gerson , it was an " obvious re @-@ write " of the Chiffons hit , and within two months US music publisher Bright Tunes had served a writ on Harrison citing unauthorised copyright infringement . In a January 1971 review for NME , Derek Johnson expressed surprise at Apple 's delay in releasing the single in the UK , before declaring : " In my opinion , this record – finally and irrevocably – establishes George as a talent equivalent to either Lennon or McCartney . " 
 More recently , AllMusic 's Richie Unterberger explains the international popularity of Harrison 's single : " ' My Sweet Lord ' has a quasi @-@ religious feel , but nevertheless has enough conventional pop appeal to reach mainstream listeners who may or may not care to dig into the spiritual lyrical message . " Added to this was a slide guitar riff that Simon Leng describes as " among the best @-@ known guitar passages in popular music " . Ian Inglis highlights the combination of Harrison 's " evident lack of artifice " and Spector 's " excellent production " , such that " My Sweet Lord " can be heard " as a prayer , a love song , an anthem , a contemporary gospel track , or a piece of perfect pop " . 
 Due to the ensuing plagiarism suit , " My Sweet Lord " became somewhat stigmatised by association , to the point where no mention of the song was complete without a reference to " He 's So Fine " . " My Sweet Lord " was ranked 460th on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of " the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " in 2004 , yet the accompanying text only briefly mentioned the success of the single and Harrison 's " teardrop slide licks " before concentrating on the controversial lawsuit . While acknowledging the common ground between the two songs , music critic David Fricke describes Harrison 's composition as " the honest child of black American sacred song " . Writing around the time of All Things Must Pass 's 2001 reissue , again for Rolling Stone , Anthony DeCurtis described " My Sweet Lord " as " capturing the sweet satisfactions of faith " , while to Mikal Gilmore , it is an " irresistible devotional " . 
 At the end of 1971 , " My Sweet Lord " topped the Melody Maker reader 's polls for both " Single of the Year " and " World 's Single of the Year " ; in the US publication Record World , the song was also voted best single and Harrison was honoured as " Top Male Vocalist of 1971 " . In June 1972 , Harrison won two Ivor Novello songwriter 's awards for " My Sweet Lord " . In 2010 , AOL Radio listeners voted " My Sweet Lord " the best song from George Harrison 's solo years , ahead of " Blow Away " and " What Is Life " . Mick Jagger and Keith Richards have both named it among their personal favourites of all Harrison 's songs , along with " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " . According to the website Acclaimed Music , " My Sweet Lord " has also appeared in the following critics ' best @-@ song lists and books , among others : The 7 @,@ 500 Most Important Songs of 1944 – 2000 by author Bruce Pollock ( 2005 ) , Dave Thompson 's 1000 Songs That Rock Your World ( 2011 ; ranked at number 247 ) , Ultimate Classic Rock 's " Top 100 Classic Rock Songs " ( 2013 ; number 56 ) , the NME 's " 100 Best Songs of the 1970s " ( 2012 ; number 65 ) , and the same magazine 's " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " ( 2014 ; number 270 ) . 
 = = Copyright infringement suit = = 
 = = = Initial action = = = 
 On 10 February 1971 , Bright Tunes filed suit against Harrison and associated organisations ( including Harrisongs , Apple Records and BMI ) , alleging copyright infringement of the late Ronnie Mack 's song " He 's So Fine " . In I Me Mine , Harrison admits to having thought " Why didn 't I realise ? " when others started pointing out the similarity between the two songs ; by June that year , country singer Jody Miller had released a cover of " He 's So Fine " incorporating Harrison 's " My Sweet Lord " slide @-@ guitar riffs , thus " really putting the screws in " from his point of view . On Harrison 's behalf , manager Allen Klein entered into negotiations with Bright Tunes to resolve the issue , by offering to buy the financially ailing publisher 's entire catalogue , but no settlement could be reached before the company was forced into receivership . 
 While comparing the two compositions , author and musicologist Dominic Pedler writes that both songs have a three @-@ syllable title refrain ( " My sweet Lord " , " He 's so fine " ) followed by a 5 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 descent of the major scale in the tonic key ( E major for " My Sweet Lord " and G major for " He 's So Fine " ) ; respective tempos are similar : 121 and 145 beats per minute . In the respective B sections ( " I really want to see you " and " I <unk> how I 'm gonna do it " ) , there is a similar ascent through 5 @-@ 6 @-@ 8 , but the Chiffons distinctively retain the G tonic for four bars and , on the repeat of the motif , uniquely go to an A @-@ note 9th embellishment over the first syllable of " gonna " . Harrison , on the other hand , introduces the more complex harmony of a relative minor ( C # m ) , as well as the fundamental and distinctly original slide @-@ guitar motif . 
 While the case was on hold , Harrison and his former bandmates Lennon and Starr chose to sever ties with Klein at the end of March 1973 – an acrimonious split that led to further lawsuits for the three ex @-@ Beatles . Bright Tunes and Harrison later resumed their negotiations ; his final offer of 40 per cent of " My Sweet Lord " ' s US composer 's and publisher 's royalties , along with a stipulation that he retain copyright for his song , was viewed as a " good one " by Bright 's legal representation , yet the offer was rejected . It later transpired that Klein had renewed his efforts to purchase the ailing company , now solely for himself , and to that end was supplying Bright Tunes with insider details regarding " My Sweet Lord " ' s sales figures and copyright value . In the build @-@ up to the case going to court , the Chiffons recorded a version of " My Sweet Lord " , with the aim of drawing attention to the lawsuit . Beatles author Alan Clayson has described the plagiarism suit as " the most notorious civil action of the decade " , the " extremity " of the proceedings provoked by a combination of the commercial success of Harrison 's single and the intervention of " litigation @-@ loving Mr Klein " . 
 = = = Court hearing and ruling = = = 
 Bright Tunes Music v. Harrisongs Music finally went to the United States district court on 23 February 1976 , to hear evidence on the allegation of plagiarism . Harrison attended the proceedings in New York , with a guitar , and each side called musical experts to support its argument . 
 After reconvening in September 1976 , the court found that Harrison had " subconsciously " copied the earlier tune , since he admitted to having been aware of the Chiffons ' recording . Judge Richard Owen said in his conclusion to the proceedings : 
 Did Harrison deliberately use the music of He 's So Fine ? I do not believe he did so deliberately . Nevertheless , it is clear that My Sweet Lord is the very same song as He 's So Fine with different words , and Harrison had access to He 's So Fine . This is , under the law , infringement of copyright , and is no less so even though subconsciously accomplished . 
 = = = Damages and subsequent litigation = = = 
 With liability established , the court then recommended an amount for the damages to be paid by Harrison and Apple to Bright Tunes , which Owen totalled at $ 1 @,@ 599 @,@ 987 – amounting to three @-@ quarters of the royalty revenue raised in North America from " My Sweet Lord " , as well as a significant proportion of that from the All Things Must Pass album . This figure has been considered over @-@ harsh and unrealistic by some observers , since it both underplayed the unique elements of Harrison 's recording – the universal spiritual message of its lyrics , the signature guitar hook , and its production – and ignored the critical acclaim his album received in its own right . Elliot Huntley observes : " People don 't usually hear a single and then automatically go and buy an expensive boxed @-@ set triple album on the off @-@ chance . " The award factored in the royalty revenue raised from " My Sweet Lord " ' s inclusion on the recent Best of George Harrison compilation , though at a more moderate percentage than for the 1970 album . 
 The ruling set new legal precedents and was a personal blow for Harrison , who admitted he was too " paranoid " to write anything new for some time afterwards . Early reaction in the music industry saw Little Richard claim for breach of copyright in a track recorded by the Beatles in 1964 for the Beatles for Sale album , as well as Ringo Starr credit songwriter Clifford T. Ward as the inspiration for his Ringo 's Rotogravure song " Lady Gaye " . In the UK , the corresponding damages suit , brought by Peter Maurice Music , was swiftly settled out of court in July 1977 . 
 During the drawn @-@ out damages portion of the US suit , events played into Harrison 's hands when Klein 's ABKCO Industries finally purchased the copyright to " He 's So Fine " , and with it all litigation claims , after which Klein proceeded to negotiate sale of the song to Harrison . On 19 February 1981 , the court decided that due to Klein 's duplicity in the case , Harrison would only have to pay ABKCO $ 587 @,@ 000 instead of the $ 1 @.@ 6 million award and he would also receive the rights to " He 's So Fine " – $ 587 @,@ 000 being the amount Klein had paid Bright Tunes for the song in 1978 . The court ruled that the former manager 's actions had been in breach of the fiduciary duty owed to Harrison , a duty that continued " even after the principal – agent relationship ended " . The litigation continued through to the early 1990s , however , as the finer points of the settlement were ironed out ; in his 1993 essay on Bright Tunes v. Harrisongs , Joseph Self describes it as " without question , one of the longest running legal battles ever to be litigated in [ the United States ] " . Matters would not ultimately be concluded until March 1998 . 
 Subsequent charges of plagiarism in the music industry have resulted in a policy of swift settlement and therefore limited damage to an artist 's credibility : the Rolling Stones ' " Anybody Seen My Baby ? " , Oasis ' " Shakermaker " , " Whatever " and " Step Out " , and the Verve 's " Bitter Sweet Symphony " are all examples of songs whose writing credits were hastily altered to acknowledge composers of a plagiarised work , with the minimum of litigation . 
 Shortly before the ruling was handed down in September 1976 , Harrison wrote and recorded a song inspired by the court case – the upbeat " This Song " – which includes the line " This tune has nothing ' Bright ' about it " . The 1960s soul hits " I Can 't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie Honey Bunch ) " and " Rescue Me " , as well as his own composition " You " , are all name @-@ checked in the lyrics , as if to demonstrate the point that , as he later put it , " 99 % of the popular music that can be heard is reminiscent of something or other . " 
 In a 1980 interview with Playboy magazine , John Lennon expressed his doubts about the notion of " subconscious " plagiarism , saying : " He must have known , you know . He 's smarter than that ... He could have changed a couple of bars in that song and nobody could ever have touched him , but he just let it go and paid the price . Maybe he thought God would just sort of let him off . " Ringo Starr 's reaction was more charitable : " There 's no doubt that the tune is similar but how many songs have been written with other melodies in mind ? George 's version is much heavier than The Chiffons – he might have done it with the original in the back of his mind , but he 's just very unlucky that someone wanted to make it a test case in court . " 
 Speaking to his friend and I , Me , Mine editor Derek Taylor in 1979 , Harrison said of the episode : " I don 't feel guilty or bad about it , in fact it saved many a heroin addict 's life . I know the motive behind writing the song in the first place and its effect far exceeded the legal hassle . " 
 = = Re @-@ releases and alternative versions = = 
 Since its initial release on All Things Must Pass , " My Sweet Lord " has appeared on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison and 2009 's career @-@ spanning Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison . The original UK single ( with " What Is Life " as the B @-@ side ) was reissued on Christmas Eve 1976 in Britain – a " provocative " move by EMI , given the publicity the lawsuit had attracted that year for the song . 
 = = = 1975 – " The Pirate Song " = = = 
 On 26 December 1975 , Harrison made a guest appearance on his friend Eric Idle 's BBC2 comedy show Rutland Weekend Television , sending up his serious public image , and seemingly about to perform " My Sweet Lord " . 
 As a running gag throughout the half @-@ hour show , Harrison interrupts the sketches , trying to land an acting role as a pirate ( and dressed accordingly ) , but gets turned down each time by RWT regulars Idle and Neil Innes , who simply want him to play the part of " George Harrison " . He then reappears at the end in more normal attire , strumming the well @-@ known introduction to " My Sweet Lord " on an acoustic guitar , and backed by the house band ; instead of continuing with the song , Harrison finally takes his chance to play " Pirate Bob " by abruptly segueing into a sea shanty – to the horror of the " greasy " compère , played by Idle . The other musicians follow Harrison 's lead , after which a group of dancers appear on stage and the show 's closing credits roll . 
 This performance is known as " The Pirate Song " , co @-@ written by Harrison and Idle , and the recording is only available unofficially on bootleg compilations such as Pirate Songs . Observing the parallels with Harrison 's real @-@ life reluctance to play the pop star , Simon Leng writes , " there was great resonance within these gags . " 
 = = = 2001 – " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " = = = 
 In January 2001 , Harrison included a new version of the song as a bonus track on the remastered All Things Must Pass album . " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " featured Harrison sharing vocals with Sam Brown , daughter of his friend Joe Brown , backed by mostly new instrumentation , including acoustic guitar by his son Dhani and tambourine by Ray Cooper . The track opens with a " snippet " of sitar , to " emphasize its spiritual roots " , Leng suggests . On release , Harrison explained that his motivation for remaking the song was partly to " play a better slide guitar solo " ; he also cited the " spiritual response " that the song had traditionally received , together with his interest in reworking the tune to avoid the contentious musical notes , as further reasons . Of the extended slide @-@ guitar break on " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " , Leng writes : " [ Harrison ] had never made so clear a musical statement that his signature bottleneck sound was as much his tool for self @-@ expression as his vocal cords . " Elliot Huntley opines that Harrison 's vocal was more " gospel inflected " and perhaps even more sincere than on the original recording , " given his deteriorating health " during the final year of his life . 
 This version also appeared on the January 2002 posthumous release of the " My Sweet Lord " single – a three @-@ song charity CD comprising the original 1970 – 71 hit , the acoustic run @-@ through of " Let It Down " ( with recent overdubs , another 2001 bonus track ) , and Harrison 's reworking of the title song . Proceeds from the single went to the Material World Charitable Foundation , set up by Harrison in April 1973 . For some months after the single 's release , a portion of " My Sweet Lord ( 2000 ) " played on Harrison 's official website , on a constant loop , over screen images of lotus petals scattering and then re @-@ forming . The song also appears on the 2014 Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of All Things Must Pass . 
 = = = 2011 – Demo version = = = 
 In November 2011 , a demo of " My Sweet Lord " , with Harrison backed by just Voormann and Starr , was included on the deluxe edition CD accompanying the British DVD release of Martin Scorsese 's George Harrison : Living in the Material World documentary . Described as an early " live take " by compilation producer Giles Martin , and an " acoustic <unk> " by David Fricke of Rolling Stone , it was recorded at the start of the All Things Must Pass sessions and was later released internationally on Early Takes : Volume 1 in May 2012 . 
 = = Live versions = = 
 Harrison performed " My Sweet Lord " at every one of his relatively few solo concerts , starting with the two Concert for Bangladesh shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden on 1 August 1971 . The recording released on the subsequent live album was taken from the evening show and begins with Harrison 's spoken " Hare Krishna " over his opening acoustic @-@ guitar chords . Among the 24 backing musicians was a " Soul Choir " featuring singers Claudia Linnear , Dolores Hall and Jo Green , but it was Harrison who sung the end @-@ of @-@ song Guru <unk> prayer in his role as lead vocalist , unlike on the studio recording ( where it was sung by the backing chorus ) ; the slide guitar parts were played by Eric Clapton and Jesse Ed Davis . 
 During his 1974 North American tour , Harrison 's only one there as a solo artist , " My Sweet Lord " was performed as the encore at each show . In contrast with the subtle shift from " hallelujah " s to Sanskrit chants on his 1970 original , Harrison used the song to engage his audience in the practice of " chanting the holy names of the Lord " , or kirtan – from " Om Christ ! " and Krishna , to Buddha and Allah – with varying degrees of success . Backed by a band that again included Billy Preston , Harrison turned " My Sweet Lord " into an " R & B @-@ styled " extended gospel @-@ funk piece , closer in its arrangement to Preston 's Encouraging Words version and lasting up to ten minutes . The performance of the song at Tulsa 's Assembly Center on 21 November marked the only guest appearance of the tour when Leon Russell joined the band on stage . 
 Harrison 's second and final solo tour took place in Japan in December 1991 , with Clapton 's band . A live version of " My Sweet Lord " recorded at the Tokyo Dome , on 14 December , was released the following year on the Live in Japan album . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following musicians are believed to have played on Harrison 's original version of " My Sweet Lord " : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitar , slide guitars , backing vocals 
 Eric Clapton – acoustic guitar 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar 
 Tom Evans – acoustic guitar 
 Joey Molland – acoustic guitar 
 Billy Preston – piano 
 Gary Wright – electric piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums , percussion 
 Jim Gordon – drums , percussion 
 Mike Gibbins – tambourine 
 John Barham – harmonium , string and woodwind arrangements 
 uncredited – zithers 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Andy Williams covered " My Sweet Lord " on his 1971 Love Story album , backed by members of the choir of the Wee Kirk o ' the Valley of Reseda , California . 
 Ronnie Aldrich , British easy listening pianist , covered the song , as well as Harrison 's " What Is Life " , on his 1971 album , also entitled Love Story ( after the equally popular theme song to the 1970 movie Love Story , by Francis Lai ) . 
 Tony Orlando and Dawn performed the song on their television series in the 1970s . 
 Homer Louis Randolph III recorded a version of " My Sweet Lord " for his eponymous 1971 album . 
 Peggy Lee recorded " My Sweet Lord " in April 1971 for her album Where Did They Go , arranged by Don <unk> ; it was issued on CD in 2008 . 
 Phil Allen covered the song on his 1971 album The Happy Hammond Goes Pop . 
 Ray Coniff 's version was released on another 1971 album titled Love Story . 
 Bola Sete 's version was released on his 1971 album <unk> . 
 Johnny Mathis covered " My Sweet Lord " on his Love Story album . 
 Edwin Starr recorded a version in 1971 , produced by Norman Whitfield , which was released as a single and appeared on his Involved album . 
 A version by Eddy Arnold appeared on his 1971 album Welcome to My World . 
 Also in 1971 , John Holt recorded a reggae version of " My Sweet Lord " , without the background chorus of " <unk> " and Krishna references . 
 Another 1971 easy listening version of " My Sweet Lord " was recorded by Stu Phillips & The Hollyridge Strings , for their Beatles tribute album The George , John , Paul & Ringo Songbook . 
 Marion Williams covered " My Sweet Lord " on her 1971 album Standing Here Wondering Which Way to Go ; the song was later released on <unk> : Songs of the Beatles . 
 French orchestral leader Franck <unk> recorded the song for his Friends album in 1971 . 
 Swedish jazz singer Monica <unk> recorded the Swedish @-@ language cover " Du mitt liv " in 1971 . 
 Another French orchestrator , Paul Mauriat , recorded " My Sweet Lord " for his 1972 album Le Grand Orchestre de Paul Mauriat <unk> Les Beatles . 
 Italian singer Iva <unk> covered the song on her album Fantasia n . 2 : The Beatles in 1972 . 
 Nina Simone performed an 18 @-@ minute gospel reworking of " My Sweet Lord " at Fort Dix before a group of African @-@ American soldiers , a version released on her 1972 album Emergency Ward ! ( along with her cover of Harrison 's " Isn 't It a Pity " ) . She interspersed the song with the David Nelson poem " Today Is a Killer " , at the end of which , God is accused of being a killer , giving the otherwise exuberant atmosphere of the performance an apocalyptic ending . No references to Krishna appear in Simone 's version . 
 Richie Havens covered the song on his 1972 live album Richie Havens on Stage , a version later released on the 1987 album Sings Beatles and Dylan . 
 Also in 1972 , The Tribe recorded the song for an album titled Bangla Desh , which included cover versions of other highlights from The Concert for Bangladesh . 
 In 1973 , The <unk> covered " My Sweet Lord " on their album Groovin ' with Jesus . 
 Marjorie McCoy released her version of the song on the 1973 album The Other Side . 
 In 1975 , Julio Iglesias covered the song on his album El Amor , singing it in English even though the song was retitled in Spanish as " Mi Dulce Señor ( My Sweet Lord ) " . 
 The Chiffons ' version of the song was released as a non @-@ album single in 1975 . 
 Larry Norman covered " My Sweet Lord " on his 1977 album Streams of White Light into <unk> Corners , and like John Holt , omitted the " hallelujah " refrains and references to Krishna . 
 On her 1978 Christmas TV special , Dolly Parton performed the song as part of a spiritual medley , with guest Cher and a choir , with only " hallelujah " being chanted . 
 The song was briefly included in Stars on 45 's medley of songs , released as a single in May 1981 . 
 For his 1981 Don 't Give In album , Leon <unk> recorded a heavily revised version of " My Sweet Lord " . ( Among other things , because this was a Christian release , the entire background " hallelujah " section is replaced with the refrain " Jesus " . ) 
 Five Thirty covered the song for the anti @-@ poll tax album Alvin Lives ( In Leeds ) , released in 1990 . 
 Boy George recorded a version of the song in 1992 for the Ruby Trax : The NME 's Roaring Forty compilation album . 
 Spanish house music band PCA released their version of " My Sweet Lord " as a single in 1995 . 
 Stacey Q covered " My Sweet Lord " on her 1997 album Boomerang . 
 Swedish band <unk> recorded the song as a medley with " He 's So Fine " and released it as a single in 1997 , titled " My Sweet Lord ( She 's So Fine ) " . 
 In December 1997 , Megadeth played the song live ( with modified lyrics ) at their concert at the Centro Cultural Recoleta in Buenos Aires . 
 The Wailing Souls covered " My Sweet Lord " for their 1998 album Psychedelic Souls . 
 In 1999 , an instrumental version of " My Sweet Lord " was included on Aretha Franklin 's <unk> Grace : The Complete Recordings collection , a repackaging of her bestselling album Amazing Grace , recorded live in a Los Angeles Baptist church in January 1972 . 
 David Young recorded the song for his 2000 covers album Songbook . 
 At the American Music Awards in January 2002 , soul singer Luther Vandross performed a medley of " Something " and " My Sweet Lord " in tribute to Harrison , among others who died in 2001 . 
 In April 2002 , Elton John , Sting , James Taylor , Ravi Shankar , Anoushka Shankar and others performed " My Sweet Lord " to close the Harrison @-@ tribute opening portion of the Rock for the Rainforest benefit concert , held at Carnegie Hall in New York City . 
 Crown of Thorns covered this track on their 2002 album Karma . 
 Richard <unk> recorded a cover of " My Sweet Lord " for his 2002 album Everybody Loves Somebody Sometime . 
 At the Concert for George on 29 November 2002 , the song was performed by Billy Preston , with Sam Brown joining on backing vocals . 
 In 2003 , Brazilian artist Emmerson Nogueira included a cover of " My Sweet Lord " on his album <unk> <unk> 3 . 
 <unk> Winans recorded a version with specifically Christian , additional verses ( and without Krishna references ) on his album My Christmas Prayer . 
 <unk> also covered this song , released on their 2003 album Remember Who I Am . 
 Danny Colfax Mallon included " My Sweet Lord " on his album George : Harrison 's Compositions Interpreted on Piano in 2004 . 
 Reggae artist Little Roy ( Earl Lowe ) , a Rastafarian , recorded the song for his 2005 album Children of the Most High , replacing the background chorus with sung references to Rastafari . 
 Les Fradkin 's cover was released in 2005 on his Something for George tribute album , featuring guest appearances from Richie Furay and former Apple recording artist Lon Van Eaton . 
 Joel Harrison covered " My Sweet Lord " on his album Harrison on Harrison : Jazz Explanations of George Harrison , released in October 2005 . 
 Nina Hagen recorded a version of " My Sweet Lord " ( with Loka Nunda ) in 2008 . 
 John Mayer performed the song live throughout 2008 , notably during his performance at that year 's Glastonbury Festival . 
 A version by Gary Christian & Desa <unk> appeared on the 2008 charity album Liverpool : The Number Ones Album . 
 <unk> covered this track on their 2009 album <unk> Yee . 
 Jim James ( under the name Yim Yames ) covered six of Harrison 's songs , including " My Sweet Lord " , on his 2009 EP Tribute To . 
 Klaus Voormann , who had played bass on Harrison 's studio version and on the Concert for Bangladesh performance of the song , included a cover of " My Sweet Lord " on his 2009 solo album A Sideman 's Journey ; Bonnie Bramlett supplied lead vocals on the track . 
 Kevin Max has covered this song , with no references to Krishna , for Christian audiences . 
 Elliott Smith performed " My Sweet Lord " live with Grandaddy . 
 Jose Feliciano has also played this song live . 
 Hurray for the Riff Raff contributed " My Sweet Lord " to Harrison Covered , a tribute CD accompanying the November 2011 issue of Mojo magazine . 
 In 2014 , Brian Wilson played this song with his band ( including Al Jardine ) live during a tribute to George Harrison . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly singles charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications and sales = = = 
 = Thích Quảng Đức = 
 Thích is a Buddhist honorary title and Quảng Đức is descriptive of meritorious attributes : see dharma name . 
 Thích Quảng Đức ( 1897 — 11 June 1963 , born Lâm Văn Túc ) , was a Vietnamese Mahayana Buddhist monk who burned himself to death at a busy Saigon road intersection on 11 June 1963 . Quang Duc was protesting the persecution of Buddhists by the South Vietnamese government led by Ngô Đình Diệm . Photographs of his self @-@ immolation were circulated widely across the world and brought attention to the policies of the Diệm government . John F. Kennedy said in reference to a photograph of Duc on fire , " No news picture in history has generated so much emotion around the world as that one . " Malcolm Browne won a Pulitzer Prize for his photograph of the monk 's death . 
 Quảng Đức 's act increased international pressure on Diệm and led him to announce reforms with the intention of <unk> the Buddhists . However , the promised reforms were not implemented , leading to a deterioration in the dispute . With protests continuing , the ARVN Special Forces loyal to Diệm 's brother , Ngô Đình Nhu , launched nationwide raids on Buddhist pagodas , seizing Quảng Đức 's heart and causing deaths and widespread damage . Several Buddhist monks followed Quảng Đức 's example , also immolating themselves . Eventually , an Army coup toppled Diệm , who was assassinated on 2 November 1963 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Accounts of the life of Quảng Đức are derived from information disseminated by Buddhist organizations . He was born in the village of Hội Khánh , in <unk> Ninh District of Khánh Hòa Province in central Vietnam as Lâm Văn Túc , one of seven children of Lâm Hữu <unk> and his wife , Nguyễn Thị <unk> . At the age of seven , he left to study Buddhism under Hòa <unk> Thích <unk> <unk> , who was his maternal uncle and spiritual master . Thích <unk> <unk> raised him as a son and Lâm Văn Túc changed his name to Nguyễn Văn <unk> . At age 15 , he took the <unk> ( novice ) vows and was ordained as a monk at age 20 under the dharma name Thích Quảng Đức . The Vietnamese name Thích ( <unk> ) is from " Thích Ca " or " Thích <unk> " ( <unk> ) , means " of the Shakya clan . " After ordination , he traveled to a mountain near Ninh Hòa , vowing to live the life of a solitary Buddhism @-@ practicing hermit for three years . He returned in later life to open the Thien Loc pagoda at his mountain retreat . 
 After his self @-@ imposed isolation ended , he began to travel around central Vietnam expounding the dharma . After two years , he went into retreat at the Sac Tu Thien An pagoda near Nha Trang . In 1932 , he was appointed an inspector for the Buddhist Association in Ninh Hòa before becoming the inspector of monks in his home province of Khánh Hòa . During this period in central Vietnam , he was responsible for the construction of 14 temples . In 1934 , he moved to southern Vietnam and traveled throughout the provinces spreading Buddhist teachings . During his time in southern Vietnam , he also spent two years in Cambodia studying the Theravada Buddhist tradition . 
 After his return from Cambodia , he oversaw the construction of a further 17 new temples during his time in the south . The last of the 31 new temples that he was responsible for constructing was the Quan The Am pagoda in the Phú Nhuận District of Gia Định Province on the outskirts of Saigon . The street on which the temple stands was later renamed Quảng Đức Street by Communists in 1975 . After the temple @-@ building phase , Đức was appointed to serve as the Chairman of the Panel on Ceremonial Rites of the Congregation of Vietnamese Monks , and as abbot of the Phuoc Hoa pagoda , which was the initial location of the Association for Buddhist Studies of Vietnam ( <unk> ) . When the office of the <unk> was relocated to the Xá Lợi Pagoda , the main pagoda of Saigon , Đức resigned . 
 = = Self @-@ immolation = = 
 = = = Religious background = = = 
 In a country where surveys of the religious composition at the time estimated the Buddhist majority to be between 70 and 90 percent , President Diệm was a member of the Catholic minority , and pursued discriminatory policies favoring Catholics for public service and military promotions , as well as in the allocation of land , business arrangements and tax concessions . Diệm once told a high @-@ ranking officer , forgetting that the officer was from a Buddhist family , " Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places . They can be trusted . " Many officers in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam converted to Roman Catholicism as their military prospects depended on it . Additionally , the distribution of firearms to village self @-@ defense militias saw weapons given only to Roman Catholics , with some Buddhists in the army being denied promotion if they refused to convert to Roman Catholicism . 
 Some Roman Catholic priests ran their own private armies , and there were forced conversions and looting , shelling , and demolition of pagodas in some areas , to which the government turned a blind eye . Some Buddhist villages converted en masse to receive aid or avoid being forcibly resettled by Diệm 's regime . The " private " status that was imposed on Buddhism by the French , which required official permission to be obtained by those wishing to conduct public Buddhist activities , was not repealed by Diệm . Catholics were also de facto exempt from corvée labor , which the government obliged all citizens to perform , and United States aid was distributed disproportionately to Catholic majority villages by Diệm 's regime . 
 The Roman Catholic Church was the largest landowner in the country and enjoyed special exemptions in property acquisition , and land owned by the Roman Catholic Church was exempt from land reform . The white and gold Vatican flag was regularly flown at all major public events in South Vietnam , and Diệm dedicated his country to the Virgin Mary in 1959 . 
 Buddhist discontent erupted following a ban in early May on flying the Buddhist flag in Huế on Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . Just days before , Catholics had been encouraged to fly the Vatican flag at a celebration for Archbishop Ngô Đình Thục of Huế , Diệm 's elder brother . A large crowd of Buddhists protested the ban , defying the government by flying Buddhist flags on the Buddhist holy day of Vesak and marching on the government broadcasting station . Government forces fired into the crowd of protesters , killing nine people . Diệm 's refusal to take responsibility — he blamed the Viet Cong for the deaths — led to further Buddhist protests and calls for religious equality . As Diem remained unwilling to comply with Buddhist demands , the frequency of protests increased . 
 = = = Day of the act = = = 
 On 10 June 1963 , U.S. correspondents were informed that " something important " would happen the following morning on the road outside the Cambodian embassy in Saigon . Most of the reporters disregarded the message , since the Buddhist crisis had at that point been going on for more than a month , and the next day only a few journalists turned up , including David Halberstam of The New York Times and Malcolm Browne , the Saigon bureau chief for the Associated Press . Đức arrived as part of a procession that had begun at a nearby pagoda . Around 350 monks and nuns marched in two phalanxes , preceded by an Austin Westminster sedan , carrying banners printed in both English and Vietnamese . They denounced the Diệm government and its policy towards Buddhists , demanding that it fulfill its promises of religious equality . Another monk offered himself , but Đức 's seniority prevailed . 
 The act occurred at the intersection of Phan Đình Phùng Boulevard ( now Nguyễn Đình <unk> Street ) and Lê Văn Duyệt Street ( now <unk> Mạng <unk> <unk> Street ) a few blocks Southwest of the Presidential Palace ( now the Reunification Palace ) . Duc emerged from the car along with two other monks . One placed a cushion on the road while the second opened the trunk and took out a five @-@ gallon petrol can . As the marchers formed a circle around him , Duc calmly sat down in the traditional Buddhist meditative lotus position on the cushion . A colleague emptied the contents of the petrol container over Đức 's head . Đức rotated a string of wooden prayer beads and recited the words Nam <unk> A di <unk> Phật ( " Homage to Amitābha Buddha " ) before striking a match and dropping it on himself . Flames consumed his robes and flesh , and black oily smoke emanated from his burning body . 
 Quảng Đức 's last words before his self @-@ immolation were documented in a letter he had left : 
 Before closing my eyes and moving towards the vision of the Buddha , I respectfully plead to President Ngô Đình Diệm to take a mind of compassion towards the people of the nation and implement religious equality to maintain the strength of the homeland eternally . I call the <unk> , <unk> , members of the sangha and the lay Buddhists to organize in solidarity to make sacrifices to protect Buddhism . 
 David Halberstam wrote : 
 I was to see that sight again , but once was enough . Flames were coming from a human being ; his body was slowly withering and shriveling up , his head blackening and charring . In the air was the smell of burning human flesh ; human beings burn surprisingly quickly . Behind me I could hear the sobbing of the Vietnamese who were now gathering . I was too shocked to cry , too confused to take notes or ask questions , too bewildered to even think ... As he burned he never moved a muscle , never uttered a sound , his outward composure in sharp contrast to the wailing people around him . 
 The spectators were mostly stunned into silence , but some wailed and several began praying . Many of the monks and nuns , as well as some shocked passersby , prostrated themselves before the burning monk . Even some of the policemen , who had orders to control the gathered crowd , prostrated before him . 
 In English and Vietnamese , a monk repeated into a microphone , " A Buddhist priest burns himself to death . A Buddhist priest becomes a martyr . " After approximately ten minutes , Đức 's body was fully immolated and it eventually toppled backwards onto its back . Once the fire subsided , a group of monks covered the smoking corpse with yellow robes , picked it up and tried to fit it into a coffin , but the limbs could not be straightened and one of the arms protruded from the wooden box as he was carried to the nearby Xá Lợi Pagoda in central Saigon . Outside the pagoda , students unfurled bilingual banners which read : " A Buddhist priest burns himself for our five requests . " 
 By 1 : 30 p.m , around one thousand monks had congregated inside to hold a meeting while outside a large crowd of pro @-@ Buddhist students had formed a human barrier around it . The meeting soon ended and all but a hundred monks slowly left the compound . Nearly one thousand monks , accompanied by laypeople , returned to the cremation site . The police lingered nearby . At around 6 : 00 p.m , thirty nuns and six monks were arrested for holding a prayer meeting on the street outside Xá Lợi . The police encircled the pagoda , blocking public passage and giving observers the impression that an armed siege was imminent by donning riot gear . 
 = = = Funeral and aftermath = = = 
 After the self @-@ immolation , the U.S. put more pressure on Diệm to re @-@ open negotiations on the faltering agreement . Diệm had scheduled an emergency cabinet meeting at 11 : 30 on 11 June to discuss the Buddhist crisis which he believed to be winding down . Following Quảng Đức 's death , Diệm canceled the meeting and met individually with his ministers . Acting U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam William Trueheart warned Nguyễn Đình Thuận , Diệm 's Secretary of State , of the desperate need for an agreement , saying that the situation was " dangerously near breaking point " and expected Diệm would meet the Buddhists ' five @-@ point manifesto . United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk warned the Saigon embassy that the White House would publicly announce that it would no longer " associate itself " with the regime if this did not occur . The Joint Communiqué and concessions to the Buddhists were signed on 16 June . 
 15 June was set as the date for the funeral , and on that day 4 @,@ 000 people gathered outside the Xá Lợi pagoda , only for the ceremony to be postponed . On 19 June , his remains were carried out of Xa Loi to a cemetery 16 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) south of the city for a re @-@ cremation and funeral ceremony . Following the signing of the Joint Communiqué , attendance was limited by agreement between Buddhist leaders and police to approximately 500 monks . 
 = = = Intact heart and symbolism = = = 
 The body was re @-@ cremated during the funeral , but Đức 's heart remained intact and did not burn . It was considered to be holy and placed in a glass chalice at Xá Lợi Pagoda . The intact heart relic is regarded as a symbol of compassion . Duc has subsequently been revered by Vietnamese Buddhists as a bodhisattva ( <unk> <unk> ) , and accordingly is often referred to in Vietnamese as <unk> <unk> Thích Quảng Đức . On 21 August , the ARVN Special Forces of Nhu attacked Xá Lợi and other Buddhist pagodas across Vietnam . The secret police intended to confiscate Đức 's ashes , but two monks had escaped with the urn , jumping over the back fence and finding safety at the U.S. Operations Mission next door . Nhu 's men managed to confiscate Đức 's charred heart . 
 The location chosen for the self @-@ immolation , in front of the Cambodian embassy , raised questions as to whether it was coincidence or a symbolic choice . Trueheart and embassy official Charles <unk> felt that the location was selected to show solidarity with the Cambodian government of Prince Norodom Sihanouk . South Vietnam and Cambodia had strained relations : in a speech on 22 May , Sihanouk had accused Diệm of mistreating Vietnamese and ethnic minority Khmer Buddhists . The pro @-@ Diem Times of Vietnam published an article on 9 June which claimed that Cambodian monks had been encouraging the Buddhist crisis , asserting it was part of a Cambodian plot to extend its neutralist foreign policy into South Vietnam . <unk> noted that Diệm was " ready and eager to see a fine Cambodian hand in all the organized Buddhist actions " . 
 = = = Diệm reaction = = = 
 Diệm made a radio address at 19 : 00 on the day of Đức 's death , asserting that he was profoundly troubled by the event . He appealed for " serenity and patriotism " , and announced that stalled negotiations would resume with the Buddhists . He claimed that negotiations had been progressing well and in a time of religious tension emphasized the role of the Roman Catholic philosophy of <unk> in his rule . He alleged that extremists had twisted the facts and he asserted that the Buddhists can " count on the Constitution , in other words , me . " 
 The Army of the Republic of Vietnam responded to the appeal , putting on a show of solidarity behind Diệm to isolate dissident officers . Thirty high @-@ ranking officers headed by General Lê Văn Tỵ declared their resolve to carry out all missions entrusted to the army for the defense of the constitution and the Republic . The declaration was a veneer which masked a developing plot to oust Diệm . Some of the signatories were to become personally involved in Diệm 's overthrow and death in November . Generals Dương Văn Minh and Trần Văn Đôn , the presidential military advisor and the chief of the army who were to lead the coup , were overseas . 
 Madame Nhu , a Catholic convert from Buddhism and the wife of Diệm 's younger brother and chief adviser Ngô Đình Nhu , who was regarded as the First Lady of South Vietnam at the time ( as Diệm was a bachelor ) , said she would " clap hands at seeing another monk barbecue show " . Later that month , Diệm 's government charged that Đức had been drugged before being forced to commit suicide . The regime also accused Browne of bribing Đức to burn himself . 
 = = = Political and media impact = = = 
 Photographs taken by Malcolm Browne of the self @-@ immolation quickly spread across the wire services and were featured on the front pages of newspapers worldwide . The self @-@ immolation was later regarded as a turning point in the Buddhist crisis and a critical point in the collapse of the Diệm regime . 
 Historian Seth Jacobs asserted that Duc had " reduced America 's Diệm experiment to ashes as well " and that " no amount of pleading could retrieve Diệm 's reputation " once Browne 's images had become ingrained into the psyche of the world public . Ellen Hammer described the event as having " evoked dark images of persecution and horror corresponding to a profoundly Asian reality that passed the understanding of Westerners . " John Mecklin , an official from the U.S. embassy , noted that the photograph " had a shock effect of incalculable value to the Buddhist cause , becoming a symbol of the state of things in Vietnam . " William Colby , then chief of the Central Intelligence Agency 's Far East Division , opined that Diệm " handled the Buddhist crisis fairly badly and allowed it to grow . But I really don 't think there was much they could have done about it once that <unk> burned himself . " 
 President John F. Kennedy , whose government was the main sponsor of Diệm 's regime , learned of Đức 's death when handed the morning newspapers while he was talking to his brother , Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy , on the phone . Kennedy reportedly interrupted their conversation about segregation in Alabama by exclaiming " Jesus Christ ! " He later remarked that " no news picture in history has generated so much emotion around the world as that one . " U.S. Senator Frank Church ( D @-@ ID ) , a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , claimed that " such grisly scenes have not been witnessed since the Christian martyrs marched hand in hand into the Roman arenas . " 
 In Europe , the photographs were sold on the streets as postcards during the 1960s , and communist China distributed millions of copies of the photograph throughout Asia and Africa as evidence of what it called " US imperialism " . One of Browne 's photographs remains affixed to the sedan in which Đức was riding and is part of a tourist attraction in Huế . For Browne and the Associated Press ( AP ) , the pictures were a marketing success . Ray Herndon , the United Press International ( UPI ) correspondent who had forgotten to take his camera on the day , was harshly criticized in private by his employer . UPI estimated that 5 @,@ 000 readers in Sydney , then a city of around 1 @.@ 5 – 2 million , had switched to AP news sources . 
 Diệm 's English @-@ language mouthpiece , the Times of Vietnam , intensified its attacks on both journalists and Buddhists . Headlines such as " Xá Lợi politburo makes new threats " and " Monks plot murder " were printed . One article questioned the relationship between the monks and the press by posing the question as to why " so many young girls are buzzing in and out of Xá Lợi early [ in the day ] " and then going on to allege that they were brought in for sexual purposes for the U.S. reporters . 
 Browne 's award @-@ winning photograph of Quảng Đức 's death has been reproduced in popular media for decades , and the incident has been used as a touchstone reference in many films and television programs . 
 A still photograph of the footage of Quảng Đức 's self @-@ immolation ( the one taken by Browne ) was used for the cover of American rap metal band Rage Against the Machine 's debut album which came out in 1992 , as well as the cover of their single " Killing in the Name " . 
 = = = Precedents and influence = = = 
 Despite the shock of the Western public , the practice of Vietnamese monks self @-@ immolating was not unprecedented . Instances of self @-@ immolations in Vietnam had been recorded for centuries , usually carried out to honor Gautama Buddha . The most recently recorded case had been in North Vietnam in 1950 . The French colonial authorities had tried to eradicate the practice after their conquest of Vietnam in the nineteenth century , but had not been totally successful . They did manage to prevent one monk from setting fire to himself in Huế in the 1920s , but he managed to starve himself to death instead . During the 1920s and 1930s , Saigon newspapers reported multiple instances of self @-@ immolations by monks in a matter @-@ of @-@ fact style . The practice had also been seen in the Chinese city of Harbin in 1948 when a monk seated down in the lotus position on a pile of sawdust and soybean oil and set fire to himself in protest against the treatment of Buddhism by the communists of Mao Zedong . His heart remained intact , as did that of Đức . 
 After Đức , five more Buddhist monks self @-@ immolated up until late October 1963 as the Buddhist protests in Vietnam escalated . On 1 November , the Army of the Republic of Vietnam overthrew Diệm in a coup . Diệm and Nhu were assassinated the next day . Monks have followed Đức 's example since for other reasons . 
 Đức 's actions were copied by United States citizens in protests against the Vietnam War : 
 Norman Morrison , a 31 @-@ year @-@ old Quaker pacifist , poured kerosene over himself and set himself alight below the third @-@ floor window of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara at the Pentagon on 2 November 1965 . 
 Alice Herz , an 82 @-@ year @-@ old woman , also burned herself that year in Detroit , Michigan . 
 Roger Allen LaPorte self @-@ immolated outside the United Nations building in New York City on 9 November 1965 . 
 Florence Beaumont burned herself to death outside the Federal Building in Los Angeles on 15 October 1967 . 
 George Winne , Jr . , a student , self @-@ immolated on 10 May 1970 on the campus of the University of California , San Diego and died the following day . 
 In an apparently non @-@ political case of imitation of Thich Quang Duc , the young son of an American officer based at the U.S. Embassy in Saigon doused himself with gasoline and set himself on fire . He was seriously burned before the fire was extinguished and later could only offer the explanation that " I wanted to see what it was like . " 
 = M @-@ 155 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 155 was a signed state trunkline in the US state of Michigan that served as a spur route from Business Loop Interstate 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 ) in Howell in Livingston County to the Hillcrest Center , the former Howell State Hospital . It was originally designated in the early 1930s and outlasted the hospital which closed in 1982 . The roadway was removed from state maps after 1991 but remains under state maintenance as an unsigned trunkline listed as either M @-@ 155 or Old M @-@ 155 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 OLD M @-@ 155 begins in front of the former state hospital on High Hillcrest Drive and runs north and northwesterly through a field and out of the property . The road passes some houses in the area as it curves onto Country Farm Road next to Sanatorium Lake , turning northward . From there , the trunkline follows Country Farm Road to Norton Road through Marion Township . The trunkline follows Norton Road east over the South Branch of the Shiawassee River and then northeasterly past a residential subdivision . OLD M @-@ 155 then turns due east on Mason Road , running along the Marion – Howell township line before crossing into the city of Howell next to I @-@ 96 . There is no interchange for the unsigned trunkline as it crosses over the freeway . The trunkline runs through more residential subdivisions before it turns northward onto Michigan Avenue . After one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) , the trunkline terminates at the intersection with BL I @-@ 96 ( Grand River Avenue ) in downtown Howell . 
 As the highway is still under state jurisdiction , M @-@ 155 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 13 @,@ 699 vehicles used the highway daily in Howell and 3 @,@ 960 vehicles did so each day near the souther terminus , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . No section of OLD M @-@ 155 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The Michigan State Sanatorium was opened on September 1 , 1907 , to treat adult patients with tuberculosis . Children were later treated there starting in 1915 . After 1955 the hospital also handled patients with mental illnesses . In 1961 the sanatorium became the Howell State Hospital , and later the Hillcrest Center in 1978 . The facility operated until September 30 , 1982 , when it was closed. and the building finally demolished a few years after . M @-@ 155 was designated in 1931 ; it began at the hospital and ran to a junction with US Highway 16 ( modern BL I @-@ 96 ) in Howell . After the hospital was abandoned , the trunkline designation remained on the road , serving a field . The designation last appeared on official state maps in 1991 . The highway remains an unsigned trunkline . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Livingston County . 
 = The Great American Bash ( 2005 ) = 
 The Great American Bash ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was the second annual event and took place on July 24 , 2005 , at the HSBC Arena in Buffalo , New York . The event featured wrestlers and other talent that performed on the SmackDown ! program . 
 The main event was Batista defending the World Heavyweight Championship against John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) . JBL won the match after Batista was disqualified , but did not win the title because a championship can only be won via pinfall or submission . One of the featured matches on the undercard was Rey Mysterio versus Eddie Guerrero , which Mysterio won by pinfall . The other was Orlando Jordan versus Chris Benoit for the WWE United States Championship , which Jordan won , also by pinfall . 
 The event grossed over $ 375 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 8 @,@ 000 , and received about 233 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , the same amount as the following year 's event . This enabled WWE 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue to increase by $ 4 @.@ 7 million from the previous year . When the 2005 event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . The event was also available free of charge for Armed Forces members and their families . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Great American Bash event featured a card , which contained matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . The name of a wrestler 's character was not always the person 's birth name , as wrestlers often use a stage name to portray their character . 
 The main event at The Great American Bash was a standard wrestling match for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Batista defended the championship against John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) . The buildup to the match began when WWE Champion John Cena was drafted to the Raw brand , taking the title with him and leaving SmackDown ! without a top @-@ tier championship for the heavyweight division . General Manager Theodore Long , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced a match between six wrestlers for a new top @-@ tier SmackDown ! championship . On the June 30 episode of the SmackDown ! television program , the match took place between JBL , Chris Benoit , Christian , Booker T , Muhammad Hassan , and The Undertaker . JBL was victorious in the match , but Long announced that he was still not the champion . Instead he had won the right to a match against the World Heavyweight Champion , Batista , who was SmackDown ! ' s final 2005 draft pick , making the World Heavyweight Championship exclusive to SmackDown ! . 
 On the July 14 episode of SmackDown ! , Batista defeated Orlando Jordan in a standard match after performing a Batista Bomb . After the match , JBL successfully attacked Batista by executing a clothesline . The following week on SmackDown ! , JBL , who was accompanied by Jordan , threw himself a celebration party with the belief that he had already won the World Heavyweight Championship . Batista appeared , and as JBL fled the scene , performed a spinebuster on Jordan . 
 The event also featured a feud between Rey Mysterio and Eddie Guerrero . At the No Way Out event , Guerrero and Mysterio won the WWE Tag Team Championships from the Basham Brothers . After Guerrero and Mysterio lost the championships , Guerrero then began to portray a villainous character , turning on Mysterio in the process . At WrestleMania , Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a standard match . On the April 21 episode of SmackDown ! , MNM ( Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury ) defeated Mysterio and Guerrero to win the tag team championship . On the April 28 episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero and Mysterio faced MNM in a rematch for the title , but MNM retained them after pinning Mysterio for the win . At the Judgment Day event , Mysterio defeated Guerrero by disqualification , and on the June 30 episode of SmackDown ! , the rivalry between Guerrero and Mysterio continued when Guerrero threatened to reveal a secret concerning Mysterio 's son Dominick . Both the Mysterio and Guerrero families continued to beg Guerrero to not reveal the secret . A match was made between Mysterio and Guerrero for The Great American Bash , where if Mysterio won , Guerrero could not reveal the secret , but if Guerrero won , he would be able to reveal the secret on live television . 
 The third predominant feud prior to the event was between Chris Benoit and Orlando Jordan for the WWE United States Championship . On the July 7 edition of SmackDown ! , Benoit defeated Booker T in a match to become the new Number One contender for the title . As a result of his winning the match and becoming the number @-@ one contender , Long granted Benoit a match against Jordan for The Great American Bash . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the pay @-@ per @-@ view went live , a match took place on the Sunday Night Heat pre @-@ show between Paul London and Nunzio for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship , which London won to retain the title . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match on the card was between MNM ( Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury , managed by Melina ) and The Legion of Doom ( Heidenreich and Road Warrior Animal ) for the WWE Tag Team Championship . During the match , Nitro hit Animal with one of the championship belts , but Animal retaliated by <unk> him . Animal and Heidenreich then performed the doomsday device on Nitro and got the pin to win the match and capture the titles . This began their reign as WWE Tag Team Champions . 
 The next match was between Booker T ( managed by Sharmell ) and Christian . Booker T won the match after using his scissor kick . The following match was between Orlando Jordan and Chris Benoit for the WWE United States Championship . During the match , Jordan removed the top turnbuckle pad before Benoit attempted to slam Jordan . Jordan avoided the attack and instead forced Benoit to run into the exposed turnbuckle . Jordan got the pin to win the match and retain the title . 
 The fourth match was between The Undertaker and Muhammad Hassan ( managed by Daivari ) . During Hassan 's entrance , men in masks accompanied him to the ring to represent his Arabic culture . The masked men proceeded to interfered in the match , but Undertaker retaliated and removed all of the masked men from the ring . Midway through the match , Undertaker attempted to use a Tombstone piledriver on Hassan , but Hassan escaped the move and attempted to hit Undertaker with a clothesline . The Undertaker countered by chokeslamming Hassan . Undertaker scored the pinfall on Hassan to win the match . Following this , Hassan was given the Last Ride powerbomb through the stage floor , writing him out of storylines . 
 The next match was between The Mexicools and The Blue World Order in a six @-@ man tag team match . At the match 's end , Super Crazy executed a moonsault onto Big Stevie Cool from the top ring rope , and Psicosis performed a leg drop . Psicosis proceeded to pin Big Stevie and win the match for his team . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The following match was between Rey Mysterio and Eddie Guerrero , where the stipulation was that if Guerrero won the match , he would reveal the secret he has been hiding from the public that neither Mysterio 's nor Guerrero 's families wanted revealed . If Mysterio won , however , Guerrero would not reveal the secret . Guerrero suplexed Mysterio three times . Afterward , Guerrero performed a frog splash . Guerrero then tried to score the pinfall , but Mysterio countered by pinning Guerrero to win the match . As a result , Guerrero was not able to reveal the secret . 
 The seventh match was between Melina and Torrie Wilson ( managed by Candice Michelle , who was also the guest referee ) , in a Bra and Panties match . The only way to win a " Bra and Panties " match is for a wrestler to strip her opponent down to her underwear . At the start of the match , Melina pulled off Wilson 's shirt to reveal her bra , but Wilson retaliated and pulled off Melina 's shirt . Wilson then lifted Melina to her shoulders and dropped her to the mat , while she attempted to pull off her pants , but Melina countered the attack by pulling Wilson 's pants off to win the match . Afterward , Michelle stripped Melina and then removed her own clothes , as well . 
 The main event was between JBL ( managed by Orlando Jordan ) and Batista for the World Heavyweight Championship . Jordan interfered by attempting to hit Batista with a folding chair , but Batista grabbed the chair from him . Batista then used the chair to hit Jordan and JBL , and JBL was declared the winner , via disqualification . In WWE , a title cannot be won by disqualification , but only by pinfall or submission ( the normal scoring conditions in professional wrestling matches ) . As a result , Batista retained the title . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The feud between Batista and JBL continued after the Bash . On the July 28 episode of SmackDown ! , JBL defeated The Undertaker after interference from Randy Orton to become the number @-@ one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship at SummerSlam . The following week on SmackDown ! , Batista and JBL held a scripted official contract signing , where it was announced that their match at SummerSlam would be a No Holds Barred match that allowed for no disqualification . At SummerSlam , Batista defeated JBL to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . The feud between the two ended when Batista defeated JBL in a Texas Bullrope match on the September 9 edition of SmackDown ! , a match where the objective is to touch all four ring corners while tied to one 's opponent with a bullrope . 
 On the edition of SmackDown ! following The Great American Bash , Eddie Guerrero revealed the secret he had been keeping ; he was Dominick 's real father , not Rey Mysterio ( was thought to be ) . At SummerSlam , Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a ladder match , where the goal is to climb a ladder to retrieve an object that is suspended in the air . As per pre @-@ match stipulations , Mysterio gained complete custody of Dominick . On the September 9 edition of SmackDown ! , Guerrero defeated Mysterio in a steel cage match to end the feud . Guerrero then began a feud with Batista when Guerrero was given a title match at No Mercy . Guerrero , however , died unexpectedly of heart failure on November 13 , 2005 . In 2006 Guerrero was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by Mysterio , his nephew Chavo Guerrero , and Chris Benoit . 
 The feud between Chris Benoit and Orlando Jordan continued . At SummerSlam , Benoit defeated Jordan for the WWE United States Championship in a match that lasted 25 @.@ 5 seconds . On the September 1 edition of SmackDown ! , Benoit once again defeated Jordan for the title , but this time the match lasted 23 @.@ 4 seconds . The following week on SmackDown ! , Benoit defeated Jordan in another title match , where the match lasted 22 @.@ 5 seconds . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The HSBC Arena has a maximum capacity of 18 @,@ 690 , but it was reduced for The Great American Bash . The event grossed over $ 375 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 8 @,@ 000 , the maximum allowed . The event resulted in 233 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was the same amount as the following year 's Great American Bash . The promotion 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue was $ 21 @.@ 6 million , greater than the previous year 's revenue of $ 16 @.@ 9 million . The event was widely criticized by fans and critics alike . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event a five out of ten . The World Heavyweight Championship main event match was rated three out of ten , and the match between Rey Mysterio and Eddie Guerrero received the highest match rating of eight out of ten . 
 The event was released on DVD on August 23 , 2005 , by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached seventh on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of October 8 , 2005 , and it rose to the fourth spot the following week . It remained on the chart 's " top ten " for four consecutive weeks , until the week of December 15 , 2005 , when it ranked thirteenth . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Janina San Miguel = 
 Janina Miller San Miguel ( born November 14 , 1990 ) is a Filipino beauty queen who was crowned Binibining Pilipinas World at the Binibining Pilipinas 2008 beauty pageant . She gained notoriety for her performance in the pageant 's question and answer portion , where she lost her composure and gave an unfocused and rambling response with a thick accent . A video of the incident has garnered millions of views on websites such as YouTube . 
 San Miguel resigned from her title in September 2008 , citing personal reasons including the death of her grandfather . The title was transferred to first runner up Danielle Castaño , who went on to represent the country at the Miss World 2008 pageant . 
 = = Background = = 
 Janina San Miguel came from a poor family living in a residential compound in Quezon City , Metro Manila . She is the eldest of three children , with her father working as a jeepney driver and her mother as a laundry washer or " <unk> " ( hired to wash other people 's clothes ) . She has Indian blood among her ancestors . 
 At the time of the Binibining Pilipinas 2008 pageant , San Miguel was a freshman student taking up broadcast communication at the University of the East in Manila , with the ambition of becoming a professional broadcaster . She had previously garnered first runner @-@ up at her school 's Mister and Miss UE pageant , and said she joined the Binibining Pilipinas competition to gain " experiences , new friends and opportunities " . 
 = = Binibining Pilipinas = = 
 The 2008 Binibining Pilipinas pageant was held on March 8 , 2008 at the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City , Metro Manila . At seventeen years old , Janina San Miguel was the youngest contestant of the twenty @-@ four women in the competition , as well as one of the tallest at 5 ft 11 in ( 180 cm ) . Early in the competition , San Miguel had won special awards for Best in Swimsuit and Best in Long Gown . 
 = = = Question and answer = = = 
 As part of the question and answer portion of the pageant , candidates were made to randomly select the name of their questioner @-@ judge out of a fishbowl . The name that San Miguel picked was that of Vivienne Tan , who asked " What role did your family play for you as candidate to Binibining Pilipinas ? " 
 San Miguel responded : 
 As San Miguel lost her composure in giving her answer , the audience reacted with jeers and applause , as well as laughter from the panel of judges and other contestants . Midway through her answer , pageant host Paolo Bediones encouraged her off @-@ microphone to continue in Tagalog , though she proceeded with her response in English . 
 Despite the problems with her answer , she went on to win the competition and was crowned Binibining Pilipinas World . The criteria for judging the winner of the pageant allotted 80 percent to physical beauty , leaving just 20 percent to be divided evenly between personality and intelligence . Bediones later defended San Miguel , saying " I admire her for not buckling under the pressure and for being as blatantly honest as possible " . However , he also added , " No matter how badly she may have performed in the Q & A , she couldn 't have lost much considering she had a huge headstart in the scores " . Winning the title made her the official designated Philippine delegate to the Miss World 2008 pageant , which was scheduled to be held later that year in Kiev , Ukraine ( the venue was later moved to Johannesburg , South Africa due to the conflict between Georgia and Russia ) . 
 San Miguel has admitted to being offended by criticism of her response . In an interview with entertainment commentator Ricky Lo a week after the event , she explained that she did not comprehend the question clearly when she was on stage at the pageant , due to the softness of the questioner 's voice . When given another opportunity to answer the same question , she smiled and said , " My family is my inspiration " . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Video clips of her response have been uploaded to YouTube and garnered over 3 million views . Rep. Eduardo <unk> , a senior lawmaker in the Philippine House of Representatives who authored a bill to reinstate English as the medium of instruction in schools , said the video of the incident was " tormenting to watch " , and added , " She is a Filipino , and English is our highly favored second language . So people expected more from her . " Following the incident , the director of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority offered to coordinate with pageant organizers to conduct English courses for all Miss Philippines candidates to better express themselves . 
 San Miguel 's response has drawn comparisons between her and Melanie Marquez , Filipina winner of the 1979 Miss International pageant who is well @-@ known for her shortcomings in speaking English . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 It was announced on September 30 , 2008 that Janina San Miguel had resigned her position of Binibining Pilipinas World . A short official statement released by Binibining Pilipinas Charities said " The untimely demise of her grandfather , among other personal reasons , has caused her undue stress , thus hindering her from fulfilling her duties for the said title " . Her resignation came 6 1 ⁄ 2 months after winning the title , and just 2 1 ⁄ 2 months before the scheduled Miss World pageant . 
 The announcement of her resignation was met with speculation that San Miguel had been forced by Binibining Pilipinas pageant organizers to relinquish her title due to a lack of professionalism during preparatory training sessions , which strained the patience of her mentors and superiors . In a later interview , she admitted that due to multiple conflicts in schedule she was unable to attend all the training sessions arranged for her by pageant organizers , which included sessions to improve her speaking ability . She also admitted to throwing a fit in the middle of a rehearsal when she received news that her grandfather was dying , and demanded that she be allowed to leave . 
 In accordance with pageant rules , San Miguel 's title was automatically transferred to the first runner up , Danielle Castaño . Castaño represented the Philippines at the Miss World 2008 pageant held in Johannesburg , South Africa in December 2008 , where she placed as a finalist in the Miss World Beach Beauty fast track event and a semi @-@ finalist in the Miss World Top Model fast track event . 
 = = Entertainment career = = 
 San Miguel was strongly considered for a role as a contestant in the second season of the reality television series Survivor Philippines , which began filming in May 2009 . Though one of the show 's criteria is that the contestants must not be celebrities , San Miguel was not regarded to be a celebrity by the show 's producers . Show host Paolo Bediones ( who incidentally also hosted the Binibining Pilipinas pageant ) explained in an interview that she was a shoo @-@ in for the part , but decided to back out at the last minute . 
 In August 2009 , San Miguel became a contestant in the third season of Celebrity Duets : Philippine Edition . In the season 's first three episodes , she performed duets with Maureen <unk> , <unk> Escalante , and Paolo Ballesteros . However , she garnered the lowest number of text votes in the first round of eliminations , and became the first contestant voted off of the show on September 12 , 2009 . 
 San Miguel has stated that she is refraining from focusing full time on her entertainment career due to her ongoing studies , though she continues to work on her figure in preparation for modeling opportunities . On October 23 , 2009 , she was one of the ten finalists in the Philippine qualifying round of the Ford Models Supermodel of the World modeling contest , which was held at the <unk> Convention Center in Pasay . She advanced to the top three , but the contest was won by Charlene <unk> , who went on to win first @-@ runner up to <unk> <unk> of the Baltics in the Supermodel of the World finals held in São Paulo , Brazil . 
 = Sunset Overdrive = 
 Sunset Overdrive is an open world third @-@ person shooter video game developed by Insomniac Games and published by Microsoft Studios for the Xbox One . It was announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2013 , and released worldwide in October 2014 . The game is set in 2027 , in a fictional metropolis called Sunset City . The player controls an employee of FizzCo , who has to fight off the OD , short for Overcharge Drinkers : humans who have turned into mutants after drinking FizzCo 's energy drink beverage . In the dystopian Sunset City the player character can wall @-@ run , use zip @-@ lines , and grind rails to swiftly navigate through it , with a large arsenal of weapons to use . The game also has a cooperative multiplayer mode called Chaos Squad , which tasks players to complete a series of missions with seven players . As the game put emphasis on momentum , the game does not feature any cover system . 
 The development of the game began in 2010 when Insomniac completed Resistance 3 . After the project was green @-@ lit internally , the studio partnered with Microsoft Studios , which helped fund the game and allowed Insomniac to keep the rights to the franchise . Insomniac described the game as a " celebration of games " , as the team took inspiration from different sources , including Prince of Persia , Jet Set Radio and Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater , though at its early stage of development the team took inspirations from DayZ instead . The game is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic future , but the team depicted it as an " <unk> " that turns the game 's initial world depiction into a " playground " for players . Sunset Overdrive is powered by Insomniac 's internal engine , previously used in Fuse , one of their previous games . 
 The game received generally positive reviews , with praise for the its visuals , traversal system , combat system , and humor . However , the game was criticized for the lack of a compelling story or innovative quest design . It was awarded multiple year @-@ end accolades , including Game of the Year and Best Xbox Game of the Year awards from several gaming publications . The game was supported with multiple downloadable content , including the story @-@ based The Mystery of the <unk> Rig and Dawn of the Rise of the Fallen Machine , after the game 's release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sunset Overdrive is an action @-@ adventure game set in a third @-@ person perspective . Players navigate a metropolis called Sunset City in the year 2027 . This dystopian world has been overrun by mutants called the OD , short for Overcharge Drinkers . The player character is a former FizzCo employee , tasked with cleaning up the mess left behind from a party FizzCo had thrown to celebrate the launch of its new energy drink , Overcharge Delirium XT . 
 At the start of the game , Players can customize the protagonist 's gender , body type , hairstyle , and outfit using the character creator . Players may also alter the look of their customized character at any point during the game by approaching a vendor named Callista . After creating their characters , players proceed to the game 's open world , which is free for players to explore at any time . A fast travel system is provided allowing players to reach different locations and to navigate the world quickly . The game features a main campaign with story elements and side @-@ missions , which are triggered automatically when players enter certain locations in the city . These quests mainly involve players delivering objects to other non @-@ playable characters and collecting items from the world . Some of these quests have time limits . 
 Throughout the game , players encounter both human enemies , such as gang members , OD 'd humans who have mutated from drinking too much of the energy drink , and several bosses who are more difficult to defeat compared with other ordinary enemies . The game features a variety of weapons for players to use to combat enemies . These include the standard assault rifle AK @-@ FU and the <unk> grenade launcher , which fires teddy bears strapped to sticks of dynamite , fireworks and toy helicopters . All weapons eventually run out of ammunition but do not need to be reloaded while being used . Players unlock more weapons by progressing through the story or purchasing them from shops . Weapons can be upgraded and modified by applying " Amps " , which increases weapons ' lethality , efficiency , and strength . The weapons can be leveled up when players earn enough experience points or defeat enough enemies with them . 
 The game 's combat focuses on velocity , and encourages players to defeat enemies in a fast @-@ paced way . As a result , players can employ different moves including : wall running , air @-@ dashing , zip lining , performing parkour , acrobatics , and water traversal . Players use grind rails to deftly navigate city streets , and are able to switch direction instantly at will . The city is also filled with items for players to bounce up into the air . Players may utilize their weapons while performing these movements and slow down time for players to take aim . On @-@ foot , players cannot walk , take cover , or take out enemies silently , but instead must rely on agility to survive as they will be overwhelmed quickly by enemies if they choose to walk on the ground . The game also features a Style Meter . Shown in the head @-@ up display ( HUD ) of the game , the Meter increases as players perform stylish moves like killing enemies and grinding on @-@ rails without touching the ground . When players are killed , they do not have to wait for the game to load . Players can respawn and return to the world by different methods , such as descending with a rocket or exiting a golden sarcophagus . Insomniac named this system " Next @-@ Gen <unk> " . 
 The game features an eight @-@ player co @-@ operative multiplayer mode called the Chaos Squad , which tasks players to complete a series of missions , as decided by the players themselves . Players defend vats of Overcharge Delirium XT from waves of OD 'd at night and stop their progression by setting up fortifications and barriers , in a manner similar to tower defense games . It is inter @-@ connected with the single @-@ player mode allowing players to transfer their story character , with all the weapons and gadgets they have already accumulated , to the mode . Although players work together , players also try to earn more Style points during play than their co @-@ op partners . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On July 13 , 2027 , FizzCo releases its new energy drink , <unk> Delirium XT ( also known as OCD ) , exclusively in Sunset City . In an attempt to sell OCD faster , FizzCo skipped health regulation protocols , in turn causing anyone who drinks it to turn into a violent boil @-@ bodied mutant known as an Overcharge Drinker ( OD ) . In order to cover up the deception , FizzCo claims that a virus has broken out and quarantines the whole city , preventing anyone from entering or exiting . The player , a FizzCo employee who works in the sanitation division , is saved from an attacking OD by Walter , a fellow survivor . 
 Upon learning that Walter is creating a plane to escape the quarantine , the player obtains the aid of Sam and the Oxfords , a group of rich but lazy geniuses . After multiple errands , the Oxfords build a propeller to complete the plane . The player joins Walter in his plane to escape the city and reveal the truth about the outbreak . At the last second , Walter notices an invisible wall preventing their escape and pushes the player out of the plane before dying in the subsequent crash . 
 Still planning to escape , the player aids Troop Bushido , scouts living in a samurai museum , and <unk> , a group of <unk> . In thanks , the two groups design and build a ship out of garbage which tricks the FizzCo sensors and allow them past . As the player is about to escape , they learn that FizzCo robots are attacking the Oxfords and Troop Bushido in order to kill all witnesses . The player returns to Sunset City and forms a band led by King <unk> ( voiced and <unk> by the real Melvins singer ) in order to save the survivors . Following the battle , Sam learns that FizzCo is planning something else at its headquarters . To break in , the player obtains the help of Las <unk> , a trio of cheerleaders caring for the Children 's ' Ward of the hospital . It is discovered that the FizzCo main office is a robot that is going to destroy Sunset City . The player defeats the robot and has milk and crackers with the other survivors . After the credits , Protocol <unk> is activated and FizzCo helicopters are seen being sent around the world to deliver OCD . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
