 By 1770 , Grill was a partner in the Carlos & Claes Grill Trading house , and as such he became a director in the third charter of the SOIC in 1778 . 
 = = Science and music = = 
 Grill wrote a number of essays for the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences about his observations and experiences in Canton , and in 1773 , he became a member of the academy . In 1774 , Grill became its <unk> or president . He was also an accomplished flute player , and on 16 June 1772 , he was elected as member no . 46 of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music . 
 Grill was also interested in porcelain . Part of his orders may have been just a way to get his money transferred from China to Sweden after he was ordered to return home in 1768 , but he also ordered his own armorial dinner service . 
 = = Ironmaster and estate owner = = 
 When Grill returned to Sweden in 1768 , he first lived in Stockholm where he occupied himself with trade . He owned a <unk> ( suburban manor ) at <unk> in the south part of Stockholm , where he established a crucible steel factory with the help of Bengt Andersson Qvist in 1770 . 
 Grill married Lovisa Ulrika Lüning ( 1744 – 1824 ) in Stockholm in 1772 . They had ten children . She was the daughter of wholesaler Johan Christian Lüning and Margaretha Sabbath . In 1775 , Grill sold the manor and the steel factory to Qvist and moved to Godegård where he had bought the manor and the ironworks from the estate of Jean de Geer . In doing so he followed the pattern of other <unk> who made their fortunes abroad during a short period of time in the East India trade and on their return invested their money in Swedish factories and farms . 
 Aside from renovating the factories in Godegård ( the largest ironworks in Östergötland ) he also had an English park planned and built at his manor in <unk> . The park had an orangery , canals , bridges and pavilions and was modelled after the larger park at <unk> Palace with its Chinese Pavilion . The Godegård estate also included <unk> with the <unk> blast furnace and the De <unk> manufacturing house . Grill also bought the Bona estate in Västra Ny , where he built a wrought iron factory and the <unk> seat farm in 1779 , ( sold the following year ) . In 1782 , he bought the <unk> ironworks . 
 Grill established a small scale trade monopoly at Godegård in 1775 . Before he became owner of the ironworks , the farmers around Godegård had refined the wrought iron from the factory into large quantities of nails using small trip hammers . The nails were sold in <unk> . As a trader Grill would not abide this . First he decreed that the farmers had to buy all their goods at the ironworks ' general store . Second , he forbade the farmers and tenant farmers to sell nails to the merchants at <unk> , at that time a center for nail trade . In this way Grill assumed control over all nail trade himself . 
 Jean Abraham Grill died on 12 March 1792 , in Norrköping under " mysterious circumstances " and was interred in the Grill family grave at the Godegård Church . When Grill died , his wife Lovisa Ulrika took over and ran the ironworks and factories until their children succeeded her . 
 = = Archives = = 
 Throughout his life Grill kept meticulous notes of his business . Some of these are in the Gothenburg University library , and most of them , along with Grill 's letters and correspondence , are now in the Godegård Archive in the Nordic Museum . Most of the 7 @,@ 000 documents in the archive have been digitized following a request from the Macau Historical Archives in 2003 . They are available online , including documentation , letters , cargo lists , provisions for the ships and accounts for the Swedish factory in Canton during Grill 's time with the SOIC . 
 = Metabolism = 
 Metabolism ( from Greek : <unk> <unk> , " change " ) is the set of life @-@ sustaining chemical transformations within the cells of living organisms . The three main purposes of metabolism are the conversion of food / fuel to energy to run cellular processes , the conversion of food / fuel to building blocks for proteins , lipids , nucleic acids , and some carbohydrates , and the elimination of nitrogenous wastes . These enzyme @-@ catalyzed reactions allow organisms to grow and reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . The word metabolism can also refer to the sum of all chemical reactions that occur in living organisms , including digestion and the transport of substances into and between different cells , in which case the set of reactions within the cells is called intermediary metabolism or intermediate metabolism . 
 Metabolism is usually divided into two categories : catabolism , the breaking down of organic matter , for example , by cellular respiration , and anabolism , the building up of components of cells such as proteins and nucleic acids . Usually , breaking down releases energy and building up consumes energy . 
 The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways , in which one chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical , by a sequence of enzymes . Enzymes are crucial to metabolism because they allow organisms to drive desirable reactions that require energy that will not occur by themselves , by coupling them to spontaneous reactions that release energy . Enzymes act as catalysts that allow the reactions to proceed more rapidly . Enzymes also allow the regulation of metabolic pathways in response to changes in the cell 's environment or to signals from other cells . 
 The metabolic system of a particular organism determines which substances it will find nutritious and which poisonous . For example , some prokaryotes use hydrogen sulfide as a nutrient , yet this gas is poisonous to animals . The speed of metabolism , the metabolic rate , influences how much food an organism will require , and also affects how it is able to obtain that food . 
 A striking feature of metabolism is the similarity of the basic metabolic pathways and components between even vastly different species . For example , the set of carboxylic acids that are best known as the intermediates in the citric acid cycle are present in all known organisms , being found in species as diverse as the unicellular bacterium Escherichia coli and huge multicellular organisms like elephants . These striking similarities in metabolic pathways are likely due to their early appearance in evolutionary history , and their retention because of their efficacy . 
 = = Key biochemicals = = 
 Most of the structures that make up animals , plants and microbes are made from three basic classes of molecule : amino acids , carbohydrates and lipids ( often called fats ) . As these molecules are vital for life , metabolic reactions either focus on making these molecules during the construction of cells and tissues , or by breaking them down and using them as a source of energy , by their digestion . These biochemicals can be joined together to make polymers such as DNA and proteins , essential macromolecules of life . 
 = = = Amino acids and proteins = = = 
 Proteins are made of amino acids arranged in a linear chain joined together by peptide bonds . Many proteins are enzymes that catalyze the chemical reactions in metabolism . Other proteins have structural or mechanical functions , such as those that form the cytoskeleton , a system of scaffolding that maintains the cell shape . Proteins are also important in cell signaling , immune responses , cell adhesion , active transport across membranes , and the cell cycle . Amino acids also contribute to cellular energy metabolism by providing a carbon source for entry into the citric acid cycle ( <unk> acid cycle ) , especially when a primary source of energy , such as glucose , is scarce , or when cells undergo metabolic stress . 
 = = = Lipids = = = 
 Lipids are the most diverse group of biochemicals . Their main structural uses are as part of biological membranes both internal and external , such as the cell membrane , or as a source of energy . Lipids are usually defined as hydrophobic or amphipathic biological molecules but will dissolve in organic solvents such as benzene or chloroform . The fats are a large group of compounds that contain fatty acids and glycerol ; a glycerol molecule attached to three fatty acid esters is called a <unk> . Several variations on this basic structure exist , including alternate backbones such as sphingosine in the sphingolipids , and hydrophilic groups such as phosphate as in phospholipids . Steroids such as cholesterol are another major class of lipids . 
 = = = Carbohydrates = = = 
 Carbohydrates are aldehydes or ketones , with many hydroxyl groups attached , that can exist as straight chains or rings . Carbohydrates are the most abundant biological molecules , and fill numerous roles , such as the storage and transport of energy ( starch , glycogen ) and structural components ( cellulose in plants , chitin in animals ) . The basic carbohydrate units are called monosaccharides and include galactose , fructose , and most importantly glucose . <unk> can be linked together to form polysaccharides in almost limitless ways . 
 = = = Nucleotides = = = 
 The two nucleic acids , DNA and RNA , are polymers of nucleotides . Each nucleotide is composed of a phosphate attached to a ribose or deoxyribose sugar group which is attached to a nitrogenous base . Nucleic acids are critical for the storage and use of genetic information , and its interpretation through the processes of transcription and protein biosynthesis . This information is protected by DNA repair mechanisms and propagated through DNA replication . Many viruses have an RNA genome , such as HIV , which uses reverse transcription to create a DNA template from its viral RNA genome . RNA in ribozymes such as spliceosomes and ribosomes is similar to enzymes as it can catalyze chemical reactions . Individual nucleosides are made by attaching a nucleobase to a ribose sugar . These bases are heterocyclic rings containing nitrogen , classified as purines or pyrimidines . Nucleotides also act as coenzymes in metabolic @-@ group @-@ transfer reactions . 
 = = = Coenzymes = = = 
 Metabolism involves a vast array of chemical reactions , but most fall under a few basic types of reactions that involve the transfer of functional groups of atoms and their bonds within molecules . This common chemistry allows cells to use a small set of metabolic intermediates to carry chemical groups between different reactions . These group @-@ transfer intermediates are called coenzymes . Each class of group @-@ transfer reactions is carried out by a particular coenzyme , which is the substrate for a set of enzymes that produce it , and a set of enzymes that consume it . These coenzymes are therefore continuously made , consumed and then recycled . 
 One central coenzyme is adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , the universal energy currency of cells . This nucleotide is used to transfer chemical energy between different chemical reactions . There is only a small amount of ATP in cells , but as it is continuously regenerated , the human body can use about its own weight in ATP per day . ATP acts as a bridge between catabolism and anabolism . Catabolism breaks down molecules and anabolism puts them together . <unk> reactions generate ATP and anabolic reactions consume it . It also serves as a carrier of phosphate groups in phosphorylation reactions . 
 A vitamin is an organic compound needed in small quantities that cannot be made in cells . In human nutrition , most vitamins function as coenzymes after modification ; for example , all water @-@ soluble vitamins are phosphorylated or are coupled to nucleotides when they are used in cells . Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD + ) , a derivative of vitamin B3 ( niacin ) , is an important coenzyme that acts as a hydrogen acceptor . Hundreds of separate types of dehydrogenases remove electrons from their substrates and reduce NAD + into NADH . This reduced form of the coenzyme is then a substrate for any of the reductases in the cell that need to reduce their substrates . Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide exists in two related forms in the cell , NADH and NADPH . The NAD + / NADH form is more important in catabolic reactions , while NADP + / NADPH is used in anabolic reactions . 
 = = = Minerals and cofactors = = = 
 Inorganic elements play critical roles in metabolism ; some are abundant ( e.g. sodium and potassium ) while others function at minute concentrations . About 99 % of a mammal 's mass is made up of the elements carbon , nitrogen , calcium , sodium , chlorine , potassium , hydrogen , phosphorus , oxygen and sulfur . Organic compounds ( proteins , lipids and carbohydrates ) contain the majority of the carbon and nitrogen ; most of the oxygen and hydrogen is present as water . 
 The abundant inorganic elements act as ionic electrolytes . The most important ions are sodium , potassium , calcium , magnesium , chloride , phosphate and the organic ion bicarbonate . The maintenance of precise ion gradients across cell membranes maintains osmotic pressure and pH . Ions are also critical for nerve and muscle function , as action potentials in these tissues are produced by the exchange of electrolytes between the extracellular fluid and the cell 's fluid , the cytosol . Electrolytes enter and leave cells through proteins in the cell membrane called ion channels . For example , muscle contraction depends upon the movement of calcium , sodium and potassium through ion channels in the cell membrane and T @-@ tubules . 
 Transition metals are usually present as trace elements in organisms , with zinc and iron being most abundant of those . These metals are used in some proteins as cofactors and are essential for the activity of enzymes such as catalase and oxygen @-@ carrier proteins such as hemoglobin . Metal cofactors are bound tightly to specific sites in proteins ; although enzyme cofactors can be modified during catalysis , they always return to their original state by the end of the reaction catalyzed . Metal micronutrients are taken up into organisms by specific transporters and bind to storage proteins such as ferritin or metallothionein when not in use . 
 = = Catabolism = = 
 Catabolism is the set of metabolic processes that break down large molecules . These include breaking down and oxidizing food molecules . The purpose of the catabolic reactions is to provide the energy and components needed by anabolic reactions . The exact nature of these catabolic reactions differ from organism to organism and organisms can be classified based on their sources of energy and carbon ( their primary nutritional groups ) , as shown in the table below . Organic molecules are used as a source of energy by <unk> , while lithotrophs use inorganic substrates and phototrophs capture sunlight as chemical energy . However , all these different forms of metabolism depend on redox reactions that involve the transfer of electrons from reduced donor molecules such as organic molecules , water , ammonia , hydrogen sulfide or ferrous ions to acceptor molecules such as oxygen , nitrate or sulfate . In animals these reactions involve complex organic molecules that are broken down to simpler molecules , such as carbon dioxide and water . In photosynthetic organisms such as plants and cyanobacteria , these electron @-@ transfer reactions do not release energy , but are used as a way of storing energy absorbed from sunlight . 
 The most common set of catabolic reactions in animals can be separated into three main stages . In the first , large organic molecules such as proteins , polysaccharides or lipids are digested into their smaller components outside cells . Next , these smaller molecules are taken up by cells and converted to yet smaller molecules , usually acetyl coenzyme A ( acetyl @-@ CoA ) , which releases some energy . Finally , the acetyl group on the CoA is oxidised to water and carbon dioxide in the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain , releasing the energy that is stored by reducing the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD + ) into NADH . 
 = = = Digestion = = = 
 Macromolecules such as starch , cellulose or proteins cannot be rapidly taken up by cells and must be broken into their smaller units before they can be used in cell metabolism . Several common classes of enzymes digest these polymers . These digestive enzymes include proteases that digest proteins into amino acids , as well as glycoside hydrolases that digest polysaccharides into simple sugars known as monosaccharides . 
 Microbes simply secrete digestive enzymes into their surroundings , while animals only secrete these enzymes from specialized cells in their guts . The amino acids or sugars released by these extracellular enzymes are then pumped into cells by active transport proteins . 
 = = = Energy from organic compounds = = = 
 <unk> catabolism is the breakdown of carbohydrates into smaller units . Carbohydrates are usually taken into cells once they have been digested into monosaccharides . Once inside , the major route of breakdown is glycolysis , where sugars such as glucose and fructose are converted into pyruvate and some ATP is generated . Pyruvate is an intermediate in several metabolic pathways , but the majority is converted to acetyl @-@ CoA and fed into the citric acid cycle . Although some more ATP is generated in the citric acid cycle , the most important product is NADH , which is made from NAD + as the acetyl @-@ CoA is oxidized . This oxidation releases carbon dioxide as a waste product . In anaerobic conditions , glycolysis produces lactate , through the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase re @-@ oxidizing NADH to NAD + for re @-@ use in glycolysis . An alternative route for glucose breakdown is the pentose phosphate pathway , which reduces the coenzyme NADPH and produces pentose sugars such as ribose , the sugar component of nucleic acids . 
 Fats are <unk> by hydrolysis to free fatty acids and glycerol . The glycerol enters glycolysis and the fatty acids are broken down by beta oxidation to release acetyl @-@ CoA , which then is fed into the citric acid cycle . Fatty acids release more energy upon oxidation than carbohydrates because carbohydrates contain more oxygen in their structures . Steroids are also broken down by some bacteria in a process similar to beta oxidation , and this breakdown process involves the release of significant amounts of acetyl @-@ CoA , propionyl @-@ CoA , and pyruvate , which can all be used by the cell for energy . M. tuberculosis can also grow on the lipid cholesterol as a sole source of carbon , and genes involved in the cholesterol use pathway ( s ) have been validated as important during various stages of the infection lifecycle of M. tuberculosis . 
 Amino acids are either used to synthesize proteins and other biomolecules , or oxidized to urea and carbon dioxide as a source of energy . The oxidation pathway starts with the removal of the amino group by a transaminase . The amino group is fed into the urea cycle , leaving a deaminated carbon skeleton in the form of a keto acid . Several of these keto acids are intermediates in the citric acid cycle , for example the deamination of glutamate forms α @-@ ketoglutarate . The <unk> amino acids can also be converted into glucose , through gluconeogenesis ( discussed below ) . 
 = = Energy transformations = = 
 = = = Oxidative phosphorylation = = = 
 In oxidative phosphorylation , the electrons removed from organic molecules in areas such as the <unk> acid cycle are transferred to oxygen and the energy released is used to make ATP . This is done in eukaryotes by a series of proteins in the membranes of mitochondria called the electron transport chain . In prokaryotes , these proteins are found in the cell 's inner membrane . These proteins use the energy released from passing electrons from reduced molecules like NADH onto oxygen to pump protons across a membrane . 
 Pumping protons out of the mitochondria creates a proton concentration difference across the membrane and generates an electrochemical gradient . This force drives protons back into the mitochondrion through the base of an enzyme called ATP synthase . The flow of protons makes the stalk subunit rotate , causing the active site of the synthase domain to change shape and phosphorylate adenosine diphosphate – turning it into ATP . 
 = = = Energy from inorganic compounds = = = 
 <unk> is a type of metabolism found in prokaryotes where energy is obtained from the oxidation of inorganic compounds . These organisms can use hydrogen , reduced sulfur compounds ( such as sulfide , hydrogen sulfide and <unk> ) , ferrous iron ( FeII ) or ammonia as sources of reducing power and they gain energy from the oxidation of these compounds with electron acceptors such as oxygen or nitrite . These microbial processes are important in global biogeochemical cycles such as acetogenesis , nitrification and denitrification and are critical for soil fertility . 
 = = = Energy from light = = = 
 The energy in sunlight is captured by plants , cyanobacteria , purple bacteria , green sulfur bacteria and some protists . This process is often coupled to the conversion of carbon dioxide into organic compounds , as part of photosynthesis , which is discussed below . The energy capture and carbon fixation systems can however operate separately in prokaryotes , as purple bacteria and green sulfur bacteria can use sunlight as a source of energy , while switching between carbon fixation and the fermentation of organic compounds . 
 In many organisms the capture of solar energy is similar in principle to oxidative phosphorylation , as it involves the storage of energy as a proton concentration gradient . This proton motive force then drives ATP synthesis . The electrons needed to drive this electron transport chain come from light @-@ gathering proteins called photosynthetic reaction centres or rhodopsins . Reaction centers are classed into two types depending on the type of photosynthetic pigment present , with most photosynthetic bacteria only having one type , while plants and cyanobacteria have two . 
 In plants , algae , and cyanobacteria , photosystem II uses light energy to remove electrons from water , releasing oxygen as a waste product . The electrons then flow to the cytochrome <unk> complex , which uses their energy to pump protons across the thylakoid membrane in the chloroplast . These protons move back through the membrane as they drive the ATP synthase , as before . The electrons then flow through photosystem I and can then either be used to reduce the coenzyme NADP + , for use in the Calvin cycle , which is discussed below , or recycled for further ATP generation . 
 = = Anabolism = = 
 Anabolism is the set of constructive metabolic processes where the energy released by catabolism is used to synthesize complex molecules . In general , the complex molecules that make up cellular structures are constructed step @-@ by @-@ step from small and simple precursors . Anabolism involves three basic stages . First , the production of precursors such as amino acids , monosaccharides , isoprenoids and nucleotides , secondly , their activation into reactive forms using energy from ATP , and thirdly , the assembly of these precursors into complex molecules such as proteins , polysaccharides , lipids and nucleic acids . 
 Organisms differ in how many of the molecules in their cells they can construct for themselves . Autotrophs such as plants can construct the complex organic molecules in cells such as polysaccharides and proteins from simple molecules like carbon dioxide and water . Heterotrophs , on the other hand , require a source of more complex substances , such as monosaccharides and amino acids , to produce these complex molecules . Organisms can be further classified by ultimate source of their energy : photoautotrophs and <unk> obtain energy from light , whereas <unk> and <unk> obtain energy from inorganic oxidation reactions . 
 = = = Carbon fixation = = = 
 Photosynthesis is the synthesis of carbohydrates from sunlight and carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . In plants , cyanobacteria and algae , oxygenic photosynthesis splits water , with oxygen produced as a waste product . This process uses the ATP and NADPH produced by the photosynthetic reaction centres , as described above , to convert CO2 into <unk> 3 @-@ phosphate , which can then be converted into glucose . This carbon @-@ fixation reaction is carried out by the enzyme <unk> as part of the Calvin – Benson cycle . Three types of photosynthesis occur in plants , C3 carbon fixation , C4 carbon fixation and CAM photosynthesis . These differ by the route that carbon dioxide takes to the Calvin cycle , with C3 plants fixing CO2 directly , while C4 and CAM photosynthesis incorporate the CO2 into other compounds first , as adaptations to deal with intense sunlight and dry conditions . 
 In photosynthetic prokaryotes the mechanisms of carbon fixation are more diverse . Here , carbon dioxide can be fixed by the Calvin – Benson cycle , a reversed citric acid cycle , or the carboxylation of acetyl @-@ CoA . Prokaryotic <unk> also fix CO2 through the Calvin – Benson cycle , but use energy from inorganic compounds to drive the reaction . 
 = = = Carbohydrates and glycans = = = 
 In carbohydrate anabolism , simple organic acids can be converted into monosaccharides such as glucose and then used to assemble polysaccharides such as starch . The generation of glucose from compounds like pyruvate , lactate , glycerol , <unk> 3 @-@ phosphate and amino acids is called gluconeogenesis . <unk> converts pyruvate to glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate through a series of intermediates , many of which are shared with glycolysis . However , this pathway is not simply glycolysis run in reverse , as several steps are catalyzed by non @-@ glycolytic enzymes . This is important as it allows the formation and breakdown of glucose to be regulated separately , and prevents both pathways from running simultaneously in a futile cycle . 
 Although fat is a common way of storing energy , in vertebrates such as humans the fatty acids in these stores cannot be converted to glucose through gluconeogenesis as these organisms cannot convert acetyl @-@ CoA into pyruvate ; plants do , but animals do not , have the necessary enzymatic machinery . As a result , after long @-@ term starvation , vertebrates need to produce ketone bodies from fatty acids to replace glucose in tissues such as the brain that cannot metabolize fatty acids . In other organisms such as plants and bacteria , this metabolic problem is solved using the <unk> cycle , which bypasses the decarboxylation step in the citric acid cycle and allows the transformation of acetyl @-@ CoA to oxaloacetate , where it can be used for the production of glucose . 
 <unk> and glycans are made by the sequential addition of monosaccharides by <unk> from a reactive sugar @-@ phosphate donor such as uridine diphosphate glucose ( UDP @-@ glucose ) to an acceptor hydroxyl group on the growing polysaccharide . As any of the hydroxyl groups on the ring of the substrate can be acceptors , the polysaccharides produced can have straight or branched structures . The polysaccharides produced can have structural or metabolic functions themselves , or be transferred to lipids and proteins by enzymes called <unk> . 
 = = = Fatty acids , isoprenoids and steroids = = = 
 Fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl @-@ CoA units . The acyl chains in the fatty acids are extended by a cycle of reactions that add the acyl group , reduce it to an alcohol , dehydrate it to an alkene group and then reduce it again to an alkane group . The enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups : in animals and fungi , all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional type I protein , while in plant plastids and bacteria separate type II enzymes perform each step in the pathway . 
 Terpenes and isoprenoids are a large class of lipids that include the carotenoids and form the largest class of plant natural products . These compounds are made by the assembly and modification of isoprene units donated from the reactive precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate . These precursors can be made in different ways . In animals and archaea , the mevalonate pathway produces these compounds from acetyl @-@ CoA , while in plants and bacteria the non @-@ mevalonate pathway uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3 @-@ phosphate as substrates . One important reaction that uses these activated isoprene donors is steroid biosynthesis . Here , the isoprene units are joined together to make squalene and then folded up and formed into a set of rings to make lanosterol . Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids such as cholesterol and ergosterol . 
 = = = Proteins = = = 
 Organisms vary in their ability to synthesize the 20 common amino acids . Most bacteria and plants can synthesize all twenty , but mammals can only synthesize eleven nonessential amino acids , so nine essential amino acids must be obtained from food . Some simple parasites , such as the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae , lack all amino acid synthesis and take their amino acids directly from their hosts . All amino acids are synthesized from intermediates in glycolysis , the citric acid cycle , or the pentose phosphate pathway . Nitrogen is provided by glutamate and glutamine . Amino acid synthesis depends on the formation of the appropriate alpha @-@ keto acid , which is then <unk> to form an amino acid . 
 Amino acids are made into proteins by being joined together in a chain of peptide bonds . Each different protein has a unique sequence of amino acid residues : this is its primary structure . Just as the letters of the alphabet can be combined to form an almost endless variety of words , amino acids can be linked in varying sequences to form a huge variety of proteins . Proteins are made from amino acids that have been activated by attachment to a transfer RNA molecule through an ester bond . This aminoacyl @-@ tRNA precursor is produced in an ATP @-@ dependent reaction carried out by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase . This aminoacyl @-@ tRNA is then a substrate for the ribosome , which joins the amino acid onto the elongating protein chain , using the sequence information in a messenger RNA . 
 = = = Nucleotide synthesis and salvage = = = 
 Nucleotides are made from amino acids , carbon dioxide and formic acid in pathways that require large amounts of metabolic energy . Consequently , most organisms have efficient systems to salvage preformed nucleotides . <unk> are synthesized as nucleosides ( bases attached to ribose ) . Both adenine and guanine are made from the precursor nucleoside inosine monophosphate , which is synthesized using atoms from the amino acids glycine , glutamine , and aspartic acid , as well as formate transferred from the coenzyme <unk> . <unk> , on the other hand , are synthesized from the base orotate , which is formed from glutamine and aspartate . 
 = = <unk> and redox metabolism = = 
 All organisms are constantly exposed to compounds that they cannot use as foods and would be harmful if they accumulated in cells , as they have no metabolic function . These potentially damaging compounds are called <unk> . <unk> such as synthetic drugs , natural poisons and antibiotics are detoxified by a set of xenobiotic @-@ metabolizing enzymes . In humans , these include cytochrome P450 oxidases , UDP @-@ <unk> , and glutathione S @-@ transferases . This system of enzymes acts in three stages to firstly oxidize the xenobiotic ( phase I ) and then conjugate water @-@ soluble groups onto the molecule ( phase II ) . The modified water @-@ soluble xenobiotic can then be pumped out of cells and in multicellular organisms may be further metabolized before being excreted ( phase III ) . In ecology , these reactions are particularly important in microbial biodegradation of pollutants and the bioremediation of contaminated land and oil spills . Many of these microbial reactions are shared with multicellular organisms , but due to the incredible diversity of types of microbes these organisms are able to deal with a far wider range of <unk> than multicellular organisms , and can degrade even persistent organic pollutants such as organochloride compounds . 
 A related problem for aerobic organisms is oxidative stress . Here , processes including oxidative phosphorylation and the formation of disulfide bonds during protein folding produce reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide . These damaging oxidants are removed by antioxidant metabolites such as glutathione and enzymes such as <unk> and peroxidases . 
 = = Thermodynamics of living organisms = = 
 Living organisms must obey the laws of thermodynamics , which describe the transfer of heat and work . The second law of thermodynamics states that in any closed system , the amount of entropy ( disorder ) cannot decrease . Although living organisms ' amazing complexity appears to contradict this law , life is possible as all organisms are open systems that exchange matter and energy with their surroundings . Thus living systems are not in equilibrium , but instead are dissipative systems that maintain their state of high complexity by causing a larger increase in the entropy of their environments . The metabolism of a cell achieves this by coupling the spontaneous processes of catabolism to the non @-@ spontaneous processes of anabolism . In thermodynamic terms , metabolism maintains order by creating disorder . 
 = = Regulation and control = = 
 As the environments of most organisms are constantly changing , the reactions of metabolism must be finely regulated to maintain a constant set of conditions within cells , a condition called homeostasis . Metabolic regulation also allows organisms to respond to signals and interact actively with their environments . Two closely linked concepts are important for understanding how metabolic pathways are controlled . Firstly , the regulation of an enzyme in a pathway is how its activity is increased and decreased in response to signals . Secondly , the control exerted by this enzyme is the effect that these changes in its activity have on the overall rate of the pathway ( the flux through the pathway ) . For example , an enzyme may show large changes in activity ( i.e. it is highly regulated ) but if these changes have little effect on the flux of a metabolic pathway , then this enzyme is not involved in the control of the pathway . 
 There are multiple levels of metabolic regulation . In intrinsic regulation , the metabolic pathway self @-@ regulates to respond to changes in the levels of substrates or products ; for example , a decrease in the amount of product can increase the flux through the pathway to compensate . This type of regulation often involves allosteric regulation of the activities of multiple enzymes in the pathway . Extrinsic control involves a cell in a multicellular organism changing its metabolism in response to signals from other cells . These signals are usually in the form of soluble messengers such as hormones and growth factors and are detected by specific receptors on the cell surface . These signals are then transmitted inside the cell by second messenger systems that often involved the phosphorylation of proteins . 
 A very well understood example of extrinsic control is the regulation of glucose metabolism by the hormone insulin . Insulin is produced in response to rises in blood glucose levels . Binding of the hormone to insulin receptors on cells then activates a cascade of protein kinases that cause the cells to take up glucose and convert it into storage molecules such as fatty acids and glycogen . The metabolism of glycogen is controlled by activity of phosphorylase , the enzyme that breaks down glycogen , and glycogen synthase , the enzyme that makes it . These enzymes are regulated in a reciprocal fashion , with phosphorylation inhibiting glycogen synthase , but activating phosphorylase . Insulin causes glycogen synthesis by activating protein phosphatases and producing a decrease in the phosphorylation of these enzymes . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The central pathways of metabolism described above , such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle , are present in all three domains of living things and were present in the last universal ancestor . This universal ancestral cell was prokaryotic and probably a methanogen that had extensive amino acid , nucleotide , carbohydrate and lipid metabolism . The retention of these ancient pathways during later evolution may be the result of these reactions having been an optimal solution to their particular metabolic problems , with pathways such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle producing their end products highly efficiently and in a minimal number of steps . The first pathways of enzyme @-@ based metabolism may have been parts of purine nucleotide metabolism , while previous metabolic pathways were a part of the ancient RNA world . 
 Many models have been proposed to describe the mechanisms by which novel metabolic pathways evolve . These include the sequential addition of novel enzymes to a short ancestral pathway , the duplication and then divergence of entire pathways as well as the recruitment of pre @-@ existing enzymes and their assembly into a novel reaction pathway . The relative importance of these mechanisms is unclear , but genomic studies have shown that enzymes in a pathway are likely to have a shared ancestry , suggesting that many pathways have evolved in a step @-@ by @-@ step fashion with novel functions created from pre @-@ existing steps in the pathway . An alternative model comes from studies that trace the evolution of proteins ' structures in metabolic networks , this has suggested that enzymes are pervasively recruited , borrowing enzymes to perform similar functions in different metabolic pathways ( evident in the <unk> database ) These recruitment processes result in an evolutionary enzymatic mosaic . A third possibility is that some parts of metabolism might exist as " modules " that can be reused in different pathways and perform similar functions on different molecules . 
 As well as the evolution of new metabolic pathways , evolution can also cause the loss of metabolic functions . For example , in some parasites metabolic processes that are not essential for survival are lost and preformed amino acids , nucleotides and carbohydrates may instead be scavenged from the host . Similar reduced metabolic capabilities are seen in endosymbiotic organisms . 
 = = Investigation and manipulation = = 
 Classically , metabolism is studied by a reductionist approach that focuses on a single metabolic pathway . Particularly valuable is the use of radioactive tracers at the whole @-@ organism , tissue and cellular levels , which define the paths from precursors to final products by identifying radioactively labelled intermediates and products . The enzymes that catalyze these chemical reactions can then be purified and their kinetics and responses to inhibitors investigated . A parallel approach is to identify the small molecules in a cell or tissue ; the complete set of these molecules is called the <unk> . Overall , these studies give a good view of the structure and function of simple metabolic pathways , but are inadequate when applied to more complex systems such as the metabolism of a complete cell . 
 An idea of the complexity of the metabolic networks in cells that contain thousands of different enzymes is given by the figure showing the interactions between just 43 proteins and 40 metabolites to the right : the sequences of genomes provide lists containing anything up to 45 @,@ 000 genes . However , it is now possible to use this genomic data to reconstruct complete networks of biochemical reactions and produce more holistic mathematical models that may explain and predict their behavior . These models are especially powerful when used to integrate the pathway and metabolite data obtained through classical methods with data on gene expression from proteomic and DNA microarray studies . Using these techniques , a model of human metabolism has now been produced , which will guide future drug discovery and biochemical research . These models are now used in network analysis , to classify human diseases into groups that share common proteins or metabolites . 
 Bacterial metabolic networks are a striking example of bow @-@ tie organization , an architecture able to input a wide range of nutrients and produce a large variety of products and complex macromolecules using a relatively few intermediate common currencies . 
 A major technological application of this information is metabolic engineering . Here , organisms such as yeast , plants or bacteria are genetically modified to make them more useful in biotechnology and aid the production of drugs such as antibiotics or industrial chemicals such as 1 @,@ 3 @-@ <unk> and shikimic acid . These genetic modifications usually aim to reduce the amount of energy used to produce the product , increase yields and reduce the production of wastes . 
 = = History = = 
 The term metabolism is derived from the Greek <unk> – " <unk> " for " change " , or " overthrow " . The first documented references of metabolism were made by Ibn al @-@ <unk> in his 1260 AD work titled Al @-@ Risalah al @-@ <unk> fil <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( The Treatise of Kamil on the Prophet 's Biography ) which included the following phrase " Both the body and its parts are in a continuous state of dissolution and nourishment , so they are inevitably undergoing permanent change . " The history of the scientific study of metabolism spans several centuries and has moved from examining whole animals in early studies , to examining individual metabolic reactions in modern biochemistry . The first controlled experiments in human metabolism were published by Santorio Santorio in 1614 in his book Ars de <unk> <unk> . He described how he weighed himself before and after eating , sleep , working , sex , fasting , drinking , and excreting . He found that most of the food he took in was lost through what he called " insensible perspiration " . 
 In these early studies , the mechanisms of these metabolic processes had not been identified and a vital force was thought to animate living tissue . In the 19th century , when studying the fermentation of sugar to alcohol by yeast , Louis Pasteur concluded that fermentation was catalyzed by substances within the yeast cells he called " ferments " . He wrote that " alcoholic fermentation is an act correlated with the life and organization of the yeast cells , not with the death or putrefaction of the cells . " This discovery , along with the publication by Friedrich Wöhler in 1828 of a paper on the chemical synthesis of urea , and is notable for being the first organic compound prepared from wholly inorganic precursors . This proved that the organic compounds and chemical reactions found in cells were no different in principle than any other part of chemistry . 
 It was the discovery of enzymes at the beginning of the 20th century by Eduard Buchner that separated the study of the chemical reactions of metabolism from the biological study of cells , and marked the beginnings of biochemistry . The mass of biochemical knowledge grew rapidly throughout the early 20th century . One of the most prolific of these modern biochemists was Hans Krebs who made huge contributions to the study of metabolism . He discovered the urea cycle and later , working with Hans Kornberg , the citric acid cycle and the <unk> cycle . Modern biochemical research has been greatly aided by the development of new techniques such as chromatography , X @-@ ray diffraction , NMR spectroscopy , <unk> labelling , electron microscopy and molecular dynamics simulations . These techniques have allowed the discovery and detailed analysis of the many molecules and metabolic pathways in cells . 
 = Bangla Desh ( song ) = 
 " Bangla Desh " is a song by English musician George Harrison . It was released as a non @-@ album single in July 1971 , to raise awareness for the millions of refugees from the country formerly known as East Pakistan , following the 1970 Bhola cyclone and the outbreak of the Bangladesh Liberation War . Harrison 's inspiration for the song came from his friend Ravi Shankar , a Bengali musician , who approached Harrison for help in trying to alleviate the suffering . " Bangla Desh " has been described as " one of the most cogent social statements in music history " and helped gain international support for Bangladeshi independence by establishing the name of the fledgling nation around the world . In 2005 , United Nations Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan identified the song 's success in personalising the Bangladesh crisis , through its emotive description of Shankar 's request for help . 
 " Bangla Desh " appeared at the height of Harrison 's popularity as a solo artist , following the break @-@ up of the Beatles and the acclaim afforded his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . It was pop music 's first charity single , and its release took place three days before the Harrison @-@ sponsored Concert for Bangladesh shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden . The single became a top ten hit in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in Europe , and peaked at number 23 on America 's Billboard Hot 100 . The recording was co @-@ produced by Phil Spector and features contributions from Leon Russell , Jim Horn , Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner . The Los Angeles session for the song marked the start of two enduring musical associations in Harrison 's solo career , with Keltner and Horn . 
 Backed by these musicians and others including Eric Clapton and Billy Preston , Harrison performed " Bangla Desh " at the UNICEF concerts , on 1 August 1971 , as a rousing encore . In a review of the Concert for Bangladesh live album for Rolling Stone magazine , Jon Landau identified this reading as " the concert 's single greatest performance by all concerned " . The studio recording appeared on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , which remained its only official CD release until September 2014 , when it was included as a bonus track on the Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of Harrison 's Living in the Material World album . Artists who have covered the song include Stu Phillips & the Hollyridge Strings and Italian saxophonist Fausto <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the spring of 1971 , George Harrison had established himself as the most successful ex @-@ Beatle during the former band members ' first year as solo artists ; in the words of biographer Elliot Huntley , he " couldn 't have got any more popular in the eyes of the public " . Just as importantly , writes Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Harrison had " amassed such good will in the music community " during that time . Rather than looking to immediately follow up his All Things Must Pass triple album , he had spent the months since recording ended in October 1970 repaying favours to the friends and musicians who had helped make the album such a success . These included co @-@ producer Phil Spector , whose wife , Ronnie Spector , Harrison supplied with songs for a proposed solo album on Apple Records ; Ringo Starr , whose " It Don 't Come Easy " single he produced and prepared for release , following the original session for the song in March 1970 ; Bobby Whitlock , singer and keyboard player with the short @-@ lived Derek and the Dominos , whose eponymous debut solo album featured Harrison and Eric Clapton on guitar ; and former Spooky Tooth pianist Gary Wright , whose Footprint album ( 1971 ) Harrison also guested on , along with All Things Must Pass orchestrator John Barham . 
 Another project was a documentary on the life and music of Ravi Shankar , Howard Worth 's Raga ( 1971 ) , for which Harrison had stepped in at the last minute to provide funding and distribution through Apple Films . With Harrison also serving as record producer for the accompanying soundtrack album , work began with Shankar in Los Angeles during April 1971 and resumed in late June , following Harrison @-@ produced sessions in London for the band Badfinger . 
 A Bengali by birth , Shankar had already brought the growing humanitarian crisis in Bangladesh to Harrison 's attention , while staying at the ex @-@ Beatle 's house , Friar Park , earlier in the year . The state formerly known as East Pakistan ( and before that , East Bengal ) had suffered an estimated 300 @,@ 000 casualties when the Bhola cyclone hit its shores on 12 November 1970 , and the indifference shown by the ruling government in West Pakistan , particularly by President Yahya Khan , was just one reason the Bengali national movement sought independence on 25 March 1971 . This declaration resulted in an immediate military crackdown by Khan 's troops , and three days later the Bangladesh Liberation War began . By 13 June , details of the systematic massacre of citizens were beginning to emerge internationally via the publication in London 's Sunday Times of an article by Anthony Mascarenhas . Along with the torrential rains and intensive flooding that were threatening the passage of millions of refugees into north @-@ eastern India , this news galvanised Shankar into approaching Harrison for help in trying to alleviate the suffering . " I was in a very sad mood , having read all this news , " Shankar later told Rolling Stone magazine , " and I said , ' George , this is the situation , I know it doesn 't concern you , I know you can 't possibly identify . ' But while I talked to George he was very deeply moved ... and he said , ' Yes , I think I 'll be able to do something . ' " 
 As a result , Harrison committed to staging the Concert for Bangladesh at Madison Square Garden , New York , on Sunday , 1 August . Six weeks of frantic activity ensued as Harrison flew between New York , Los Angeles and London , making preparations and recruiting other musicians to join him and Shankar for the shows . While conceding that Harrison was no " natural <unk> " in the manner of his former bandmate John Lennon , author Robert Rodriguez has written : " if any ex @-@ Fab had the cachet with his fan base to solicit good works , it was the spiritual Beatle . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Foreign journalists had been deported from East Pakistan shortly before the Pakistani army 's Operation Searchlight , and even after Mascarenhas ' first @-@ hand observations had been published , Shankar and Harrison were concerned that the mainstream media in the West were showing a reluctance to report all the facts . That summer , it also emerged that America was supporting General Khan 's military offensive , both financially and with weaponry – despite the Blood telegram in April , in which officials at the US Consulate in Dacca advised their State Department of the " genocide " taking place and accused the US Government of " moral bankruptcy " . Realising the need to create greater awareness of the situation in Bangladesh , and particularly the refugee camps of India that had become " infectious open @-@ air graveyards " with the outbreak of cholera , Harrison quickly composed a song for the cause . " Bangla Desh " was " written in ten minutes at the piano " , he would later recall . The title translates as " Bengal nation " , and the fact that Harrison spelt it as two words is indicative of how little the new country name had been acknowledged by the Western media at this time . 
 As with the concerts , Harrison made a point of steering clear of the politics behind the problem , his lyrics focusing instead on the human perspective . At the suggestion of Leon Russell , who had participated in the recent Ronnie Spector and Badfinger sessions , Harrison began the song with a brief verse outlining his own introduction to the Bangladesh crisis : 
 My friend came to me with sadness in his eyes 
 Told me that he wanted help before his country dies 
 Although I couldn 't feel the pain , I knew I had to try 
 Now I 'm asking all of you to help us save some lives . 
 These lines refer to Shankar 's request for help , and " [ in ] deference to the Shankar context " , musical biographer Simon Leng suggests , Harrison set the opening verse as a rock version of Indian music 's traditional alap – " a slow introductory statement of the main ideas " . Lyrically , the remainder of the song concentrates on the uncompromising message " We 've got to relieve Bangla Desh " as thousands of refugees , particularly children , fell victim to the effects of famine and disease . 
 Bangla Desh , Bangla Desh 
 Where so many people are dying fast 
 And it sure looks like a mess 
 I 've never seen such distress 
 Now won 't you lend your hand , try to understand 
 Relieve the people of Bangla Desh . 
 The final verse @-@ chorus reflects a point that former US Fund for UNICEF president Charles Lyons has identified as a perennial obstacle when addressing global issues of poverty – that the problems appear to be too big and too distant for individuals to be able to solve : 
 Now , it may seem so far from where we all are 
 It 's something we can 't reject 
 That suffering , I can 't neglect ... 
 In this verse , the line " Now won 't you give some bread to get the starving fed " contains a " clever pun " , Harrison biographer Ian Inglis notes , whereby the word " bread " is used to refer to both money and food . 
 = = Recording = = 
 With little time to begin rehearsing for the New York shows , the " Bangla Desh " single was rush @-@ recorded in Los Angeles . Sources differ over the venue and date : the Record Plant West seems the most likely studio , with sessions taking place on 4 – 5 July and horn overdubs perhaps on 10 July . Phil Spector again co @-@ produced , but as with the recording details for the sessions , the exact line @-@ up of musicians is a matter of conjecture . According to Simon Leng , who consulted Klaus Voormann and Jim Horn for his book While My Guitar Gently Weeps , the line @-@ up comprised Harrison , Leon Russell ( piano ) , Horn ( saxophones ) , Voormann ( bass ) , Starr , Jim Keltner ( both on drums ) and Billy Preston ( organ ) . Leng and Beatles author Bruce Spizer credit a " horn section " led by Jim Horn , which could include regular partner Chuck Findley and even the rest of the six @-@ piece section , christened " the Hollywood Horns " , that would go on to perform in New York on 1 August . 
 The recording begins with Harrison 's emotive introduction backed by what Lavezzoli describes as a " rolling piano figure " from Russell . Following the words " help us save some lives " , the piano sets up the song 's " driving groove " , Lavezzoli continues , as the rhythm section and Harrison 's electric guitar join in , creating the same musical blend of gospel and rock that Harrison had adopted on much of All Things Must Pass . In a review for the NME in August 1971 , Derek Johnson wrote of " Bangla Desh " : " Opens almost like a sermon , then the beat come is ... as George wails fervently to a backing of a solid rhythm section and handclaps . " The track retains an " urgent ' live ' mood " , Leng notes , although it is possible that Starr 's contribution was overdubbed after the main session , due to his filming schedule for the Western movie Blindman ( 1971 ) , in Spain . The song features solos shared between Russell , Horn ( on tenor sax ) and Harrison ( slide guitar ) , and fades out with the ensemble playing in double time , similar to a fast gat section ( or drut ) used in Hindustani classical music . 
 " Bangla Desh " marked the first occasion that Harrison worked with Horn , who would go on to become a regular collaborator . Already a veteran of the LA music scene by 1971 , Horn recalls his " jaded " mindset before meeting Harrison , but describes the session as a " real turning point " in his career , " because we were doing something for a cause " . It was also the first time that Keltner played on a George Harrison session , the two musicians having already worked together on Lennon 's Imagine album ( 1971 ) . The " Bangla Desh " session was the beginning of a lifelong friendship , with the pair remaining " as brothers " , Keltner has said , until Harrison 's death in 2001 . Together with Clapton , Preston , Bob Dylan and the group Badfinger , all these musicians joined Harrison and Shankar on stage at Madison Square Garden . 
 Ravi Shankar cut a benefit disc of his own at this time , the Harrison @-@ produced Joi Bangla EP . The A @-@ side featured two vocal compositions sung in Bengali – the title track ( which translated to mean " Victory to Bangladesh " ) and " Oh <unk> " – while on the reverse was a six @-@ minute recital of " Raga Mishra <unk> " , featuring Shankar , sarod master Ali Akbar Khan , and Shankar 's regular tabla player , Alla Rakha . 
 = = Release = = 
 At Harrison 's urging , Capitol Records , Apple 's distributor in the United States , set all four of its manufacturing plants to producing copies of the " Bangla Desh " single ; one @-@ sided , white label promo discs were also rushed through to ensure immediate radio play for the song . For the US picture sleeve , designer Tom Wilkes chose a suitably topical image , incorporating headlines and text from New York Times articles about the Bangladesh crisis . The articles made mention of vultures being the " happiest creatures " amid the chaos in Dacca , and India 's " wait and see " policy regarding events in East Pakistan . The front of the picture sleeve was topped with the line " ( We 've Got to Relieve ) " before the words " Bangla Desh " , leading a number of publications to include the parenthetical text as part of the official song title . Boxed off at the foot of the front sleeve were details of the George Harrison – Ravi Shankar Special Emergency Relief Fund ( care of UNICEF 's New York headquarters ) , to which proceeds of the single would go and further donations were encouraged . The back cover of the US sleeve was taken from a UPI news agency photograph – an " emotional " image showing a mother comforting her starving child . This photo was also used in the aid project 's magazine advertising campaign , as well as for the front of the single 's picture sleeve in Denmark and Japan . 
 Backed with the well @-@ regarded " Deep Blue " , the " Bangla Desh " single was issued on 28 July 1971 in the United States ( as Apple 1836 ) , with a UK release following two days later ( R <unk> ) . It peaked at number 10 on Britain 's national singles chart and number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 in America ; the other US chart compilers , Cash Box and Record World , placed the single at number 20 and number 13 , respectively . " Bangla Desh " attracted sustained airplay in the days leading up to the concerts , and lent the relief project an authentic social and political significance . A Bangladeshi academic , Professor Farida Majid , would later write : " To the utter consternation of [ US President ] Nixon and [ Secretary of State ] Kissinger , George Harrison 's ' Bangla Desh ' hit the chart . It was a thrilling moment in the midst of all the sad news emanating from the battlefront . Even the Western journalists covering the civil war in East Pakistan were not yet using the word ' Bangladesh ' . " The studio recording was also played at the Concert for Bangladesh shows , following Shankar 's opening set , over footage of the refugees and scenes from the war . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 Despite the song having been a hit – and its status as the first @-@ ever pop charity single , fourteen years before Band Aid and USA for Africa – " Bangla Desh " was mostly ignored by record @-@ company <unk> following 1971 . Over a period of 43 years , the studio version received an album release only on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , which was issued on CD in 1987 . The song has since been included as a bonus track , remixed by Paul Hicks , on the 2014 reissue of Harrison 's Living in the Material World album , part of the eight @-@ disc Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 On release , Billboard magazine described " Bangla Desh " as " a musical appeal to help our fellow @-@ man " that " should find immediate and heavy chart action " . In his contemporary review for the NME , Derek Johnson considered the song to be " [ n ] ot so strong melodically as ' My Sweet Lord ' , but still nagging and insistent " , and added : " one can immediately detect the despair and pity in [ Harrison 's ] voice as he sings of the appalling plight of the East Pakistanis ... his lyric is bound to cause some heart @-@ searching . " A wave of public goodwill accompanied the single 's release in 1971 , as was the case with the two benefit concerts , the subsequent live album , and the 1972 concert film . Simon Leng has identified genuine friendship as being key to the success of Harrison and Shankar 's relief project : the friendship between the two of them that saw the ex @-@ Beatle become involved , and the friendships Harrison had cultivated with Dylan , Clapton and Starr that ensured their participation . Leng notes that the opening lyrics to " Bangla Desh " ( " My friend came to me ... " ) could equally have applied to Harrison 's efforts to enlist the reluctant Dylan and heroin @-@ sidelined Clapton . 
 In his concert review for The Village Voice , Don Heckman described " Bangla Desh " as " a song which expresses far better than words what kind of man Harrison is " . Heckman went on to compare Harrison 's philanthropy with the activities of two of his former bandmates , saying : " I have no quarrel with John Lennon 's endless clattering around inside his psyche , or Paul McCartney 's search for sweetness and light , but at the moment I have to have stronger feelings about George Harrison 's active efforts to do something about the misery in the world around him . How surprising that the most introspective of the Beatles should be the one who , in the long run , takes the most effective actions . " 
 Away from its context as a song designed purely to bring attention to the Bengalis ' cause , as Harrison himself described it , " Bangla Desh " has often been viewed by commentators as a rushed and underwhelming composition . Robert Rodriguez qualifies this opinion , however : " As a single , the song was possibly not the most commercial of records , but as a call to service , it could scarcely have been improved upon . " " Bangla Desh " ' s standing as rock music 's first charity single is not overlooked , with Ian Inglis stating : " ' Bangla Desh ' serves as a model for the charity singles that would become commonplace in the decades ahead , although , in this instance , the power of Harrison 's song lies not in its assembly of famous performers but in its literal and absolute commitment . " On this point , Leng deems the song as having " as much raw energy as anything [ Lennon 's ] Plastic Ono Band ever offered " . In The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Peter Lavezzoli writes : " Harrison 's lyric and vocal were concise and powerful , a direct call for action in a specific crisis . As such , ' Bangla Desh ' remains one of the most cogent social statements in music history . " 
 In his interview for the 2005 reissue of Saul Swimmer 's Concert for Bangladesh film , UN Secretary @-@ General Kofi Annan acknowledged Harrison and Shankar as " pioneers " in their efforts for the people of Bangladesh , and credited the song 's opening verse for personalising the crisis by showing " the man behind the music " . Thirty @-@ three years before this , on 5 June 1972 , UNICEF officially recognised Harrison and Shankar with its annual Child Is the Father of the Man award . 
 In 2004 , " Bangla Desh " was played during the final episode of the BBC television series Himalaya with Michael Palin , in which Palin travels south from Bhutan to Bay of Bengal and reflects on Bangladesh 's struggle for independence . Writing for Blender magazine in April that year , Paul Du Noyer described the song as a " fine 1971 single " . In the 2005 " Beatles Solo " edition of NME Originals , Adrian Thrills rated " Bangla Desh " second among Harrison 's " ten solo gems " ( behind " What Is Life " ) , referring to it as a " jazz @-@ blues @-@ rock shuffle " that " set the template for Band Aid " . Writing in The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles in 2009 , Michael Frontani said that with his Bangladesh relief effort , Harrison " pioneered the whole idea of the charity album and single , as well as of the rock concert fundraiser " . While bemoaning the song 's omission from the 2009 Harrison compilation Let It Roll , Jon Cummings of <unk> described " Bangla Desh " as " no great artistic achievement " within itself , but " a key moment ... in the evolution of pop @-@ music activism " . 
 The song is featured in Bruce Pollock 's 2005 book The 7 @,@ 500 Most Important Songs of 1944 – 2000 . In 2010 , AOL Radio listeners placed " Bangla Desh " at number 10 in a poll to decide the ten best post @-@ Beatles Harrison songs . 
 = = Live version = = 
 Harrison played " Bangla Desh " as an encore at both of the Madison Square Garden shows on 1 August 1971 , with the evening performance being selected for inclusion on the Concert for Bangladesh triple live album . After the familiar introduction to the song , the band " threw their full weight behind Harrison " , Lavezzoli writes , " playing the darkest and heaviest music of the show " . On release that December , Jon Landau of Rolling Stone identified the song as " the concert 's single greatest performance by all concerned " , and added that by the close of the show , the lyrics to Harrison 's single were " no longer an expression of intent but of an accomplished mission – help has been given , people have been reached , an effort has been made and results will be felt " . 
 In his album review for Melody Maker , Richard Williams wrote that the live version of " Bangla Desh " " roars and rages to a stunning close " . Played at a faster tempo than the studio recording , it features what Spizer terms a " blistering " saxophone solo from Horn , and a vocal by Harrison that Leng describes as " astonishingly powerful " and " a pure act of zeal " . As shown in the concert film , following his brief guitar solo towards the end of the song , Harrison repeats the line " Relieve the people of Bangla Desh " before exiting the stage to great applause , as the band plays on without him . In his book on the Beatles ' first decade as solo artists , Rodriguez views this live performance as perhaps Harrison 's " high water mark of public esteem " . 
 Although he was reportedly eager to repeat the experience of these New York shows , Harrison never played " Bangla Desh " in concert after 1971 and he did not perform live again until his 1974 North American tour with Shankar . By that point , the Bangladesh Liberation War had long ended , with India 's defeat of the Pakistani army in December 1971 , but Bangladesh was now experiencing a devastating famine that would account for up to 1 @.@ 5 million lives . During a concert in Los Angeles on 11 November , Harrison responded to requests for the song " Bangla Desh " with a suggestion that the audience instead chant " Krishna , Krishna , Krishna " and use the positive power of mantra to help the Bangladeshi population . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Harrison biographer Alan Clayson has written of the " triumph " of the Bangladesh concerts leading to a host of imitators and tribute acts replicating the shows ' programme , among which was a French band 's cover version of " Bangla Desh " . Another example was the Tribe 's Bangla Desh ( 1972 ) , a full album of highlights from the concerts , including Harrison 's " Bangla Desh " , " My Sweet Lord " and " Here Comes the Sun " . The previous year , Stu Phillips & the Hollyridge Strings released an easy listening version of " Bangla Desh " on their Beatles tribute album The George , John , Paul & Ringo Songbook ( 1971 ) . Another 1971 cover version , re @-@ released in 2002 on the compilation When They Was Fab – A Tribute to the Solo Beatles , was recorded by the Top of the Poppers . 
 Following Jim Horn 's prominent contribution to the original Harrison recording , Italian saxophonist Fausto <unk> recorded the song for his 1972 album 14a <unk> . Alternative band <unk> covered " Bangla Desh " on their 1988 album Bird , as part of their parody of early 1970s rock stars such as the former Beatles . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following musicians are believed to have played on the studio recording of " Bangla Desh " . 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric guitar , slide guitar , backing vocals 
 Leon Russell – piano 
 Jim Horn – tenor sax , baritone sax , horn arrangement 
 Billy Preston – organ 
 Klaus Voorman – bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums , handclaps * 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 Chuck Findley – trumpet * 
 * denotes unconfirmed credits . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Anna Akhmatova = 
 Anna Andreyevna <unk> ( 23 June [ O.S. 11 June ] 1889 – 5 March 1966 ) , better known by the pen name Anna Akhmatova ( / <unk> / ; Russian : <unk> <unk> , IPA : [ <unk> ] ) , was a Russian modernist poet , one of the most acclaimed writers in the Russian canon . 
 Akhmatova 's work ranges from short lyric poems to intricately structured cycles , such as Requiem ( 1935 – 40 ) , her tragic masterpiece about the Stalinist terror . Her style , characterised by its economy and emotional restraint , was strikingly original and distinctive to her contemporaries . The strong and clear leading female voice struck a new chord in Russian poetry . Her writing can be said to fall into two periods – the early work ( 1912 – 25 ) and her later work ( from around 1936 until her death ) , divided by a decade of reduced literary output . Her work was condemned and censored by Stalinist authorities and she is notable for choosing not to emigrate , and remaining in Russia , acting as witness to the events around her . Her perennial themes include meditations on time and memory , and the difficulties of living and writing in the shadow of Stalinism . 
 Primary sources of information about Akhmatova 's life are relatively scant , as war , revolution and the totalitarian regime caused much of the written record to be destroyed . For long periods she was in official disfavour and many of those who were close to her died in the aftermath of the revolution . Akhmatova 's first husband , Nikolai Gumilev was executed by the Soviet secret police , and her son Lev Gumilev and her common @-@ law husband Nikolay Punin spent many years in the Gulag , where Punin died . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Akhmatova was born at Bolshoy <unk> , near the Black Sea port of Odessa . Her father , Andrey <unk> <unk> , a naval engineer , and her mother , Inna <unk> <unk> , were both descended from the Russian nobility . She wrote : 
 No one in my large family wrote poetry . But the first Russian woman poet , Anna Bunina , was the aunt of my grandfather <unk> Ivanovich <unk> . The <unk> were modest landowners in the Mozhaisk region of the Moscow Province . They were moved here after the insurrection during the time of <unk> Marfa . In Novgorod they had been a wealthier and more distinguished family . Khan <unk> , my ancestor , was killed one night in his tent by a Russian killer @-@ for @-@ hire . Karamzin tells us that this marked the end of the Mongol yoke on Russia . [ ... ] It was well known that this <unk> was a descendant of <unk> Khan . In the eighteenth century , one of the <unk> Princesses – <unk> <unk> – married the rich and famous Simbirsk landowner <unk> . Yegor <unk> was my great @-@ grandfather ; his daughter , Anna <unk> , was my grandmother . She died when my mother was nine years old , and I was named in her honour . Several diamond rings and one emerald were made from her brooch . Though my fingers are thin , still her thimble didn 't fit me . 
 Her family moved north to Tsarskoye Selo , near St. Petersburg when she was eleven months old . The family lived in a house on the corner of <unk> Street and <unk> Lane ; ( the building is no longer there today ) , spending summers from age 7 to 13 in a dacha near Sevastopol . She studied at the <unk> High School , moving to Kiev ( 1906 – 10 ) and finished her schooling there , after her parents separated in 1905 . She went on to study law at Kiev University , leaving a year later to study literature in St Petersburg . 
 Akhmatova started writing poetry at the age of 11 , and was published in her late teens , inspired by the poets Nikolay Nekrasov , Jean Racine , Alexander Pushkin , Evgeny <unk> and the Symbolists ; however , none of her juvenilia survives . Her sister Inna also wrote poetry though she did not pursue the practice and married shortly after high school . Akhmatova 's father did not want to see any verses printed under his " respectable " name , so she chose to adopt her grandmother 's distinctly Tatar surname ' Akhmatova ' as a pen name . 
 She met a young poet , Nikolay Gumilev , on Christmas Eve in 1903 . Gumilev , encouraged her to write and pursued her intensely , making numerous marriage proposals starting in 1905 . At 17 years old , in his journal Sirius , she published her first poem which could be translated as " On his hand you may see many glittering rings " , ( 1907 ) signing it " Anna G. " She soon became known in St Petersburg 's artistic circles , regularly giving public readings . That year , she wrote unenthusiastically to a friend , “ He has loved me for three years now , and I believe that it is my fate to be his wife . Whether or not I love him , I do not know , but it seems to me that I do . ” She married Gumilev in Kiev in April 1910 ; however , none of Akhmatova ’ s family attended the wedding . The couple honeymooned in Paris , and there she met and befriended the Italian artist Amedeo Modigliani . 
 In late 1910 , she came together with poets such as Osip Mandelstam and Sergey Gorodetsky to form the Guild of Poets . It promoted the idea of craft as the key to poetry rather than inspiration or mystery , taking themes of the concrete rather than the more ephemeral world of the Symbolists . Over time , they developed the influential Acmeist anti @-@ symbolist school , concurrent with the growth of Imagism in Europe and America . From the first year of their marriage , Gumilev began to chafe against its constraints . She wrote that he had " lost his passion " for her and by the end of that year he left on a six @-@ month trip to Africa . 
 She had " her first taste of fame " , becoming renowned , not so much for her beauty , as her intense magnetism and allure , attracting the fascinated attention of a great many men , including the great and the good . She returned to visit Modigliani in Paris , where he created at least 20 paintings of her , including several nudes . 
 She later began an affair with the celebrated Acmeist poet Osip Mandelstam , whose wife , Nadezhda , declared later , in her autobiography that she came to forgive Akhmatova for it in time . Akhmatova 's son , Lev , was born in 1912 , and would become a renowned Neo @-@ <unk> historian . 
 = = Silver Age = = 
 In 1912 , the Guild of Poets published her book of verse Evening ( <unk> ) – the first of five in nine years . The small edition of 500 copies quickly sold out and she received around a dozen positive notices in the literary press . She exercised a strong selectivity for the pieces – including only 35 of the 200 poems she had written by the end of 1911 . ( She noted that Song of the Last Meeting , dated 29 September 1911 , was her 200th poem ) . The book secured her reputation as a new and striking young writer , the poems Grey @-@ eyed king , In the Forest , Over the Water and I don ’ t need my legs anymore making her famous . She later wrote " These naïve poems by a frivolous girl for some reason were reprinted thirteen times [ ... ] And they came out in several translations . The girl herself ( as far as I recall ) did not foresee such a fate for them and used to hide the issues of the journals in which they were first published under the sofa cushions " . 
 Her second collection , The Rosary ( or Beads – <unk> ) appeared in March 1914 and firmly established her as one of the most popular and sought after poets of the day . Thousands of women composed poems " in honour of Akhmatova " , mimicking her style and prompting Akhmatova to exclaim : " I taught our women how to speak , but don 't know how to make them silent " . Her aristocratic manners and artistic integrity won her the titles " Queen of the Neva " and " Soul of the Silver Age , " as the period came to be known in the history of Russian poetry . In Poem Without a Hero , the longest and one of the best known of her works , written many decades later , she would recall this as a blessed time of her life . She became close friends with Boris Pasternak ( who , though married , proposed to her many times ) and rumours began to circulate that she was having an affair with influential lyrical poet Alexander Blok . In July 1914 , Akhmatova wrote “ Frightening times are approaching / Soon fresh graves will cover the land " ; on August 1 , Germany declared war on Russia , marking the start of " the dark storm " of world war , civil war , revolution and totalitarian repression for Russia . The Silver Age came to a close . 
 Akhmatova had a relationship with the mosaic artist and poet Boris Anrep ; many of her poems in the period are about him and he in turn created mosaics in which she is featured . She selected poems for her third collection , Belaya <unk> ( White Flock ) , in 1917 , a volume which poet and critic Joseph Brodsky later described as writing of personal lyricism tinged with the “ note of controlled terror ” . She later came to be memorialised by his description of her as " the keening muse " . Essayist John Bayley describes her writing at this time as " grim , spare and laconic " . 
 In February 1917 , the revolution started in Petersburg ( then named Petrograd ) ; soldiers fired on marching protestors , and others mutinied . They looked to a past in which the future was " rotting " . In a city without electricity or sewage service , with little water or food , they faced starvation and sickness . Her friends died around her and others left in droves for safer havens in Europe and America , including Anrep , who escaped to England . She had the option to leave , and considered it for a time , but chose to stay and was proud of her decision to remain . : 
 She wrote of her own temptation to leave : 
 At the height of Akhmatova 's fame , in 1918 , she divorced her husband and that same year , though many of her friends considered it a mistake , Akhmatova married prominent Assyriologist and poet Vladimir <unk> . She later said “ I felt so filthy . I thought it would be like a cleansing , like going to a convent , knowing you are going to lose your freedom . ” She began affairs with theatre director Mikhail Zimmerman and composer Arthur <unk> , who set many of her poems to music . 
 = = 1920s and 1930s = = 
 In 1921 , Akhmatova 's former husband Nikolay Gumilev was prosecuted for his alleged role in a monarchist anti @-@ Bolshevik conspiracy and on 25 August was shot along with 61 others . According to the historian Rayfield , the murder of Gumilev was part of the state response to the Kronstadt Rebellion . The Cheka ( secret police ) blamed the rebellion on Petrograd 's intellectuals , prompting the senior Cheka officer Yakov <unk> to forcibly extract the names of ' conspirators ' , from an imprisoned professor , guaranteeing them amnesty from execution . <unk> 's guarantee proved to be meaningless . He sentenced dozens of the named persons to death , including Gumilev . Maxim Gorky and others appealed for leniency , but by the time Lenin agreed to several pardons , the condemned had been shot . Within a few days of his death , Akhmatova wrote : 
 The murders had a powerful effect on the Russian intelligentsia , destroying the Acmeist poetry group , and placing a stigma on Akhmatova and her son Lev ( by Gumilev ) . Lev 's later arrest during the purges and terrors of the 1930s was based on being his father 's son . From a new Marxist perspective , Akhmatova 's poetry was deemed to represent an introspective " bourgeois aesthetic " , reflecting only trivial " female " preoccupations , not in keeping with these new revolutionary politics of the time . She was roundly attacked by the state , by former supporters and friends , and seen to be an anachronism . During what she termed " The Vegetarian Years " , Akhmatova 's work was unofficially banned by a party resolution of 1925 and she found it hard to publish , though she didn 't stop writing poetry . She made acclaimed translations of works by Victor Hugo , Rabindranath Tagore , Giacomo Leopardi and pursued academic work on Pushkin and Dostoyevsky . She worked as a critic and essayist , though many USSR and foreign critics and readers concluded she had died . 
 She had little food and almost no money ; her son was denied access to study at academic institutions by dint of his parents ' alleged anti @-@ state activities . The impact of the nationwide repression and purges had a decimating effect on her St Petersburg circle of friends , artists and intellectuals . Her close friend and fellow poet Mandelstam was deported and then sentenced to a Gulag labour camp , where he would die . Akhmatova narrowly escaped arrest , though her son Lev was imprisoned on numerous occasions by the Stalinist regime , accused of counter @-@ revolutionary activity . She would often queue for hours to deliver him food packages and plead on his behalf . She describes standing outside a stone prison : 
 One day somebody in the crowd identified me . Standing behind me was a woman , with lips blue from cold , who had , of course , never heard me called by name before . Now she started out of the torpor common to us all and asked me in a whisper ( everyone whispered there ) : ' Can you describe this ? ' 
 And I said : ' I <unk> 
 Then something like a smile passed fleetingly over what had once been her face . 
 Akhmatova wrote that by 1935 every time she went to see someone off at the train station as they went into exile , she 'd find herself greeting friends at every step as so many of St Petersburg 's intellectual and cultural figures would be leaving on the same train . In her poetry circles Mayakovsky and <unk> committed suicide and Marina <unk> would follow them in 1941 , after returning from exile . 
 Akhmatova was a common @-@ law wife to Nikolai Punin , an art scholar and lifelong friend , whom she stayed with until 1935 . He also was repeatedly taken into custody , dying in the Gulag in 1953 . Her tragic cycle Requiem documents her personal experience of this time ; as she writes , " one hundred million voices shout " through her " tortured mouth " . 
 = = 1939 – 1960 = = 
 In 1939 , Stalin approved the publication of one volume of poetry , From Six Books ; however , the collection was withdrawn and pulped after only a few months . In 1993 , it was revealed that the authorities had bugged her flat and kept her under constant surveillance , keeping detailed files on her from this time , accruing some 900 pages of " denunciations , reports of phone taps , quotations from writings , confessions of those close to her " . Although officially stifled , Akhmatova 's work continued to circulate in secret . Akhmatova 's close friend , chronicler Lydia Chukovskaya described how writers working to keep poetic messages alive used various strategies . A small trusted circle would , for example , memorise each other 's works and circulate them only by oral means . She tells how Akhmatova would write out her poem for a visitor on a scrap of paper to be read in a moment , then burnt in her stove . The poems were carefully disseminated in this way , however it is likely that many complied in this manner were lost . " It was like a ritual , " Chukovskaya wrote . " Hands , matches , an ashtray . A ritual beautiful and bitter . " 
 During World War II , Akhmatova witnessed the 900 day Siege of Leningrad ( now St Petersburg ) . In 1940 , Akhmatova started her Poem without a Hero , finishing a first draft in Tashkent , but working on " The Poem " for twenty years and considering it to be the major work of her life , dedicating it to " the memory of its first audience – my friends and fellow citizens who perished in Leningrad during the siege " . She was evacuated to <unk> in spring of 1942 and then to greener , safer Tashkent in Uzbekistan , along with other artists , such as <unk> . During her time away she became seriously ill with typhus ( she had suffered from severe bronchitis and tuberculosis as a young woman ) . On returning to Leningrad in May 1944 , she writes of how disturbed she was to find " a terrible ghost that pretended to be my city " . 
 She regularly read to soldiers in the military hospitals and on the front line ; her later pieces seem to be the voice of those who had struggled and the many she has outlived . She moved away from romantic themes towards a more diverse , complex and philosophical body of work and some of her more patriotic poems found their way to the front pages of Pravda . She was condemned for a visit by the liberal , western , Jewish philosopher Isaiah Berlin in 1945 , and Official Andrei Zhdanov publicly labelled her " half harlot , half nun " , her work " the poetry of an overwrought , upper @-@ class lady " , her work the product of " eroticism , mysticism , and political indifference " . He banned her poems from publication in the journals Zvezda and Leningrad , accusing her of poisoning the minds of Soviet youth . Her surveillance was increased and she was expelled from the Union of Soviet Writers . 
 Berlin described his visit to her flat : It was very barely furnished — virtually everything in it had , I gathered , been taken away — looted or sold — during the siege .... A stately , grey @-@ haired lady , a white shawl draped about her shoulders , slowly rose to greet us . Anna Akhmatova was immensely dignified , with unhurried gestures , a noble head , beautiful , somewhat severe features , and an expression of immense sadness . 
 Akhmatova 's son Lev was arrested again at the end of 1949 and sentenced to 10 years in a Siberian prison camp . She spent much of the next years trying to ensure his release , to this end , and for the first time , she published overtly propagandist poetry , “ In Praise of Peace , ” in the magazine <unk> , openly supporting Stalin and his regime . Lev remained in the camps until 1956 , well after Stalin 's death , his final release potentially aided by his mother 's concerted efforts . Bayley suggests that her period of pro @-@ Stalinist work may also have saved her own life ; notably however , Akhmatova never acknowledged these pieces in her official corpus . Akhmatova 's stature among Soviet poets was slowly conceded by party officials , her name no longer cited in only scathing contexts and she was readmitted to Union of Writers in 1951 , being fully recognised again following Stalin 's death in 1953 . With the press still heavily controlled and censored under Nikita Khrushchev , a translation by Akhmatova was praised in a public review in 1955 , and her own poems began to re @-@ appear in 1956 . That same year Lev was released from the camps , embittered , believing that his mother cared more about her poetry than for him and that she had not worked hard for his release . Akhmatova 's status was confirmed by 1958 , with the publication of Stikhotvoreniya ( Poems ) and then Stikhotvoreniya 1909 – 1960 ( Poems : 1909 – 1960 ) in 1961 . Beg <unk> ( The flight of time ) , collected works 1909 – 1965 , published 1965 , was the most complete volume of her works in her lifetime , though the long damning poem Requiem , condemning the Stalinist purges , was conspicuously absent . Isaiah Berlin predicted at the time that it could never be published in the Soviet Union . 
 = = Last years = = 
 During the last years of her life she continued to live with the Punin family in Leningrad , still translating , researching Pushkin and writing her own poetry . Though still censored , she was concerned to re @-@ construct work that had been destroyed or suppressed during the purges or which had posed a threat to the life of her son in the camps , such as the lost , semi @-@ autobiographical play Enûma Elish . She worked on her official memoirs , planned novels and worked on her epic Poem without a hero , 20 years in the writing . 
 Akhmatova was widely honoured in the USSR and the West . In 1962 she was visited by Robert Frost ; Isaiah Berlin tried to visit her again , but she refused him , worried that her son might be re @-@ arrested due to family association with the ideologically suspect western philosopher . She inspired and advised a large circle of key young Soviet writers . Her dacha in <unk> was frequented by such poets as Yevgeny Rein and Joseph Brodsky , whom she mentored . Brodsky , arrested in 1963 and interned for social parasitism , would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature ( 1987 ) and become Poet Laureate ( 1991 ) as an exile in the U.S. 
 As one of the last remaining major poets of the Silver Age , she was newly acclaimed by the Soviet authorities as a fine and loyal representative of their country and permitted to travel . At the same time , by virtue of works such as Requiem , Akhmatova was being hailed at home and abroad as an unofficial leader of the dissident movement , and reinforcing this image herself . She was becoming representative of both the Soviet Union and Tsarist Russia , more popular in the 1960s than she had ever been before the revolution , this reputation only continuing to grow after her death . For her 75th birthday in 1964 , new collections of her verse were published . 
 Akhmatova was able to meet some of her pre @-@ revolutionary acquaintances in 1965 , when she was allowed to travel to Sicily and England , in order to receive the Taormina prize and an honorary doctoral degree from Oxford University , accompanied by her lifelong friend and secretary Lydia Chukovskaya . Akhmatova 's Requiem in Russian finally appeared in book form in Munich in 1963 , the whole work not published within USSR until 1987 . Her long poem The Way of All the Earth or Woman of Kitezh ( <unk> ) was published in complete form in 1965 . 
 In November 1965 , soon after her Oxford visit , Akhmatova suffered a heart attack and was hospitalised . She was moved to a sanatorium in Moscow in the spring of 1966 and died of heart failure on March 5 , at the age of 76 . Thousands attended the two memorial ceremonies which were held in Moscow and in Leningrad . After being displayed in an open coffin , she was interred at <unk> Cemetery in St Petersburg . 
 Isaiah Berlin described the impact of her life , as he saw it : 
 The widespread worship of her memory in Soviet Union today , both as an artist and as an <unk> human being , has , so far as I know , no parallel . The legend of her life and unyielding passive resistance to what she regarded as unworthy of her country and herself , transformed her into a figure [ ... ] not merely in Russian literature , but in Russian history in [ the Twentieth ] century . 
 In 1988 , to celebrate what would have been Akhmatova 's 100th birthday , the University of Harvard held an international conference on her life and work . Today her work may be explored at the Anna Akhmatova Literary and Memorial Museum in St. Petersburg . 
 = = Work and themes = = 
 Akhmatova joined the Acmeist group of poets in 1910 with poets such as Osip Mandelstam and Sergey Gorodetsky , working in response to the Symbolist school , concurrent with the growth of Imagism in Europe and America . It promoted the use of craft and rigorous poetic form over mysticism or spiritual in @-@ roads to composition , favouring the concrete over the ephemeral . Akhmatova modeled its principles of writing with clarity , simplicity , and disciplined form . Her first collections Evening ( 1912 ) and Rosary ( 1914 ) received wide critical acclaim and made her famous from the start of her career . They contained brief , psychologically taut pieces , acclaimed for their classical diction , telling details , and the skilful use of colour . Evening and her next four books were mostly lyric miniatures on the theme of love , shot through with sadness . 
 Her early poems usually picture a man and a woman involved in the most poignant , ambiguous moment of their relationship , much imitated and later parodied by Nabokov and others . Critic Roberta Reeder notes that the early poems always attracted large numbers of admirers : " For Akhmatova was able to capture and convey the vast range of evolving emotions experienced in a love affair , from the first thrill of meeting , to a deepening love contending with hatred , and eventually to violent destructive passion or total indifference . But [ ... ] her poetry marks a radical break with the erudite , ornate style and the mystical representation of love so typical of poets like Alexander Blok and Andrey Bely . Her lyrics are composed of short fragments of simple speech that do not form a logical coherent pattern . Instead , they reflect the way we actually think , the links between the images are emotional , and simple everyday objects are charged with psychological associations . Like Alexander Pushkin , who was her model in many ways , Akhmatova was intent on conveying worlds of meaning through precise details . " 
 Akhmatova often complained that the critics " walled her in " to their perception of her work in the early years of romantic passion , despite major changes of theme in the later years of The Terror . This was mainly due to the secret nature of her work after the public and critical effusion over her first volumes . The risks during the purges were very great . Many of her close friends and family were exiled , imprisoned or shot ; her son was under constant threat of arrest , she was often under close surveillance . Following artistic repression and public condemnation by the state in the 1920s , many within literary and public circles , at home and abroad , thought she had died . Her readership generally did not know her later opus , the railing passion of Requiem or Poem without a Hero and her other scathing works , which were shared only with a very trusted few or circulated in secret by word of mouth ( samizdat ) . 
 Between 1935 and 1940 Akhmatova composed , worked and reworked the long poem Requiem in secret , a lyrical cycle of lamentation and witness , depicting the suffering of the common people under Soviet terror . She carried it with her as she worked and lived in towns and cities across the Soviet Union . It was conspicuously absent from her collected works , given its explicit condemnation of the purges . The work in Russian finally appeared in book form in Munich in 1963 , the whole work not published within USSR until 1987 . It consists of ten numbered poems that examine a series of emotional states , exploring suffering , despair , devotion , rather than a clear narrative . Biblical themes such as Christ 's crucifixion and the devastation of Mary , Mother of Jesus and Mary Magdelene , reflect the ravaging of Russia , particularly witnessing the harrowing of women in the 1930s . It represented , to some degree , a rejection of her own earlier romantic work as she took on the public role as chronicler of the Terror . This is a role she holds to this day . 
 Her essays on Pushkin and Poem Without a Hero , her longest work , were only published after her death . This long poem , composed between 1940 and 1965 , is often critically regarded as her best work and also one of the finest poems of the twentieth century . It gives a deep and detailed analysis of her epoch and her approach to it , including her important encounter with Isaiah Berlin ( 1909 – 97 ) in 1945 . Her talent in composition and translation is evidenced in her fine translations of the works of poets writing in French , English , Italian , Armenian , and Korean . 
 = = = Cultural influence = = = 
 Translations of some of her poems by Babette Deutsch and Lyn Coffin are set to music on the album The <unk> Woods by Iris <unk> . 
 = = Honours = = 
 1964 Etna @-@ Taormina prize 
 1965 honorary doctorate from Oxford University in 1965 . 
 = = Selected poetry collections = = 
 = = = Published by Akhmatova = = = 
 1912 <unk> / <unk> ( Evening ) . 
 1914 <unk> ( Rosary or literally Beads ) 
 1917 Belaya <unk> ( White flock ) 
 1921 <unk> ( Wayside grass / Plantain ) . 60 pages , 1000 copies published . 
 1921 Anno Domini <unk> 
 Reed – 2 Volume Selected Poems ( 1924 – 1926 ) was compiled but never published . 
 Uneven – compiled but never published . 
 1940 From Six Books ( Publication suspended shortly after release , copies pulped ) . 
 1943 <unk> <unk> ( Selections of poetry ) Tashkent , government edited . 
 Iva not separately published 
 Sed <unk> <unk> ( Seventh book ) – not separately published ; 
 1958 Stikhotvoreniya ( Poems ) ( 25 @,@ 000 copies ) 
 1961 Stikhotvoreniya 1909 – 1960 ( Poems : 1909 – 1960 ) 
 1965 Beg <unk> ( The flight of time Collected works 1909 – 1965 ) 
 = = = Later editions = = = 
 1967 Poems of Akhmatova . Ed. and Trans . Stanley Kunitz , Boston 
 1976 Anna Akhmatova Selected Poems . D.M. Thomas Penguin Books 
 1985 Twenty Poems of Anna Akhmatova ( trans Jane Kenyon ) ; Eighties Press and Ally Press ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 30 @-@ 9 
 1988 Selected Poems Trans . Richard <unk> ; Bloodaxe Books Ltd ; ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 063 @-@ 6 
 2000 The Complete Poems of Anna Akhmatova ( trans . Judith <unk> ; ed . Roberta Reeder ) ; Zephyr Press ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 27 @-@ 5 
 2004 The Word That Causes Death 's Defeat : Poems of Memory ( Annals of Communism ) ( trans . Nancy Anderson ) . Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 2006 Selected Poems ( trans D. M. Thomas ) ; Penguin Classics ; ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 2009 Selected Poems ( trans . Walter Arndt ) ; Overlook TP ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 180 @-@ 9 
 = Isaac = 
 Isaac ( / <unk> / ; Hebrew : <unk> , Modern <unk> , Tiberian <unk> , ISO 259 @-@ 3 <unk> , " [ he ] will laugh " ; Ancient Greek : <unk> Isaak Arabic : إسحاق or <unk> <unk> ) as described in the Hebrew Bible and the Qur 'an , was the second son of Abraham , the only son Abraham had with his wife Sarah , and the father of Jacob and Esau . According to the Book of Genesis , Abraham was 100 years old when Isaac was born , and Sarah was past 90 . 
 According to Genesis , Abraham brought Isaac to Mount Moriah , where , at God 's command , Abraham built a sacrificial altar to sacrifice Isaac . This event served as a test of Abraham 's faith . At the last moment , Abraham was stopped by the angel of the Lord . 
 Isaac was one of the three patriarchs of the Israelites . Isaac was the only biblical patriarch whose name was not changed , and the only one who did not move out of Canaan . Compared to Abraham and Jacob , the Bible relates fewer incidents of Isaac 's life . He died when he was 180 years old , making him the longest @-@ lived of the three . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The anglicized name Isaac is a transliteration of the Hebrew term <unk> which literally means " He laughs / will laugh . " Ugaritic texts dating from the 13th century BCE refer to the benevolent smile of the Canaanite deity El . Genesis , however , ascribes the laughter to Isaac 's parents , Abraham and Sarah , rather than El . According to the biblical narrative , Abraham fell on his face and laughed when Elohim imparted the news of their son 's eventual birth . He laughed because Sarah was past the age of childbearing ; both she and Abraham were advanced in age . Later , when Sarah overheard three messengers of the Lord renew the promise , she laughed inwardly for the same reason . Sarah denied laughing when Elohim questioned Abraham about it . 
 = = Genesis narrative = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 It was prophesied to the patriarch Abraham that he would have a son and that his name should be Isaac . When Abraham became one hundred years old , this son was born to him by his first wife Sarah . Though this was Abraham 's second son it was Sarah ’ s first and only child . 
 On the eighth day from his birth , Isaac was circumcised , as was necessary for all males of Abraham 's household , in order to be in compliance with Yahweh 's covenant . 
 After Isaac had been weaned , Sarah saw Ishmael mocking , and urged her husband to cast out Hagar the <unk> and her son , so that Isaac would be Abraham 's sole heir . Abraham was hesitant , but at God 's order he listened to his wife 's request . 
 = = = Binding = = = 
 At some point in Isaac 's youth , his father Abraham brought him to Mount Moriah . At God 's command , Abraham was to build a sacrificial altar and sacrifice his son Isaac upon it . After he had bound his son to the altar and drawn his knife to kill him , at the very last moment an angel of God prevented Abraham from proceeding . Rather , he was directed to sacrifice instead a nearby ram that was stuck in thickets . This event served as a test of Abraham 's faith in God , not as an actual human sacrifice . 
 = = = Family life = = = 
 When Isaac was 40 , Abraham sent Eliezer , his steward , into Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac , from his nephew <unk> 's family . Eliezer chose the Aramean Rebekah for Isaac . After many years of marriage to Isaac , Rebekah had still not given birth to a child and was believed to be barren . Isaac prayed for her and she conceived . Rebekah gave birth to twin boys , Esau and Jacob . Isaac was 60 years old when his two sons were born . Isaac favored Esau , and Rebekah favored Jacob . 
 Isaac is unique among the patriarchs for remaining faithful to his wife , and for not having concubines . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 At the age of 75 , Isaac moved to Beer @-@ <unk> @-@ roi after his father died . When the land experienced famine , he removed to the Philistine land of <unk> where his father once lived . This land was still under the control of King Abimelech as it was in the days of Abraham . Like his father , Isaac also deceived Abimelech about his wife and also got into the well business . He had gone back to all of the wells that his father dug and saw that they were all stopped up with earth . The Philistines did this after Abraham died . So , Isaac unearthed them and began to dig for more wells all the way to Beersheba , where he made a pact with Abimelech , just like in the day of his father . 
 = = = Birthright = = = 
 Isaac grew old and became blind . He called his son Esau and directed him to procure some venison for him , in order to receive Isaac 's blessing . While Esau was hunting , Jacob , after listening to his mother 's advice , deceived his blind father by misrepresenting himself as Esau and thereby obtained his father 's blessing , such that Jacob became Isaac 's primary heir and Esau was left in an inferior position . According to Genesis 25 : 29 @-@ 34 , Esau had previously sold his birthright to Jacob for " bread and stew of lentils " . Thereafter , Isaac sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to take a wife of his mother 's brother 's house . After 20 years working for his uncle Laban , Jacob returned home . He reconciled with his twin brother Esau , then he and Esau buried their father , Isaac , in Hebron after he died at the age of 180 . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = = Burial site = = 
 According to local tradition , the graves of Isaac and Rebekah , along with the graves of Abraham and Sarah and Jacob and Leah , are in the Cave of the Patriarchs . 
 = = Jewish views = = 
 In rabbinical tradition , the age of Isaac at the time of binding is taken to be 37 which contrasts with common portrayals of Isaac as a child . The rabbis also thought that the reason for the death of Sarah was the news of the intended sacrifice of Isaac . The sacrifice of Isaac is cited in appeals for the mercy of God in later Jewish traditions . The post @-@ biblical Jewish interpretations often elaborate the role of Isaac beyond the biblical description and primarily focus on Abraham 's intended sacrifice of Isaac , called the <unk> ( " binding " ) . According to a version of these interpretations , Isaac died in the sacrifice and was revived . According to many accounts of <unk> , unlike the Bible , it is Satan who is testing Isaac as an agent of God . Isaac 's willingness to follow God 's command at the cost of his death has been a model for many Jews who preferred martyrdom to violation of the Jewish law . 
 According to the Jewish tradition , Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer . This tradition is based on Genesis chapter 24 , verse 63 ( " Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide " ) . 
 Isaac was the only patriarch who stayed in Canaan during his whole life and though once he tried to leave , God told him not to do so . Rabbinic tradition gave the explanation that Isaac was almost sacrificed and anything dedicated as a sacrifice may not leave the Land of Israel . Isaac was the oldest of the biblical patriarchs at the time of his death , and the only patriarch whose name was not changed . 
 Rabbinic literature also linked Isaac 's blindness in old age , as stated in the Bible , to the sacrificial binding : Isaac 's eyes went blind because the tears of angels present at the time of his sacrifice fell on Isaac 's eyes . 
 = = Christian views = = 
 The early Christian church continued and developed the New Testament theme of Isaac as a type of Christ and the Church being both " the son of the promise " and the " father of the faithful " . Tertullian draws a parallel between Isaac 's bearing the wood for the sacrificial fire with Christ 's carrying his <unk> and there was a general agreement that , while all the sacrifices of the Old Law were anticipations of that on Calvary , the sacrifice of Isaac was so " in a pre @-@ eminent way " . 
 The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church consider Isaac as a Saint along with other biblical patriarchs . Along with those of other patriarchs and the Old Testament Righteous , his feast day is celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before Christmas ( December 11 – 17 ) , under the title the Sunday of the Forefathers . 
 = = = New Testament = = = 
 The New Testament states Isaac was " offered up " by Abraham his father , and that Isaac blessed his sons . Paul contrasted Isaac , symbolizing Christian liberty , with the rejected older son Ishmael , symbolizing slavery ; Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant , while Sarah is associated with the covenant of grace , into which her son Isaac enters . The Epistle of James chapter 2 , verses 21 @-@ 24 , states that the sacrifice of Isaac shows that justification ( in the Johannine sense ) requires both faith and works . 
 In the Epistle to the Hebrews , Abraham 's willingness to follow God 's command to sacrifice Isaac is used as an example of faith as is Isaac 's action in blessing Jacob and Esau with reference to the future promised by God to Abraham In verse 19 , the author views the release of Isaac from sacrifice as analogous to the resurrection of Jesus , the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac being a prefigure of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross . 
 = = Islamic views = = 
 Isaac ( Arabic : إسحاق [ note A ] <unk> ) is revered by Muslims to be a prophet of Islam . Islam considers Isaac as a prophet of Islam , and describes him as the father of the Israelites and a righteous servant of God . 
 Isaac , along with Ishmael , is highly important for Muslims for continuing to preach the message of monotheism after his father Abraham . Among Isaac 's children was the follow @-@ up Israelite patriarch Jacob , who too is venerated an Islamic prophet . 
 Isaac is mentioned fifteen times by name in the Qur 'an , often with his father and his son , Jacob . The Qur 'an states that Abraham received " good tidings of Isaac , a prophet , of the righteous " , and that God blessed them both ( 37 : 12 ) . In a fuller description , when angels came to Abraham to tell him of the future punishment to be imposed on Sodom and Gomorrah , his wife , Sarah , " laughed , and We gave her good tidings of Isaac , and after Isaac of ( a grandson ) Jacob " ( 11 : 71 @-@ 74 ) ; and it is further explained that this event will take place despite Abraham and Sarah 's old age . Several verses speak of Isaac as a " gift " to Abraham ( 6 : 84 ; 14 : 49 @-@ 50 ) , and 24 : 26 @-@ 27 adds that God made " prophethood and the Book to be among his offspring " , which has been interpreted to refer to Abraham 's two prophetic sons , his prophetic grandson Jacob , and his prophetic great @-@ grandson Joseph . In the Qur 'an , it later narrates that Abraham also praised God for giving him Ishmael and Isaac in his old age ( 14 : 39 @-@ 41 ) . 
 Elsewhere in the Qur 'an , Isaac is mentioned in lists : Joseph follows the religion of his forefathers Abraham , Isaac and Jacob ( 12 : 38 ) and speaks of God 's favor to them ( 12 : 6 ) ; Jacob 's sons all testify their faith and promise to worship the God that their forefathers , " Abraham , Ishmael and Isaac " , worshiped ( 2 : 127 ) ; and the Qur 'an commands Muslims to believe in the revelations that were given to " Abraham , Ishmael , Isaac , Jacob and the Patriarchs " ( 2 : 136 ; 3 : 84 ) . In the Qur 'an 's narrative of Abraham 's near @-@ sacrifice of his son ( 37 : 102 ) , the name of the son is not mentioned and debate has continued over the son 's identity , though many feel that the identity is the least important element in a story which is given to show the courage that one develops through faith . 
 = = = Qur 'an = = = 
 The Qur 'an mentions Isaac as a prophet and a righteous man of God . Isaac and Jacob are mentioned as being bestowed upon Abraham as gifts of God , who then worshipped God only and were righteous leaders in the way of God : 
 And We bestowed on him Isaac and , as an additional gift , ( a grandson ) , Jacob , and We made righteous men of every one ( of them ) . 
 And We made them leaders , guiding ( men ) by Our Command , and We sent them inspiration to do good deeds , to establish regular prayers , and to practise regular charity ; and they constantly served Us ( and Us only ) . 
 And WE gave him the glad tidings of Isaac , a Prophet , and one of the righteous . 
 = = Academic = = 
 Some scholars have described Isaac as " a legendary figure " while others view him " as a figure representing tribal history , or " as a seminomadic leader . " The stories of Isaac , like other patriarchal stories of Genesis , are generally believed to have " their origin in folk memories and oral traditions of the early Hebrew pastoralist experience . " The Cambridge Companion to the Bible makes the following comment on the biblical stories of the patriarchs : 
 Yet for all that these stories maintain a distance between their world and that of their time of literary growth and composition , they reflect the political realities of the later periods . Many of the narratives deal with the relationship between the ancestors and peoples who were part of Israel ’ s political world at the time the stories began to be written down ( eighth century B.C.E. ) . Lot is the ancestor of the Transjordanian peoples of Ammon and Moab , and Ishmael personifies the nomadic peoples known to have inhabited north Arabia , although located in the Old Testament in the Negev . Esau personifies Edom ( 36 : 1 ) , and Laban represents the Aramean states to Israel ’ s north . A persistent theme is that of difference between the ancestors and the indigenous Canaanites … In fact , the theme of the differences between Judah and Israel , as personified by the ancestors , and the neighboring peoples of the time of the monarchy is pressed effectively into theological service to articulate the choosing by God of Judah and Israel to bring blessing to all peoples . ” 
 According to Martin Noth , a scholar of the Hebrew Bible , the narratives of Isaac date back to an older cultural stage than that of the West @-@ Jordanian Jacob . At that era , the Israelite tribes were not yet sedentary . In the course of looking for grazing areas , they had come in contact in southern Philistia with the inhabitants of the settled countryside . The biblical historian , A. <unk> , believes in the connection between the Isaac traditions and the north , and in support of this theory <unk> Amos 7 : 9 ( " the high places of Isaac " ) . 
 Albrecht Alt and Martin Noth hold that , " The figure of Isaac was enhanced when the theme of promise , previously bound to the cults of the ' God the Fathers ' was incorporated into the Israelite creed during the southern @-@ Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition . " According to Martin Noth , at the Southern Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition , Isaac became established as one of the biblical patriarchs , but his traditions were receded in the favor of Abraham . 
 = = = Documentary hypothesis = = = 
 Form critics variously assign passages like Genesis chapter 26 , verses 6 @-@ 11 , to the <unk> source , and Genesis chapter 20 verses 1 @-@ 7 , chapter 21 , verse 1 to chapter 22 , verse 14 and chapter 22 , verse 19 to the <unk> . According to the compilation hypothesis , the formulaic use of the word <unk> ( generations ) indicates that Genesis chapter 11 , verse 27 to chapter 25 , verse 19 is Isaac 's record through Abraham 's death ( with Ishmael 's record appended ) , and Genesis chapter 25 , verse 19 to chapter 37 , verse 2 is Jacob 's record through Isaac 's death ( with Esau 's records appended ) . 
 = = In art = = 
 The earliest Christian portrayal of Isaac is found in the Roman catacomb frescoes . Excluding the fragments , Alison Moore Smith classifies these artistic works in three categories : 
 " Abraham leads Isaac towards the altar ; or Isaac approaches with the bundle of sticks , Abraham having preceded him to the place of offering .... Abraham is upon a pedestal and Isaac stands near at hand , both figures in <unk> attitude .... Abraham is shown about to sacrifice Isaac while the latter stands or kneels on the ground beside the altar . Sometimes Abraham grasps Isaac by the hair . Occasionally the ram is added to the scene and in the later paintings the Hand of God emerges from above . " 
 = Yugoslav destroyer Dubrovnik = 
 Dubrovnik was a flotilla leader built for the Royal Yugoslav Navy by Yarrow Shipbuilders in Glasgow between 1930 and 1931 . She was one of the largest destroyers of her time . Resembling contemporary British designs , Dubrovnik was a fast ship with a main armament of four Czechoslovak @-@ built Škoda 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) guns in single mounts . Intended to be the first of three flotilla leaders built for Yugoslavia , she was the only one completed . During her service with the Royal Yugoslav Navy , Dubrovnik undertook several peacetime cruises through the Mediterranean , the Turkish Straits and the Black Sea . In October 1934 , she conveyed King Alexander to France for a state visit , and carried his body back to Yugoslavia following his assassination in Marseille . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Dubrovnik was captured by the Italians . After a refit , which included the replacement of some of her weapons and the shortening of her mainmast and funnels , she was commissioned into the Royal Italian Navy as Premuda . In Italian service she was mainly used as an escort and troop transport . In June 1942 , she was part of the Italian force that attacked the Allied Operation Harpoon convoy attempting to relieve the island of Malta . In July 1943 , she broke down and put in to Genoa for repair and a refit . Premuda was the most important and effective Italian war prize ship of World War II . 
 At the time of the Italian surrender to the Allies in September 1943 , Premuda was still docked in Genoa , and was seized by Germany . Plans to convert her into a radar picket for night fighters were abandoned . In August 1944 , following the replacement of her armament , she was commissioned into the German Navy as a Torpedoboot Ausland ( foreign torpedo boat ) with the designation TA32 . The ship saw action shelling Allied positions on the Italian coast and laying naval mines . In March 1945 , she took part in the Battle of the Ligurian Sea against two Royal Navy destroyers , during which she was lightly damaged . She was scuttled the following month as the Germans retreated from Genoa . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the demise of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire and the creation of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS ) , Austria @-@ Hungary transferred the vessels of the former Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to the new nation . The Kingdom of Italy was unhappy with this , and convinced the Allies to share the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships among the victorious powers . As a result , the only modern sea @-@ going vessels left to the KSCS were 12 torpedo boats , and they had to build their naval forces from scratch . During the 1920s , many navies were pursuing the flotilla leader concept , building large destroyers similar to the World War I Royal Navy V and W @-@ class destroyers . In the interwar French Navy , these ships were known as contre @-@ torpilleurs , and were intended to operate with smaller destroyers , or as half @-@ flotillas of three ships . The idea was that such a half @-@ flotilla could defeat an Italian light cruiser of the <unk> @-@ class . The Navy of the KSCS decided to build three such flotilla leaders , ships that would have the ability to reach high speeds and with a long endurance . The long endurance requirement reflected Yugoslav plans to deploy the ships into the central Mediterranean , where they would be able to operate alongside French and British warships . 
 At the time the decision was made , French shipyards were heavily committed to producing vessels for the French Navy . So , despite its intention to develop a French concept , the KSCS engaged Yarrow Shipbuilders in Glasgow , Scotland to build the ships . Unlike the French , who preferred to install guns of their own manufacture , Yarrow was happy to order the guns from the Czechoslovak firm Škoda . The initial Yarrow design was based on an expanded version of the British Shakespeare @-@ class , with five Skoda 14 cm / 56 naval guns . Excessive top weight resulted in the deletion of one of the guns , to be replaced with a seaplane mounting . The final version replaced the seaplane mounting with improved anti @-@ aircraft armament . The intention to build three flotilla leaders was demonstrated by the fact that Yarrow ordered a total of 12 Škoda 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) guns , four per ship . In the late summer of 1929 , the KSCS ( the Kingdom of Yugoslavia from 3 October 1929 ) signed a contract with Yarrow for a destroyer named Dubrovnik . Soon after she was ordered , the onset of the Great Depression meant that only one ship of the planned half @-@ flotilla was ever built . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Dubrovnik was similar in many respects to the British destroyers being manufactured at the same time , having a square box @-@ like bridge , a long forecastle , and a sharp raked stem similar to the later Tribal @-@ class . Her rounded stern was adapted for minelaying . She had an overall length of 113 @.@ 2 metres ( 371 ft 5 in ) , with a 10 @.@ 67 m ( 35 ft ) beam and a mean draught of 3 @.@ 58 m ( 11 ft 9 in ) ( maximum draught of 4 @.@ 1 m ( 13 ft 5 in ) ) . Her standard displacement was 1 @,@ 880 long tons ( 1 @,@ 910 t ) , ( 2 @,@ 400 long tons ( 2 @,@ 439 t ) at full load ) . Dubrovnik had two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers , located in separate boiler rooms , and the turbines were rated at 48 @,@ 000 shp ( 36 @,@ 000 kW ) . As designed , the ship had a maximum speed of 37 knots ( 69 km / h ; 43 mph ) . In 1934 , under ideal conditions , she achieved a maximum speed of 40 @.@ 3 knots ( 74 @.@ 6 km / h ; 46 @.@ 4 mph ) . A separate Curtis turbine , rated at 900 shp ( 670 kW ) , was installed for cruising , with which she could achieve a range of 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried 470 tonnes ( 460 long tons ) of fuel oil . 
 Her main armament consisted of four Škoda 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) L / 56 superfiring guns in single mounts , two forward of the superstructure and two aft . For air defence , Dubrovnik had twin @-@ mounted Škoda 83 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 29 in ) L / 55 guns , and six Škoda 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft guns , arranged in two twin mounts and two single mounts . She was also equipped with two triple 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , two depth charge throwers and two depth charge rails , two Škoda 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) machine guns and 40 mines . Her crew comprised 20 officers and 220 ratings . She was laid down on 10 June 1930 , and was launched on 11 October 1931 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Dubrovnik = = = 
 Dubrovnik was completed at the Yarrow shipyards in Glasgow in 1932 , at which time her main guns and light anti @-@ aircraft guns had been installed . After sailing to the Bay of Kotor in the southern Adriatic , she was fitted with her heavy anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was commissioned with the Royal Yugoslav Navy in 1932 , and her captain was Armin Pavić . In late September 1933 , the ship left the Bay of Kotor and sailed through the Turkish Straits to Constanța on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria , where she embarked King Alexander and Queen Maria of Yugoslavia . She then visited <unk> in Romania and Varna in Bulgaria , before returning via Istanbul and the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , arriving back at the Bay of Kotor on 8 October . On 6 October 1934 , King Alexander left the Bay of Kotor on board Dubrovnik for a state visit to France , arriving in Marseille on 9 October . He was killed that same day by a Bulgarian assassin , and Dubrovnik conveyed his body back to Yugoslavia , escorted by French , Italian and British ships . Soon after , Vladimir <unk> replaced Pavić as captain . In August 1935 , Dubrovnik visited Corfu and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . In August 1937 , Dubrovnik visited Istanbul and the Greek ports of Mudros in the northern Aegean Sea and Piraeus near Athens . 
 In April 1941 , Yugoslavia entered World War II when it was invaded by the German @-@ led Axis powers . At the time , Dubrovnik was still under the command of <unk> and was assigned as flagship of the 1st Torpedo Division , along with the three smaller Beograd @-@ class destroyers , Beograd , Ljubljana and Zagreb . 
 = = = Premuda = = = 
 The Italians captured Dubrovnik in the Bay of Kotor on 17 April 1941 ; she had been damaged by Yugoslav civilians prior to her seizure . Dubrovnik was sailed to Taranto in southern Italy on 21 May , where she underwent repairs and a refit . She was renamed Premuda , after the Dalmatian island near which an Italian motor torpedo boat had sunk the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought Szent István in June 1918 . Her aft deckhouse and emergency bridge was removed and replaced with an anti @-@ aircraft platform , and her mainmast and funnels were shortened . Her twin Škoda 83 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 29 in ) L / 55 anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by a 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / <unk> howitzer firing star shells for illumination , while the six Škoda 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by four Breda Model 35 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / <unk> machine guns in single mounts . Later in her Italian service , the 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) howitzer was replaced by a twin Breda 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft gun mount . In Italian service , her crew consisted of 13 officers and 191 enlisted ranks . 
 Premuda was commissioned in the Italian Navy ( Italian : Regia Marina ) in February 1942 . Later that month she rescued British prisoners of war who survived the sinking of the SS Ariosto , an Italian ship ferrying them from Tripoli to Sicily . In early June , the Italian submarine Alagi fired on Premuda , mistaking her for a British destroyer due to her similarities with a British H @-@ class destroyer . The attack missed Premuda and struck the Navigatori @-@ class destroyer <unk> <unk> , sinking her . From 12 – 16 June 1942 , Premuda took part in operations against the Allied Operation Harpoon convoy attempting to reach the beleaguered island of Malta from Gibraltar . As part of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla , Premuda supported the Italian 7th Cruiser Squadron , comprising the light cruisers Eugenio di Savoia and Raimondo Montecuccoli . The force that attacked the Operation Harpoon convoy included most of the fighting power of the Italian Navy , including two battleships and two heavy cruisers . The Allied naval escort lost one cruiser , three destroyers and several merchant ships to a combination of air attacks , submarines and naval mines . One Italian battleship was damaged , and the Trento @-@ class cruiser Trento was sunk . One of the other damaged Italian ships was the Navigatori @-@ class destroyer Ugolino Vivaldi , and Premuda was tasked to tow her to safety in the harbour of Pantelleria , an island in the Strait of Sicily , under escort from the destroyer <unk> <unk> . 
 On 6 – 7 January 1943 , Premuda and 13 other Italian destroyers transported troops to the Axis @-@ held port of Tunis in North Africa , completing two more such missions over the next two months . On 17 July , she developed serious engine problems in the Ligurian Sea near La Spezia , and was brought to Genoa for a major boiler and engine overhaul . It was decided to rebuild her along the lines of the Navigatori @-@ class , including a wider beam to improve her stability . As shells for her Škoda @-@ built main guns were in short supply , the decision was made to replace them with Italian @-@ made 135 mm ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) / L45 guns in single mounts . The rebuild had not been completed when Italy surrendered to the Allies , and Premuda was seized by Germany at Genoa on 9 September 1943 . Premuda was the most important and effective Italian war prize ship of World War II . 
 = = = TA32 = = = 
 When she was captured by the Germans , Premuda 's new guns had not been completed . Their initial plans called for the ship to serve as a radar picket for night fighters , with three 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) / L45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in single mounts , Freya early @-@ warning radar , Würzburg gun @-@ laying radar and a FuMO 21 surface fire @-@ control system . These plans were soon abandoned due to the German lack of destroyers and torpedo boats in the Mediterranean , and the decision was made to commission her as a Torpedoboot Ausland ( foreign torpedo boat ) with a <unk> radar instead of the Freya and Würzburg radar sets . Her armament was replaced with four 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) / L45 naval guns , eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns and between thirty @-@ two and thirty @-@ six 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns in quadruple and twin mounts . The number of torpedo tubes was reduced from six to three . The number of 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns was later increased to ten , in four twin and two single mounts . In German service , she had a total crew of 220 officers and men . 
 She was commissioned in the German Navy ( German : Kriegsmarine ) on 18 August 1944 , as TA32 , under the command of Kapitänleutnant Emil <unk> . She served in the Ligurian Sea with the 10th Torpedo Boat Flotilla , and was immediately committed to shelling Allied positions on the Italian coast , then scouting and minelaying tasks in the western Gulf of Genoa . On 2 October 1944 , TA32 , along with TA24 and TA29 , sailed towards Sanremo to lay mines , where they encountered the destroyer USS Gleaves . After exchanging fire , the three ships returned to Genoa without being hit . By mid @-@ March 1945 , TA32 , TA24 and TA29 were the only ships of the 10th Torpedo Boat Flotilla that remained operational . On the night of 17 – 18 March 1945 , TA32 placed 76 naval mines off Cap Corse , the northern tip of Corsica , in an offensive minelaying operation , along with TA24 and TA29 . After being detected by a shore based radar , the ships were engaged by the destroyers HMS Lookout and HMS Meteor , in what would become known as the Battle of the Ligurian Sea . Outgunned , TA24 and TA29 were sunk , while TA32 managed to escape with light damage to her rudder , after firing a few rounds and making an unsuccessful torpedo attack . TA32 was finally scuttled at Genoa on 24 April 1945 , as the Germans retreated . Her wreck was raised and broken up in 1950 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 = Sozin 's Comet : The Final Battle = 
 " Sozin 's Comet : The Final Battle " is the series finale for the Nickelodeon television series Avatar : The Last Airbender . It was directed by Ethan Spaulding , Giancarlo Volpe , and Joaquim Dos Santos , and written by Michael Dante DiMartino , Bryan Konietzko , and Aaron <unk> . Although the finale is split into four episodes , it aired as a two @-@ hour four @-@ part movie on July 19 , 2008 . Before the week of July 14 – 19 , no episodes had been shown since November 30 , 2007 . The Saturday airing of Sozin 's Comet acted as a climax to a week of ten new episodes that concluded Avatar 's third season . 
 The finale focuses on series protagonist Aang 's non @-@ violent personality and his reluctance to kill Fire Lord Ozai . The finale also follows the exploits of many of Aang 's friends and allies , including Sokka , Toph and Suki 's struggle to destroy a Fire Nation airship armada , Zuko and Katara 's battle against Zuko 's sister Azula , and Iroh , King Bumi , and the Order of the White Lotus ' attempt to liberate Ba Sing Se . 
 Sozin 's Comet received positive reception from critics and fans alike . The initial showing averaged 5 @.@ 6 million viewers , a 195 % increase in ratings compared with ratings from mid @-@ July 2007 . The premiere of episodes 52 – 61 throughout the week of Sozin 's Comet 's release received over 19 million views , of which 5 @.@ 6 million were from the premiere of Sozin 's Comet . At the 2008 Annie Awards , the director of the third part of Sozin 's Comet won an award for " Best Directing in an Animated Television Production " . 
 Although " Sozin 's Comet " is the series finale , Avatar : The Last Airbender has continued as an ongoing graphic novel series , taking place after the finale and before the sequel series The Legend of Korra , which has been published by Dark Horse Comics since January 2012 , with each annual story arc split into three parts . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part 1 : " The Phoenix King " = = = 
 Aang suddenly abandons his Firebending lesson with Zuko to have a beach party , causing Zuko to attack him in his frustration . Aang explains he plans to challenge Fire Lord Ozai only after Sozin 's Comet and its enhancement of Firebending have come and gone , due to his own self @-@ perceived lack of Firebending skills at the moment . When Zuko tells the group Ozai plans to use the comet 's power to burn down the Earth Kingdom , Aang resolves to face him before the comet arrives . Sokka decides to have a simulation fight against a scarecrow , but Aang refuses to kill it due to his pacifistic nature and non @-@ violent upbringing , and even berates his friends as they tell him that he may eventually have no choice but to kill Ozai . 
 That night , Aang sleepwalks to an island not to be found in the morning . After the group fails to locate him , Zuko takes them to June , a tracker who might be able to locate Aang . Meanwhile , Fire Lord Ozai proclaims himself to be ruler of the world , under the title " Phoenix King " , and declares Azula to be the new Fire Lord , setting off to burn the world and rebuild it under his new order . 
 = = = Part 2 : " The Old Masters " = = = 
 Zuko 's tracker , June , is unable to locate Aang , but he is reunited with his uncle , Iroh , who reconcile with each other after Zuko 's betrayal in Ba Sing Se . He and several other characters ( Katara 's Waterbending master Pakku , Aang 's first Firebending instructor Jeong Jeong , Aang 's <unk> friend King Bumi , and Sokka 's swordmaster <unk> ) are part of an otherwise non @-@ aligned group known as the " Order of the White Lotus " , which plans to liberate the Earth Kingdom capital , Ba Sing Se , from Fire Nation rule . Zuko and Katara decide to fight Azula in the Fire Nation capital while Sokka , Toph , and Suki attempt to destroy the airship fleet . 
 Meanwhile , Aang awakens on a floating island . Frustrated with his inability to find a way to defeat Ozai without killing him , he asks four of his past lives for advice . Unsatisfied with their answers , he asks the island for help . The island , which is actually a giant " lion @-@ turtle " , provides Aang with the power of <unk> and leaves him on the Earth Kingdom shores while Ozai readies his airship fleet for takeoff . 
 = = = Part 3 : " Into the Inferno " = = = 
 The Comet appears in the sky , and Azula 's coronation takes place . Azula banishes nearly all of her subjects ( including her Dai Li agents ) in fear of betrayal , haunted by the actions of former friends Mai and Ty Lee in " The Boiling Rock , Part 2 " . Her paranoia and loneliness begin to drive her insane . Before she is crowned , Zuko and Katara arrive . Zuko accepts Azula 's challenge of an Agni Kai , or " fire duel " , because he feels that something is wrong with Azula and he does not want Katara injured . Just as Zuko is on the verge of defeating Azula , she shoots a bolt of lightning at Katara instead of Zuko . Zuko throws himself in front of her and intercepts the lightning , preventing Katara from getting hurt , but he gravely injures himself after he fails to correctly redirect the lightning . 
 Meanwhile , Sokka , Toph , and Suki hijack a Fire Nation airship , and use it to destroy many others , effectively stopping Ozai 's plan of incinerating the Earth Kingdom . In Ba Sing Se , the Order of the White Lotus , led by Iroh , lays siege to the Fire Nation forces within the city , with the sole intention of re @-@ conquering it in the name of the Earth Kingdom . Aang reappears and begins to duel the Fire Lord . However , when Aang successfully redirects lightning he intentionally aims it into the sky to avoid killing Ozai . Because of Aang 's pacifism , Ozai begins to gain the advantage . 
 = = = Part 4 : " Avatar Aang " = = = 
 Zuko lies on the ground twitching as Katara and Azula fight . After several minutes of running and being unable to gain the advantage at first , Katara freezes Azula and chains her to the ground defeating her . Katara then uses her waterbending to revive and heal Zuko . As a result of her defeat by two people she considers less than worthless , Azula 's mind finally snaps and she screams and sobs in fury , breathing blue fire out of her mouth , yet unable to escape her chains . 
 After a fierce battle , Ozai slams Aang into a rock , hitting the scar on his back from Azula 's lightning in the previous season and inadvertently releasing his locked seventh chakra , allowing Aang to enter the Avatar State . With the combined power of his past lives , Aang quickly overwhelms Ozai . Once Ozai is subdued , Aang refuses to kill him , instead locking him down with earth ; understanding the lion @-@ turtle 's meaning , he uses Energybending to strip Ozai of his Firebending powers , removing his ability to wage war . Then Aang raises and lowers the nearby ocean to undo the damage from the Fire Nation ; Sozin 's Comet vanishes beyond the horizon afterward . 
 The Order of the White Lotus liberates Ba Sing Se in the name of the Earth King . During his coronation , Zuko promises to aid the world in the postwar reconstruction . Sometime after the ceremony , Zuko visits Ozai 's prison and demands he tell him the location of the banished Ursa , Zuko 's mother . Zuko and Mai finally reconcile . Ty Lee joins the Kyoshi warriors , having bonded with them in prison and shared some chi @-@ blocking techniques . A final scene depicts the main cast gathered in Iroh 's new tea shop , the Jasmine Dragon , and with Aang and Katara officially confirming their genuinely strong and close romantic relationship with a loving hug and passionate kiss . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ creators Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko wrote the majority of the finale ; DiMartino wrote parts one , three , and four , and Konietzko assisted with parts three and four . Aaron <unk> , co @-@ executive producer and head writer of the show , wrote part two . Ethan Spaulding directed part one , Giancarlo Volpe directed part two , and Joaquim Dos Santos directed parts three and four . Dos Santos was nominated for an Annie Award for his directing of part three , " Into the Inferno " . Although Sozin 's Comet was originally written as a three @-@ part story , the creators noticed that the length had grown beyond what they had predicted from the initial script . To avoid pacing issues , they split the final part in two , adding several scenes to fill the remaining time . 
 Although Avatar is not considered anime because of its American origin , Tasha Robinson of the SciFi Channel observed that " Avatar blurs the line between anime and [ US ] domestic cartoons until it becomes irrelevant . " An IGN reviewer commented that Sozin 's Comet " had that classic anime @-@ look that I 've always loved to see when watching old anime movies . The story through the animation was perfectly done . " The special 's music was written and composed by " The Track Team " , led by Jeremy Zuckerman . However , unlike past episodes , a music track produced by a live orchestra was used , rather than one in MIDI format . 
 During the San Diego Comic @-@ con , it was announced that a reunion between Zuko and his mother , Ursa , had been arranged and made into a storyboard . However , it was dropped just before the finale was finished , as requested by show co @-@ creator Michael Dante DiMartino , who felt that it resolved Ursa 's disappearance in an unsatisfactory way and that wasn 't the way the story should be told . 
 The cast of Sozin 's Comet includes all of the key characters from season three . Protagonists Aang , Katara , Sokka , and Toph are voiced by Zach Tyler Eisen , Mae Whitman , Jack <unk> , and Jessie Flower respectively . Iroh is voiced by Greg Baldwin and Zuko is voiced by Dante Basco . Grey DeLisle and Mark Hamill voice the two antagonists , Azula and Fire Lord Ozai , respectively . The co @-@ creators also lend their voices to two minor characters in the third part , " Into the Inferno " . 
 Avatar : The Last Airbender borrows extensively from East Asian art to create its fictional universe . Four " bending " arts exist in the universe ; they are based on different styles and variations of Chinese martial arts : Baguazhang for Airbending , Hung Gar and Southern Praying Mantis for Earthbending , Northern Shaolin for Firebending , and T 'ai chi for Waterbending . Additionally , series borrows heavily from the Taoist concept of balance and order . The Avatar , an incarnation of a divine being , is supposed to maintain the world 's order . 
 Nickelodeon originally broadcast Sozin 's Comet from 8 : 00 pm to 10 : 00 pm EST on July 19 , 2008 . Just ten days later , on July 29 , the " Book 3 : Fire – Volume 4 " DVD was released , which contained the four episodes as well as episodes 56 and 57 , audio commentary from the series ' co @-@ creators , cast , and crew , and a comic book . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sozin 's Comet received many positive critical reviews ; Ed Liu of Toon Zone stated that it made Avatar " one of the finest animated television series ever made " , and IGN stating that this " film " deserved an Academy Award . Toon Zone praised the skill of the animation directors in designing the sweeping movements of the battle scenes , as well as the slower scenes , " including one moving reconciliation and the quiet coda that ties off many of the remaining loose ends of the series " . IGN reviewer Tory Ireland Mell wrote that she would " put it in the top ten films of all time " . She also praised the artistic skill of the designers , stating that the " whole dark tone was gorgeous to look at " , especially the " art of the Lion Turtle " . She thought that Sozin 's Comet lacked plot holes , as well as unnecessary plot devices , stating that the " story moved and kept us moving right along with it from beginning to end " . She gave Sozin 's Comet a 10 out of 10 " Masterful " rating . 
 Sozin 's Comet has received its share of criticism as well . Reviewers commented about the difficulty in understanding the voice of a new character : the Lion Turtle . The Lion Turtle was designed by Bryan Konietzko and character designer Jae Woo Kim . Bryan Konietzko disliked how the Lion Turtle turned out ; he felt that the art was not up to standards of the original design he had received . CraveOnline felt that because " the series was for children , the writers were at a loss of ideas to work around the murder angle , " and the decision not to kill the Fire Lord introduced " so many convenient plot twists [ that ] set us up for a humongous deus ex machina that allows the Fire Lord to be thwarted without dying " . 
 The premiere of Sozin 's Comet averaged 5 @.@ 6 million viewers , 195 % more viewers than Nickelodeon had received in mid @-@ July 2007 . During the week of July 14 , 2008 , it ranked as the most @-@ viewed program for the under @-@ 14 demographic . The premiere of episodes 52 – 61 throughout the week of Sozin 's Comet ' s release received a total of 19 million views , and Avatar reached Neilsen 's list of Top 20 Cable Results for the week ending June 20 , 2008 four times . It also appeared on iTunes ' top ten list of best @-@ selling television episodes during that same week . Sozin 's Comet ' s popularity affected online media as well ; " Rise of the Phoenix King " , a Nick.com online game based on Sozin 's Comet , generated almost 815 @,@ 000 game plays within three days . A video game loosely based on the third season , Avatar : The Last Airbender – Into the Inferno , was released on October 13 , 2008 . 
 Joaquim Dos Santos won the " Best Directing in an Animated Television Production " caption in the 2008 Annie Awards for his directing in " Into the Inferno " . Additionally , music editor and composer Jeremy Zuckerman and the sound editing team were nominated a Golden Reel award for " Best Sound Editing in a Television Animation " for their work in " Avatar Aang " . 
 = Magnus Carlsen = 
 Sven Magnus Øen Carlsen ( Norwegian : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ̩ ] ; born 30 November 1990 ) is a Norwegian chess grandmaster , and the current World Chess Champion . 
 Carlsen is a former chess prodigy . He became a Grandmaster in 2004 , at the age of 13 years , 148 days . This made him the third youngest grandmaster in history . 
 In November 2013 Carlsen became World Champion by defeating Viswanathan Anand in the World Chess Championship 2013 . On the May 2014 FIDE rating list , Carlsen reached his peak rating of <unk> , which is the highest in history . He successfully defended his title in November 2014 , once again defeating Anand . The same year , he also won the World Rapid Championship and the World Blitz Championship , thus holding all three world championship titles . In 2015 Carlsen won the inaugural Grand Chess Tour , a series of three <unk> featuring the 10 best chess grandmasters in the world . 
 Carlsen was known for his attacking style as a teenager , but he has since developed into a more universal player . He does not rely on opening preparation as much as other top players , and plays a variety of openings in order to make it more difficult for opponents to prepare against him . Carlsen 's positional mastery and endgame prowess have drawn comparisons to those of former world champions Bobby Fischer , José Raúl Capablanca , Vasily Smyslov , and Anatoly Karpov . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Carlsen was born in Tønsberg , Norway , on 30 November 1990 , to Sigrun Øen and Henrik Albert Carlsen , both engineers ( <unk> ) by profession . The family spent one year in Espoo , Finland , and then in Brussels , Belgium , and in 1998 returned to Norway and settled in <unk> , Bærum . They later moved to <unk> . Carlsen showed an aptitude for intellectual challenges at a young age : at two years , he could solve 50 @-@ piece jigsaw puzzles ; at four , he enjoyed assembling Lego sets with instructions intended for children aged 10 – 14 . His father taught him to play chess at the age of 5 , although he initially showed little interest in the game . 
 The first chess book Carlsen read was Find the Plan by Bent Larsen , and his first book on openings was Eduard <unk> 's The Complete Dragon . Carlsen developed his early chess skills by playing by himself for hours at a time — moving the pieces around the chessboard , searching for combinations , and replaying games and positions shown to him by his father . Simen Agdestein emphasises Carlsen 's extreme memory , claiming that he was able to recall the areas , population numbers , flags and capitals of all the countries in the world by the age of five . Later , Carlsen had memorised the areas , population numbers , coat @-@ of @-@ arms and administrative centres of " virtually all " Norwegian municipalities . Carlsen participated in his first tournament — the youngest division of the 1999 Norwegian Chess Championship — at the age of 8 years and 7 months , scoring 6 ½ / 11 . 
 Carlsen was later coached at the Norwegian College of Elite Sport by the country 's top player , Grandmaster ( GM ) Simen Agdestein , who in turn cites Norwegian football manager Egil " <unk> " Olsen as a key inspiration for his coaching strategy . In 2000 , Agdestein introduced Carlsen to Torbjørn Ringdal Hansen , an International Master ( IM ) and former Norwegian junior champion , as Ringdal served a one @-@ year <unk> ( an alternative civilian service programme ) at the college . Over the course of this year , Carlsen 's rating rose from 904 in June 2000 , to 1907 . Carlsen 's breakthrough occurred in the Norwegian junior teams championship in September 2000 , where Carlsen scored 3 ½ / 5 against the top junior players of the country , and a performance rating ( PR ) of about 2000 . Apart from chess , which Carlsen studied about three to four hours a day , his favourite pastimes included football , skiing , and reading Donald Duck comics . Carlsen also practiced ski jumping until the age of ten . His personal best is 21 metres . 
 From autumn 2000 to the end of 2002 , Carlsen played almost 300 rated tournament games , as well as several blitz tournaments , and participated in other minor events . In October 2002 , he placed sixth in the European Under @-@ 12 Championship in <unk> . In the following month , he tied for first place in the World Under @-@ 12 Championship in <unk> , placing second to Ian <unk> on tiebreak . After this , he obtained three IM norms in relatively quick succession ; his first was at the January 2003 Gausdal Troll Masters ( score 7 / 10 , 2345 PR ) , the second was at the June 2003 <unk> IM @-@ tournament in Stockholm ( 6 / 9 , 2470 PR ) , and the third and final IM norm was obtained at the July 2003 Politiken Cup in Copenhagen ( 8 / 11 , <unk> PR ) . He was officially awarded the IM title on 20 August 2003 . After finishing primary school , Carlsen took a year off to participate in international chess tournaments held in Europe during the fall season of 2003 , returning to complete secondary education at a sports school . During the year away from school , he finished in a tie for third in the European Under @-@ 14 Championship and placed ninth in the World Under @-@ 14 Championship . Both events were won by Sergei <unk> . 
 = = Chess career = = 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 Carlsen made headlines after his victory in the C group at the Corus chess tournament in Wijk aan Zee . Carlsen obtained a score of 10 ½ / 13 , losing just one game ( against the highest @-@ rated player of the C group , Duško <unk> ) . As a result of the victory , he earned his first GM norm , and achieved a PR of <unk> . Particularly notable was his win over <unk> Ernst in the penultimate round , when Carlsen sacrificed material to give mate in just 29 moves . The first 23 moves in that game had already been played in another game — Almagro <unk> – Gustafsson , Madrid 2003 ( which ended in a draw ) — but Carlsen 's over @-@ the @-@ board novelty immediately led to a winning position . Carlsen 's victory in the C group qualified him to play in the B group in 2005 , and it led Lubomir Kavalek , writing for the Washington Post , to give him the title " Mozart of chess " . Agdestein said that Carlsen had an excellent memory and played an unusually wide range of openings . Carlsen 's prowess caught the attention of Microsoft , which became his sponsor . 
 Carlsen obtained his second GM norm at the Moscow Aeroflot Open in February . On 17 March , in a blitz chess tournament in Reykjavík , Iceland , Carlsen defeated former World Champion Anatoly Karpov . The blitz tournament was a preliminary event leading up to a rapid knockout tournament beginning the next day . In that event , Carlsen was paired with Garry Kasparov , then the top @-@ rated player in the world . Carlsen achieved a draw in their first game and lost the second one , and was thus knocked out of the tournament . 
 In the sixth Dubai Open Chess Championship , held 18 – 28 April , Carlsen obtained his third and final GM norm . This caused him to become the world 's youngest GM at the time , as well as the third @-@ youngest GM in history ( after Sergey Karjakin , who earned the title at the age of 12 years and 7 months and <unk> Negi ) . Carlsen played in the FIDE World Chess Championship , thus becoming the youngest player ever to participate in one , but was knocked out in the first round by Levon Aronian . 
 In July , Carlsen and Berge Østenstad ( then the reigning Norwegian champion ) tied for first in the Norwegian Chess Championship , each scoring 7 / 9 . A two @-@ game match between them was arranged to decide the title . Both games were drawn , which left Østenstad the champion because he had superior tiebreaks in the tournament . 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 In the <unk> Chess Masters event at the Drammen International Chess Festival 2004 – 05 , Carlsen defeated Alexei Shirov , then ranked No. 10 in the world , as well as the co @-@ winner of the tournament . In the semifinals of the Ciudad de León rapid chess tournament in June , Carlsen played a four @-@ game match against Viswanathan Anand , who was ranked No. 2 in the world at the time and had won the 2003 World Rapid Chess Championship . Anand won 3 – 1 . 
 In the Norwegian Chess Championship , Carlsen again finished in shared first place , this time with his mentor Simen Agdestein . A playoff between them was played between 7 and 10 November . This time , Carlsen had the better tiebreaks , but the rule giving the title to the player with better tiebreak scores in the event of a 1 – 1 draw had been revoked previously . The match was closely fought — Agdestein won the first game , Carlsen the second — so the match went into a series of two @-@ game rapid matches until there was a winner . Carlsen won the first rapid game , Agdestein the second . Then followed three draws until Agdestein won the championship title with a victory in the sixth rapid game . 
 At the end of 2005 , Carlsen participated at the Chess World Cup in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Russia . In the knockout tournament , he upset the 44th @-@ ranked Zurab <unk> in round one , and proceeded to defeat Farrukh <unk> and Ivan <unk> to reach the round of 16 . There , Carlsen lost to Evgeny <unk> , but then won against Joël <unk> and Vladimir Malakhov before losing again to Gata Kamsky . Thus , Carlsen finished in tenth place and became the youngest player to be an official World Championship Candidate . In October , he took first place at the Arnold <unk> Memorial in Gausdal with a score 8 / 9 and a PR of <unk> . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 Carlsen qualified for a place in the Corus B group due to his first @-@ place finish in Corus group C in 2004 . His shared first place with Alexander <unk> with 9 / 13 ( + 6 − 1 = 6 ) qualified him to play in the Corus group A in 2007 . 
 At the traditional international ' Bosna ' tournament in Sarajevo 2006 , Carlsen shared first place with Liviu @-@ Dieter Nisipeanu ( who won on tiebreak evaluation ) and Vladimir Malakhov ; this could be regarded as Carlsen 's first “ A ” elite tournament win , although it was not a clear first . 
 Carlsen was close to winning the 2006 Norwegian Chess Championship outright , but a last @-@ round loss to Berge Østenstad dropped him into another tie for first place with Agdestein . It also prevented Carlsen from beating Agdestein 's record as the youngest Norwegian champion ever . Nonetheless , in the playoff held from 19 – 21 September , Carlsen won 3 – 1 . After two draws at standard time controls , Carlsen won both rapid games in round two , securing his first Norwegian championship win . 
 Carlsen won the Glitnir Blitz Tournament in Iceland . He achieved a 2 – 0 win over Viswanathan Anand in the semifinals and achieved the same score in the finals . He scored 6 / 8 in the 37th Chess Olympiad and achieved a PR of <unk> . 
 In the Midnight Sun Chess Tournament in Tromsø , Carlsen finished second behind Sergei <unk> . In the Biel Grandmaster Tournament , he placed second , beating the tournament winner Alexander Morozevich twice . 
 In the NH Chess Tournament held in Amsterdam in August , Carlsen participated in an " Experience " vs. " Rising Stars " Scheveningen team match . The " Rising Stars " won the match 28 – 22 , with Carlsen achieving the best individual score for the Rising Stars team ( 6 ½ / 10 ) and a 2700 PR , thus winning the right to participate in the 2007 Melody Amber tournament . 
 With a score of 7 ½ / 15 , Carlsen placed 8th out of 16 participants at the World Blitz Championship in Rishon LeZion , Israel . In the rapid chess tournament <unk> nationales et <unk> d <unk> in Cap d 'Agde , France , he reached the semifinal , losing there to Sergey Karjakin . In November , Carlsen achieved a shared 8th place of 10 participants in the Mikhail Tal Memorial in Moscow with two losses and seven draws . He finished ninth in a group of 18 participants in the associated blitz tournament , which was won by Anand . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 Playing in the top group of the Corus chess tournament for the first time , Carlsen placed last with nine draws and four losses , scoring 4 ½ / 13 . In the prestigious Linares chess tournament , Carlsen played against the following top @-@ rated players : Veselin Topalov , Viswanathan Anand , Peter Svidler , Alexander Morozevich , Levon Aronian , Peter Leko , and Vassily Ivanchuk . Despite being rated significantly lower than any of them , he finished in second place on tiebreaks with 7 ½ / 14 , having scored four wins , seven draws and three losses , and achieving a PR of <unk> . 
 Carlsen played for the first time in the Melody Amber blind and rapid chess tournament in Monte Carlo in March . In the 11 rounds , he achieved eight draws and three losses in the blindfold games , as well as three wins , seven draws and one loss in the rapid games . This resulted in a shared ninth place in the blindfold , shared second place in the rapid ( behind Anand ) , and a shared eighth place in the overall tournament . 
 In May and June , he participated in the Candidates Tournament for the FIDE World Chess Championship 2007 , facing Levon Aronian in a six @-@ game match at standard time controls , which Carlsen drew ( + 2 − 2 = 2 ) by coming from behind twice . The four @-@ game rapid playoff was drawn as well ( + 1 − 1 = 2 ) , with Carlsen winning the last game to stay in the match . Eventually , Aronian eliminated Carlsen from the tournament after winning both tiebreak blitz games . 
 In July and August , Carlsen won the Biel Grandmaster Tournament with a 6 / 10 record and a PR of <unk> . His score was matched by Alexander <unk> and they played a match to break the tie . After drawing two rapid and two blitz games , Carlsen won the armageddon game . Immediately after the Biel tournament , Carlsen entered the open Arctic Chess Challenge in Tromsø , but his fourth @-@ place result with + 5 = 4 was a slight underperformance in terms of rating . In the first round , Carlsen , surprisingly , conceded a draw to his classmate Brede Hagen ( rated 2034 ) after having a lost position at one point . A game which attracted some attention was his sixth @-@ round win over his father , Henrik Carlsen . 
 Carlsen reached the semifinal round of the World Chess Cup in December , after defeating Michael Adams in the round of 16 and Ivan <unk> in the quarterfinals . In the semifinal , he was eliminated by the eventual winner , Gata Kamsky , scoring ½ – 1 ½ . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 In the top group A of the Corus chess tournament , Carlsen scored 8 / 13 , achieving a PR of <unk> . Carlsen won five games , lost two and drew six , sharing first place with Levon Aronian . At the Linares chess tournament , Carlsen had another 2800 + PR , scoring 8 / 14 . He finished in sole second place , ½ point behind the winner World Champion Viswanathan Anand . 
 In March , Carlsen played for the second time in the Melody Amber blind and rapid chess tournament , held in Nice for the first time . In the 11 rounds he achieved four wins , four draws and two losses in the blindfold , and three wins , two losses , and six draws in the rapid . This resulted in a shared fifth place in the blindfold , shared third place in the rapid and a shared second place in the overall tournament . 
 Carlsen was one of 21 players in the six @-@ tournament FIDE Grand Prix 2008 – 2009 , a qualifier for the World Chess Championship 2012 . In the first tournament , in Baku , Azerbaijan , he finished in a three @-@ way tie for first place , with another 2800 PR . Carlsen later withdrew from the Grand Prix cycle despite his initial success , criticizing how FIDE was " changing the rules dramatically in the middle of a [ World Championship ] cycle " . 
 Carlsen won a rapid match against Peter Leko held in Miskolc , Hungary , scoring 5 – 3 . In June , Carlsen won the annual <unk> chess tournament , finishing undefeated with 8 / 11 in a category 19 field and achieving a PR of <unk> , his best PR at that point in his career . Playing in the category 18 Biel Grandmaster Tournament , Carlsen finished third with 6 / 10 , with a PR of <unk> . 
 In the Mainz World Rapid Chess Championship , Carlsen finished in second place after losing the final to defending champion Anand 3 – 1 . In the qualification round Carlsen scoring 1 ½ – ½ against Judit Polgár , 1 – 1 against Anand and 1 – 1 against Alexander Morozevich . In the category 22 Bilbao Masters , Carlsen tied for second with a <unk> PR . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Playing in Group A of the Corus chess tournament , Carlsen tied for fifth with a <unk> PR . In the Linares chess tournament , Carlsen finished third with a <unk> PR . Carlsen tied for second place with Veselin Topalov at the M @-@ Tel Masters ( category 21 ) tournament in Sofia , Bulgaria . He lost to eventual winner Alexei Shirov in their final game , dropping him from first . 
 Carlsen won the category 21 Nanjing Pearl Spring tournament , 2 ½ points ahead of second @-@ place finisher Topalov , the world 's highest @-@ rated player at the time . He scored an undefeated 8 / 10 , winning every game as white ( against Topalov , Wang Yue , Leko , Teimour Radjabov , and Dmitry <unk> ) , and also winning as black against <unk> . By rating performance , this was one of the greatest results in history , with a PR of 3002 . Chess statistician Jeff Sonas has declared it one of the 20 best tournament performances of all time , and the best chess performance of all time by a teenager . 
 In the Tal Memorial , played from 5 to 14 November , Carlsen started with seven straight draws , but finished with wins over former FIDE World Champion Ruslan Ponomariov and Peter Leko . This result put Carlsen in shared second place behind former World Champion Vladimir Kramnik and equal with Ivanchuk . After the Tal Memorial , Carlsen won the World Blitz Championship , played from 16 to 18 November in Moscow , Russia . His score of 28 wins , 6 draws and 8 losses left him three points ahead of Anand , who finished in second place . 
 Carlsen entered the London Chess Classic as the top seed in a field including Kramnik , Hikaru Nakamura , Michael Adams , Nigel Short , Ni Hua , Luke McShane and David Howell . He defeated Kramnik in round one and went on to win the tournament with 13 / 21 ( three points were awarded for a win , and one for a draw ; using classical scoring he finished with 5 / 7 ) and a PR of <unk> , one point ahead of Kramnik . This victory propelled him to the top of the FIDE rating list , surpassing Veselin Topalov . 
 Based on his average ranking from the July 2009 and January 2010 FIDE lists , Carlsen qualified for the Candidates Tournament that would determine the challenger to World Champion Viswanathan Anand in the World Chess Championship 2012 . In November 2010 , however , Carlsen announced he was withdrawing from the Candidates Tournament . Carlsen described the 2008 – 12 cycle as " [ not ] sufficiently modern and fair " , and wrote that " Reigning champion privileges , the long ( five year ) span of the cycle , changes made during the cycle resulting in a new format ( Candidates ) that no World Champion has had to go through since Kasparov , puzzling ranking criteria as well as the shallow ceaseless match @-@ after @-@ match concept are all less than satisfactory in my opinion . " 
 In early 2009 Carlsen engaged former World Champion Garry Kasparov as a personal trainer . In September their partnership was revealed to the public by Norwegian newspapers . 
 Responding to a question in an interview with Time magazine in December 2009 as to whether he used computers when studying chess , Carlsen explained that he does not use a chess set when studying on his own . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 Carlsen won the Corus chess tournament played 16 – 31 January with 8 ½ points . His ninth @-@ round loss to Kramnik ended a streak of 36 rated games undefeated . Carlsen appeared to struggle in the last round against Fabiano Caruana , but saved a draw , leaving him half a point ahead of Kramnik and Shirov . 
 In March it was announced that Carlsen had split from Kasparov and would no longer use him as a trainer , although this was put into different context by Carlsen himself in an interview with the German magazine Der Spiegel , in which he stated that they would remain in contact and he would continue to attend training sessions with Kasparov . In 2011 , Carlsen said : " Thanks to [ Kasparov ] I began to understand a whole class of positions better . ... Kasparov gave me a great deal of practical help . " In 2012 , when asked what he learnt from working with Kasparov , Carlsen answered : " Complex positions . That was the most important thing . " 
 Carlsen shared first place alongside Ivanchuk in the Amber blindfold and rapid tournament . Scoring 6 ½ / 11 in the blindfold and 8 / 11 in the rapid , Carlsen accumulated 14 ½ from a possible 22 points . In May it was revealed that Carlsen had helped Anand prepare for the World Chess Championship 2010 against challenger Veselin Topalov , which Anand won 6 ½ – 5 ½ to retain the title . Carlsen had also helped Anand prepare for the World Chess Championships in 2007 and 2008 . 
 Carlsen played in the Bazna Kings Tournament in Romania on 14 – 25 June . The tournament was a double round robin involving Wang Yue , Boris Gelfand , Ruslan Ponomariov , Teimour Radjabov , and Liviu @-@ Dieter Nisipeanu . He finished with 7 ½ / 10 and a <unk> PR , winning the tournament by two points ahead of Radjabov and Gelfand . Carlsen then played in a rapid tournament 28 – 30 August at the Arctic Securities Chess Stars tournament in Kristiansund , Norway . The field featured World Champion Viswanathan Anand , female world No. 1 Judit Polgár , and Jon Ludvig Hammer . In the preliminary round robin , Carlsen scored 3 ½ / 6 to qualify for the final , second behind Anand . In the final , Carlsen defeated Anand 1 ½ – ½ to win the championship . Following this event , Carlsen suffered setbacks in his next two tournaments . In the 39th Chess Olympiad from 19 September to 4 October , he scored 4 ½ / 8 , losing three games , to <unk> <unk> , Michael Adams , and <unk> <unk> ; these were his first losses with the black pieces in more than a year . His team , Norway , finished 51st out of 149 teams . 
 Carlsen 's next tournament was the Grand Slam Masters Final on 9 – 15 October , which he had qualified for automatically by winning three of the previous year 's four Grand Slam chess events ( 2009 Nanjing Pearl Spring , 2010 Corus , 2010 Bazna Kings ) . Along with Carlsen , the finals consisted of World Champion Anand and the highest two scorers from the preliminary stage held in Shanghai in September : Kramnik and Shirov . The average Elo of the participants at the time was <unk> , making the Grand Slam Final the strongest chess tournament in history . In the first round , Carlsen lost with black to Kramnik ; this was Carlsen 's second consecutive loss to Kramnik , and placed his hold on the world No. 1 ranking in serious jeopardy . In his second round , Carlsen lost with the white pieces to Anand ; this was his first loss as White since January 2010 . Carlsen recovered somewhat in the latter part of the tournament , achieving a win over Shirov , and finishing with 2 ½ / 6 . The tournament was won by Kramnik with 4 / 6 . Carlsen finished this tournament with a rating of <unk> , two points behind Anand at <unk> who temporarily ended Carlsen 's reign at world No. 1 . These setbacks called into question from some whether Carlsen 's activities outside chess , such as modelling for G @-@ Star Raw , were distracting him from performing well at the chessboard . Carlsen said he did not believe there was a direct connection . 
 Carlsen 's next tournament was the Pearl Spring chess tournament on 19 – 30 October in Nanjing , China , against Anand , Topalov , Vugar Gashimov , Wang Yue , and Étienne Bacrot . This was the only tournament in 2010 to feature Anand , Carlsen and Topalov , at the time the top three players in the world , and was the first tournament in history to feature three players rated at least 2800 . With early wins over Bacrot , Wang Yue , and Topalov with white , Carlsen took the early lead , extending his winning streak with white in Nanjing to eight . This streak was halted by a draw to Anand in round seven , but in the penultimate round Carlsen secured first place by defeating Topalov with black . This was his second victory in the tournament over the former world No. 1 ; his final score of 7 / 10 ( with a PR of 2903 ) was a full point ahead of runner @-@ up Anand . 
 In the World Blitz Championship , held in Moscow on 16 – 18 November , Carlsen attempted to defend his 2009 title . With a score of 23 ½ / 38 , he finished in third place behind Radjabov and winner Levon Aronian . After the tournament , Carlsen played a private 40 @-@ game blitz match against Hikaru Nakamura , winning with a score of 23 ½ – 16 ½ . 
 Carlsen won the London Chess Classic on 8 – 15 December in a field comprising World Champion Anand , Vladimir Kramnik , Nakamura , and British players Adams , Nigel Short , David Howell , and Luke McShane . Carlsen had a rocky start , losing his games to McShane and Anand in rounds 1 and 3 , but winning with white against Adams and Nakamura in rounds 2 and 4 . He joined the lead with a win over Howell in round 5 , and managed to stay in the lead following a harrowing draw against Kramnik in round 6 , before defeating Short in the last round . Since the tournament was played with three points for a win , Carlsen 's + 4 − 2 = 1 score put him ahead of Anand and McShane who scored + 2 = 5 ( a more traditional two @-@ points @-@ for @-@ a @-@ win system would have yielded a three @-@ way tie , with Carlsen still on top , having the better tiebreaker due to four games with black — Anand and McShane played only three times with black ) . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 Carlsen competed in the GM @-@ A group of the Tata Steel Chess Tournament ( formerly called Corus Chess Tournament ) on 14 – 30 January in Wijk aan Zee in an attempt to defend his title ; the field included World Champion Viswanathan Anand , Levon Aronian , former World Champion Vladimir Kramnik , Alexander Grischuk , Hikaru Nakamura , Ruslan Ponomariov , among others . Despite losing games with white against Anish Giri and reigning Russian champion Ian <unk> , Carlsen finished with 8 / 13 , including victories over Kramnik and tournament winner Nakamura . Although Carlsen 's performance raised his rating from 2814 to 2815 , Anand 's 8 ½ / 13 score elevated his rating to <unk> , making him the world No. 1 for the March 2011 FIDE rating list . 
 The first tournament victory of the year came in the Bazna Kings tournament , a double round robin played in Mediaș , Romania on 11 – 21 June . Carlsen finished with 6 ½ / 10 , equal with Sergey Karjakin but with a better tiebreak score . Carlsen won his White games against Nakamura , Nisipeanu , and Ivanchuk and drew the rest of the games . 
 The Grand Slam Chess Final was held as a double round robin with six players , in São Paulo ( 25 September – 1 October ) and Bilbao ( 5 – 11 October ) . Although Carlsen had a slow start , including a loss against bottom @-@ ranked Francisco Vallejo Pons , he finished + 3 − 1 = 6 , equal with Ivanchuk ( whose + 4 − 3 = 3 finish was equal due to three points for a win ) . Carlsen then won the blitz tiebreak against Ivanchuk . The other players were Anand , Aronian , Nakamura , and Vallejo Pons . 
 Another tournament victory was achieved in the Tal Memorial in Moscow 16 – 25 November as a round robin with ten players . Carlsen won two games , against Gelfand and Nakamura , and drew the rest . Although he finished equal on points with Aronian , he placed ahead since the tiebreak was determined by the number of black games ; Carlsen had five black games , while Aronian only had four . 
 In the London Chess Classic , played 3 – 12 December , Carlsen 's streak of tournament victories ended when he finished third , behind Kramnik and Nakamura . Carlsen won three games and drew five . Although he did not win the tournament , Carlsen gained rating points , rising to a new personal record of <unk> . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 At the Tata Steel Chess Tournament held on 14 – 29 January in Wijk aan Zee , Carlsen finished in a shared second place with 8 / 13 , behind Aronian , and equal with Radjabov and Caruana . Carlsen defeated Gashimov , Aronian , Gelfand , and Topalov , but lost against Karjakin . At the blitz chess tournament at Tal Memorial , held in Moscow on 7 June , Carlsen shared first place with Morozevich . In the main event ( a category 22 ten @-@ player round robin ) , he won two games and drew seven . He finished in first place , ahead of Radjabov and Caruana . 
 Carlsen then went on to finish second in the Biel Grandmaster Tournament , with 18 points , just one point behind Wang Hao using the 3 – 1 – 0 scoring system . As in the Tal Memorial earlier in 2012 , Carlsen managed to finish the tournament without any losses ( + 4 − 0 = 6 ) . He also defeated the winner Wang in both of their individual games . In the exhibition blitz tournament at Biel before the GM tournament , Carlsen was eliminated ( + 1 − 2 = 0 ) in the first round by Étienne Bacrot . Bacrot deprived Carlsen of a win in the classical tournament by holding him to a draw in the final round . Carlsen would have won the classical tournament on the traditional 1 – ½ – 0 scoring system , with 7 / 10 . 
 The Grand Slam Chess Final was again held as a double round robin with six players , in São Paulo and Bilbao . Carlsen started with a loss against Caruana , but after three wins in the second ( Bilbao ) round , finished + 4 − 1 = 5 , equal first with Caruana , and ahead of Aronian , Karjakin and Anand . Carlsen won the tournament by winning both tiebreak games against Caruana . 
 From 24 to 25 November , Carlsen took part in the chess festival " Segunda Gran Fiesta Internacional de Ajedrez " in Mexico City . As part of it , Carlsen took on an online audience ( dubbed as " The World " ) with the white pieces and won . He then took part in the knockout exhibition event " <unk> UNAM " . Carlsen first beat Lázaro <unk> 1 ½ – ½ , thus qualifying for a final against Judit Polgár ( who had in turn beat Manuel León Hoyos 1 ½ – ½ ) . Carlsen lost the first game , but won the second one , and in the tiebreak defeated Polgár 2 – 0 . 
 Carlsen won the London Chess Classic in December with five wins ( over McShane , Aronian , Gawain Jones , Adams and Judit Polgár ) and three draws ( against Kramnik , Nakamura and Anand ) . This win , the third time Carlsen had won the tournament in the past four years , increased his rating from <unk> to a new record of 2861 , breaking Kasparov 's 13 @-@ year record of 2851 . By rating performance , this was one of the best results in history , with a PR of <unk> . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 Carlsen played in the 75th Tata Steel Chess Tournament from 11 to 27 January in Wijk aan Zee . In the 13 @-@ round tournament , he scored 10 points ( + 7 − 0 = 6 ) , winning clear first 1 ½ points ahead of second @-@ place finisher Aronian . On 1 February , Danish GM Peter Heine Nielsen joined the team of assistants who helped Carlsen prepare for the Candidates Tournament in March . Before this , Nielsen was on Viswanathan Anand 's team . 
 Carlsen played in the 2013 Candidates Tournament , which took place in London , from 15 March to 1 April . He finished with + 5 − 2 = 7 , and won the tournament on tiebreak over Vladimir Kramnik . As a result , he earned the right to challenge Anand for the World Champion title . 
 In May , Carlsen played in the first edition of Norway Chess tournament . He finished second , scoring 5 ½ / 9 ( + 3 − 1 = 5 ) , half a point behind Sergey Karjakin . 
 Carlsen played in the Tal Memorial from June 12 to June 23 . He finished second , with 5 ½ / 9 , half a point behind Boris Gelfand . Carlsen ended the tournament with + 3 − 1 = 5 , losing to Caruana but beating Anand , Kramnik and Nakamura . Later that month , Carlsen played a four @-@ game friendly rapid match against <unk> <unk> , which he won 2 ½ – 1 ½ . 
 In the Sinquefield Cup , held in September , Carlsen finished first , scoring + 3 − 0 = 3 , a point ahead of Nakamura . 
 = = = = World Chess Championship 2013 = = = = 
 Carlsen faced Anand in the World Chess Championship 2013 in Chennai , India , from 9 to 22 November . Carlsen won the match 6 ½ – 3 ½ by winning games five , six and nine and drawing the remainder . Thus , Carlsen became the new world chess champion . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 From 29 January to 4 February , Carlsen played in the Zurich Chess Challenge , winning the preliminary blitz event ( + 2 − 1 = 2 ) and the classical event ( + 3 − 0 = 2 ) . He performed less well in the rapid event ( + 1 − 2 = 2 ) , which counted towards the overall standings , but retained enough of a lead to win the tournament . The other players in the event were Aronian , Nakamura , Caruana , Gelfand and Anand . 
 Carlsen played a game for his club Stavanger in the final team match for promotion to the Norwegian Premier League on 22 March . His win over Vladimir Georgiev helped his team to a 3 ½ – 2 ½ win over Nordstrand . 
 Carlsen won the Vugar Gashimov Memorial in <unk> , Azerbaijan , played from 20 – 30 April . He played in the A group along with Caruana , Nakamura , Karjakin , <unk> Mamedyarov and Radjabov . Carlsen started the tournament with 2 / 2 , beating Mamedyarov and Nakamura . He then drew Karjakin , only to lose two games in a row for the first time in four years , losing to Caruana with black and then with white to Radjabov . In the second half of the tournament , Carlsen scored 4 / 5 , beating Mamedyarov and Nakamura again , and securing the tournament victory by beating Caruana in the final round , finishing with + 5 − 2 = 3 . 
 On 8 May Carlsen played an exhibition game at Oslo City against the people of Norway , assisted by a grandmaster panel consisting of Simen Agdestein , Leif Erlend Johannessen , and Jon Ludvig Hammer . Each of the panel members proposed a move and the public could then vote over the proposed moves . Each panel member was allowed three chances to let chess engine Houdini propose a move during the game . Norway 's moves were executed by Oddvar <unk> who was disguised in a red spandex suit for the occasion . The game was drawn when Carlsen forced a perpetual check . 
 Carlsen placed second ( to Sergey Karjakin ) in the second edition of Norway Chess , a ten @-@ player round robin , from 2 June to 13 June . Other players in the event were Aronian , Caruana , Topalov , Svidler , Kramnik , Grischuk , Giri and Agdestein . 
 Carlsen won FIDE World Rapid Championships held in Dubai from 16 June to 19 June . He went on to claim the World Blitz Championships two days later , becoming the first player to simultaneously hold the title in all three FIDE rated time controls . 
 Carlsen played nine games for Norway in the 41st Chess Olympiad , scoring five wins , two draws , and two losses ( against Arkadij Naiditsch and Ivan Šarić ) . 
 Carlsen placed second to Fabiano Caruana in the Sinquefield Cup , a six @-@ player double round robin in Saint Louis , Missouri from 27 August to 7 September . Billed as the strongest chess tournament ever held , the remaining 4 players in the event were Levon Aronian , Hikaru Nakamura , Veselin Topalov , and Maxime Vachier @-@ Lagrave . He lost to Fabiano Caruana in Round 3 and defeated Levon Aronian and Hikaru Nakamura in Rounds 5 and 7 , respectively . He finished the tournament in second place , with 5 @.@ 5 / 10 ( + 2 @-@ 1 = 7 ) , behind Caruana . 
 = = = = World Chess Championship 2014 = = = = 
 Carlsen faced Anand in a match for the title of World Chess Champion in November 2014 , as Anand qualified by winning the 2014 Candidates Tournament . The rematch was held from November 7 to 23 in Sochi , Russia . After 11 of 12 games , Carlsen led 6 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 , thereby defending his World Champion title . 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 In January , Carlsen won the Tata Steel Chess Tournament , which was played mainly in Wijk aan Zee on 9 – 25 January . Carlsen had a poor start to the tournament with two draws and a loss in the third round to Radosław <unk> , which left him in tenth place among the fourteen players . However , a string of six wins in a row thrust Carlsen into clear first place . Drawing the final four games was sufficient to win the tournament with 9 points out of 13 , half a point ahead of Anish Giri , Maxime Vachier @-@ Lagrave , Wesley So and Ding <unk> . In February , Carlsen won the 3rd <unk> Chess Classic in Baden @-@ Baden after a five @-@ game tiebreak with Arkadij Naiditsch . Carlsen finished equal first with Naiditsch on 4 @.@ 5 / 7 , beating Michael Adams , Anand , and David <unk> , and losing to Naiditsch in their classical encounter . This tournament victory meant that Carlsen began 2015 by winning two out of two tournaments . Carlsen continued his streak in April , winning <unk> Chess with a score of 7 / 9 , beating Mamedyarov , Caruana , Vachier @-@ Lagrave , Kramnik , and Rauf <unk> , going + 5 @-@ 0 = 4 . With a performance rating of <unk> , this was Carlsen 's third best tournament result ever . His performance was only bested in Nanjing 2009 ( 3002 TPR ) and London 2012 ( <unk> TPR ) . Carlsen had a poor result in the Norway Chess event of 15 – 26 June . In the first round he obtained a winning position against Topalov after pressing in a long endgame , only to lose on time when he mistakenly thought that he would receive 15 minutes of extra time at move 60 . He was then outplayed by Caruana in the second round , missed a win against Anish Giri in round 3 , and lost to Anand in round 4 . He won against Grischuk in round 5 , drew against Nakamura and Vachier @-@ Lagrave in rounds 6 and 7 , and defeated Aronian in round 8 , but he lost the last round against Jon Ludvig Hammer , leaving him tied for seventh and eighth place . Carlsen finished 2nd place at the 2015 Sinquefield Cup with 5 points , one point below tournament winner Levon Aronian . He defeated the 2014 Sinquefield Cup 's winner Fabiano Caruana , French # 1 Maxime Vachier @-@ Lagrave , and wild @-@ card Wesley So , but lost to Veselin Topalov and Alexander Grischuk . 
 In October , Carlsen successfully defended his title in the FIDE World Rapid Championships held in Berlin , as the first world rapid champion to do so in history , going + 8 @-@ 0 = 7 . He reached the highest live rapid rating in history after the tournament , and was at that point ranked # 1 in all three disciplines simultaneously . However , Carlsen quickly lost his # 1 blitz spot after he had a weak second day in the World Blitz Championship , causing him to lose his title to Alexander Grischuk . In November 2015 , Carlsen participated in the European Team Chess Championship , playing for the Norwegian team . He started off poorly , scoring 0 @.@ 5 points out of 3 games - losing to Levon Aronian , drawing against Sune Berg Hansen , and losing again to Yannick Pelletier due to a blunder . He finished the tournament strongly , scoring victories against Peter Leko and <unk> <unk> , the latter of whom he had lost to earlier in the year . However , his performance was not enough to earn his team a medal , and he lost 16 rating points during the event . In December 2015 , Carlsen participated in the final leg of the Grand Chess Tour , the London Chess Classic . He scored + 2 @-@ 0 = 7 in the event , defeating Hikaru Nakamura ( and inflicting Nakamura 's 12th classical loss to Carlsen ) and Alexander Grischuk . In the 3 @-@ way tiebreak between Anish Giri and Maxime Vachier @-@ Lagrave , he was the top seed , meaning he faced the winner of the two @-@ game match between Giri and Vachier @-@ Lagrave . He eventually won against the match , the Classic , and the overall inaugural Grand Chess Tour , earning him $ 75 @,@ 000 for the London Chess Classic and the Grand Chess Tour bonus prizes . In late @-@ December 2015 , Carlsen won first place at the 2nd edition of the Qatar Masters Open , defeating Grandmaster Yu <unk> in a tie @-@ break after both players had finished on a + 5 score . This concluded his final tournament for the 2015 year . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 From January 15 to 31 , 2016 , Carlsen participated in the 78th Tata Steel Chess Tournament , held in Wijk Aan Zee , The Netherlands . Carlsen won the tournament by scoring 9 points out of 13 ( + 5 @-@ 0 = 8 ) , earning him his 5th Wijk Aan Zee title . 
 In the 2016 World Chess Championship in New York City , Carlsen will face Sergey Karjakin for the World Chess Championship . The match will take place from 11 – 30 November . 
 On April 29th , 2016 , Magnus Carlsen won the 4th edition of the Norway Chess Tournament , after scoring a final round victory against Pavel <unk> . 
 In July 2016 , Carlsen won the 9th edition of the Bilbao Masters Final , scoring 17 points out of 10 games ( + 4 @-@ 1 = 5 ) . Wins were awarded with 3 points , a draw with 1 point and losses with 0 points . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Carlsen won the Chess Oscars for 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 . The Chess Oscar , conducted by the Russian chess magazine 64 , is awarded to the year 's best player according to a worldwide poll of leading chess critics , writers , and journalists . The Norwegian tabloid Verdens Gang ( VG ) has awarded him " Name of the Year " ( <unk> <unk> ) twice , in 2009 and 2013 . VG also named him " Sportsman of the year " in 2009 and in the same year he won the Folkets <unk> , a people 's choice award from the newspaper Dagbladet . In 2011 , he was given the Peer Gynt Prize , a Norwegian honour prize awarded annually to " a person or institution that has achieved distinction in society " ; the following year , he repeated as winner of Folkets <unk> . In 2013 , Time magazine named Carlsen one of the 100 most influential people in the world . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Carlsen had an aggressive style of play as a youth , and , according to Agdestein , his play was characterised by " a fearless readiness to offer material for activity " . Carlsen found as he matured that this risky playing style was not as well suited against the world elite . When he started playing in top tournaments he was struggling against top players , and had trouble getting much out of the opening . To progress , Carlsen 's style became more universal , capable of handling all sorts of positions well . Carlsen opens with both 1.d4 and 1.e4 , as well as 1.c4 , and , on occasion , 1.Nf3 , thus making it harder for opponents to prepare against him . Evgeny Sveshnikov has criticised Carlsen 's opening play , claiming in a 2013 interview that without a more " scientific " approach to preparation , his " future doesn 't look so promising " . 
 Garry Kasparov , who coached Carlsen from 2009 to 2010 , said that Carlsen has a positional style similar to that of past world champions such as Anatoly Karpov , José Raúl Capablanca , and Vasily Smyslov , rather than the tactical style of Alexander Alekhine , Mikhail Tal , and Kasparov himself . According to Carlsen , however , he does not have any preferences in playing style . Kasparov said in 2013 that " Carlsen is a combination of Karpov [ and ] Fischer . He gets his positions [ and ] then never lets go of that bulldog bite . <unk> for opponents . " Carlsen has also stated that he follows in the traditions of Karpov and Fischer , but also mentions Reuben Fine as a player who " was doing in chess similar to what I am doing . " Anand has said of Carlsen : " The majority of ideas occur to him absolutely naturally . He 's also very flexible , he knows all the structures and he can play almost any position . ... Magnus can literally do almost everything . " Kasparov expressed similar sentiments : " [ Carlsen ] has the ability to correctly evaluate any position , which only Karpov could boast of before him . " In a 2012 interview , Vladimir Kramnik attributed much of Carlsen 's success against other top players to his " excellent physical shape " and his ability to avoid " psychological lapses " , which enables him to maintain a high standard of play over long games and at the end of tournaments , when the energy levels of others have dropped . Tyler Cowen gave a point of view on Carlsen 's playing style : " Carlsen is demonstrating one of his most feared qualities , namely his ' <unk> , ' to use a term coined for this purpose by Ken Regan . Using computer analysis , you can measure which players do the most to cause their opponents to make mistakes . Carlsen has the highest <unk> score by this metric , because his creative moves pressure the other player and open up a lot of room for mistakes . In contrast , a player such as Kramnik plays a high percentage of very accurate moves , and of course he is very strong , but those moves are in some way calmer and they are less likely to induce mistakes in response . " 
 Carlsen 's endgame prowess has been described as among the greatest in history . Jon <unk> , analysing several of Carlsen 's endgames from the 2012 London Classic ( in particular , his wins against McShane , Aronian , and Adams ) , described what he calls the " Carlsen effect " : 
 ... through the combined force of his skill and no less important his reputation , he drives his opponents into errors . ... He plays on for ever , calmly , methodically and , perhaps most importantly of all , without fear : calculating superbly , with very few outright mistakes and a good proportion of the " very best " moves . This makes him a monster and makes many opponents wilt . 
 = = Rating = = 
 = = = Rating achievements = = = 
 In the January 2006 FIDE list , at the age of 15 years , 32 days , he attained a <unk> Elo rating , which made Carlsen the youngest person to surpass 2600 Elo ( the record has since been broken by Wesley So , Wei Yi and John M. Burke ) . In the July 2007 FIDE list , at the age of 16 years , 213 days , Carlsen attained a 2710 Elo rating , which made him the youngest person to surpass 2700 Elo ( the record has since been broken by Wei Yi at the age of 15 years , 9 months ) . On 5 September 2008 , after winning round 4 in the Bilbao Grand Slam chess championship , Carlsen , just 17 years , 280 days old , briefly became No. 1 on the unofficial live ratings list . Carlsen 's September – October 2009 victory in the Nanjing Pearl tournament raised his FIDE rating to 2801 , making him at age 18 years , 336 days , the youngest player ever to break 2800 . The youngest before him was Vladimir Kramnik at age 25 . Before Carlsen , only Kasparov , Topalov , Kramnik , and Anand had achieved a 2800 + rating . After the Tal Memorial ( November 2009 ) he became No. 1 on the unofficial live chess rating list with his new peak rating of <unk> @.@ 7 , 0 @.@ 6 point over the No. 2 ranked player , Veselin Topalov . 
 The FIDE rankings from January 2010 , which took into account the 16 games played at the Tal Memorial and the London Chess Classic , were enough to raise Carlsen 's rating to <unk> . This meant that Carlsen started 2010 by being , at the age of 19 years , 32 days , the youngest ever world No. 1 , and also the first player from a Western nation to reach the top of the FIDE rating list since Bobby Fischer in 1971 . The press coverage of this feat included an interview and article in Time magazine . 
 The March 2010 FIDE rating list showed Carlsen with a new peak rating of <unk> , a figure that only Kasparov had bettered at that time . On the January 2013 FIDE rating list , Carlsen reached 2861 , thus surpassing Garry Kasparov 's 2851 record from July 1999 . On list from May 2014 , Carlsen achieved an all @-@ time high record of <unk> . 
 = = Head @-@ to @-@ head record versus selected grandmasters = = 
 ( Rapid , blitz and blindfold games not included ; listed as + wins − losses = draws as of 23 Jul 2016 . ) Players who have been undisputed World Champion in boldface 
 = = Notable games = = 
 All links in this section lead to an external site . 
 Carlsen – Garry Kasparov , Reykjavík Rapid ( 2004 ) , Queen 's Gambit Declined : Cambridge Springs Variation ( <unk> ) , ½ – ½ At the age of just 13 years , Carlsen had serious winning chances in a rapid game against Garry Kasparov , ranked No. 1 in the world at that time , and considered by many to be the greatest chess player of all time . 
 Carlsen – Veselin Topalov , M @-@ Tel Masters ( 2009 ) , Semi @-@ Slav Defense : General ( <unk> ) , 1 – 0 This was Carlsen 's first win against a 2800 + player . 
 Carlsen – Boris Gelfand , Tal Memorial ( 2011 ) , Slav Defense : Quiet Variation . <unk> Defense ( D12 ) , 1 – 0 The No. 1 Israeli player and future World Championship challenger creates a seemingly decisive rook invasion into White 's back rank , but Carlsen vanquishes his threats . Carlsen called it " one of the most interesting games I have played in recent times " . 
 Carlsen – Hikaru Nakamura , London Chess Classic ( 2011 ) , Italian Game : Classical Variation . <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , 1 – 0 Facing the No. 1 American player , Carlsen demolishes Black 's pawn structure . 
 Carlsen – Viswanathan Anand , Bilbao Masters ( 2012 ) , Sicilian Defense : Canal Attack . Main Line ( B52 ) , 1 – 0 Playing against the then World Champion in a game he considers one of the best in his career , Carlsen sacrifices a pawn to leave Black with a cramped position , leading to his resignation at move 30 . 
 Carlsen 's complete <unk> chess game collection can be downloaded from [ 1 ] 
 = = Beyond chess = = 
 Carlsen modelled for G @-@ Star Raw 's Autumn / Winter 2010 advertising campaign with actress Liv Tyler . The campaign was shot by Dutch film director and photographer Anton Corbijn . The campaign was coordinated with the RAW World Chess Challenge in New York , an event where Carlsen played an online team of global chess players who voted on moves suggested by three GMs : Maxime Vachier @-@ Lagrave , Hikaru Nakamura , and Judit Polgár . Carlsen , playing White , won in 43 moves . Film director J. J. Abrams offered Carlsen a role in the movie Star Trek Into Darkness as " a chess player from the future " , but he had to decline , unable to get a US work permit in time for shooting . In 2012 , Carlsen was featured in a 60 Minutes segment , and appeared as a guest on The Colbert Report . He was also interviewed by Rainn Wilson for <unk> . Carlsen was selected as one of the " sexiest men of 2013 " by Cosmopolitan . In August 2013 , Carlsen became an ambassador for Nordic Semiconductor . 
 As of 2012 , Carlsen is the only active chess professional with a full @-@ time manager . Espen Agdestein , brother of Carlsen 's former trainer Simen , and a FIDE Master and twice member of the Norwegian team at the Chess Olympiads , began working as an agent for Carlsen in late 2008 . His work consisted initially of finding sponsors and negotiating media contacts , but since 2011 , he has taken over management tasks formerly performed by Carlsen 's father Henrik . Carlsen reportedly earned roughly US $ 1 @.@ 2 million in 2012 , the bulk of which was from sponsorships . 
 In October 2013 , Carlsen started his majority @-@ owned company , Play Magnus AS . Based in Oslo , Norway , Play Magnus ' first product is an iOS app that allows a user to play a Magnus Carlsen @-@ tuned chess engine at 21 different ages ( from ages 5 to 25 ) . The chess engine was created using a database of thousands of Carlsen 's recorded games from the age of 10 . Carlsen 's goal is to use Play Magnus as a platform to encourage more people to play chess . 
 In 2008 during a Q & A session with <unk> , when Carlsen was asked whether he had a form of autism spectrum disorder , he replied " well , isn 't that obvious ? " In December 2013 , in an interview with Norwegian tabloid Verdens Gang , he clarified that he had meant " obviously not " , and said that he considers himself to have " normal social skills and to be functioning normally . " 
 In February 2014 , Carlsen appeared in G @-@ Star Raw 's Spring / Summer 2014 campaign along with actress and model Lily Cole . 
 = = Books and films = = 
 <unk> , O ; Carlsen , M. ( 2004 ) . <unk> <unk> med Magnus [ Learn Chess with Magnus ] . Gyldendal Norsk Forlag . ISBN 978 @-@ 82 @-@ 05 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 The Prince of Chess , a film about Magnus Carlsen ( 2005 ) . Directed by Øyvind <unk> . 
 Opedal , Hallgeir ( 2011 ) . <unk> <unk> . Magnus Carlsen : Verdens <unk> <unk> [ Smart Moves . Magnus Carlsen : The World 's Best Chess Player ] . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 82 @-@ 489 @-@ 1050 @-@ 3 
 <unk> , Adrian ; <unk> , Oleg . ( 2012 ) . Fighting Chess with Magnus Carlsen ( Progress in Chess ) . Edition Olms . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 283 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Crouch , Colin ( 2013 ) . Magnus Force : How Carlsen Beat Kasparov 's Record . Everyman Chess . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 133 @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , <unk> & Logothetis , <unk> ( 2013 ) . Carlsen 's assault on the throne . Quality Chess . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 22 @-@ 0 . 
 Magnus ( 2016 ) . Directed by Benjamin Ree . 
 = Louis Antoine de Saint @-@ Just = 
 Louis Antoine Léon de Saint @-@ Just ( French pronunciation : ​ [ sɛ ̃ <unk> ] ; 25 August 1767 – 28 July 1794 ) was a military and political leader during the French Revolution . The youngest of the deputies elected to the National Convention in 1792 , Saint @-@ Just rose quickly in their ranks and became a major leader of the government of the French First Republic . He spearheaded the movement to execute King Louis XVI and later drafted the radical French Constitution of 1793 . 
 He became a close friend of Maximilien Robespierre , and served with him as one of the commissioners of the powerful Committee of Public Safety . Dispatched as a commissar to the army during its rocky start in the French Revolutionary Wars , Saint @-@ Just imposed severe discipline , and he was credited by many for the army 's subsequent revival at the front . Back in Paris , he supervised the consolidation of Robespierre 's power through a ruthless and bloody program of intimidation . In his relatively brief time on the historical stage , he became the enduring public face of the Reign of Terror and was dubbed the " Angel of Death " by later writers . Saint @-@ Just organized the arrests and prosecutions of many of the most famous figures of the Revolution . 
 Saint @-@ Just was arrested in the violent episode of 9 Thermidor and executed the next day with Robespierre and their allies . In many histories of the Revolution , their deaths at the guillotine mark the end of the Reign of Terror . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Louis Antoine de Saint @-@ Just was born at <unk> in the former Nivernais province of central France . He was the eldest child of Louis Jean de Saint @-@ Just de <unk> ( 1716 – 1777 ) , a retired French cavalry officer , knight of the Order of Saint Louis , and of the 20 @-@ years younger Marie @-@ Anne <unk> ( 1736 – 1811 ) , the daughter of a notary . He had two younger sisters , born in 1768 and 1769 . The family later moved north and in 1776 settled in the village of Blérancourt in the former Picardy province , establishing themselves as a countryside noble family living out of the rents from their land . A year after the move , Louis Antoine 's father died leaving his mother with the three children . She saved diligently for her only son 's education , and in 1779 he was sent to the Oratorian school at Soissons . After a promising start , Saint @-@ Just acquired a reputation as a troublemaker , augmented by infamous stories ( almost certainly apocryphal ) of how he led a students ' rebellion and tried to burn down the school . Nonetheless , he earned his graduation in 1786 . 
 His restive nature , however , did not diminish . As a young man , Saint @-@ Just was " wild , handsome , [ and ] transgressive " . Well @-@ connected and popular , he showed a special affection toward a young woman of Blérancourt , Thérèse Gellé . She was the daughter of another wealthy notary , a powerful and autocratic figure in the town ; he was still an undistinguished adolescent . He is said to have proposed marriage to her ; she is said to have desired it . Though no hard evidence exists regarding their relationship , official records show that on 25 July 1786 , Thérèse was married to Emmanuel Thorin , the scion of a prominent local family . Saint @-@ Just was out of town and unaware of the event , and tradition portrays him as brokenhearted . Whatever his true state , it is known that a few weeks after the marriage he abruptly left home for Paris – without an announcement , but not without gathering up a pair of pistols and a good quantity of his mother 's silver . His venture turned short when his mother had him seized by police and sent to a reformatory ( maison de correction ) where he stayed from September 1786 to March 1787 . Chastened , Saint @-@ Just attempted to begin anew : he enrolled as a student at the School of Law , Reims University . After a year , however , he drifted away from law school and returned to his mother 's home in Blérancourt penniless , without any occupational prospects . 
 = = = Organt = = = 
 At a young age Saint @-@ Just had shown a fascination with literature , and during his stay at the reformatory he used his time to begin writing a lengthy poem . He published it anonymously more than two years later , in May 1789 , at the very outbreak of the Revolution . The 21 @-@ year @-@ old Saint @-@ Just thereby added his own touch to the social tumult of the times with Organt , poem in twenty cantos . The poem , a medieval epic fantasy , relates the quest of young Antoine Organt . It extols the virtues of primitive man , praising his <unk> and independence while blaming all present @-@ day troubles on modern inequalities of wealth and power . Written in a style mimicking Ariosto , it gave a juvenile foreshadowing of his own political extremism . Spiked with brutal satire and scandalous pornographic episodes , it also made unmistakable attacks upon the monarchy , the nobility , and the Church . 
 Contemporaries regarded Organt as something of a salacious novelty and it was quickly banned , but censors who tried to confiscate it discovered that few copies were available anywhere . It did not sell well and resulted in a financial loss for its author . The public 's taste for literature had changed in the prelude to the Revolution , and Saint @-@ Just 's taste changed with it : aside from a few pages of an unfinished novel found amidst his papers at the end of his life , Saint @-@ Just devoted his future writing entirely to undecorated essays of social and political theory . With his previous ambitions of literary and lawyerly fame unfulfilled , Saint @-@ Just directed his focus on the single goal of revolutionary command . 
 = = Early revolutionary career = = 
 Blérancourt 's traditional power structure was reshaped by the events of 1789 . The notary Gellé , previously an undisputed town leader , was challenged by a group of reformists who were led by several of Saint @-@ Just 's friends , including the husband of his sister Louise . Their attempts were not successful until 1790 when Blérancourt held its first open municipal elections . Mandated by the National Constituent Assembly , the new electoral structure allowed Saint @-@ Just 's friends to assume authority in the village as mayor , secretary , and , in the case of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , head of the local National Guard . The jobless Saint @-@ Just , despite not meeting the legal age and tax qualifications , was allowed to join the Guard . 
 Saint @-@ Just immediately exhibited the ruthless <unk> for which he would be famous . Within a few months he was the commanding officer , at the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel . At local meetings he moved attendees with his patriotic zeal and flair : in one much @-@ repeated story , Saint @-@ Just brought the town council to tears by thrusting his hand into the flame of a burning anti @-@ revolutionary pamphlet , swearing his devotion to the Republic . He had powerful allies when he sought to become a member of his district ’ s electoral assembly , and he initiated correspondence with well @-@ known leaders of the Revolution like Camille Desmoulins . In late 1790 , he wrote to Robespierre for the first time , asking him to consider a local petition . The letter was filled with the highest of praise , beginning : “ You , who uphold our tottering country against the torrent of despotism and intrigue ; you whom I know , as I know God , only through his miracles ... ” Through their correspondence , the two developed " a deep and mysterious friendship that would last until the day [ they ] died . " 
 = = = L 'Esprit de la Revolution = = = 
 While Saint @-@ Just waited for the next election , he composed an extensive work , L 'Esprit de la Revolution et de la constitution de France , published in the spring of 1791 . His writing style had shed all satire and now adopted the stern and moralizing tone of classical Romans so adored by French revolutionaries . It revealed an unexpectedly moderate set of principles deeply influenced by Montesquieu , and remained fully confined to a paradigm of constitutional monarchy . He expressed abhorrence at the violence in the Revolution thus far , and he disdained the character of those who partook in it as little more than " riotous slaves " . Instead , he heaped his praise upon the people 's representatives in the Legislative Assembly , whose sober virtue would guide the Revolution best . Spread out over five books , L 'Esprit de la Revolution is inconsistent in many of its assertions but still shows clearly that Saint @-@ Just no longer saw government as oppressive to man 's nature but necessary to its success : its ultimate object was to " edge society in the direction of the distant ideal . " 
 The new work , like its predecessor , attracted minimal readership . On 21 June 1791 , just days after it was published , all attention became focused on King Louis XVI 's ill @-@ fated flight to Varennes , and Saint @-@ Just 's theories about constitutional monarchy were made suddenly irrelevant . Yet the episode had another effect – it fostered a public anger toward the king which simmered all year until finally a Parisian mob attacked the Tuileries Palace on 10 August 1792 . In response , the Assembly declared itself ready to step down ahead of schedule and called for a new election , this one under universal male suffrage . The timing was excellent for Saint @-@ Just , who turned the legal age of twenty @-@ five before the end of the month . The fear inspired by the invasion of the Tuileries made most of his opponents retire from the scene , and Saint @-@ Just was elected as one of the deputies for the département of Aisne . He left for Paris to join the National Convention as its youngest member . 
 = = = Deputy to the Convention = = = 
 Among the deputies , Saint @-@ Just was watchful but interacted little at first . He joined the Parisian Jacobin Club but he remained aloof from Girondins and Montagnards alike . He waited until 13 November 1792 to give his first speech to the Convention , but when he did the effect was spectacular . What brought him to the lectern was the discussion over how to treat the king after Varennes . In dramatic contrast to the earlier speakers , Saint @-@ Just delivered a blazing condemnation of the king . He demanded that " Louis Capet " should be judged not as a king or even a citizen , but as a traitor , an enemy who deserves death . " As for me , " he declared , " I see no middle ground : this man must reign or die ! He oppressed a free nation ; he declared himself its enemy ; he abused the laws : he must die to assure the repose of the people , since it was in his mind to crush the people to assure his own . ” 
 The young deputy 's speech electrified the Convention . Saint @-@ Just was interrupted frequently by bursts of applause and towards the end of his speech he uttered his eerily universal observation , " No one can reign innocently . " Robespierre was particularly impressed – he spoke from the lectern the next day in terms almost identical to those of Saint @-@ Just , and their views became the official position of the Jacobins . By December , that position had become law : the king was taken to a trial before the Convention , sentenced to death , and executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793 . 
 = = Constitution of 1793 = = 
 Because the first French Constitution had included a role for the king , it was long since invalid and needed to be updated for the Republic . A large number of drafts had been circulating within the Convention since the king 's execution , and Saint @-@ Just submitted his own lengthy proposal on 24 April 1793 . His draft incorporated the most common assertions of the others : the right to vote , the right to petition , and equal eligibility for employment were among the basic principles that made his draft tenable . Where he stood apart from the rest was on the issue of elections . Saint @-@ Just dismissed all complex systems of voting and eligibility and supported only the classical style of a simple majority of citizens in a nationwide vote . Amid a flurry of proposals by other deputies , Saint @-@ Just held inflexibly to his " one man one vote " plan , and this conspicuous homage to Greco @-@ Roman traditions ( which were particularly prized and idealized in French culture during the Revolution ) enhanced his political cachet . When no plan gained enough votes to pass , a compromise was made which tasked a small body of deputies as official constitutional draftsmen , and Saint @-@ Just was among the five elected members . In recognition of the importance of their mission , the draftsmen were all added to the powerful new Committee of Public Safety . 
 The Convention had given the Committee extraordinary authority to provide for state security ever since the outbreak of the French Revolutionary War in early 1793 . Committee members were originally intended to serve for periods of only thirty days before replacements were elected , so they needed to work quickly . Saint @-@ Just took charge of the issue and led the development of the French Constitution of 1793 . Before the end of his first term , the new document was completed , submitted to the Convention , and ratified as law on 24 June 1793 . 
 The new constitution remained a showpiece for Saint @-@ Just but little more . However much he may have wanted to see it implemented , emergency measures for wartime were in effect . The war had called for ( or provided cover for ) a moratorium on constitutional democracy . It gave supreme power to the sitting Convention , with the Committee of Public Safety at the top of its administrative pyramid . Robespierre , with Saint @-@ Just 's assistance , fought vigorously to ensure that the government would remain under emergency measures – " revolutionary " – until victory . 
 = = Committee of Public Safety = = 
 = = = <unk> of the Girondins = = = 
 During the time that Saint @-@ Just was working on the constitution , dramatic political warfare was taking place . The sans @-@ culottes – deemed " the people " by many radicals , and represented by the Paris Commune – had grown antipathetic to the moderate Girondins and on 2 June 1793 , in a mass action supported by National Guardsmen , they surrounded the Convention and exacted the arrest of the Girondin deputies . The deputies – even the Montagnards , who had long enjoyed an informal alliance with the sans @-@ culottes – resented the intimidation but they were compelled to make some obeisance . The Girondin leader Jacques Pierre Brissot was indicted for treason and scheduled for trial , but the other <unk> were imprisoned ( or pursued ) without formal charges . The Convention debated their fate and the political disorder lasted for weeks . Saint @-@ Just had previously remained silent about the Girondins , but now clearly stood with Robespierre who had been thoroughly opposed to most of them for a long time . When the initial indictment by the Committee was served , it was Saint @-@ Just who delivered the report to the Convention . 
 In its secret negotiations , the Committee of Public Safety was initially unable to form a consensus concerning the jailed deputies , but as some Girondins fled to the provinces and attempted to incite an insurrection , its opinion hardened . By early July , Saint @-@ Just was able to address the Convention with a lengthy report in the name of the Committee , and his damning attack left no room for any further conciliation . The Girondins ' trials must proceed , he said , and any verdicts must be severe . The proceedings dragged on for months , but Brissot and twenty of his allies were eventually condemned and sent to the guillotine on 31 October 1793 . Saint @-@ Just used their situation to gain approval for intimidating new laws , culminating in the Law of Suspects ( 17 September 1793 ) which gave the Committee vast new powers of arrest and punishment . 
 = = Military commissar = = 
 Saint @-@ Just made the proposal that deputies from the Convention should directly oversee all military efforts , which was approved on 10 October 1793 . Amid worsening conditions at the front in the fall of that year , several deputies were sent to the critical area of Alsace to shore up the disintegrating Army of the Rhine . Results were not sufficiently forthcoming , so at the end of the month Saint @-@ Just himself was sent there along with an ally from the Convention , Philippe @-@ François @-@ Joseph Le Bas . The two men were charged with " extraordinary powers " to impose discipline and reorganize the troops . 
 From the start , Saint @-@ Just dominated the mission . He was relentless in demanding results from the commanders as well as sympathetic to the complaints of common soldiers . On his first day at the front , he issued a proclamation promising " examples of justice and severity as the Army has not yet witnessed . " Within a short time , many officers were dismissed and many more were executed by firing squad , including at least one general . The entire army was placed immediately under the harshest discipline . 
 Among soldiers and civilians alike , Saint @-@ Just repressed opponents of the Revolution but he did not agree to the mass executions ordered by some of the other deputies on the mission . He vetoed much of the deputies ' work and had many of them recalled to Paris . Local politicians were even more vulnerable to him : even the powerful Eulogius Schneider , the revolutionary leader of Alsace 's largest city and called the " Marat of Strasbourg " , was arrested by Saint @-@ Just 's orders and rapidly dispatched to the guillotine . Saint @-@ Just worked closely only with General Charles Pichegru , a reliable Jacobin whom he respected . Under Saint @-@ Just 's unblinking surveillance , Pichegru and General Lazare Hoche ably secured the frontier and began an invasion of the German Rhineland . 
 With the army revitalized , Saint @-@ Just returned briefly to Paris where his success was applauded . However , there was little time to celebrate . He was quickly sent back to the frontlines , this time in Belgium where the Army of the North was experiencing the same problems of discipline and organization . Again he delivered results ruthlessly and effectively , but after less than a month the mission was cut short . As Paris convulsed in political violence , his assistance was required by Robespierre . 
 = = President of the Convention = = 
 With the republican army advancing and the Girondins destroyed , the left @-@ wing Montagnards , led by the Jacobins and Robespierre , controlled the Convention . In these circumstances , on the first day of Ventôse in Year II of the Revolution ( 19 February 1794 ) , Saint @-@ Just was elected president of the National Convention . 
 With this new power he persuaded the chamber to pass the radical Ventôse Decrees , under which the régime would confiscate aristocratic émigré property and distribute it to needy sans @-@ culottes . But these acts of wealth redistribution , arguably the most revolutionary acts of the French Revolution , never went into operation . The Committee faltered in creating procedures for their enforcement , and the frantic pace of unfolding political events left them behind . 
 Opponents of the Jacobins saw the Ventôse Decrees as a cynical ploy to appeal to the militant extreme left . Sincere or not , Saint @-@ Just made impassioned arguments for them . One week after their adoption , Saint @-@ Just urged that the Decrees be exercised vigorously , and hailed them for ushering in a new era : " <unk> the poverty that dishonors a free state ; the property of patriots is sacred but the goods of conspirators are there for the wretched . The wretched are the powerful of the earth ; they have the right to speak as masters to the governments who neglect them . " 
 = = = Germinal = = = 
 As the spring of 1794 approached , the Committee of Public Safety , led by Robespierre , <unk> , Lebas and Saint @-@ Just , exercised near complete control over the government . Despite the vast reach of their powers , however , rivals and enemies remained . One of the <unk> problems , at least to Robespierre , came in the shape of the populist agitator Jacques Hébert , who discharged torrents of criticism against bourgeois Jacobinism in his newspaper , Le Père Duchesne . Ultra @-@ radical Hébertists in the Cordeliers Club undermined Jacobin efforts to court and manage the sans @-@ culottes , and the most extreme Hébertists even called openly for insurrection . 
 Saint @-@ Just , in his role as president of the Convention , announced unequivocally that " whoever vilified or attacked the dignity of the revolutionary government should be condemned to death " , and the Convention agreed in a vote on 13 Ventôse . Hébert and his closest associates were arrested the following day . Saint @-@ Just vowed , " No more pity , no weakness towards the guilty ... Henceforth the government will pardon no more crimes , " and on 4 Germinal ( 24 March 1794 ) , the Revolutionary Tribunal sent Hébert , <unk> , Vincent and most other prominent Hébertists to the guillotine . 
 The ongoing political combat – bloody enough since at least the time of the arrest of the Girondins to be known as the Reign of Terror – spread more and more widely . When the Hébertists fell , Robespierre felt compelled to eliminate his other rivals in the Cordeliers , starting with Fabre d <unk> and his close friend Georges Danton . These powerful deputies were difficult prey , but a financial scandal involving the French East India Company provided a " convenient pretext " . Robespierre again sent Saint @-@ Just to the Convention to deliver a Committee " report " ( 31 March 1794 ) in which he announced the arrest of Danton and " the last partisans of royalism " . After a tumultuous show @-@ trial , Fabre , Desmoulins , and other top supporters of Danton went to the scaffold with their leader on 16 Germinal ( 5 April 1794 ) . In his report , Saint @-@ Just had promised that this would be a " final cleansing " of the Republic 's enemies . 
 The violent removal of the Hébertists and <unk> provided only a mirage of stability for Saint @-@ Just and Robespierre . The deaths caused deep resentment and their absence only made it more difficult for the Jacobins to influence the dangerously unpredictable masses of sans @-@ culottes . This lack of support in the street would prove fatal during the events of Thermidor . 
 As the deliverer of Committee reports , Saint @-@ Just served as the public face of the Terror , and he became known widely as the " Angel of Death " . After the events of Germinal , Saint @-@ Just intensified his control over the state @-@ security apparatus . He created a new bureau of " general police " for the Committee of Public Safety which matched – and usurped – the powers that had been given officially to the Committee of General Security . Shortly after its establishment , however , administration of the new bureau passed to Robespierre when Saint @-@ Just left Paris once more for the front lines . 
 = = Last days = = 
 = = = Battle of Fleurus = = = 
 Sent back on mission to the army in Belgium , Saint @-@ Just again took supreme oversight of the Army of the North and contributed to the victory at Fleurus . This hotly contested battle on 26 June 1794 sent the Austrian army into retreat and marked the turning point in the War of the First Coalition . France would remain on the offensive until its eventual victory in 1797 . After his return from the battle , Saint @-@ Just was treated as a hero and " cheered from all sides . " 
 Back in Paris , Saint @-@ Just discovered that Robespierre 's political position had degraded significantly . As the Terror reached its apogee – the so @-@ called " Great Terror " – the danger of a counterstrike by his enemies became almost inevitable . Saint @-@ Just , however , remained unshakable in his alliance with Robespierre . The French victory at Fleurus , and others which followed , reduced the need for national security during the war which had been predicated as a justification for the Terror . " The excuse for the Terror was at an end . " Opponents of the Terror used Saint @-@ Just 's own words against him by demanding a full implementation of the constitution of 1793 . 
 With political combat reaching a fever pitch , the Committee introduced a bill to establish a newer version of the " Law of Suspects " – the Law of 22 Prairial . With it , a new category of " enemies of the people " was established in terms so vague that virtually anyone could be accused . Defendants were not permitted legal counsel and the Revolutionary Tribunal was instructed to impose no sentence other than death . The bill was swiftly shepherded into law by Robespierre , and although Saint @-@ Just was not directly involved in its composition , he was certainly supportive . The new statutes defined the Great Terror : in their first month , the average of executions in Paris rose from five per day to seventeen , soaring in the following month to twenty @-@ six . 
 The Law of Prairial was the breaking point for opponents of Robespierre . Resistance to the Terror spread throughout the Convention , and Saint @-@ Just was compelled to address the division . Barère and other <unk> have claimed that he proposed a dictatorship for Robespierre , but nonetheless some of them considered him to be redeemable , or at least useful – until he delivered his uncompromising public defence of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor ( 27 July 1794 ) . 
 = = = Thermidor = = = 
 On the dais , Saint @-@ Just declared the absolute necessity of current law , and conspiring deputies buzzed angrily as he spoke . Finally several of them physically shoved him away from the lectern , and each started his own address in which they called for the removal of Robespierre and all his supporters . Amid the uproar , recalled Barras , Saint @-@ Just " did not leave the platform , in spite of the interruptions which would have driven any one else away . He only came down a few steps , then mounted again , to continue his discourse proudly ... Motionless , unmoved , he seemed to defy everyone with his calm . " 
 Saint @-@ Just saved his dignity at the lectern but not his life . Rising in his support , Robespierre sputtered and lost his voice ; his brother Augustin , Philippe Lebas , and other key allies all tried to sway the deputies , but failed . The meeting ended with an order for their arrest . Saint @-@ Just , still on the platform , remained unmoved and " looked on contemptuously " at the scene . His confidence seemed validated when troops from the Paris Commune under Hanriot arrived to liberate them , but within hours the entire group was confined to the Hôtel de Ville . When soldiers finally broke inside , a number of the defeated Jacobins tried to commit suicide ; Saint @-@ Just stood beside Lebas who shot himself in the head . Any contemplation of his own suicide is unclear , but he alone emerged unruffled from the wild , violent final arrest – among the captured , " only St. Just , his hands bound but his head held high , was able to walk . " Robespierre , Saint @-@ Just and twenty of their allies were guillotined the next day , and Saint @-@ Just reputedly accepted his death with coolness and pride . At a last formality of identification , he gestured to a copy of the Constitution of 1793 and said , " I am the one who made that . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Other writings = = = 
 Throughout his lifetime , Saint @-@ Just continued to work on books and essays about the meaning of the Revolution , but he did not survive to see any of them published . They have been collected and edited in various Œuvres complètes . These include Organt , L 'Esprit de la Revolution , published speeches and legislative proposals , as well as military orders , notes , drafts , and private correspondence . 
 Many of Saint @-@ Just 's legislative proposals were compiled after his death to form an outline for a communal and egalitarian society – they were published as a single volume , Fragments sur les institutions <unk> . The proposals were far more radical than the constitution of 1793 , and identify closely with the legendarily fearsome traditions of ancient Sparta . Many of them are interpreted as proto @-@ socialist precepts : the overarching theme is equality , which Saint @-@ Just at one point summarizes as " Man must be independent ... There should be neither rich nor poor . " 
 = = = = De la Nature = = = = 
 Saint @-@ Just also composed a lengthy draft of his own philosophical views , De la Nature , which remained hidden in obscurity until its transcription by Albert <unk> in 1951 . <unk> first published this work in 1951 under the title " Un <unk> <unk> de Saint @-@ Just " in the Annales historiques de la révolution française , No. 124 . An expanded version is included in Alain Liénard 's Saint @-@ Just , théorie politique and later versions of Œuvres complètes . De la Nature outlines Saint @-@ Just 's ideas on the nature of society ; the actual date it was written is disputed , but the most agreed upon range is between 1791 and 1792 . 
 Based on the assumption that man is a social animal , Saint @-@ Just argues that in nature there is no need for contracts , legislation , or acts of force . These constructs only become necessary when a society is in need of moral regeneration and serve merely as unsatisfactory substitutes for the natural bonds of free people . Such constructs permit small groups to assume unwarranted powers which , according to Saint @-@ Just , leads to corruption within society . Because a return to the natural state is impossible , Saint @-@ Just argues for a government composed of the most educated members of society , who could be expected to share an understanding of the larger social good . Outside the government itself , Saint @-@ Just asserts there must be full equality between all men , including equal security in material possessions and personal independence . Property must be protected by the state but , in order to secure universal independence , all citizens ( including women ) must own property . 
 = = = = Posthumous publications = = = = 
 Saint @-@ Just , Fragments sur les institutions <unk> ( French ) 
 Saint @-@ Just , Théorie politique , edited by Alain Liénard , <unk> , Paris , 1976 . ( French ) 
 = = = = Complete collections = = = = 
 Œuvres de Saint @-@ Just , <unk> d 'une notice historique sur sa vie edited by Adolphe <unk> , Paris , 1834 . ( French ) 
 Œuvres complètes de Saint @-@ Just in two volumes edited by Charles <unk> , Paris , 1908 . ( French ) 
 Œuvres <unk> , with introduction by Jean <unk> , Paris , 1946 . ( French ) 
 Œuvres complètes , edited by Michèle Duval , Paris , 1984 . ( French ) 
 Œuvres complètes , edited by Anne <unk> and Miguel <unk> , Paris , 2004 . ( French ) 
 = = = Character = = = 
 Ambitious and active @-@ minded , Saint @-@ Just worked urgently and tirelessly towards his goals : " For <unk> there is no rest but in the tomb . " He was repeatedly described by contemporaries as arrogant , believing himself to be a skilled leader and orator as well as having proper revolutionary character . This self @-@ assurance manifested itself in a superiority complex , and he always “ made it clear … that he considered himself to be in charge and that his will was law . ” Camille Desmoulins once wrote of Saint @-@ Just , " He carries his head like a sacred host . " 
 Saint @-@ Just 's rise to power wrought a remarkable change in his personality . <unk> and passionate in his youth , Saint @-@ Just quickly became focused , " tyrannical and <unk> thorough . " He became " the ice @-@ cold ideologist of republican purity , " " as inaccessible as stone to all the warm passions . " A measure of his change can be inferred from the experience of Thérèse Gellé , who is known to have left her husband and taken up residence in a Parisian neighborhood near Saint @-@ Just in late 1793 . Saint @-@ Just – who had already developed something of a relationship , tepid but potentially expedient , with the sister of his colleague Lebas – refused to see her . <unk> stayed there for over a year , returning to Blérancourt only after Saint @-@ Just was dead . No record exists of any exchanges they might have had , but Saint @-@ Just is known to have written to a friend complaining impatiently about the rumors connecting him to " citizen Thorin " . 
 In his public speaking , Saint @-@ Just was even more daring and outspoken than his mentor Robespierre . Regarding France 's internal strife , he spared few : “ You have to punish not only the traitors , but even those who are indifferent ; you have to punish whoever is passive in the republic , and who does nothing for it . ” He thought the only way to create a true republic was to rid it of enemies , to enforce the “ complete destruction of its opposite . ” Regarding the war , he declared without regret to the Convention , “ The vessel of the Revolution can arrive in port only on a sea reddened with torrents of blood . ” He urged the deputies to embrace the notion that “ a nation generates itself only upon heaps of corpses . ” 
 Despite his flaws , Saint @-@ Just is often accorded respect for the strength of his convictions . Although his words and actions may be viewed as reprehensible , his commitment to them is rarely questioned : he was " implacable but sincere " . Like Robespierre , he was incorruptible in the sense that he exhibited no attraction to material benefits but devoted himself entirely to the advancement of a political agenda . 
 = = = = Camus and Saint @-@ Just = = = = 
 In Albert Camus 's The Rebel ( 1951 ) , Saint @-@ Just is discussed extensively in the context of an analysis of rebellion and man 's progression towards enlightenment and freedom . Camus identifies Saint @-@ Just 's successful argument for the execution of Louis XVI as the moment of death for monarchical divine right , a Nietzschean Twilight of the Idols . Saint @-@ Just 's dedication to " the sovereignty of the people and the sacred power of laws " is described as " a source of absolutism " and indeed " the new God " . His kind of " deification of the political " is examined as the source of the creeping totalitarianism which grew so powerfully in Camus ' own lifetime . 
 = = = = In popular culture = = = = 
 Representations of Saint @-@ Just include those found in the novel <unk> ( 1832 ) by Alfred de Vigny , and in the plays Danton 's Death ( 1835 , by Georg Büchner ) and Poor <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , ou Le dîner de <unk> , 1956 , by Jean Anouilh ) . In film , Saint @-@ Just has been portrayed by Abel Gance in Napoléon ( 1927 ) ; Jess Barker in Reign of Terror ( 1949 ) ; Bogusław Linda in Danton ( 1983 ) ; and Christopher Thompson in La Révolution française ( 1989 ) . Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> plays a surreal caricature of Saint @-@ Just in Jean @-@ Luc Godard 's Week End ( 1967 ) . Saint @-@ Just is the main character in the fantasy novel Light from Aphelion : Rising from Dust ( 2016 , by Martine Carlsson ) . 
 = Feeling This = 
 " Feeling This " is a song recorded by American rock band Blink @-@ 182 for their eponymously titled fifth studio album ( 2003 ) . The song was released as the lead single from Blink @-@ 182 on October 2 , 2003 through Geffen Records . It was written by guitarist Tom DeLonge , bassist Mark Hoppus , and drummer Travis Barker , and was produced and mixed by Jerry Finn . The song originated on the first day of producing the album . Its lyrics are purely sexual in nature ; the band attempted to juxtapose lust and passion between verses and choruses , thematically connected with a wistful , regretful tone . 
 The song 's composition contains elements of spoken word in the verses and a Latin @-@ inspired backbeat in the chorus , and the song ends in a melodic , harmonized duet split between DeLonge and Hoppus . Elements of the song were inspired by rock groups Led Zeppelin and the Beach Boys . The song 's music video , photographed by David LaChapelle , depicts a dystopian correctional facility that is overtaken by its inmates . An early version of the song , erroneously titled " Action " , was released on the soundtrack for the video game Madden NFL 2004 . 
 " Feeling This " received critical acclaim and the song peaked to number two on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart in late 2003 . It was also a top 20 hit in the United Kingdom and Australia . The digital single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 2005 . Blink @-@ 182 has performed " Feeling This " in a number of live appearances , including on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Feeling This " was the first track that was recorded for Blink @-@ 182 in early 2003 . On the first day of pre @-@ production on the album , bassist Mark Hoppus asked an engineer to explain Pro Tools to him , as it was the first time the band would record their music digitally . He began recording guitar and bass parts and experimenting with the software . When guitarist Tom DeLonge and drummer Travis Barker arrived , they too began adding new tracks to the project . The song was written in one day . " I think if I sit there and try to analyze everything , what would be cool here or there , I just feel like I get so far away from what I would do , and I think your gut instinct is usually the best thing , " said Barker at the time . 
 The lyrics were written with Hoppus and DeLonge going into separate rooms — Hoppus writing the choruses and DeLonge writing the verses . The two had not spoken to each other about the lyrics ahead of time , and it turned out that the two had both written about sex . When put together , the song represents the lustful side of sex during the verses , the passionate side in the bridge and the romantic side in the chorus , creating a juxtaposition between both voices . It has been interpreted as a description for failed romance , one that " illustrates a scenario of lust , ambivalence and regret . " For Barker , the song 's drum track was " super in respect to John Bonham . [ ... ] We were kind of messing around with the verse . It ’ s like , ' Well , I want to do a four @-@ bar drum intro and just see how it works for the song . ' And we never second @-@ guessed it . We were like , ' That sounds rad . ' " 
 According to engineer Ryan Hewitt , the track contains " four distinct drum sounds created by old school tape editing . " The song was recorded " part @-@ by @-@ part , committing to different sounds by changing relative levels , EQ , and compression throughout , " and the engineers would slightly move microphones used to record Barker 's drum kit to tailor the natural ambience of the home it was recorded in . Upon playback of a rough mix of the song , the engineer automated the music to fade at the song 's conclusion , but mistakenly forgot to do the same for the vocal tracks . Hoppus , who had been listening to the Beach Boys at the time , liked the a cappella interplay of their voices . All agreed to keep it in the final version of the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is composed in the key of E major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 173 beats per minute . The vocal range spans from E3 to B4 . 
 " Feeling This " opens with flanged drums . Although computer technology offered it during the album ’ s production , according to Hoppus , the band opted to produce the effect " the old school way " , opting for two tape machines . Originally taking root as a faster @-@ paced drum ' n ' bass @-@ inspired track , Barker imitated that genre 's groove on open hi @-@ hats . The influence of John Bonham is most explicit in the song 's first few seconds , in which Barker performs eighth @-@ note triplets on his bass drum , much like the Led Zeppelin song " Good Times Bad Times " ( 1969 ) . Following a sample from Captain America ( 1990 ) — " Get ready for action ! — the song moves into a " stabbing guitar rhythm " over the verses , which are " half @-@ barked " and contain delivery reminiscent of hip @-@ hop . The " harmony @-@ rich " chorus of the song , which contains the refrain " Fate fell short this time , smile fades in the summer / Place your hand in mine , I 'll leave when I wanna " , is replete with a " syncopated Latin @-@ flavored backbeat . " In the chorus , Barker plays a cowbell , which he initially included as a joke , believing Hoppus and DeLonge would " hate it . " 
 The song is particularly memorable for a section of the chorus of the song ( right before the bridge begins ) , in which guitarist Tom DeLonge sings the vocals loudly and off @-@ key . According to the liner notes for Blink @-@ 182 , DeLonge stated that the recording was done in a 30 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) living room at the home previously mentioned , with microphones 10 to 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) away . The end of the song is a melodic duet between the band 's two vocalists , both singing conflicting but harmonizing parts . 
 = = Release = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 first performed " Feeling This " alongside other new songs from Blink @-@ 182 during their performances at the 2003 Reading and Leeds festivals . The band picked " Feeling This " as the first single because they felt it representative of the transition they had undergone since their fourth studio album , Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( 2001 ) . A slightly different version of the song had been released previously as part of the soundtrack for the video game Madden NFL 2004 under the erroneous title " Action " . Barker explained in an interview that " ' Action ' just sounded kind of dorky to us . Like we would always call it ' Feeling This ' and then someone at our label , I think , like wrote it as ' Action ' one time and sent out singles to people . And it was always supposed to be ' Feeling This ' . " 
 To promote Blink @-@ 182 , the group performed " Feeling This " , as well as their past hit " Dammit " on Total Request Live on November 11 , 2003 , and on the late @-@ night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! in November 26 , 2003 . Richard Cheese covered the song on their 2004 album I 'd Like a Virgin . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Feeling This " debuted at number 40 on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart on October 18 , 2003 , jumping to number 13 in its second week , which was at that time the fourth @-@ biggest move in the history of that chart . The song moved upwards on the chart over the following weeks , eventually achieving a peak of number two on November 29 , 2003 . It remained at number two for two more weeks before dropping to number three , after which it continued dropping before exiting the top 20 on February 21 , 2004 . In total , it spent nine weeks on the chart . It spent eight weeks on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , which acts as an extension to the Billboard Hot 100 chart ; it peaked at number two on December 20 , 2003 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Feeling This " debuted at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart for the week ending date November 30 , 2003 . It dropped to number 35 the following week before exiting the chart on December 28 ; in all , it spent ten weeks on the chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Feeling This " received favorable reviews from music critics . Kelefa Sanneh , writing for The New York Times felt the song was an " appealing hybrid , " while noting the growing popularity of emo could have influenced the " more anguished " tone . Greg Kot of Entertainment Weekly praised the vocal harmonies , calling them reminiscent of Queen . Joshua Klein of The Washington Post similarly complimented the interplay between DeLonge and Hoppus and its " multiple @-@ perspective portrait of first love . " Andy Doerschuk of Drum ! praised Barker 's " fat , syncopated beat " and noted elements of Bonham as well as James Brown 's drummers . Rolling Stone 's Jenny Eliscu made note of its " catchy hooks " , while Stephen Thompson , writing for The A.V. Club , considered it among many songs on the album that were " straightforwardly conventional . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video follows students at a dystopian @-@ based correctional facility who rebel and take over the establishment , intertwined with shots of the band performing outside the prison in a cage , providing a " soundtrack to the chaos . " Hoppus described their idea for the facility : " It 's kind of a combination of prep school and reform school , and it 's very repressed and kids are being held down . There is a lot of authority and a lot of strict regiment , and the kids lash out and take over the school and destroy the place . " The band 's main goal for the video was for it to resemble an art piece , much in the same way they viewed the production of the album , to keep in line with tone . To this end , they enlisted director David LaChapelle . LaChapelle 's input — which " ranges from an evil prison warden cracking a whip at marching school kids to escapees ripping their uniforms and doing acrobatic moves down the hallways " — was regarded by the band as " completely wacked out and twisted , which is exactly what we love . " 
 In the narrative , the boys and girls are separated at the school and sexually repressed , and release their energies when they meet between a glass window . The clip was shot at the abandoned Lincoln Heights Jail north of downtown Los Angeles . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 All songs written and composed by Tom DeLonge , Mark Hoppus and Travis Barker , except where noted . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Blink @-@ 182 , Geffen Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Scipione Piattoli = 
 Scipione Piattoli ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; November 10 , 1749 – April 12 , 1809 ) was an Italian Catholic priest — a Piarist — an educator , writer and political activist , and a major figure of the Enlightenment in Poland . After ten years as a professor at the University of Modena in Italy , he migrated to the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , where he became associated with several magnate families — the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . He was a member of the Duchess Dorothea von Medem 's court in Courland ( Lithuania ) and of King Stanisław August Poniatowski 's court in the Commonwealth . 
 Piattoli was politically active in Warsaw during and after the Four @-@ Year Sejm ( 1788 – 92 ) . He served as intermediary between the reformist Patriotic Party and King Stanisław August Poniatowski , and as an aide to the King ( 1789 – 93 ) . He is best remembered for his participation in drafting the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 , a milestone act in the history of Polish political legislation . He was one of the organizers of the Kościuszko Insurrection against Russian influence in 1794 , which was the last armed struggle to be held under the banners of the Commonwealth . After the Third Partition of Poland in 1795 , Piattoli was interned by the Austrians for several years , together with another Polish activist of the Constitution movement , Hugo Kołłątaj . Freed in 1800 , he worked several years with Polish and Russian statesman Prince Adam Jerzy Czartoryski in the service of Russia , before retiring to Courland . 
 Piattoli was an inspiration to Leo Tolstoy , who based the figure of the Abbé Morio in War and Peace ( 1869 ) on him . He is also one of the figures immortalized in Jan Matejko 's 1891 painting , Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . In his 1980 ten @-@ page entry on Piattoli in the Polish Biographical Dictionary , historian Emanuel Rostworowski notes that , “ despite two Italian monographs ( by A.D. Ancon and G. <unk> ) ” , Piattoli still awaits a definitive biography . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scipione Piattoli was born in Florence on November 10 , 1749 , to a family of painters ( father , Gaetano Piattoli ; mother , Maria Anna <unk> ; brother , Giuseppe Piattoli ) . 
 In 1763 he joined the Piarist order , taking the name Urban . Some historians have questioned whether he ever took Holy Orders ; in any case he was known for a rather secular lifestyle . He taught rhetoric in Piarist schools in <unk> and <unk> , and got his doctorate from the University of Florence . From 1772 to 1782 he was a professor at the University of Modena , teaching religious history and Greek . Soon he became involved in political activism , and in 1774 he published ( anonymously ) a brochure titled <unk> intorno al <unk> del <unk> , which focused on the issue of hygiene and burials near churches . Also in 1774 he received permission to leave the Piarists , and resumed using the name Scipione . He would , however , keep and use the title of " the priest " ( l <unk> ) for most of his life . By the turn of the decade , Piattoli found himself in a faction that was losing in the politics of Modena , and decided to move , giving up his professorship in 1782 . 
 Piattoli arrived in the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth that year , as a tutor for the sons of Piotr Potocki , a member of the magnate Potocki family . It was said in a contemporary account that his entire material wealth at that time was composed of a “ sizable library ” . Piattoli ended his service with the Potocki family around 1784 due to personal disagreements with Pelagia Potocka and Maria Radziwiłł . In the meantime , he became associated with the Lubomirski family — Izabela Lubomirska in particular — and through them befriended Stanisław Kostka Potocki and Grzegorz <unk> . Through Potocki and <unk> he became a member of the Society for Elementary Books in 1784 . In the Society he was tasked with writing a textbook on the history of science . Around that time he was also active in Warsaw freemasonry . 
 Piattoli traveled through Europe in the retinue of the Lubomirski family , including Izabela , and as a tutor of young Henryk Lubomirski . During that time he developed extensive contacts at various European courts in Courland , Austria ( Vienna ) , Italy ( Turin ) and France ( Paris ) . During his three @-@ year stay in the <unk> ' Parisian residence , he was in touch with many important men of the Age of Enlightenment . He met — often through another <unk> , Filippo Mazzei — Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Thomas Jefferson , the Marquis de Lafayette , Luigi <unk> , Girolamo Lucchesini , and the Marquis de Condorcet . He also corresponded with J. G. Herder . In Poland , he developed close contacts with Ignacy Potocki and Julian Ursyn <unk> . From 1787 he also tutored Adam Jerzy Czartoryski , later an important politician in the Russian Empire , on whom Piattoli would retain significant influence . 
 = = Reformer and constitution drafter = = 
 Piattoli developed contacts with notable figures on the Polish political scene , initially from the group opposed to the royal faction . By the end of his stay in Paris , he likely became a supporter of reforms in France and Poland , and begun taking his first serious steps in political activism , through the involvement in the <unk> , a group of magnates planning a ( never realized ) confederacy . He became a foreign member of the Société des Amis des Noirs . 
 Through his freemason contacts with Pierre Maurice <unk> , Piattoli won the confidence of Poland 's King Stanisław August Poniatowski , becoming his agent in Paris and , by the end of 1789 , his private secretary and librarian , although without any official title . Acting as a sort of cultural aide , Piattoli , who had strong ties to the reformist and often anti @-@ royal opposition , became an important link between the reformers — Ignacy Potocki in particular — and the king . In the words of a Swedish diplomat , L. Engstrom , he was “ like a tireless spring ” , constantly mediating between the two factions . 
 Due to his association with the reformers , in conservative Rome he became infamous as a staunch supporter of revolutionary ideals and was accused of " <unk> " . Vatican diplomats criticized the king for hiring such a " revolutionary " , but the king defended Piattoli quite vividly . In any case , many such claims were exaggerations or rumours spread by his political enemies : according to one such rumour , Piattoli was alleged to incite crowds in France to kill the king . In reality , Piattoli supported the <unk> of the French Revolution 's early stages , but more in the direction of peaceful transformation into a constitutional republic than the <unk> excesses . 
 Between 1790 and 1792 , Piattoli was sent on several sensitive diplomatic missions for the king to Berlin and other places . He was involved in the negotiations of the Polish @-@ Prussian alliance . He collaborated with Ignacy Potocki , helping draft many texts connected with Potocki 's work in the Sejm , the legislature of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . He was also an active supporter of Poniatowski 's plan for a hereditary succession . Piattoli , as Poniatowski 's secretary and a resident of the Royal Castle in Warsaw , has been credited with winning the King over to the idea of social reforms and with playing a part in the drafting of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . The exact nature of Piattoli 's role in regard to the Constitution remains uncertain ; modern historians disagree to what degree he was an executor , a mediator , or an initiator . He played a role in convincing the King to collaborate with the leaders of the Patriotic Party on drafting a constitution . He might have prepared or expanded drafts of the document , based on discussions among the principal authors , including the King , Hugo Kołłątaj ( another politically active Roman Catholic priest ) and Ignacy Potocki . At a minimum , he seems to have helped catalyze the process . Historian Emanuel Rostworowski describes him as a vital secretary @-@ editor , who certainly participated in related discussions and influenced both Potocki and the king , and calls Piattoli 's quarters in the Royal Palace a “ creche ” of the constitution . Piattoli was , finally , involved in the final preparations for the vote that took place during the Sejm session on May 3 . 
 Later that month he became a founder of the Friends of the Constitution . He was active in various political causes and worked closely with other key figures in Poland such as Hugo Kołłątaj . He became a trusted adviser to Dorothea von Medem , Duchess of Courland . He supported reforms to improve the status of the burghers and Jews . 
 = = Final years = = 
 During the War in Defence of the Constitution in 1792 , Piattoli found himself on another diplomatic mission to Dresden , where he stayed after the Commonwealth 's defeat at the hands of Imperial Russia resulted in the Second Partition of Poland . In Dresden and nearby Leipzig , Piattoli was active in the circles of Polish patriotic emigres , who included Potocki and <unk> . In 1793 he officially parted ways with Poniatowski , receiving a letter in which he was discharged from his service . In 1794 he was involved in the preparations for the Kościuszko Insurrection against Russian influence , and in negotiations with the newly republican France , in which Polish reformists proposed an alliance with France , promising to turn Poland into a second republic in Europe . At the same time , he was involved in much more conservative negotiations with Russians . 
 In July 1794 he and several other activists were exiled from Leipzig , and Piattoli was soon arrested by the Austrian authorities . After the failure of the Kościuszko Insurrection later in 1794 , many prisoners were set free , but Piattoli was kept imprisoned , together with Kołłątaj , as the Russian authorities insisted that the two were “ extremely dangerous ” . Hence , even after the final Partitions of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795 , Piattoli was kept interned in Prague by the Austrian Empire authorities until 1800 , despite requests for his release from Poniatowski and even Napoleon Bonaparte . His release in 1800 seems to have been the result of efforts of the Czartoryski family and Duchess Dorothea . 
 After his release he returned to Dorothea 's Courland court , where he served as a tutor for her daughter . Around 1803 he began cooperating with Adam Jerzy Czartoryski , who was now working for the Russian authorities . Around that time , he and Czartoryski authored a plan for a European federal organization of states intended to prevent armed conflicts and to maintain perpetual peace . Piattoli , through Czartoryski , briefly worked in the diplomatic service and administration of the Russians , too . Like Czartoryski , Piattoli tried to push for a more lenient and friendly attitude towards Poland at the Russian court , but with little success . 
 In 1807 Scipione Piattoli returned to Courland . There he finally settled , abandoned the priesthood , and married one of the ladies of the court . In his final years in Courland he was involved with Courland 's educational system , and hoped to pursue some scientific studies , a lifelong dream for which he never found enough time . He died of a lung infection in Altenburg on April 12 , 1809 . He was buried in a park in <unk> . 
 = = Remembrance = = 
 Piattoli was an inspiration to Leo Tolstoy , who based the figure of the Abbé Morio in War and Peace ( 1869 ) on him . He is also one of the figures immortalized in Jan Matejko 's 1891 painting , Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . In his 1980 ten @-@ page entry on Piattoli in the Polish Biographical Dictionary , historian Emanuel Rostworowski notes that , “ despite two Italian monographs ( by A.D. Ancon and G. <unk> ) ” , Piattoli still awaits a definitive biography . 
 = Sudirman = 
 General of the Army Raden <unk> ( Perfected Spelling : Sudirman ; 24 January 1916 – 29 January 1950 ) was a high @-@ ranking Indonesian military officer during the Indonesian National Revolution . The first commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Indonesian Armed Forces , he continues to be widely respected in the country . 
 Born in Purbalingga , Dutch East Indies , Sudirman moved to Cilacap in 1916 and was raised by his uncle . A diligent student at a Muhammadiyah @-@ run school , he became respected within the community for his devotion to Islam . After dropping out of teacher 's college , in 1936 he began working as a teacher , and later headmaster , at a Muhammadiyah @-@ run elementary school . After the Japanese occupied the Indies in 1942 , Sudirman continued to teach , before joining the Japanese @-@ sponsored Defenders of the Homeland as a battalion commander in Banyumas in 1944 . In this position he put down a rebellion by his fellow soldiers , but was later interned in Bogor . After Indonesia proclaimed its independence on 17 August 1945 , Sudirman led a break @-@ out then went to Jakarta to meet President Sukarno . Tasked with overseeing the surrender of Japanese soldiers in Banyumas , he established a division of the People 's Safety Body there . On 12 November 1945 , at an election to decide the military 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief in Yogyakarta , Sudirman was chosen over Oerip Soemohardjo in a close vote . While waiting to be confirmed , Sudirman ordered an assault on British and Dutch forces in Ambarawa . The ensuing battle and British withdrawal strengthened Sudirman 's popular support , and he was ultimately confirmed on 18 December . 
 During the following three years Sudirman saw negotiations with the returning Dutch colonial forces fail , first after the Linggadjati Agreement – which Sudirman participated in drafting – and then the Renville Agreement ; he was also faced with internal dissent , including a 1948 coup d 'état attempt . He later blamed these issues for his tuberculosis , which led to his right lung being collapsed in November 1948 . On 19 December 1948 , several days after Sudirman 's release from the hospital , the Dutch launched an assault on the capital . Sudirman and a small contingent escaped Dutch forces and left the city , making their headquarters at Sobo , near Mount Lawu . There Sudirman commanded military activities throughout Java , including a show of force in Yogyakarta on 1 March 1949 . When the Dutch began withdrawing , in July 1949 Sudirman was recalled to Yogyakarta and forbidden to fight further . In late 1949 Sudirman 's tuberculosis relapsed , and he retired to Magelang , where he died slightly more than a month after the Dutch recognised Indonesia 's independence . He is buried at Semaki Heroes ' Cemetery in Yogyakarta . 
 Sudirman 's death was grieved throughout Indonesia , with flags flown at half @-@ mast and thousands gathering to see his funeral convoy and procession . He continues to be highly respected in Indonesia . His guerrilla campaign has been credited with developing the army 's esprit de corps , and the 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) long route he took must be followed by Indonesian cadets before graduation . Sudirman featured prominently on the 1968 series of rupiah banknotes , and has numerous streets , museums , and monuments named after him . On 10 December 1964 he was declared a National Hero of Indonesia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sudirman was born to Karsid <unk> ( father ) and Siyem while they lived with Siyem 's sister Tarsem , one of three women married to the sub @-@ district head Raden Cokrosunaryo , in Rembang , <unk> <unk> , Purbalingga , Dutch East Indies . According to the family 's records , Sudirman – named by his uncle – was born on a pon Sunday in the month of <unk> in the Javanese calendar ; the Indonesian government later established 24 January 1916 as Sudirman 's birthday . As Cokrosunaryo was in a better financial situation , he adopted Sudirman and gave him the title Raden , reserved for Javanese nobility ; however , Sudirman was not told that Cokrosunaryo was not his birth father until he was eighteen . When Cokrosunaryo retired from his position as chief in late 1916 , Sudirman went with the family to <unk> , Cilacap , where he was raised . In Cilacap Karsid and Siyem had another son , Muhammad <unk> . Karsid died when Sudirman was six , at which time Siyem left the boys with her brother @-@ in @-@ law and went back to her village at Parakan <unk> , <unk> . 
 Sudirman was raised with stories of heroic deeds and taught the etiquette and ways of the priyayi , or noble caste , as well as the work ethic and simplicity of the wong <unk> , or commoners . For his religious education , he studied Islam under Kyai Hajji <unk> with his brother ; Sudirman was a religious child , and always prayed on time . He was soon entrusted with performing both the adhan and <unk> , or calls to prayer . When he was seven years old , Sudirman was enrolled at a school for natives ( <unk> <unk> school ) , where he was an average student . The family , although it had enough to live by , was not rich . During his tenure as sub @-@ district head , Cokrosunaryo had not accumulated much wealth , and in Cilacap he became a distributor of Singer sewing machines . 
 In his fifth year of school , Sudirman asked to leave his studies , concerned with the ridicule he faced at the government @-@ run school ; this request was at first refused , but Sudirman was transferred to a junior high school run by Taman Siswa in his seventh year of school . In his eighth year , Sudirman transferred to Wirotomo Junior High School after the Taman Siswa School was found to be unregistered and closed under the Wild School Ordinance . Many of Sudirman 's teachers at Wirotomo were Indonesian nationalists , which influenced his views of the Dutch colonists . Sudirman studied diligently at school ; his teacher <unk> <unk> later recalled that Sudirman would already be studying second @-@ term lessons while the class was still in term one . Although he performed poorly in Javanese calligraphy , Sudirman was strong in mathematics , science , and writing in both Dutch and Indonesian . Sudirman also became more religious under the guidance of his teacher Raden Mohamad <unk> ; his classmates named him " hajji " because of his devotion to his prayers , and Sudirman took up preaching to other students . Aside from his studies and religious activities , Sudirman also served in the school 's musical troupe and on the football team , on which he was a defender . Although Cokrosunaryo 's death in 1934 left the family poor , Sudirman was allowed to continue his studies without paying until he graduated later that year ; after his step @-@ father 's death , Sudirman also devoted more time to studying the Sunnah and prayer . By age 19 , Sudirman had become a pupil teacher at Wirotomo . 
 While at Wirotomo Sudirman was a member of the Wirotomo Student Union , drama club , and band . He helped establish a branch of the <unk> Wathan , an organisation similar to the Boy Scouts , which was run by the Islamic establishment Muhammadiyah . Sudirman became the leader of the Cilacap division after graduating from Wirotomo ; he was tasked with deciding and planning his groups ' activities . He emphasised the need for religious studies , insisting that the contingents from Cilacap attend Muhammadiyah conferences throughout Java . He taught the younger members about the history of Islam and the importance of morality , while with older members he enforced near @-@ military discipline . 
 = = Teaching = = 
 After graduating from Wirotomo , Sudirman spent a year at a Muhammadiyah @-@ run teacher 's college in Surakarta , but later dropped out owing to a lack of funds . In 1936 he returned to Cilacap to teach at a Muhammadiyah @-@ run elementary school , having been trained by his teachers at Wirotomo ; that year he married Alfiah , a former schoolmate and the daughter of the rich batik merchant Raden <unk> . After the marriage Sudirman lived at his father @-@ in @-@ law 's house in Cilacap so he could save money for his own home . The couple went on to have three sons , Ahmad <unk> , Muhammad Teguh Bambang <unk> , and <unk> Effendi , and four daughters , Didi <unk> , Didi <unk> , Didi <unk> , and Titi <unk> <unk> . 
 As a teacher , Sudirman taught his students lessons on morality using examples from the lives of the prophets and traditional wayang stories . One of his students later recalled that Sudirman was an even @-@ handed and patient teacher who would mix humour and nationalism in his lessons ; this made him popular with the students . A hard @-@ working teacher despite poor pay , within several years Sudirman had become headmaster despite not having a teacher 's certificate . As a result , his monthly wages quadrupled from three gulden to twelve and a half . As headmaster , Sudirman worked on numerous administrative duties , including finding middle ground between feuding teachers . A coworker later recalled that Sudirman was a moderate , democratic leader . He was also active in fundraising , both for the needs of his school and the construction of others . 
 During this time Sudirman also continued to serve as a member of the Muhammadiyah Youth Group . Within the group he was known as a keen negotiator and mediator , working to resolve issues between members ; he also preached at the local mosque . He was elected as Chair of the Banyumas District of the Muhammadiyah Youth Group at the end of 1937 . In this role he enacted policies facilitating members ' studies and activities , both religious and secular . He was later put in charge of Youth Group activities throughout Central Java and spent much of his free time travelling and preaching Islam , putting an emphasis on self @-@ awareness . Alfiah was also active in Muhammadiyah @-@ sponsored activities through the group 's branch for women , <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Japanese occupation = = 
 When World War II broke out in Europe , it was expected that the Japanese , who had already made aggressive moves against mainland China , would try to invade the Indies . In response , the Dutch colonial government – which had previously limited military training for native Indonesians – began teaching the populace how to deal with air raids . To co @-@ ordinate the preparations , the Dutch formed Air Raid Preparation teams . Sudirman , respected in the community , was asked to lead the Cilacap chapter . Aside from teaching local citizens the safety procedures for dealing with an air raid , Sudirman established <unk> throughout the area . He and the Dutch would also have passing aircraft drop materials to simulate a bombing run ; this was intended to improve response time . 
 After the Japanese began occupying the Indies in early 1942 , winning several battles against Dutch and Dutch @-@ trained forces of the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army ( Koninklijk Nederlands Indisch Leger , or KNIL ) , on 9 March 1942 Governor @-@ General Tjarda van Starkenborgh Stachouwer and head of the KNIL General Hein ter Poorten capitulated . This brought drastic changes in the governance of the archipelago and reduced the quality of life for non @-@ Japanese in the Indies , many of whom suffered from widespread human rights violations at the hands of the Japanese . In Cilacap , Sudirman 's school had been closed and turned into a military outpost ; this was part of a widespread effort to close private schools . After Sudirman convinced the Japanese to reopen the school , he and the other teachers were forced to use substandard supplies . Sudirman was also involved in several social and humanitarian organisations during this period , including as chair of the Indonesian People 's Cooperation . This brought him greater recognition among the people of Cilacap . 
 In early 1944 , after a year as a representative at the Japanese @-@ run regency council board ( Syu <unk> ) , Sudirman was asked to join the Defenders of the Homeland ( Pembela Tanah Air , or PETA ) ; the Japanese occupation government had established PETA in October 1943 to help repel any Allied invasion , and were focused on recruiting younger men , those who had " not yet been ' contaminated ' " by Dutch rule . After a few days of hesitance , caused in part by a knee injury he had occurred as a youth , Sudirman agreed to begin training in Bogor . Owing to his standing in the community , Sudirman was made a commander ( <unk> ) and trained with other persons of that rank . Trained by Japanese officers and soldiers , the cadets were armed with confiscated Dutch equipment . After four months of training Sudirman was put in charge of the battalion stationed at Kroya , Banyumas , Central Java , not far from Cilacap . 
 Sudirman 's time as a PETA commander passed uneventfully until 21 April 1945 , when PETA troops under the command of Kusaeri began to rebel against the Japanese . Ordered to stop the rebellion , Sudirman agreed to do so only if the PETA rebels would not be harmed , and places harbouring them not razed ; this condition was accepted by the Japanese commander , and Sudirman and his troops began searching for the rebels . Although Kusaeri 's men initially shot at the commander , after Sudirman used a loudspeaker to tell them they would not be harmed , they backed down . Kusaeri surrendered on 25 April . This garnered support for Sudirman within the occupation forces , although several high @-@ ranking Japanese officers expressed concern over Sudirman 's support for Indonesian independence . Sudirman and his men were soon sent to a camp in Bogor , ostensibly for training ; however , they were tasked with hard labour as a way to prevent a further uprising , and rumours circulated that the PETA officers would be killed . 
 = = National revolution = = 
 = = = Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief = = = 
 After news of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki reached the Indies in early August 1945 , followed by the proclamation of Indonesian independence on 17 August , it was evident that Japanese control was weakening . Sudirman led a break out from the camp in Bogor . Although his fellow internees wanted to attack the Japanese soldiers , Sudirman convinced them against it . After ordering the others to their hometowns , Sudirman made his way to Jakarta and met with President Sukarno , who asked him to lead resistance against Japanese forces in the city . Unfamiliar with Jakarta , Sudirman refused , instead offering to lead forces in Kroya . He left for his former command on 19 August 1945 . At the same time , Allied forces were in the process of retaking the Indonesian archipelago for the Netherlands . The first British forces arrived on 8 September 1945 . 
 In late August , Sukarno established the People 's Safety Body ( Badan Keamanan Rakjat , or BKR ) , which united troops from the former PETA , Heihō , and KNIL . The BKR served mostly as a police organisation , partly because the political leadership were intent on using diplomacy to garner international recognition of the new country and partly to avoid appearing overly aggressive to the Japanese forces still in the archipelago . Sudirman and several of his fellow PETA soldiers formed a BKR branch in Banyumas in late August , after stopping at Kroya and discovering that his battalion had been disbanded . In a meeting with the Japanese commander for the region , Saburo Tamura , and the resident of Banyumas , <unk> , Sudirman and Iskak <unk> forced the Japanese to surrender and hand over their weapons while a crowd of armed Indonesians encircled the Japanese camp . Many of these weapons were later used by Sudirman 's BKR unit , making it one of the best equipped in the country ; surplus weapons were distributed to other battalions . 
 As the newly independent nation did not yet have a professional military , on 5 October 1945 Sukarno passed a decree establishing the People 's Security Army ( Tentara <unk> Rakjat or TKR , now known as the Tentara Nasional Indonesia ) . Most officers were former KNIL officers , while rank @-@ and @-@ file soldiers were mostly PETA and Heihō . As the decreed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Armed Forces , Soeprijadi , failed to come forward , chief of staff Lieutenant General Oerip Soemohardjo served as an interim leader . That October British @-@ led forces , tasked with disarming Japanese troops and repatriating Dutch prisoners of war , arrived in Semarang , then made their way south to Magelang . When the British began rearming repatriated Dutch prisoners and seemed to be preparing a military base in Magelang , Sudirman – now a colonel – sent some of his troops under Lieutenant Colonel Isdiman to drive them away ; the mission was successful , and the European soldiers withdrew to Ambarawa , midway between Magelang and Semarang . On 20 October Sudirman was put in command of the Fifth Division , after Oerip began dividing Java into different military commands . 
 On 12 November 1945 , at the first general meeting of Army leadership , Sudirman was elected leader of the Army following two deadlocked votes . In the third round , Oerip had 21 votes to Sudirman 's 22 ; the division commanders from Sumatra voted unanimously for Sudirman and swayed the ballot in his favour . Sudirman , aged 29 at the time , was surprised at his selection and offered to relinquish the leadership position to Oerip , but the meeting did not allow it . Oerip himself , who had lost control of the meeting prior to the vote , was glad to no longer be in charge of the entire Army . Sudirman kept Oerip to serve as chief of staff under him . In accordance with his new role , Sudirman was promoted to general . After the meeting , Sudirman returned to Banyumas to await confirmation as leader of the TKR and began developing strategies on how repel Allied advances . The Indonesians feared that the Dutch , through the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration ( Nederlandsch Indië Civil <unk> , or NICA ) , would attempt to retake the archipelago ; soldiers of the Dutch @-@ British alliance had landed in Java in September , and a large battle had occurred in Surabaya during late October and early November . This instability , as well as Sukarno 's uncertainty about Sudirman 's qualifications , led to a delay in Sudirman 's confirmation . 
 While waiting for his appointment to be confirmed , in late November Sudirman ordered the Fifth Division to attack Allied forces stationed in Ambarawa , once again with Isdiman in charge ; the city was considered strategically important owing to its military barracks and training facilities dating from the colonial period . This assault was countered by an air strike and the use of tanks , which forced the division to retreat ; Isdiman died in the battle , killed by a strafing P @-@ 51 Mustang Sudirman then led the Division in another assault against Allied forces ; the Indonesian troops were armed with a variety of weapons , ranging from bamboo spears and confiscated katanas to rifles , while the British were armed with modern equipment . Sudirman led from the front , wielding a katana . The Allies , whose air support had been cut off when guerrilla soldiers attacked <unk> Airfield in Semarang , were forced onto the defensive and holed up in Willem Fortress . On 12 December Sudirman led a four @-@ day siege , which resulted in the Allied force withdrawing to Semarang . 
 The Battle of Ambarawa brought Sudirman greater attention at a national level , and generally silenced whispers that he was unfit for military command because of his lack of military experience and previous employment as a schoolteacher . Ultimately , Sudirman was chosen as his loyalty was undoubted , while Oerip 's former pledge of loyalty to the Dutch led to him being viewed with suspicion . Sudirman was confirmed as commander @-@ in @-@ chief on 18 December 1945 . He was replaced as head of the Fifth Division by Colonel <unk> , and began to focus on strategic problems . This was done partly by establishing a board of advisors , which gave the general advice on both political and military issues . Oerip handled many of the military matters . 
 Together , Sudirman and Oerip were able to reduce the differences and mistrust between former KNIL and PETA troops , although some troops were reluctant to be subordinated to a central command , instead choosing to follow their popularly @-@ selected battalion commanders . The government renamed the Army twice in January 1946 , first to the Peoples ' Salvation Army ( Tentara <unk> Rakjat ) , then to the Army of the Republic of Indonesia ( Tentara <unk> Indonesia , or TRI ) . This was followed by the formal establishment of a navy and air force in early 1946 . In the meantime , the Indonesian government had moved from Jakarta – now under Dutch control – to Yogyakarta in January ; delegates led by Prime Minister Sutan Sjahrir spent much of April and May unsuccessfully negotiating for Dutch recognition of Indonesian sovereignty . On 25 May Sudirman was reconfirmed as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the expanded military , after its reorganisation . At the ceremony , Sudirman swore to protect the republic " until he shed his last drop of blood . " 
 The leftist Minister of Defence Amir Sjarifuddin , who had received greater power in the reorganisation , began collecting socialist and communist troops under his direct control , as well as leftist paramilitary units ( laskar ) that were funded by and loyal to the various political parties . The minister instituted political education programmes in the army , which were meant to spread leftist ideology . This use of the military for political <unk> disappointed both Sudirman and Oerip , who were at the time busy ensuring equal treatment for soldiers from different military backgrounds . However , rumours among the populace had spread that Sudirman was preparing for a coup d 'état ; although an attempt did occur in early July 1946 , Sudirman 's role , if any , is not certain . In July Sudirman addressed these rumours through a speech broadcast on Radio Republik Indonesia ( RRI ) , stating that he , like all Indonesians , was a servant of the State , and that , if he were offered the presidency , he would refuse it . In his later career he stated that the military had no place in politics , and vice versa . 
 = = = Negotiations with the Dutch = = = 
 Meanwhile , Sjahrir continued to work on negotiations with the Allied forces . On 7 October 1946 , Sjahrir and the former Dutch Prime Minister , Wim Schermerhorn , agreed to work towards a ceasefire . The discussions were to be moderated by the British diplomat Lord <unk> and involved Sudirman . He took a specially commissioned train to Jakarta , departing on 20 October . However , he ordered it to return to Yogyakarta when Dutch troops refused to allow him and his men to enter the city with their weapons , feeling that such an order violated his sense of honour ; the Dutch apologised , construing the events as a misunderstanding . Sudirman took another train in late October , arriving at Gambir Station in Jakarta on 1 November , where he was greeted by large crowds . The discussions in Jakarta resulted in the drafting of the Linggadjati Agreement on 15 November ; the agreement was ratified on 25 March 1947 , despite heavy opposition from Indonesian nationalists . Sudirman was vocally against the agreement , which he found to be detrimental to Indonesian interests , but considered himself obliged to follow his orders . 
 In early 1947 , with the Linggadjati Agreement granting relative peace , Sudirman began work on consolidating the TKR with various laskar . As part of a committee , Sudirman began reorganising the military ; they reached an agreement in May 1947 , and on 3 June 1947 the Indonesian National Armed Forces ( Tentara Nasional Indonesia , or TNI ) was formalised ; it consisted of TKR forces and various laskar groups , which Sudirman had included only after realising the extent of their manipulation by the political parties . However , the ceasefire obtained through the Linggadjati Agreement was not long lasting . On 21 July 1947 the Dutch forces – which had occupied areas left by the British during their withdrawal – launched Operation Product , and quickly gained control of large swaths of Java and Sumatra ; the national government in Yogyakarta remained untouched . Sudirman called the army to fight , using the code " Ibu Pertiwi is calling ! Ibu Pertiwi is calling ! " , and later delivered several speeches over RRI in an unsuccessful attempt to encourage soldiers to fight against the Dutch . However , the Indonesian soldiers were unprepared and their lines crumbled quickly . 
 Pressured by the United Nations , which had looked at the situation in the former East Indies with disdain , on 29 August 1947 the Dutch established the Van Mook Line , which divided Dutch and Indonesian @-@ controlled areas . Along this line a ceasefire was called . Sudirman recalled the Indonesian guerrillas hiding in Dutch @-@ held lands , ordering them to return to Indonesian @-@ held areas . To keep their spirits up , he referred to the withdrawal as a <unk> , reminiscent of Muhammad 's migration to Medina in 622 AD , implying that they would return . Over 35 @,@ 000 troops left western Java at this order , travelling to Yogyakarta by train and ship . This boundary was formalised by the Renville Agreement on 17 January 1948 ; among the signatories was Amir Sjarifuddin , by then also serving as prime minister . Meanwhile , Sjarifuddin began rationalising the army , cutting back on the number of troops . At the time the regular army consisted of 350 @,@ 000 men , with a further 470 @,@ 000 in the laskar . 
 In this programme , by presidential decree Sudirman was no longer commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the military starting on 2 January 1948 . He was demoted to lieutenant general , while Chief of the Air Force <unk> <unk> was intended to be commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Shortly afterwards , Sjarifuddin was ousted in a vote of no confidence for his involvement in the Renville Agreement , and the new prime minister , Mohammad Hatta , worked to implement the rationalisation programme . This led to a several months @-@ long debate between pro- and anti @-@ rationalisation groups . Sudirman served as a rallying point and driving force for soldiers , including numerous older commanders , who were against the programme . Sudirman was formally reinstated on 1 June 1946 , upon which he effectively rescinded the command to rationalise . He chose Colonel Abdul Haris Nasution as his deputy , but remained a lieutenant general . 
 As the rationalisation programme was winding down , Sjarifuddin began gathering soldiers from the Socialist Party , Communist Party , and members of the All Indonesia Centre of Labour Organizations for a would @-@ be proletarian revolution in Madiun , East Java , which occurred on 18 September 1948 . Sudirman , ill at the time , sent Nasution to deal with the revolution ; Sudirman also sent two other officers as peace feelers before the attacks . Although the revolutionary leader Muso was amenable to peace , Nasution and his soldiers had quashed the uprising by 30 September . Sudirman visited Madiun not long after the battle , later telling his wife that he had been unable to sleep there for all the bloodshed . 
 This rebellion , and ongoing political instability , sapped Sudirman of much of his remaining strength . On 5 October 1948 , after celebrations of the military 's third anniversary , Sudirman collapsed . After being examined by numerous doctors , he was diagnosed with tuberculosis . At the end of the month he was brought to <unk> <unk> Hospital and had his right lung collapsed , in hope that it would stop the spread of the disease . During his time at the hospital , he delegated most of his duties to Nasution . However , the two continued to discuss plans for the war against the Dutch , and Sudirman continued to receive status reports . They agreed that guerrilla warfare , which had been applied on raids into Dutch @-@ held territory since May , would be best suited for their needs ; towards this goal , Sudirman issued a general order on 11 November , with Nasution handling most of the preparations . Sudirman was released from the hospital on 28 November 1948 . 
 Although he continued to issue orders , Sudirman only returned to active duty on 17 December ; in light of the growing tension between the Dutch and Indonesian forces , he ordered the TNI soldiers to maintain an increased level of awareness ; he also ordered large @-@ scale military exercises as a in an unsuccessful attempt to convince the Dutch that the TNI was too strong to attack . Two days later , after a nighttime announcement that they were no longer bound by the Renville Agreement , on 19 December the Dutch launched Operation Kraai , an attempt to capture the capital at Yogyakarta . By 07 : 10 local time ( UTC + 7 ) , the airfield at <unk> had been taken by paratroopers under the command of Captain <unk> . Sudirman , upon becoming aware of the attack , had an order read over RRI which stated that soldiers should fight as they had been trained – as guerrillas . 
 He then went to the Presidential Palace in central Yogyakarta , where the government leaders were discussing an ultimatum which stated that the city would be stormed unless the leadership accepted colonial rule . Sudirman urged that the president and vice @-@ president leave the city and fight as guerrillas , actions they had previously promised , but this suggestion was rejected . Although his doctors forbade it , Sudirman received permission from Sukarno to join his men . The central government evacuated to the Kraton <unk> <unk> at the urging of Sultan Hamengkubuwana IX , but were captured and exiled . 
 = = = Guerrilla warfare = = = 
 Sudirman first went to his official home and gathered sensitive documents , which he burned to prevent them falling into Dutch hands . His convoy , consisting of Sudirman , a small group of soldiers , and his personal doctor , then made their way south , towards <unk> , Parangtritis , Bantul . There they were received by the district head at 18 : 00 . After several days in <unk> , during which time Sudirman sent undercover troops into the Dutch @-@ occupied city for reconnaissance and to ask his wife for jewellery to sell and help fund the guerrilla movement , he and his group travelled east along the south coast to Wonogiri . Before the Dutch attack it had already been decided that Sudirman would be able to better control the guerrillas from eastern Java , where there were still several bases . Meanwhile , Alfiah and the children were ordered to stay in the Kraton . Aware that he was being pursued by the Dutch , on 23 December Sudirman ordered his troops to continue to <unk> , where they stopped at the home of Mahfuz , a kyai and Islamic religious leader ; Mahfuz gave the general a cane to help him walk , although Sudirman was , and continued to be , carried on a litter . They then continued east . 
 Outside of Trenggalek , Sudirman and his group were stopped by TNI soldiers belonging to 102 Battalion . These soldiers , who were told that Sudirman – who was in civilian clothes and unrecognised by the troops holding them – was a prisoner , refused to allow the group to pass ; they were suspicious as Sudirman 's convoy carried maps and notes on Indonesian military movements , things which may have belonged to spies . When the group 's commander , Major Zainal <unk> , came to check the situation , he realised that Sudirman was with them and apologised . Told that his men were right to guard their areas diligently , <unk> called a post in Kediri and ordered that a car be sent to pick up the general and his troops . After a time in Kediri , they continued further east ; as they left the city on 24 December , Dutch planes attacked Kediri . 
 The constant Dutch attacks led Sudirman , perhaps at the suggestion of one of his men , to change his clothes and give his old outfit to one of his soldiers , Second Lieutenant <unk> <unk> – who bore a resemblance to Sudirman . <unk> was ordered to head south with a large company of soldiers , remove the clothes , and furtively return north , while Sudirman waited in <unk> . The diversion was successful , and on 27 December Sudirman and his men made their way to Jambu Village . Arriving on 9 January 1949 , Sudirman met with several government ministers who had not been present during the Dutch attack on Yogyakarta : <unk> , Susanto <unk> , and <unk> . With the politicians , Sudirman made his way to <unk> , ordering some of his soldiers to linger back and hold off Dutch ground troops . In <unk> , they held for over a week . However , on 21 January , when Dutch forces approached the village , Sudirman and his entourage were forced to leave , fighting their way out in heavy rain . 
 Sudirman and his troops continued to make their way through the jungles and forests , eventually arriving at Sobo , near Mount Lawu , on 18 February . During the journey , Sudirman used a radio set to convey orders to local TNI troops if he believed that the region was secure . Feeling weaker because of the physical hardships he had faced , including travelling through the forests and a lack of food , and believing the area to be safe , Sudirman decided that Sobo would serve as his guerrilla headquarters . The local commander , Lieutenant Colonel <unk> Hutagalung , served as his go @-@ between with the other TNI leaders . Aware that international opinion , which was beginning to condemn Dutch actions in Indonesia , could bring Indonesia greater recognition , Sudirman and Hutagalung discussed possible terms of action , before agreeing on a large @-@ scale assault . Meanwhile , the Dutch began to spread propaganda claiming that they had captured Sudirman ; this claim was intended to break the morale of the guerrillas . 
 Sudirman ordered Hutagalung to begin planning a full @-@ scale assault , in which TNI soldiers – in uniform – would attack the Dutch and show their strength in front of foreign reporters and United Nations investigative teams . Hutagalung , together with officers under his commander Colonel Bambang <unk> and government officials under Governor Wongsonegoro , spent several days discussing ways to ensure the attack could be successful . The discussion may have resulted in the General Offensive of 1 March 1949 , which saw TNI soldiers attack Dutch outposts throughout central Java . Troops under Lieutenant Colonel Suharto retook Yogyakarta for six hours before withdrawing , a successful show of force which caused the Dutch to lose face internationally ; they had previously declared the TNI eradicated . However , who truly ordered the offensive remains uncertain : Suharto and Hamengkubuwana IX claimed responsibility , while Bambang <unk> 's brother reportedly overheard him ordering the assault . 
 Under increased pressure from the United Nations , on 7 May 1949 Dutch – Indonesian negotiations resulted in the Roem @-@ <unk> Agreement , a controversial measure which guaranteed Dutch withdrawal from Yogyakarta , among other points ; The Dutch withdrawal commenced in late June , and the Indonesian leadership began returning to Yogyakarta from exile in early July . Sukarno ordered Sudirman to return to Yogyakarta as well , but Sudirman refused to let the Dutch withdraw without a fight ; he considered the TNI to now be strong enough to defeat the dispirited Dutch . Although he was promised medicine and support in Yogyakarta , Sudirman refused to return to the political leadership , whom he considered acquiescent to the Dutch . He only agreed to return after receiving a letter , although sources disagree on its sender . On 10 July , Sudirman and his group returned to Yogyakarta , where they were greeted by thousands of civilians and warmly received by the political elite there . The reporter Rosihan Anwar , who was present when the letter was delivered , wrote in 1973 that " Sudirman had to return to Yogyakarta to avoid any perceptions of a rift among the republic 's top leaders " . 
 = = Post @-@ war and death = = 
 In early August Sudirman approached Sukarno and asked him to continue the guerrilla war ; Sudirman did not expect the Dutch to abide by the Roem @-@ <unk> Agreement , based on the failings of the previous agreements . Sukarno disagreed , which was a blow to Sudirman . When Sudirman threatened to resign his post , blaming the government 's inconsistency for his tuberculosis and Oerip 's death in November 1948 , Sukarno threatened to do so as well . As he thought that such a resignation would have a destabilising effect , Sudirman stayed his hand , and a Java @-@ wide cease fire came into effect on 11 August 1949 . 
 Continuing to suffer from tuberculosis , Sudirman was checked into <unk> <unk> hospital , where he stayed until October , when he was transferred to a sanatorium in nearby <unk> . As a result of his illness , Sudirman made few public appearances . Sudirman was transferred to a home in Magelang in December . In the meantime , the Indonesian and Dutch governments held a several @-@ month @-@ long conference which resulted in Dutch recognition of Indonesian sovereignty on 27 December 1949 . Sudirman , despite his illness , was reconfirmed that day as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the TNI , now serving the newly established Republic of the United States of Indonesia . On 28 December , Jakarta once again became the nation 's capital . 
 Sudirman died in Magelang at 18 : 30 on 29 January 1950 ; this was reported in a special broadcast over RRI . Upon receiving news of his death , the Sudirman family home received numerous visitors , including the entirety of the 9th Brigade , which was stationed nearby . The following morning Sudirman 's body was brought to Yogyakarta . As the funeral convoy passed , led by four tanks and consisting of eighty motor vehicles , thousands of mourners stood at the sides of the streets . The convoy was organised by members of the 9th Brigade . 
 The viewing , held at the Great Mosque of Yogyakarta in the afternoon , was attended by numerous political and military elite from both Indonesia and foreign countries ; this included Prime Minister Abdul Halim , Minister of Defence Hamengkubuwana IX , Minister of Health Johannes <unk> , Minister of Justice Abdoel <unk> <unk> , Minister of Information Arnold <unk> , Chief of the Air Force <unk> <unk> , Colonel Paku Alam VIII , and Suharto . The viewing was closed with a 24 @-@ gun salute . Sudirman 's body was brought to Semaki Heroes ' Cemetery on foot , with a crowd of mourners 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) long trailing behind . He was interred next to Oerip , after another gun salute . His wife filled in the first scoop of dirt , followed by the government ministers . The national government ordered flags to be flown at half @-@ mast throughout the country , and Sudirman was promoted to full general . Major @-@ General Tahi Bonar Simatupang was selected as the new leader of the armed forces . Sudirman 's memoirs were published later that year ; a series of his speeches were also published in 1970 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 An obituary in the Yogyakarta @-@ based daily <unk> Rakjat wrote that Indonesia had lost a " brave and true hero " . Colonel Paku Alam VIII , in charge of the Yogyakarta area , told the national news agency Antara that all Indonesians , especially the armed forces , had " lost a father figure who did uncountable deeds for his country " . The Indonesian Muslim leader Haji Abdul Malik Karim Amrullah , writing soon after Sudirman 's death , described the general as a " symbol of the strength of spirit shown by Indonesian heroes , " while the Muslim politician Muhammad Isa <unk> described Sudirman as a " son of the revolution , as he was born in the revolution , and raised by the revolution . " In a radio speech , Hatta described Sudirman as impossible to control and hard @-@ headed , but ultimately intent on doing what was right for the country ; Hatta noted that , although Sudirman often did not like the government 's position , he would generally obey his orders . However , Hamengkubuwana IX noted that KNIL trained soldiers such as Abdul Haris Nasution and Tahi Bonar Simatupang were disappointed in Sudirman because of his background and poor knowledge of military techniques . 
 Modern opinions in Indonesia tend to be laudatory . <unk> , a professor of history at Yogyakarta State University , writes that Sudirman was as lively a speaker as Sukarno , who was known for his fiery speeches , and a devoted , incorruptible leader . The Indonesian historian and former Minister of Education and Culture Nugroho Notosusanto described Sudirman as " his only idol " , citing the general 's guerrilla period as the origin of the army 's esprit de corps . The general 's guerrilla campaign is emphasised in biographies of him because , during that period , the army had a greater role than the exiled political leadership ; beginning in the 1970s , all military cadets had to retrace the 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) long route prior to graduation , a " pilgrimage " meant to instill a sense of struggle . Sudirman 's grave is also a pilgrimage destination , both for the military and general public . According to Katharine McGregor of the University of Melbourne , the Indonesian military has elevated Sudirman to a saint @-@ like status . 
 Sudirman received numerous awards from the national government posthumously , including the Bintang Sakti , Bintang Gerilya , Bintang Mahaputera Adipurna , Bintang Mahaputera <unk> , Bintang Republik Indonesia Adipurna , and Bintang Republik Indonesia <unk> . On 10 December 1964 Sudirman was declared a National Hero of Indonesia by Presidential Decree 314 of 1964 . Oerip was declared a National Hero by the same decree . He was promoted to General of the Army in 1997 . 
 According to McGregor , the military increasingly used Sudirman 's image as a symbol of leadership as it gained more political power . An image of Sudirman was featured on every denomination of the 1968 series of rupiah . He featured as a major character in several war films , including Janur Kuning ( Yellow Coconut Leaf ; 1979 ) and Serangan Fajar ( Dawn Attack ; 1982 ) . 
 Numerous museums have been dedicated to Sudirman . His childhood home in Purbalingga is now the Sudirman Museum , while his official home in Yogyakarta is now the <unk> Museum to General Sudirman . The house in Magelang where he died is also now the Sudirman Museum , established on 18 May 1967 and containing artefacts belonging to the general . Other museums , including the Monument <unk> Kembali in Yogyakarta and the <unk> Museum in Jakarta have rooms dedicated to him . Numerous streets are named after Sudirman , including a major street in Jakarta ; McGregor states that nearly every city in the country has a General Sudirman Street . Statues and monuments to him are spread throughout the archipelago , most of which were built after 1970 . Jenderal <unk> University in Banyumas , established in 1963 , is named after him . 
