 Sunset Overdrive was developed by Insomniac Games , which had mainly developed games for PlayStation consoles . Drew Murray and Marcus Smith , the game 's creative directors , began brainstorming Sunset Overdrive after the completion of Resistance 3 in 2011 . They presented their ideas to Insomniac 's owners and CEO Ted Price , outlining a project that would borrow influences from the documentary Hyena Men of Kenya , Tank Girl comics , the novel I Am Legend , the British television series The Young Ones , Halloween masks from the 1960s , and Lego . The initial presentation failed to generate interest , but Murray and Smith were asked to come back a week later to explain how the game would actually be played . In their second presentation , they explained their vision of a game featuring fast @-@ paced action that would be " the rock and roll end times " . According to Smith this confused some team members who thought that they were making Brütal Legend . 
 The team received approval after their second presentation . After Sunset Overdrive was green @-@ lit internally , Insomniac had to pitch it to a number of publishers . Insomniac wanted to retain brand ownership , causing some firms to opt out of publishing it . Murray and Smith traveled to Microsoft Studios a number of times to pitch the game to them . The main pitch began with the playing of " Kick Out the Jams " by MC5 , and ended with Murray : " ... on top of a chair , mimicking how the game was going to play , and the last minute heroics . " Microsoft was eager to work with Insomniac and agreed to fund and publish the game . The team originally did not want to make it a console exclusive , but they were impressed by Microsoft 's philosophy toward the development of Xbox One , and the capabilities of Xbox Live features , which allow the initiation of a " two @-@ way dialogue " with players . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Choosing a name for the game was the first thing the team did before starting development . They decided on the name Sunset Overdrive because they felt it was unique , and captured the feeling of the " grindhouse " from the 1970s . The project was originally conceived as an open world survival game similar to DayZ . The initial version of the game did not feature the traversal system , nor the unusual weapons included in the final version , and was described as " grounded " by Murray . In this version , players were tasked with scavenging resources during daytime , and defending their base at night . This later evolved to become the game 's cooperative multiplayer mode . It employed the animation model from Insomniac 's previous game , Fuse . The direction of the game changed after the team watched a video based on Gorillaz , and Murray gave up the idea of a realistic survival game . He then asked the team to start prototyping ideas for a game that they thought would work . Some team members came up with the idea of having skateboarding elements in the game , which led the development team to start working and experimenting with a new traversal system . In hindsight , Murray described the shift in focus as an " organic , evolutionary process " . As the game 's development progressed , the team began to draw on elements from other video game franchises such as Prince of Persia , Jet Set Radio , and Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater , and put the emphasis on momentum . 
 In 2013 , the team had released Fuse , which was a critical and commercial failure . The team now reflected on the reasons for its poor reception , and felt that they should go back to Insomniac 's roots — developing unusual titles with vibrant visuals — instead of another dark shooter like Fuse . They also thought that Sunset Overdrive 's stylization should reflect the personality of the company , and that building a world that has a sense of humor and irreverence was something the team was eager to do . Ted Price , CEO of Insomniac Games , described it as a game Insomniac had wanted to develop for a long time . The game 's producer , Bryan <unk> , called it : " ... the game [ they 've ] been meaning to make for 20 years . " Microsoft supported it and shared the same vision and the idea of creating something new . 
 According to Price , Insomniac wanted to " break the rules of shooters " . He felt that the last generation of shooters had established a formula of staying behind cover for defense , and leaning out from it to attack . He wanted to change that pattern with Sunset Overdrive by encouraging players to attack in an aggressive manner and to focus on momentum . To accomplish this , the team developed a city that supported parkour and fast movements . They also hoped that with the introduction of a new generation of video game consoles , they could establish a new standard for the genre which would " retrain " shooter fans playing the game . 
 Smith compared Sunset Overdrive 's gameplay to pinball games , where a player 's every movement has consequences , and the on @-@ screen chaos created by players is based on their actions . The game 's combat and traversal elements were originally separate from each other , but were later connected as the team began to think that : " shooting while grinding was fun " . The combination of these aspects led the studio to adjust the game 's world design . The team calculated how the city should be designed so that it could support both combat and traversal . As a result , they ensured that the world was built in modular 4x4 blocks , and that no surface featured an angle that was between 26 and 45 degrees . Furthermore , the team considered how long grinds should be , and decided that they should be at least 8 meters in length . The grinds were designed to be longer than usual in enemy @-@ concentrated areas so as to allow additional time for players to consider both combat and traversal options . In order to encourage experimentation , the game features a vertical map @-@ design , in which the difficulty the enemies ' players face increases as they move towards higher ground . 
 Insomniac described the game as " a celebration of games " , in which the team pushed existing concepts in a new direction . Besides drawing influences from Prince of Persia , Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater and Jet Set Radio series of games for the game 's traversal system , they drew influences from Bill & Ted 's Excellent Adventure for their " Next @-@ Gen Respawn " system , Scott Pilgrim and The Omega Man for the game 's setting , and Peggle when they were creating the game 's weaponry . The game 's humor was inspired by Insomniac 's own game series Ratchet & Clank and Spyro the Dragon . There are also references to other pop culture icons such as Breaking Bad and Portal . Despite that , Smith said that the game would be completely different from The Last of Us , in which the unnamed protagonist sometimes broke the fourth wall and communicated with players . 
 The game 's character creator function allowed players to create different kinds of combinations in an avatar . The team ensured that there were many customization options , including allowing players to " dress like a crazy person " . The developers felt that this feature would suit the story , because the game 's city enters a state of anarchy , where social norms no longer exist . The team wanted the character creator to feature diversity , so that players could build an avatar based on their own choices . They found the process of introducing diversity challenging . As a result , a system was developed that broke the character creator down into three different categories : mainstream , street ( emo and goth ) , and costume . The team originally added role @-@ playing games @-@ styled stats to the game 's costumes , but later decided to scrap that so that players " would just choose what they thought looked cool . " 
 = = = Art and setting = = = 
 The game is set in a near @-@ future , post @-@ apocalyptic world . The team wanted to try something different , unwilling to return to a setting that was similar to Resistance 3 . Instead of depicting a world with a dark atmosphere and gritty environments , the catastrophe that occurs in the game 's story line is referred to as an " <unk> ” that transforms the user 's initial view of the game 's world as a " playground " for players to explore and do whatever they want – " emphasizing the fun of free reign [ sic ] during end times . " The goal was to make players feel that the post @-@ apocalyptic world in Sunset Overdrive is fun and limitless , delighting and lively , instead of a place that is dreadful and worrying . To achieve this , vibrant and vivid colors were used to create the game 's world and the team hoped that by tweaking the nature of the setting , the game would be " self @-@ aware , humorous , and fun " . The team also intentionally avoided creating a very serious tone because the final product needed to be entertaining and comparable to games like Crazy Taxi and Jet Grind Radio , instead of something too serious that looked like an interactive movie . The team emphasized " fun trumps realism " and reflected that through the " Next @-@ gen Respawn " system , unrealistic weaponry , and the game 's visual style . 
 While the game features colorful graphics that appeal to a broad audience , it was intended for a mature audience which is reflected in the game 's story , dialogue , and characters ' portrayals . The story was designed to be casual , but compelling . The game 's setting is inspired by both I Am Legend and imagining Iggy Pop as the last person surviving in a post @-@ apocalyptic world . The team also wanted to create a satirical story , and explore the theme of anti @-@ corporatism . The punk rock style was implemented in the game because the game 's directors thought that it reflected a sense of " aggression " , which suited the gameplay . 
 When designing the cover art , the team collaborated with the English studio <unk> . They wanted it to be easily recognized and stand out from the cover art of other video games in stores . They also wanted it to represent the game 's characteristics : " intensity " , " fun in the end times " in a " dynamic and vibrant world " . There were three different iterations of the cover art , with major changes made to the game 's protagonist throughout its development , as the studio struggled with the protagonist 's portrayal . Insomniac was ultimately satisfied with <unk> 's finished art design . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Price called Sunset Overdrive the biggest game the studio had worked on . As it was the first open world game developed by Insomniac they had to deploy new design and development skills to produce it . The time and resources needed to develop the game also expanded significantly . While developing the game 's world , the team broke it down into 10 to 11 hexes and zones . They are classified into three different types : low resolution zones , shadow zones , and mission zones , and they overlap each other so that they can keep all zones loaded at the same time . Sunset City had three different iterations . In the early stages , it was called Greenlight City , based on Burbank , California . This version of the city featured interior structures that could be explored by players , and existed when the game 's core concept revolved around " scavenge , craft , defend " . This city was replaced with " Razor City " when skateboarding , which later became oil slicks and trampolines , was introduced to the game . Razor City was " Neo @-@ Tokyo " -styled , but was later replaced by Sunset City which was more organized . While designing the game 's artificial intelligence , the team thought that the game 's enemies must force players to use the traversal system while simultaneously engaging in combat with them . Because of the game 's vertical design , the enemies were designed to adopt the game 's vertical map @-@ design . The team also developed a “ nav position tracker ” , which programmed these enemies to detect the location of players and find an ambush point . 
 The game is powered by an internal engine developed previously by Insomniac Games for its game Fuse . The engine of the game was reworked and optimized for the Xbox One . The game runs on 900p at 30 frame rate per second . The game originally ran at a higher definition of 1080p , but it was decided to fix it at 900p so that more actions and enemies can appear on @-@ screen . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Development of the game 's music was led by Boris Salchow , who had composed scores for Insomniac 's previous games Ratchet & Clank : A Crack In Time , Resistance 2 and Resistance 3 . He collaborated with composers from Microsoft Studios , and <unk> music studio . The design team wanted the composers to implement eight different styles of music for eight different sections featured in the game . However , this idea was dropped as being confusing and overly @-@ chaotic . The team wanted to achieve a " high energy vibe " for this title and the resulting soundtrack features a lot of punk rock and electronic dance music . Fourteen different bands and artists were hired to perform the music often avoiding using musical instruments and writing lyrics for the game instead . The game 's soundtrack was also inspired by works from <unk> , DZ <unk> and Ty Segall . 
 Composers tried to match beats @-@ per @-@ minute to the gameplay and traversal system . The game features a dynamic music system , in which in @-@ game actions are reflected by the music . When there is more on @-@ screen action , or when players perform kills , the music becomes more frantic and exciting to help players further immerse themselves in the game . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Sunset Overdrive was among one of the first Xbox One exclusives revealed at Microsoft 's press conference at E3 2013 . The first gameplay details were revealed by gaming magazine Edge in May 2014 . A gameplay demo and a release date announcement happened at E3 2014 . Insomniac had worked solely for the PlayStation family for about twenty years , and the announcement of Sunset Overdrive being an Xbox exclusive led to speculation that the relationship between Sony and Insomniac had ended . Insomniac denied such rumors , saying the company would still be working with other publishers to produce titles and that petitions would not change Sunset Overdrive 's status as an Xbox exclusive . It was released on October 28 , 2014 . 
 In addition to the game 's standard edition , players can purchase the game 's Season Pass , which adds new in @-@ game items , locations , quests , and bosses . There is also a Day One Edition , which includes three different downloadable content items : " Nothin ' but the Hits " gun , the Hardcore Hammer , and a <unk> costume . Players who pre @-@ ordered the game from Xbox Live Marketplace also got two additional weapons : the <unk> de la Muerte and the Hangover . A white Xbox One bundle was also released for the game . To promote the game , Insomniac organized a series of shows called the Sunset TV . They provided new information to players regarding the game prior to its release . Microsoft also launched a website called Sunset Overdrive : Walter 's Workshop , which is a browser game that allows players to use some of the weapons featured in the game with footage captured in real @-@ life . 
 A three @-@ hour free trial of the game was available for players to download for a limited time . Once it was launched the game was supported with downloadable content ( DLC ) . Insomniac released multiple packs which add new weapons to the game . A story @-@ based DLC , titled The Mystery of the <unk> Rig , was released on December 23 , 2014 . Another story DLC , Dawn of the Rise of the Fallen Machine , was released on April 1 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Sunset Overdrive received positive reviews . It received aggregated scores of 83 % from GameRankings based on 63 reviews and 81 / 100 from Metacritic based on 89 reviews . 
 The game 's tone was praised by reviewers . Daniel Bischoff from Game Revolution praised the game 's comedic elements describing them as " contemporary " . He added that the game is one of the rare few that made him laugh while playing . Sam Prell from Joystiq appreciated the humor , and thought that its quality was boosted by the performance of the voice @-@ actors . His opinion was echoed by Peter Brown from GameSpot , who found the voice acting in the game entertaining and believable . However , Prell considered some humorous moments " hit @-@ or @-@ miss " . Andrew Reiner from Game Informer described the game as a " full circle " , in which Insomniac has incorporated all the elements from their previous game into this one . As a result , he thought that while the story emphasized comedy , it successfully reflected some pressing issues existing in society . Mollie L Patterson from Electronic Gaming Monthly appreciated the game 's humor , but noted that it would not be able to satisfy every type of player . Arthur Gies from Polygon described the story as " gleefully stupid " , and commended the self @-@ aware narrative . Chris Carter from Destructoid praised the jokes featured in the game . However , he disliked the story , which he thought failed to offer motivation for players to complete the game . 
 Sunset Overdrive 's gameplay was also commended by many reviewers . Prell compared the game favorably to Jet Grind Radio , Saints Row The Third , Infamous , and Ratchet & Clank . He singled out the traversal system , which he thought was fluid and well @-@ executed . He added that the fast travel system was not useful in this game , since players can find a lot of fun by simply traveling between different locations in the game 's world . He thought that all of the game 's systems intertwined with each other , and ultimately made the game a complete and worthwhile experience . Reiner echoed similar thoughts , and considered getting around Sunset City fun for players . He added that the traversal system increased the game 's replay value . However , he was disappointed by the game 's occasionally repetitive mission design . Sliva and Brown shared similar thoughts , with the latter saying that the game featured too many fetch quests . Patterson disliked the game 's traversal ; he found that the system was frustrating at times . However , he thought that this problem lessened as players unlocked new moves and skills . Gies felt overwhelmed by the traversal options . He added that Insomniac had successfully created a system that was accessible for ordinary players , while creating challenges for those who want to master the system . However , he noted the camera system may not able to track the movement of the character accurately . He further commended the game 's world design , and described it as one of the most " <unk> sophisticated " worlds he had ever experienced in a game . Bischoff considered the shooting mechanic " loose " , but thought that the problem was overshadowed by the game 's forgiving aiming and steady difficulty curve . Lucas Sullivan also criticized the mechanic , calling it " inconsistent " . 
 The customization options received acclaim . Bischoff praised the arsenal of weapons featured in the game , which he thought was deep , interesting , and creative , benefited by the Amps system , which added additional complexity to them . Prell described it as the " king " of the game . He praised the game 's ability to allow players to customize their characters , and considered the weapons featured " varied " , and thought they enhanced the game with personality . Reiner thought that all of the weapons featured in the game were fun to use , and that the amps system made experimenting with different weapons rewarding . Patterson also commended the game 's weapons though he was initially skeptical about them . Gies thought that the customization options allowed players to play the game as they preferred , and described the character creator as " flexible " . Marty Sliva from IGN praised the Amp upgrade system , which he felt encouraged players to try out unusual ways to experiment with it . 
 The game 's art style was applauded . Bischoff praised the colorful graphics and the different graphical effects featured in the game . He further praised the game 's presentation , which he thought would lead " the Xbox One console ’ s personality this generation . " Reiner compared the colorful graphics of the game to Sesame Street , and thought the bright colors " [ electrified ] the screen " . Reiner also praised the " Next @-@ Gen Respawn " system , and the protagonist 's animation . Sliva praised the design of the city , as he thought it featured a unique artistic style , and aided the traversal system . He added that the game 's visuals " pop " , and compared them to the " Easter Bunny on an acid trip " . Carter praised the variety existed within the game 's world , which he considered has prevented the game 's world from being repetitive , and made landmarks easily recognizable . Brown thought that the game did not look realistic , but felt this did not stop the game from being one of the best @-@ looking games available for the console . Sullivan also praised the use of colors , which he found was organic and vibrant . However , Steven Burns from VideoGamer.com was critical of the game 's world , finding it empty . 
 The game 's multiplayer received mixed reviews . Prell thought that the mission @-@ design was varied , and the voting system kept the mode from being repetitive . He also praised the interconnected structure between the single @-@ player and multiplayer , noting that the items that could be carried over from multiplayer to campaign made the mode feel rewarding for players . Reiner thought that the action featured in this mode is satisfying , but thought that the system lacked enough depth and complexity to engage players . Patterson echoed similar thoughts , and felt that the ability of players to switch between the campaign and the Chaos Squad mode made the multiplayer mode a rewarding experience . Brown criticized the mode , saying that its difficulty was not properly scaled . 
 The game was the second best @-@ selling game in the UK on its release , and was outsold by FIFA 15 . In its second week of release , it was the eighth best @-@ selling game . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Tropical Storm Delfina = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Delfina was a damaging tropical cyclone that affected southeastern Africa in January 2003 . The fourth named storm of the 2002 – 03 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season , Delfina formed off the northwest coast of Madagascar on December 30 , 2002 . It quickly intensified while moving westward , becoming a strong tropical storm before hitting northeastern Mozambique on December 31 . Delfina weakened while moving inland , and it was no longer classifiable as a tropical cyclone by January 1 , 2003 . However , its remnants moved across the country and into Malawi , later looping around and crossing back over Mozambique ; the remnants of Delfina were last observed on January 9 . 
 In both Mozambique and Malawi , Delfina dropped heavy rainfall that caused flooding . In the former country , over 18 @,@ 000 houses were severely damaged or destroyed , leaving thousands homeless . The storm damaged roads and bridges , which disrupted relief efforts in the aftermath , and floods destroyed widespread areas of crops in the midst of an ongoing food shortage . Lingering flooding caused an outbreak of cholera and malaria in Mozambique , and 47 people were killed by Delfina . In Malawi , flooding was not widespread , although the storm destroyed about 3 @,@ 600 houses and killed eight people . Only two months after the storm struck , however , Cyclone Japhet left damage and deaths in many of the same areas that Delfina affected . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 At 1100 UTC on December 30 , 2002 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) noted in its Significant Tropical Weather Outlook that an area of convection persisted in the Mozambique Channel off the northwest coast of Madagascar . The system had a weak circulation , located in an area of minimal wind shear . At 1200 UTC that day , Météo @-@ France classified the system as the sixth zone of disturbed weather of the season . It quickly developed , organizing into Tropical Disturbance 6 at 1800 UTC on December 30 . At around the same time , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 08S . The convection became better organized , developing outflow and rainbands . With a ridge to the south , the storm tracked in a generally westward direction toward Mozambique . At 0600 UTC on December 31 , MFR upgraded the system to Tropical Depression 6 , and six hours later the agency upgraded it to Tropical Storm Delfina . 
 While approaching the Mozambique coastline , Delfina quickly intensified , developing en eye feature and reaching maximum 1 @-@ minute sustained winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . At 1800 UTC on December 31 , MFR estimated peak 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . At about 2130 UTC , Delfina made landfall near Angoche in eastern Mozambique . It rapidly weakened while moving inland , and MFR discontinued advisories early on January 1 , 2003 . Delfina entered Malawi on January 2 , where dry air affected the storm . The remnants turned to the northeast , drifting into Mozambique and later turning to the south . On January 6 , it crossed over its track and emerged into the Mozambique Channel . When the remnants reached the Mozambique Channel , they were reclassified as Tropical Disturbance 07 , which moved southward over waters . It re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on January 8 before weakening the next day , becoming extratropical . The remnants persisted for several days , dissipating on January 14 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Upon striking Mozambique , Delfina produced strong winds and heavy rains , particularly in the northern portion of the country . A station in Nampula reported 281 mm ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) in a 48 ‑ hour period . Delfina washed out roads and bridges in Nampula and Zambezia provinces , which isolated towns and disrupted the transportation network . A train derailed due to effects from the storm , which cut rail travel between northern Mozambique and neighboring Malawi . The cyclone destroyed or severely damaged over 18 @,@ 000 houses , which directly affected about 133 @,@ 000 people , mostly in Nampula where 22 @,@ 000 people were displaced . Floods along the <unk> River forced 1 @,@ 800 people to leave their homes . In Nampula and Zambezia , Delfina damaged four health facilities and 376 schools . The storm caused a power outage in Nampula for several days , and in <unk> , there were water shortages after the storm . The cyclone destroyed over 2 @,@ 000 ha ( 4 @,@ 900 acres ) of beans and cassava crops and knocked down thousands of cashew trees , in areas already affected by food shortages due to drought conditions . Overall , Delfina resulted in $ 3 @.@ 5 million in damage ( 2003 USD ) , and caused 47 deaths in the country , at least 19 due to flooding . 
 After Delfina moved through Mozambique , the local Red Cross chapter provided shelter , water , and relief items to the affected residents . Residual flooding in northern Mozambique , compounded with lack of drinking water , caused a cholera outbreak that affected at least 400 people . By January 27 , 12 people had died from the disease . Flooding also caused a malaria outbreak that killed 45 people in the country . Government officials deployed food to the affected areas by airplane and by road , after workers repaired damaged bridges . Residents in Mozambique gradually recovered from storm damage in the weeks after it struck . Only two months after the storm struck , however , Cyclone Japhet left damage and deaths in many of the same areas . 
 In neighboring Malawi , the storm 's remnants caused flooding in seven provinces , although it was not widespread . Delfina damaged roads , and destroyed one rail bridge in Balaka District . The storm destroyed about 3 @,@ 600 houses ; which forced about 30 @,@ 000 people to leave their homes . The floods affected 57 @,@ 000 properties , damaging 23 @,@ 500 ha ( 58 @,@ 000 acres ) in the midst of a food shortage . Delfina killed eight people in Malawi , prompting President Bakili Muluzi to declare the country as a disaster area on January 11 . After the storm , the Red Cross provided blankets and food for the affected residents . The damaged rail line that initially prevented relief supplies from entering the country was repaired in early February . 
 = Sweetheart of the Rodeo = 
 Sweetheart of the Rodeo is the sixth album by American rock band The Byrds and was released on August 30 , 1968 on Columbia Records ( see 1968 in music ) . Recorded with the addition of country rock pioneer Gram Parsons , it was influential as the first major country rock album by an established act and represented a stylistic move away from the psychedelic rock of the band 's previous LP , The Notorious Byrd Brothers . The Byrds had occasionally experimented with country music on their four previous albums , but Sweetheart of the Rodeo represented their fullest immersion into the genre thus far . The album was also responsible for bringing Gram Parsons , who had joined The Byrds prior to the recording of the album , to the attention of a mainstream rock audience for the first time . Thus , the album can be seen as an important chapter in Parsons ' personal and musical crusade to make country music fashionable for a young audience . 
 The album was initially conceived as a musical history of 20th century American popular music , encompassing examples of country music , jazz and rhythm and blues , among other genres . However , steered by the passion of the little @-@ known Parsons , who had only joined The Byrds in February 1968 , this proposed concept was abandoned early on and the album instead became purely a country record . The recording of the album was divided between sessions in Nashville and Los Angeles , with contributions from several notable session musicians , including Lloyd Green , John Hartford , JayDee Maness and Clarence White . Tension developed between Parsons and the rest of the band , guitarist Roger McGuinn especially , with some of Parsons ' vocals being re @-@ recorded , partly due to legal complications , and by the time the album was released in August , Parsons had left the band . The Byrds ' move away from rock and pop towards country music elicited a great deal of resistance and hostility from the ultra @-@ conservative Nashville country music establishment who viewed The Byrds as a group of long @-@ haired hippies attempting to subvert country music . 
 Upon its release , the album reached # 77 on the Billboard Top LPs chart , but failed to reach the charts in the United Kingdom . Two attendant singles were released during 1968 , " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " , which achieved modest success , and " I Am a Pilgrim " , which failed to chart . The album received mostly positive reviews in the music press , but the band 's shift away from psychedelic music alienated much of its pop audience . Despite being the most commercially unsuccessful Byrds ' album to date upon its initial release , Sweetheart of the Rodeo is today considered to be a seminal and highly influential country rock album . 
 = = Background ( January – March 1968 ) = = 
 The initial concept by Roger McGuinn for the album that would become Sweetheart of the Rodeo was to expand upon the genre @-@ spanning approach of The Byrds ' previous LP , The Notorious Byrd Brothers , by recording a double album overview of the history of American popular music . The planned album would begin with bluegrass and Appalachian music , then move through country and western , jazz , rhythm and blues , and rock music , before culminating with futuristic proto @-@ electronica , featuring the Moog modular synthesizer . 
 But with a U.S. college tour to promote The Notorious Byrd Brothers looming , a more immediate concern was the recruitment of new band members . David Crosby and Michael Clarke had departed the band in late 1967 , leaving Roger McGuinn as de facto leader of The Byrds , along with Chris Hillman , the only other remaining member of the band . To address this problem , McGuinn hired Hillman 's cousin , Kevin Kelley ( formerly a member of the Rising Sons ) , as the band 's new drummer , and it was this three @-@ piece line @-@ up , with McGuinn on guitar and Hillman on bass , that embarked on the early 1968 college tour . It soon became apparent , however , that The Byrds were having difficulty in performing their studio material live as a trio , and so it was decided that a fourth member was required . McGuinn , with an eye still on his envisaged American music concept album , felt that a pianist with a jazz background would be ideal for the group . 
 A candidate was found by Larry Spector , the band 's business manager , in the shape of 21 @-@ year @-@ old Gram Parsons . Parsons , a marginal figure in the L.A. music scene , had been acquainted with Hillman since 1967 and he auditioned for the band as a piano player in February 1968 . His faux @-@ jazz piano playing and genial personality at audition was enough to impress both McGuinn and Hillman ; so Parsons was recruited as the fourth member of the band , although he quickly switched to playing guitar instead of piano . Although Parsons and Kelley were considered full members of The Byrds , they both received a salary from McGuinn and Hillman , and did not sign with Columbia Records when The Byrds ' recording contract was renewed on February 29 , 1968 . 
 Unbeknownst to McGuinn or Hillman , Parsons had his own musical agenda in which he planned to marry his love of traditional country music ( which he saw as being the purest form of American music ) with youth culture 's passion for rock . He had already successfully attempted this fusion as a member of the little @-@ known International Submarine Band , on the album Safe at Home , but Parsons ' new status as a Byrd offered him an international stage from which to launch his bid to reclaim country music for his generation . 
 Following his recruitment , Parsons began to lure Hillman away from McGuinn 's proposed concept album idea and towards a blend of what Parsons would later term " Cosmic American Music " . In essence , this was a hybrid of various roots music forms , primarily oriented towards honky tonk country music but also encompassing American folk , soul , rhythm and blues , rock ’ n ’ roll and contemporary rock . Hillman , who had come from a musical background firmly rooted in bluegrass , had himself successfully persuaded The Byrds to incorporate country influences into their music in the past , beginning with the song " Satisfied Mind " on their 1965 album , Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! Many of Hillman 's songs on the Younger Than Yesterday and The Notorious Byrd Brothers albums also had a pronounced country feel to them , with several featuring Clarence White ( a renowned bluegrass guitar player and session musician ) on lead guitar , rather than McGuinn . During time spent singing old country songs with Parsons , Hillman became convinced that Parsons ' concept of a country @-@ oriented version of The Byrds could work . 
 Parsons ' passion for his country rock vision was so contagious that he even convinced McGuinn to abandon his plans for The Byrds ' next album and follow Parsons ' lead in recording a country rock album . Parsons also persuaded McGuinn and Hillman to record the album in the country music capital of Nashville , Tennessee , as Bob Dylan had done for his Blonde On Blonde and John Wesley Harding albums . Although McGuinn had some reservations about the band 's new direction , he decided that such a move could expand the already declining audience of the group . After long @-@ time Byrds ' producer Gary Usher , who had little interest in producing McGuinn 's proposed concept album , indicated a preference for the country concept , McGuinn finally acquiesced . On March 9 , 1968 , the band decamped to Columbia 's recording facility in Nashville , with Clarence White in tow , to begin recording sessions for Sweetheart of the Rodeo . 
 = = Recording ( March – May 1968 ) = = 
 Between March 9 and March 15 , 1968 , the band , accompanied by several prominent session musicians , recorded multiple takes of eight songs at Columbia Records ' recording studios in the Music Row area of Nashville . Recording sessions for the album continued from April 4 through May 27 , 1968 at Columbia Studios in Hollywood , with a further seven songs recorded during these sessions and finishing touches applied to many of the tracks recorded in Nashville . 
 The songs that The Byrds recorded for the album included " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " and " Nothing Was Delivered " , two country @-@ influenced Dylan covers from his then @-@ unreleased Basement Tapes sessions . Despite the change in musical style that the Sweetheart of the Rodeo album represented for The Byrds , the inclusion of two Dylan covers provided a link with their previous folk @-@ rock incarnation , when Dylan 's material had been a mainstay of their repertoire . The Byrds also recorded a trio of classic country songs for the album : the traditional " I Am a Pilgrim " , which had been popularized by Merle Travis in the late @-@ 1940s ; the Cindy Walker @-@ penned " Blue Canadian Rockies " , which had been sung by Gene Autry in the 1952 film of the same name ; and " The Christian Life " , written by the Louvin Brothers , which was the antithesis of a traditional rock song with its gentle lyrics extolling the simple pleasures of Christianity as a lifestyle . 
 The band supplemented these older country standards and Dylan covers with a couple of contemporary country songs : Merle Haggard 's maudlin convict 's lament , " Life in Prison " ; and Luke McDaniel 's " You 're Still On My Mind " , a sorrowful tale of a heartbroken drunkard failing to find solace at the bottom of a bottle . Additionally , The Byrds gave William Bell 's Stax hit , " You Don 't Miss Your Water " , a country flavored make @-@ over , highlighted by the band 's trademark crystal clear harmonies and contributions from JayDee Maness and Earl P. Ball , on pedal steel guitar and honky @-@ tonk piano respectively . With its fusion of country and soul , " You Don 't Miss Your Water " was a perfect example of what Parsons would later define , with his self @-@ coined phrase , as " Cosmic American Music " . 
 Lacking any country songs of his own , McGuinn delved into his pre @-@ Byrds folk song repertoire instead , contributing Woody Guthrie 's " Pretty Boy Floyd " , a romanticized portrayal of the real @-@ life folk hero and outlaw . The March 12 , 1968 recording session that produced " Pretty Boy Floyd " saw McGuinn attempting to play the song 's banjo accompaniment , but feeling dissatisfied with his efforts he finally ceded the part to session player John Hartford . The Byrds also recorded a Kelley original , " All I Have Are Memories " , Tim Hardin 's " You Got a Reputation " , and the traditional song , " Pretty Polly " , but none of these songs were selected for the final Sweetheart of the Rodeo album . 
 Parsons also brought three of his songs to the recording sessions : " Lazy Days " , " One Hundred Years from Now " and " Hickory Wind " , the latter of which had been written by Parsons and former International Submarine Band member , Bob Buchanan , during an early 1968 train ride from Florida to Los Angeles . " One Hundred Years from Now " has a quicker tempo than most of the material on Sweetheart of the Rodeo and functions as a speculation on current human vanities and how they might be viewed by successive generations . The Chuck Berry influenced " Lazy Days " was not included in the final album , but was re @-@ recorded by Parsons and Hillman 's later band , The Flying Burrito Brothers , for their 1970 album , Burrito Deluxe . 
 = = Nashville reaction and touring = = 
 Upon completion of the Music Row recording sessions , the band ended their stay in Nashville with an appearance at the Grand Ole Opry at Ryman Auditorium ( introduced by future " outlaw " country star Tompall Glaser ) , on March 15 , 1968 . The band was greeted with derision by the conservative audience because they were the first group of hippie " longhairs " to play at the venerable country music establishment . In fact , The Byrds had all had their hair cut shorter than they normally wore it , specifically for their appearance at the Grand Ole Opry , but this did nothing to appease their detractors in the audience . The Byrds opened with a rendition of Merle Haggard 's " Sing Me Back Home " , which was met with derisive heckling , booing , and mocking calls of " tweet , tweet " from the hostile Opry audience . Any hope of salvaging the performance was immediately destroyed when Parsons , rather than singing a song announced by Glaser , launched into a rendition of " Hickory Wind " dedicated to his grandmother . The deviation from protocol stunned Opry regulars such as Roy Acuff and embarrassed Glaser , ensuring that The Byrds would never be invited back to play on the show . 
 Nearly as disastrous was the group 's appearance on the WSM program of legendary Nashville DJ , Ralph Emery , who mocked his guests throughout the interview and initially refused to play an acetate of " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " . Eventually playing the record , he dismissed it over the air and in the presence of the band as being mediocre . Clearly upset by their treatment , Parsons and McGuinn would make Emery the subject of their song , " Drug Store Truck Drivin ' Man " , which was written by the pair in London in May 1968 . The song appeared on The Byrds ' next album , Dr. Byrds & Mr. Hyde , although this recording did not feature Parsons because he had left the band by this time . 
 After returning from Nashville , the band played a handful of concerts throughout the Los Angeles area with the addition of pedal steel guitarist JayDee Maness , who had played on several tracks on the album . Throughout April 1968 , McGuinn came under considerable pressure from Parsons to recruit Maness as a full member of The Byrds , so that the band 's new country material would sound authentic in concert , but McGuinn resisted , although Maness has stated in interview that he declined the invitation anyway . Having failed to recruit Maness as a permanent member of the band , Parsons next recommended another pedal steel guitar player , Sneaky Pete Kleinow , but once again , McGuinn held firm . Parsons ' attempts to recruit new members and dictate the band 's musical direction caused a power struggle within the band , with McGuinn finding his position as band leader challenged by Parsons , who was also pushing for a higher salary . At one point Parsons even demanded that the album be billed as Gram Parsons and The Byrds , a demand that was ignored by McGuinn and Hillman . 
 In May 1968 the band embarked on a short European tour and while in England for concerts at the Middle Earth Club and <unk> , The Byrds met with Mick Jagger and Keith Richards who both expressed concern over The Byrds ' intention to tour South Africa during the summer . McGuinn remained undaunted regarding these concerns over the country 's apartheid policies , however , having already received the blessing of South African singer Miriam Makeba , and convinced the rest of The Byrds that a trip to South Africa would be an interesting experience . This meeting between The Byrds and the two Rolling Stones would play an important part in Parsons departure from the band two months later . 
 = = Post @-@ production = = 
 Upon the group 's return to California , post @-@ production work on the Sweetheart of the Rodeo album was disrupted when Parsons ' appearance on the album was contested by Lee Hazlewood , who contended that the singer was still under contract to his LHI record label . While the legal problems were being resolved , McGuinn replaced three of Parsons ' lead vocals with his own singing , a move that still infuriated Parsons as late as 1973 , when he told Cameron Crowe in an interview that McGuinn " erased it and did the vocals himself and fucked it up . " However , Parsons was still featured singing lead vocals on the songs " Hickory Wind " , " You 're Still on My Mind " , and " Life in Prison " . There has been speculation that McGuinn 's decision to re @-@ record Parsons ' lead vocals himself was not entirely motivated by the threat of legal action , but by a desire to decrease Parsons ' presence on the album . According to producer Gary Usher : 
 The three songs that had their lead vocals replaced by McGuinn were " The Christian Life " , " You Don 't Miss Your Water " , and " One Hundred Years from Now " , with the last featuring McGuinn and Hillman sharing vocals on the final album version . However , Parsons ' lead vocals weren 't completely eradicated from these songs and can still be faintly heard , despite having either McGuinn or Hillman 's voice overdubbed on them . The master recordings of these three songs , with their original Parsons ' vocals restored to full prominence , were finally issued as part of The Byrds box set in 1990 . These same master recordings , featuring Parsons ' lead vocals , were also included as bonus tracks on disc one of the 2003 Legacy Edition of Sweetheart of the Rodeo . 
 With the legal problems surrounding Parsons ' appearance on the album resolved , The Byrds returned to England for an appearance at the Royal Albert Hall on July 7 , 1968 . Following the concert , Parsons announced that he would not be accompanying the band on their imminent tour of South Africa in protest over the country 's policies of apartheid ( a policy that did not cease until 1994 ) . Both McGuinn and Hillman doubted the sincerity of Parsons ' protest , believing instead that Parsons had used the apartheid issue as a convenient excuse to leave the band and stay in England to hang out with Mick Jagger and Keith Richards . Consequently , by the time Sweetheart of the Rodeo was released in August 1968 , Parsons had been an ex @-@ member of The Byrds for almost eight weeks . Following the South African tour , McGuinn and Hillman replaced Parsons with longtime Byrd @-@ in @-@ waiting Clarence White , and Kevin Kelley was dismissed from the band soon after . In total , the McGuinn , Hillman , Parsons , and Kelley line @-@ up of The Byrds had lasted a mere five months . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Sweetheart of the Rodeo was released on August 30 , 1968 , in the United States ( catalogue item CS <unk> ) and September 27 , 1968 , in the UK ( catalogue item <unk> ) . Columbia Records launched an accompanying print advertising campaign proclaiming " This Country 's for the Byrds " and featuring the tag line " Their message is all country ... their sound is all Byrds . " The album is notable for being the first Byrds LP to be issued exclusively in stereo in the United States , although the album was released in mono and stereo variations in the United Kingdom . The album reached # 77 on the Billboard Top LPs chart , during a chart stay of ten weeks , but failed to chart in the United Kingdom . The lead single from the album was a cover of Bob Dylan 's " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " , which was released on April 2 , 1968 , climbing to # 75 on the Billboard Hot 100 and # 45 in the UK charts . A second single from the album , " I Am a Pilgrim " , was released on September 2 , 1968 , but failed to chart . 
 Despite receiving generally favourable reviews from the critics , the country rock style of Sweetheart of the Rodeo was such a radical departure from the band 's previous sound that large sections of the group 's counter @-@ culture following were alienated by its contents , resulting in the lowest sales of any Byrds album up to that point . Barry Gifford , in the August 1968 edition of Rolling Stone magazine , said of the album : " The new Byrds do not sound like Buck Owens & his <unk> . They aren 't that good . The material they 've chosen to record , or rather , the way they perform the material , is simple , relaxed and folky . It 's not pretentious , it 's pretty . The musician @-@ ship is excellent . " Gifford added that " The Byrds have made an interesting album . It 's really very uninvolved and not a difficult record to listen to . It ought to make the " Easy @-@ Listening " charts . " Bringing it all back home " has never been an easy thing to do . " 
 Rolling Stone also praised the album in its September 1968 issue , with Jon Landau writing " The Byrds , in doing country as country , show just how powerful and relevant unadorned country music is to the music of today . " Landau added " they leave just enough rock in the drums to let you know that they can still play rock & roll . " Noted rock critic , Robert Christgau , described Sweetheart of the Rodeo in a 1969 article for The New York Times as " a bittersweet tribute to country music . " However , contemporary reviews of the album were not universally positive , with an anonymous Melody Maker review from late 1968 deriding the album as " Not typical Byrds music , which is rather a pity . " Similarly , Robert Shelton , writing in The New York Times in November 1968 , commented that " The latest Byrds album adheres to most of the ' rules of the game ' about country sound , and yet , sad to say , to this old fan of The Byrds , the album is a distinguished bore . " 
 In more recent years , AllMusic critic Mark Deming noted in his review of the album that " no major band had gone so deep into the sound and feeling of classic country ( without parody or condescension ) as the Byrds did on Sweetheart ; at a time when most rock fans viewed country as a musical " L 'il Abner " routine , the Byrds dared to declare that C & W could be hip , cool , and heartfelt . " Alexander Lloyd <unk> , reviewing the album for Pitchfork Media , described it as " a blindingly rusty gait through parched weariness and dusted reverie . It 's not the natural sound of Death Valley or Utah , but rather , a false portrait by people who wished it was , which makes it even more melancholy and charismatic . " Journalist Matthew Weiner commented in his review for Stylus that " Thirty @-@ five years after it startled Byrds fans everywhere with its Podunk proclivities , Sweetheart remains a particularly fascinating example of two musical ships passing in the night , documenting both Parsons ’ transformation into a visionary country @-@ rock auteur and a pop band ’ s remarkable sense of artistic risk . " 
 The Byrds ' biographer , Johnny Rogan , noted that the album " stood alone as a work almost completely divorced from the prevailing rock culture . Its themes , mood and instrumentation looked back to another era at a time when the rest of America was still recovering from the recent assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy . " Ultimately , The Byrds ' experimentation with the country genre on Sweetheart of the Rodeo was slightly ahead of its time , to the detriment of the band 's commercial fortunes , as the international success of country rock flavoured bands like The Eagles , America and Dr. Hook & The Medicine Show during the 1970s demonstrated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Released at a time when The Byrds ' surprising immersion in the world of country music coincided with their declining commercial appeal , Sweetheart of the Rodeo was certainly an uncommercial proposition at the time of its release . However , the album has proved to be a landmark , serving not only as a blueprint for Parsons ' and Hillman 's The Flying Burrito Brothers , but also for the entire nascent 1970s Los Angeles country rock movement . The album was also influential on the outlaw country and new traditionalist movements , as well as the so @-@ called alternative country genre of the 1990s and 2000s . Among fans of The Byrds , however , opinion is often sharply divided regarding the merits of the album , with some seeing it as a natural continuation of the group 's innovations , and others mourning the loss of the band 's trademark Rickenbacker guitar jangle and psychedelic experimentation . Nonetheless , Sweetheart of the Rodeo is widely considered to be The Byrds ' last truly influential album . 
 Although it was not the first country rock album , Sweetheart of the Rodeo was the first album widely labeled as country rock to be released by an internationally successful rock act , pre @-@ dating the release of Bob Dylan 's Nashville Skyline by over six months . The first bona fide country rock album is often cited as being Safe at Home by Parsons ' previous group , The International Submarine Band . However , the genre 's antecedents can be traced back to the Rockabilly music of the 1950s , The Beatles ' covers of Carl Perkins and Buck Owens ' material on Beatles For Sale and Help ! , as well as the stripped down arrangements of Dylan 's John Wesley Harding album and The Byrds ' own forays into country music on their pre @-@ Sweetheart albums . The Band 's debut album , Music from Big Pink , released in July 1968 , was also influential on the genre but it was Sweetheart of the Rodeo that saw an established rock band playing pure country music for the first time . 
 In 2003 , the album was ranked # 117 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , and Stylus Magazine named it their 175th favorite album of all time in the same year . 
 Sweetheart of the Rodeo went on to inspire the name of the 1980s country duo , Sweethearts of the Rodeo , who paid tribute to The Byrds ' album with the sleeve of their 1990 album , Buffalo Zone . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " You Ain 't Goin ' Nowhere " b / w " Artificial Energy " ( Columbia <unk> ) April 2 , 1968 ( US # 75 , UK # 45 ) 
 " I Am a Pilgrim " b / w " Pretty Boy Floyd " ( Columbia <unk> ) September 2 , 1968 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Sources as follows : 
 = = Release history = = 
 Sweetheart of the Rodeo was remastered at 20 @-@ bit resolution as part of the Columbia / Legacy Byrds series and reissued in an expanded form on March 25 , 1997 . The eight bonus tracks featured on this reissue include the outtakes " You Got a Reputation " , " Lazy Days " , and " Pretty Polly " , as well as four previously unreleased rehearsal takes and an instrumental backing track for " All I Have Are Memories " . A hidden track on the CD features a 1968 Columbia Records radio advertisement for the album . 
 On September 2 , 2003 , a 2 CD Legacy Edition of Sweetheart of the Rodeo was released by Columbia / Legacy . This version of the album features additional outtakes , rehearsal versions , and the master takes of the songs that had their Parsons ' lead vocals replaced , presented here with their Parsons ' vocals intact . Most of the alternate versions and rehearsal takes on disc two of the Legacy Edition feature Parsons singing songs that were later released with vocals by McGuinn on the original album . Also included on the Legacy Edition is an outtake from the album sessions called " All I Have Are Memories " , written and sung by drummer Kevin Kelley . In addition , the Legacy Edition of Sweetheart of the Rodeo includes six tracks performed by the International Submarine Band ( Parsons ' previous group ) . 
 In 2007 , <unk> Records released a 7 " single featuring previously unreleased alternate versions of " Lazy Days " and " You Got a Reputation " ( titled " Reputation " on this release ) that date from The Byrds ' March 1968 recording sessions in Nashville . These two alternate versions have not been issued on CD . 
 = = = 1997 reissue bonus tracks = = = 
 The final song on the 1997 reissue ( " All I Have Are Memories " ) ends at 2 : 48 ; at 3 : 48 begins the hidden track " Radio Spot : Sweetheart of the Radio Album " 
 = = = 2003 Legacy Edition bonus tracks = = = 
 The 2003 CD reissue contains alternative versions of songs with Parsons singing lead , along with recordings by Parsons ' pre @-@ Byrds group , The International Submarine Band ( tracks 1 @-@ 6 on disc two ) . 
 = Parental Advisory = 
 The Parental Advisory label ( abbreviated PAL ) is a warning label first introduced by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 1985 and later adopted by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in 2011 . It is placed on audio recordings in recognition of excessive profanities or inappropriate references , with the intention of alerting parents of potentially unsuitable material for younger children . The label was first affixed on physical compact discs and cassette tapes , and it has been included on digital listings offered by online music stores to accommodate the growing popularity of the latter platform . 
 Recordings with the Parental Advisory label are often released alongside censored versions that reduce or eliminate the questionable material . Several retailers will distribute all varieties of the product , occasionally with an increased price for censored versions , while some sellers offer the amended pressings as their main options and choose not to distribute the explicit counterparts . However , the label has been questioned for its perceived ineffectiveness in limiting the amount of inappropriate material that young audiences are exposed to . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shortly after their formation in April 1985 , the Parents Music Resource Center ( PMRC ) assembled a list of fifteen songs with deemed unsuitable content . Particular criticism was placed on " Darling Nikki " by Prince , after the daughter of PMRC co @-@ founder Mary " Tipper " Gore recognized its references to masturbation . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) responded by introducing an early version of their content warning label , although the PMRC was displeased and proposed that a music rating system structured like the Motion Picture Association of America film rating system be enacted . The RIAA alternatively suggested using a warning label reading " Parental Guidance : Explicit Lyrics " , and after continued conflict between the organizations , the matter was discussed on September 19 during a hearing with the United States Senate Committee on Commerce , Science , and Transportation . Notable musicians , Frank Zappa , Dee Snyder , and John Denver each testified at this hearing with strong opposition to PMRC ’ s warning label system , and censorship in general . Approximately two months after the hearing , the organizations agreed on a settlement in which audio recordings were to either be affixed with a warning label reading " Explicit Lyrics : Parental Advisory " or have its lyrics attached on the backside of its packaging . 
 In 1990 , a black @-@ and @-@ white warning label reading " Parental Advisory : Explicit Lyrics " was introduced as a standard for affected records to follow , and was to be placed on the bottom right @-@ hand section of a given product . By May 1992 , approximately 225 records had been marked with the warning . In response to later hearings in the following years , it was reworded as " Parental Advisory : Explicit Content " in 1996 . The system went unchanged until 2002 , when record labels affiliated with Bertelsmann Music Group began including specific areas of concern including " strong language " , " violent content " , or " sexual content " on compact discs alongside the generic Parental Advisory label . The Parental Advisory label was first used on music streaming services and online music stores in 2011 . That year , the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) revised its own music censorship policies to incorporate more prominent usage of the warning label . 
 = = Application = = 
 The " Parental Advisory Label Program " in the United States and the " Parental Advisory Scheme " in the United Kingdom lack agreed @-@ upon standards for using the warning label , although they provide guidelines for its recommended inclusion . Although a voluntary practice that is ultimately left to the discretion of record labels , the RIAA suggests that material with " strong language or depictions of violence , sex , or substance abuse to such an extent as to merit parental notification " be affixed with the Parental Advisory label . The BPI additionally requests that " racist , homophobic , misogynistic or other discriminatory language or behavior " be taken under consideration when determining the appropriateness of a record . 
 Audio recordings that include Parental Advisory labels in their original formats are generally released in censored versions that reduces or completely eliminates the questionable material , They are recognized as " clean " editions by the RIAA , and are left <unk> in their revised formats . American retailers including Best Buy and f.y.e. distribute explicit and censored records ; Target has sold both varieties of a given record , although has occasionally offered only the explicit version depending on the product . Walmart and their affiliated properties are well known for only carrying censored versions of records ; in one instance , the retailer refused to distribute 21st Century Breakdown ( 2009 ) by Green Day because they were not given the " clean " copies that they requested . Online music stores , including the iTunes Store , generally have the Parental Advisory logo embedded into digital files . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Since its introduction , the effectiveness of the Parental Advisory label has frequently been called into question . Jon Wiederhorn from MTV News suggested that artists benefited from the label and noted that younger customers interested in explicit content could more easily find it with a label attached . On behalf of Westword , Andy Thomas implied that the label was purposeless on the grounds that a young customer " would get a copy of the album sooner or later from a friend or another lethargic record store clerk " like the cashier that sold him a labeled pressing of La <unk> : Devil Music , Vol . 1 ( 1992 ) by White Zombie in his childhood . He noted that its intended reaction in parents was varied ; his lax mother was indifferent towards the warning , while the mother of his stricter companion did not allow her child to listen to the record . 
 Danny Goldberg from Gold Village Entertainment opined that the Parental Advisory label offered minimal value other than " being a way for certain retailers like Wal @-@ Mart to brand themselves as ' family friendly ' " ; he felt that children were successful in getting content they desired " even before the Internet " , and believed that the label had little impact on sales figures . In contrast , the RIAA maintains that " it 's not a PAL Notice that kids look for , it 's the music " . They stated that research they had gathered revealed that " kids put limited weight on lyrics in deciding which music they like , caring more about rhythm and melody " and implied that the label is not a deciding factor for a given purchase . Tom Cole from NPR commented that the Parental Advisory label has become " a fact of music @-@ buying life " , which made it difficult for current consumers to understand the widespread controversy that came about from its introduction . 
 = = Edited counterparts = = 
 It is fairly common for an album which received the Parental Advisory seal to be sold alongside an " edited " version which removes objectionable content , usually to the same level as a radio edit . However , the RIAA Uniform Guidelines say " An Edited Version need not remove all potentially objectionable content from the sound recording . " These albums are packaged nearly @-@ identically to their explicit counterparts , usually with the only indicator being the lack of Parental Advisory seal . ( A notable exception is Box Car Racer , in which a black box reading " <unk> <unk> " is placed where the Parental Advisory seal would be ) . 
 Most of the time , the edited version will only edit the content which is absolutely necessary , in order to be as identical to the explicit counterpart as possible . However , some edited albums , such as Halfway Between the Gutter and the Stars ( " Star 69 " ) and Curtain Call : The Hits ( first 2 tracks ) will have tracks removed completely , while others , such as Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( " Happy Holidays You Bastards " renamed " Happy Holidays " ) and The Slim Shady LP ( 4 tracks were renamed ) will remove objectionable content from song titles . The edited version of Life After Death is notable for having so many tracks omitted that it was able to be condensed to one disc in spite of being a double album . 
 The edited version of an album will normally edit to the level in which the content would be considered appropriate for radio airplay . Strong language is almost always edited out ( however the edited version of The Marshall Mathers LP left in nearly all profanities other than " fuck " , with the exception of the album 's singles in which the existing radio edits were used ) , in addition to racial slurs ( most albums will remove " nigga / nigger " ) . Specific drug references are also usually edited out , primarily slang terms for illegal drugs . Generally , however , some edited albums are not consistent with editing violent and sexual lyrics , as often , these lyrics are left in unedited . An example is " Tomb of the Boom " on the edited version of Speakerboxxx / The Love Below , which leaves in detailed lyrics about street violence ( including sound effects of gunfire and police sirens ) and sexual innuendos , both of which would normally be edited out , but on the other hand , all obscenities are muted . 
 = Rare Replay = 
 Rare Replay is a 2015 compilation of 30 video games from the 30 @-@ year history of developers Rare and its predecessor , Ultimate Play the Game . The emulated games span multiple genres and consoles — from the ZX Spectrum to the Xbox 360 — and retain the features and errors of their original releases with minimal edits . The compilation adds cheats to make the older games easier and a Snapshots mode of specific challenges culled from parts of the games . Player progress is rewarded with behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage and interviews about Rare 's major and unreleased games . 
 The compilation was one of several ideas Rare considered to celebrate their 30th anniversary . Inspired by fans , upcoming Xbox One backwards compatibility features , and the idea to connect Rare 's past and future , the company sorted through 120 games to choose titles that best represented its oeuvre . They prioritized games with characters and environments original to the company . Rare incorporated six hardware emulators in the package , and worked with its parent company , Microsoft , to use its unannounced Xbox 360 emulation . Rare Replay released worldwide as an Xbox One exclusive on August 4 , 2015 . 
 Rare Replay 's reviews were generally favorable . Critics appreciated the package 's design and craft and called the release a new pinnacle for compilation releases . They commended its " rewind " and Snapshot features , but criticized technical issues in the Xbox 360 emulation and game installation . Rare 's Nintendo 64 classics , with Blast Corps in particular , were communal favorites among reviewers , while Perfect Dark Zero , Grabbed by the Ghoulies , and the Spectrum games were liked least . Some reviewers were disappointed by the absence of the Donkey Kong Country series and GoldenEye 007 due to inevitable licensing issues , while a few thought the package was fine without them . Critics deemed the archival game content and developer interviews as among the compilation 's best features , but were upset to see the content hidden behind time @-@ consuming in @-@ game challenges . Reviewers noted that Rare 's founders , the Stamper brothers , were conspicuously absent from the interviews . Rare Replay became Rare 's first United Kingdom all @-@ format charts bestseller since Banjo @-@ Kazooie in 1998 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Rare Replay is a compilation of 30 games previously developed by Rare and its predecessor , Ultimate Play the Game , over their 30 @-@ year history across platforms from the ZX Spectrum to the Xbox 360 ( 1983 to 2008 ) , up until Rare 's Kinect Sports series . The 30 games span multiple genres , including fighting , first @-@ person shooter , simulation , 3D platforming , racing , and skiing . The compilation opens with a musical number featuring Rare characters . Each game has a landing page with a variation on its theme music . While the core gameplay remains unedited , Rare added extra features to the older releases . The player can toggle the visual appearance of scanlines and " rewind " up to ten seconds of gameplay in pre @-@ Nintendo 64 games . The older games can be saved at will and autosave progress upon the player 's exit . Rare also added an infinite lives cheat setting for some older games and fixed a game @-@ breaking bug in Battletoads . The " Snapshots " feature presents small segments of the older games as challenges for the player , such as collecting a set amount of points in a set amount of time in a set scenario , similar in function to the NES Remix series . Some Snapshots are connected sequentially as a playlist . 
 The ZX Spectrum emulation retains the technical idiosyncrasies of the original hardware . For instance , the game 's graphics speed up or slow down dependent on the number of items for the computer to process on @-@ screen . The Nintendo 64 emulation upgrades the games ' polygon rendering and frame rate . The nine Xbox 360 releases ( and re @-@ releases ) install directly to the Xbox One dashboard separately from the Rare Replay compilation , and require online activation before they can be played offline . The Xbox 360 games share player saved game and Achievement progress between the consoles via Xbox Live 's cloud sync features . Rare Replay uses the prior Xbox 360 ports of Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Banjo @-@ Tooie , and Perfect Dark rather than emulating their originals . However , Rare chose to emulate the original Conker 's Bad Fur Day rather than using its Xbox port . Grabbed by the Ghoulies runs natively on the Xbox One , as a port upgraded its display resolution and frame rate . Rare Replay retains the local and online multiplayer modes of the original games , and includes their main downloadable content add @-@ ons . Multiple classic Rare titles , such as the Donkey Kong Country series and GoldenEye 007 , are not included in the compilation due to licensing issues . 
 A bonus feature section , " Rare Revealed " , contains over an hour of behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage focusing on Rare 's major and unreleased games . The player completes in @-@ game challenges to collect stamps , which increase the player 's rank and unlock the bonus features . The player must finish each game to receive all stamps . The compilation automatically grants stamps for prior progress in the package 's Xbox 360 games . Current and former Rare employees , such as Grant Kirkhope , feature in the documentary clips , though studio founders Tim and Chris Stamper do not appear . Rare Revealed unveils gameplay footage from several unreleased games . In the open world adventure game Black Widow , the player controls a spider @-@ like robot equipped with missiles . The spider was expected to be recycled in Kameo 2 . This unreleased sequel to Kameo was designed with a darker tone than the original . Rare also worked on The Fast and the <unk> , a spiritual successor to Diddy Kong Racing with vehicle customization and track alterations . The company 's other planned intellectual properties included the survival game prototype Sundown and the airplane @-@ based Tailwind . The " Rare Revealed " videos include trivia behind some game design decisions such as Blast Corps ' character design , the fate of Banjo @-@ Kazooie 's Stop ' n ' Swop features , and audio overrides built into Killer Instinct . Additional Rare Revealed featurettes not present in Rare Replay have been released since the game 's launch via the company 's official YouTube channel . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rare began work on Rare Replay in 2014 as a 30th anniversary celebration . They wanted to do something unique for what they considered a rare milestone in the industry . Rare was also influenced by community requests to bring their classics to Xbox One , and the Microsoft backwards compatibility team 's progress on the feature . The compilation was one of several celebration ideas , but once it was chosen , the " 30 years " theme led to the 30 game limit and US $ 30 price point . As reflective of the company 's character and celebratory theme , Rare chose a papercraft art style and theatrical stage setting for the compilation . Rare Replay became part of Rare 's plan to simultaneously celebrate its past and introduce its future with a logo redesign , new website , and announcement of their upcoming game , Sea of Thieves . Rare sorted through 120 games in their history and rated each for fitness to select the collection 's final 30 . Rare prioritized titles that featured characters and environments original to the company , which was their explanation for excluding licensed titles . The availability of licensed titles was a secondary factor , as was how fun they considered the game and how well the title aged against its contemporary video games . They wanted a wide and representative sample of " popular games that would hit that nostalgic beat that everyone likes " . Rare chose the Nintendo 64 Conker 's Bad Fur Day over the Xbox version ( Conker : Live & Reloaded ) because they felt the latter had strayed too far from the original . While Rare Replay 's designers made the final call , other Rare employees and veterans gave input and recollected old game development stories . 
 Unlike the usual product development cycle , which grows a concept into a final product , most of the development work in Rare Replay was in converging 30 games across six platforms onto one disc . The engineering challenge rested in the quantity of games and platforms being emulated rather than the emulation effort itself . Rare worked in close collaboration with Microsoft as the latter developed the Xbox One 's backwards compatibility features in secret , which Rare ultimately used in Rare Replay . The Microsoft team helped prepare Rare 's nine Xbox 360 games for the release . Their discontinued online services were not restored for the compilation . On Rare Replay 's design , lead designer Paul Collins added that the Snapshot challenges were built to encourage players to sample all of the games , and that the rewind feature was to help all players finish the games without quitting in frustration . The compilation 's opening musical number was a compromise from the original vision : a musical history of the company 's oeuvre , as told through small musical introductions to each Snapshot . The final opening was intended to evoke players ' memories of Rare properties , and includes several Easter eggs . 
 Rare Replay was announced during the Microsoft press conference at the June 2015 Electronic Entertainment Expo . The reveal was leaked in the hours prior to the show . The compilation was released as an Xbox One exclusive worldwide on August 4 , 2015 . There are no plans for a Windows 10 release or downloadable content additions . While Rare 's founders , the Stamper brothers , were not interviewed in the bonus features , Tim Stamper appeared in a Develop interview set to coincide with the compilation 's release . Rare also added a tie @-@ in wherein Rare Replay owners unlocked the Battletoads character Rash as a playable character in the 2013 fighting game Killer Instinct during a limited test period . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rare Replay received " generally favorable " reviews , according to review aggregator Metacritic . It reached the top of the United Kingdom all @-@ format games sales charts — the first Xbox One exclusive to do so and Rare 's first since Banjo @-@ Kazooie in 1998 . Rare Replay was also the first top @-@ ranked budget title since Wii Fit Plus ( 2009 ) before it fell to sixth place the next week . Rare Replay was the sixth best selling game in North America for August 2015 . The compilation had earlier been Amazon.com 's most preordered game of the 2015 Electronic Entertainment Expo . Reviewers liked its value proposition and low price . 
 Reviewers noted the quality and craft that went into the compilation 's design . Jaz Rignall ( USgamer ) was impressed by the compilation 's presentation and balance between frills and efficiency , and Dan Whitehead ( Eurogamer ) felt that the theatrical theme fit Rare 's character . Reviewers considered Rare Replay a high @-@ water mark for video game compilations . Stephen Totilo ( Kotaku ) called it the best since Valve 's The Orange Box . Chris Plante ( The Verge ) praised Rare Replay as a viable response to <unk> copyright infringement , with its slight hardware improvements and added touches . Alternatively , Jeremy Parish ( USgamer ) judged the Criterion Collection @-@ style presentation of the contemporaneous Mega Man Legacy Collection ( 2015 ) to provide a more authentic appreciation of its original material . Ars Technica wrote that the compilation 's target audience — gamers who experienced the originals in their heyday — would likely not be affected by a critical review of the included games . He felt that the compilation 's variety offered players at least eight new and exciting games apiece regardless of their feelings towards Rare . Many of the compilation 's games already had long @-@ established legacies . 
 Communal favorites of the package included Blast Corps , Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Nuts & Bolts , the Viva Piñata games , and the Nintendo 64 classics ( especially Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Conker , and Perfect Dark ) . Least favorites included Perfect Dark Zero , Grabbed by the Ghoulies , Snake Rattle & Roll , and the early Spectrum games , which reviewers felt had aged the worst . However , Sam Machkovech of Ars Technica felt that the seven Spectrum games showed a more experimental and unrefined side of the company that tested the bounds of game design . He called the selections " incredibly forward @-@ thinking " but too confusing to control and heavily focused on repeated quests and item collection . 
 Critics were disappointed at the exclusion of Donkey Kong Country , GoldenEye 007 , and Diddy Kong Racing , which they considered among the company 's best games , but an inevitable absence due to licensing issues . Other reviewers were not as disappointed , and felt that the package was fine without them . The Kotaku reviewer found that the package 's omission of Nintendo franchises and Kinect Sports hurt its overall continuity , such as understanding how Conker was a response to the " cutesy " Nintendo characters of its predecessors . The reviewer discerned that Rare Replay was , in part , " image rehabilitation for a studio that had stopped making classic games many years ago " , and hoped that the package was a sign of commitment to more " deep and daring games " in Rare 's future . Ars Technica 's critic lamented that GoldenEye was yet to receive any remaster or rerelease while Donkey Kong Country was rereleased on Nintendo 's Virtual Console . He was impressed by Microsoft 's ability to license from publishers including Tradewest , Nintendo , Milton Bradley , and Electronic Arts , but noted that Rare 's Super Nintendo @-@ era games were unrepresented and was upset to see Rare 's " Mario Kart clones " and It 's Mr. Pants ! left out . Eurogamer 's reviewer considered the compilation a feat in an era where consoles were receiving endless re @-@ releases . He was surprised to see Rare 's style remain consistent over time , and compared the company 's legacy to that of Cosgrove Hall . Philip Kollar ( Polygon ) said that the selections represented Rare 's full gamut . Kyle Hilliard ( Game Informer ) wrote that the compilation had two pleasant surprises for every dud . 
 Reviewers felt that the archival game content and developer interviews were among Rare Replay 's best features . Some were frustrated that the features were locked behind time @-@ consuming in @-@ game challenges . Machkovech ( Ars Technica ) found himself stuck not even halfway through the stamp card progress after finishing the easiest achievements . This made the unreleased game footage particularly hard to access . Totilo ( Kotaku ) similarly became uninterested in finishing the stamp collection . He called the stamps the package 's " sickest joke " in consideration of Rare 's reputation for collectible @-@ heavy games . Some reviewers found the developer content more important than individual games . Polygon 's reviewer called the compilation " an essential piece of gaming history " , while Kotaku 's critic noted that the features lacked a straightforward history of the company and hid Rare 's significant , former ties with Nintendo . Whitehead ( Eurogamer ) wondered why Mire Mare and other early games were ignored in the bonus content . Machkovech ( Ars Technica ) found Rare Replay to be as much a " memorial " as an anthology since Rare had become " a shadow of its former self " . He noted how the compilation ends around the time when Rare 's founding Stamper brothers left the company . Reviewers felt that the Stamper brothers were a conspicuous absence from the compilation and Jaz Rignall figured that the compilation 's stamps feature was a reference to the brothers . 
 Reviewers praised the feature by which players could " rewind " time and reattempt difficult sections of ZX Spectrum and Nintendo Entertainment System games , which were known for their difficulty , especially in the notoriously challenging Battletoads . Kotaku figured that Rare added cheats to make the esoteric and " crushingly tough " Spectrum games tolerable , and the Ars Technica review wished that this " rewind " feature had been extended to the Nintendo 64 titles . Critics liked the Snapshot challenges and Polygon reported that they were crucial for learning basic game mechanics , though less accessible than those of NES Remix . Reviewers complained that the Spectrum game controls were difficult to decipher . The Ars Technica reviewer thought that the compilation did a poor job of explaining each game 's controls , and wondered why Rare did not include introductory or how @-@ to videos . Instead , he turned to YouTube videos and external <unk> before playing each game . Eurogamer and Ars Technica disagreed on the virtues of having the Spectrum emulator replicate the graphical glitches of the original console . Jaz Rignall of USgamer appreciated the added option to save game progress at any time for the Spectrum classics , and wrote that the collection will remind players how difficult games used to be . 
 Rare Replay 's Nintendo 64 emulation pleased critics . Ars Technica wrote that the polygonal upgrades compensated for the " blurry " and " pixelated " source material , though the Nintendo 64 multiplayer modes lacked the frame rate upgrades that their single @-@ player modes received . Kotaku noted that the Xbox One had more Nintendo 64 re @-@ releases than Nintendo 's Wii U Virtual Console . Its reviewer found the in @-@ game Xbox One button prompts to be " delightful anachronisms " . Ars Technica 's reviewer commended Rare 's choice to the Nintendo 64 version of Conker 's Bad Fur Day over its updated yet censored Xbox re @-@ release . Initial reviews found Jet Force Gemini unplayable without dual thumbstick controls , which were later added . While Machkovech ( Ars Technica ) considered Rare 's Microsoft games to the weakest of the lot , Whitehead ( Eurogamer ) found them even more enjoyable in the context of Rare Replay . Reviewers noted frame rate and technical issues in the Xbox 360 emulation and did not like its separation from the rest of the compilation . Kollar ( Polygon ) called the Xbox 360 game installation process needlessly complex , and Marty Sliva ( IGN ) did not like how the Xbox 360 startup sequence interrupted the compilation 's cohesion . He added that the emulated Xbox 360 experience was subpar compared to the <unk> experience . 
 = Battle of the Nile = 
 The Battle of the Nile ( also known as the Battle of Aboukir Bay ; French : Bataille d <unk> ; Egyptian Arabic : معركة أبي <unk> <unk> ) was a major naval battle fought between the British Royal Navy and the Navy of the French Republic at Aboukir Bay on the Mediterranean coast off Egypt from 1 to 3 August 1798 . The battle was the climax of a naval campaign that had ranged across the Mediterranean during the previous three months , as a large French convoy sailed from Toulon to Alexandria carrying an expeditionary force under then General Napoleon Bonaparte . In the battle , the British fleet , led by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson , decisively defeated the French under Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys d 'Aigalliers . 
 Napoleon Bonaparte sought to invade Egypt as the first step in a campaign against British India in an effort to drive Britain out of the French Revolutionary Wars . As Bonaparte 's fleet crossed the Mediterranean , it was pursued by a British force under Nelson , who had been sent from the British fleet in the Tagus to learn the purpose of the French expedition and defeat it . For more than two months , he chased the French , on several occasions only missing them by a matter of hours . Bonaparte , aware of Nelson 's pursuit , enforced absolute secrecy about his destination and was able to capture Malta and then land in Egypt without interception by the British naval forces . 
 With the French army ashore , the French fleet anchored in Aboukir Bay , 20 miles ( 32 km ) northeast of Alexandria . Commander Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys d 'Aigalliers believed he had established a formidable defensive position . When the British fleet arrived off Egypt on 1 August and discovered Brueys 's dispositions , Nelson ordered an immediate attack . His ships advanced on the French line and split into two divisions as they approached . One cut across the head of the line and passed between the anchored French and the shore while the other engaged the seaward side of the French fleet . Trapped in a crossfire , the leading French warships were battered into surrender during a fierce three @-@ hour battle , while the centre succeeded in repelling the initial British attack . As British reinforcements arrived , the centre came under renewed assault and at 22 : 00 the French flagship Orient exploded . With Brueys dead , and his vanguard and centre defeated , the rear division of the French fleet attempted to break out of the bay , but ultimately only two ships of the line and two frigates escaped , from a total of 17 ships engaged . 
 The battle reversed the strategic situation between the two nations ' forces in the Mediterranean and entrenched the Royal Navy in the dominant position it would retain for the rest of the war . It also encouraged other European countries to turn against France , and was a factor in the outbreak of the War of the Second Coalition . Bonaparte 's army was trapped in Egypt , and Royal Navy dominance off the Syrian coast contributed significantly to its defeat at the Siege of Acre in 1799 that preceded Bonaparte 's return to Europe . Nelson , who had been wounded in the battle , was proclaimed a hero across Europe and was subsequently made Baron Nelson , although he was privately dissatisfied with his rewards . His captains were also highly praised and would go on to form the nucleus of the legendary <unk> Band of Brothers . The legend of the battle has remained prominent in the popular consciousness , with perhaps the best @-@ known representation being Felicia Hemans ' 1826 poem Casabianca . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following Napoleon Bonaparte 's victories over the Austrian Empire in northern Italy – which helped secure victory for the French in the War of the First Coalition in 1797 – Great Britain remained the only major European power still at war with the French Republic . The French Directory investigated a number of strategic options to counter British opposition , including projected invasions of Ireland and Britain and the expansion of the French Navy to challenge the Royal Navy at sea . Despite significant efforts , British control of Northern European waters rendered these ambitions impractical in the short term , and the Royal Navy remained firmly in control of the Atlantic Ocean . However , the French navy was dominant in the Mediterranean , following the withdrawal of the British fleet after the outbreak of war between Britain and Spain in 1796 . This allowed Bonaparte to propose an invasion of Egypt as an alternative to confronting Britain directly , believing that the British would be too distracted by an imminent Irish uprising to intervene in the Mediterranean . 
 Bonaparte believed that by establishing a permanent presence in Egypt ( nominally part of the neutral Ottoman Empire ) the French would obtain a staging point for future operations against British India , possibly in conjunction with the Tipu Sultan of Seringapatam , that might successfully drive the British out of the war . The campaign would sever the chain of communication that connected Britain with India , an essential part of the British Empire whose trade generated the wealth Britain required to prosecute the war successfully . The French Directory agreed with Bonaparte 's plans , although a major factor in their decision was a desire to see the politically ambitious Bonaparte and the fiercely loyal veterans of his Italian campaigns travel as far from France as possible . During the spring of 1798 , Bonaparte assembled more than 35 @,@ 000 soldiers in Mediterranean France and Italy and developed a powerful fleet at Toulon . He also formed the Commission des Sciences et des Arts , a body of scientists and engineers intended to establish a French colony in Egypt . Napoleon kept the destination of the expedition top secret — most of the army 's officers did not know of its target , and Bonaparte did not publicly reveal his goal until the first stage of the expedition was complete . 
 = = = Mediterranean campaign = = = 
 Bonaparte 's armada sailed from Toulon on 19 May 1798 , making rapid progress through the Ligurian Sea and collecting more ships at Genoa , before sailing southwards along the Sardinian coast and passing Sicily on 7 June . On 9 June , the fleet arrived off Malta , then under the ownership of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem , ruled by Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim . Bonaparte demanded that his fleet be permitted entry to the fortified harbour of Valletta . When the Knights refused , the French general responded by ordering a large scale invasion of the Maltese Islands , overrunning the defenders after 24 hours of skirmishing . The Knights formally surrendered on 12 June and , in exchange for substantial financial compensation , handed the islands and all of their resources over to Bonaparte , including the extensive property of the Roman Catholic Church on Malta . Within a week , Bonaparte had resupplied his ships , and on 19 June , his fleet departed for Alexandria in the direction of Crete , leaving 4 @,@ 000 men at Valletta under General Claude @-@ Henri Vaubois to ensure French control of the islands . 
 While Bonaparte was sailing to Malta , the Royal Navy re @-@ entered the Mediterranean for the first time in more than a year . Alarmed by reports of French preparations on the Mediterranean coast , Lord Spencer at the Admiralty sent a message to Vice @-@ Admiral Earl St. Vincent , commander of the Mediterranean Fleet based in the Tagus River , to despatch a squadron to investigate . This squadron , consisting of three ships of the line and three frigates , was entrusted to Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson . 
 Nelson was a highly experienced officer who had been blinded in one eye during fighting in Corsica in 1794 and subsequently commended for his capture of two Spanish ships of the line at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent in February 1797 . In July 1797 , he lost an arm at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and had been forced to return to Britain to recuperate . Returning to the fleet at the Tagus in late April 1798 , he was ordered to collect the squadron stationed at Gibraltar and sail for the Ligurian Sea . On 21 May , as Nelson 's squadron approached Toulon , it was struck by a fierce gale and Nelson 's flagship , HMS Vanguard , lost its topmasts and was almost wrecked on the Corsican coast . The remainder of the squadron was scattered . The ships of the line sheltered at San Pietro Island off Sardinia ; the frigates were blown to the west and failed to return . 
 On 7 June , following hasty repairs to his flagship , a fleet consisting of ten ships of the line and a fourth @-@ rate joined Nelson off Toulon . The fleet , under the command of Captain Thomas Troubridge , had been sent by Earl St. Vincent to reinforce Nelson , with orders that he was to pursue and intercept the Toulon convoy . Although he now had enough ships to challenge the French fleet , Nelson suffered two great disadvantages : He had no intelligence regarding the destination of the French , and no frigates to scout ahead of his force . Striking southwards in the hope of collecting information about French movements , Nelson 's ships stopped at Elba and Naples , where the British ambassador , Sir William Hamilton , reported that the French fleet had passed Sicily headed in the direction of Malta . Despite pleas from Nelson and Hamilton , King Ferdinand of Naples refused to lend his frigates to the British fleet , fearing French reprisals . On 22 June , a brig sailing from Ragusa brought Nelson the news that the French had sailed eastwards from Malta on 16 June . After conferring with his captains , the admiral decided that the French target must be Egypt and set off in pursuit . Incorrectly believing the French to be five days ahead rather than two , Nelson insisted on a direct route to Alexandria without deviation . 
 On the evening of 22 June , Nelson 's fleet passed the French in the darkness , overtaking the slow invasion convoy without realising how close they were to their target . Making rapid time on a direct route , Nelson reached Alexandria on 28 June and discovered that the French were not there . After a meeting with the suspicious Ottoman commander , Sayyid Muhammad Kurayyim , Nelson ordered the British fleet northwards , reaching the coast of Anatolia on 4 July and turning westwards back towards Sicily . Nelson had missed the French by less than a day — the scouts of the French fleet arrived off Alexandria in the evening of 29 June . 
 Concerned by his near encounter with Nelson , Bonaparte ordered an immediate invasion , his troops coming ashore in a poorly managed amphibious operation in which at least 20 drowned . Marching along the coast , the French army stormed Alexandria and captured the city , after which Bonaparte led the main force of his army inland . He instructed his naval commander , Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys D 'Aigalliers , to anchor in Alexandria harbour , but naval surveyors reported that the channel into the harbour was too shallow and narrow for the larger ships of the French fleet . As a result , the French selected an alternative anchorage at Aboukir Bay , 20 miles ( 32 km ) northeast of Alexandria . 
 Nelson 's fleet reached Syracuse in Sicily on 19 July and took on essential supplies . There the admiral wrote letters describing the events of the previous months : " It is an old saying , ' the Devil 's children have the Devil 's luck . ' I cannot find , or at this moment learn , beyond vague conjecture where the French fleet are gone to . All my ill fortune , hitherto , has proceeded from want of frigates . " By 24 July , his fleet was resupplied and , having determined that the French must be somewhere in the Eastern Mediterranean , Nelson sailed again in the direction of the Morea . On 28 July , at Coron , Nelson finally obtained intelligence describing the French attack on Egypt and turned south across the Mediterranean . His scouts , HMS Alexander and HMS Swiftsure , sighted the French transport fleet at Alexandria on the afternoon of 1 August . 
 = = = Aboukir Bay = = = 
 When Alexandria harbour had proved inadequate for his fleet , Brueys had gathered his captains and discussed their options . Bonaparte had ordered the fleet to anchor in Aboukir Bay , a shallow and exposed anchorage , but had supplemented the orders with the suggestion that , if Aboukir Bay was too dangerous , Brueys could sail north to Corfu , leaving only the transports and a handful of lighter warships at Alexandria . Brueys refused , in the belief that his squadron could provide essential support to the French army on shore , and called his captains aboard his 120 @-@ gun flagship Orient to discuss their response should Nelson discover the fleet in its anchorage . Despite vocal opposition from Contre @-@ amiral Armand Blanquet , who insisted that the fleet would be best able to respond in open water , the rest of the captains agreed that anchoring in a line of battle inside the bay presented the strongest tactic for confronting Nelson . It is possible that Bonaparte envisaged Aboukir Bay as a temporary anchorage : on 27 July , he expressed the expectation that Brueys had already transferred his ships to Alexandria , and three days later , he issued orders for the fleet to make for Corfu in preparation for naval operations against the Ottoman territories in the Balkans , although Bedouin partisans intercepted and killed the courier carrying the instructions . 
 Aboukir Bay is a coastal indentation 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ) across , stretching from the village of Abu Qir in the west to the town of Rosetta to the east , where one of the mouths of the River Nile empties into the Mediterranean . In 1798 , the bay was protected at its western end by extensive rocky shoals which ran 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) into the bay from a promontory guarded by Aboukir Castle . A small fort situated on an island among the rocks protected the shoals . The fort was garrisoned by French soldiers and armed with at least four cannon and two heavy mortars . Brueys had augmented the fort with his bomb vessels and gunboats , anchored among the rocks to the west of the island in a position to give support to the head of the French line . Further shoals ran unevenly to the south of the island and extended across the bay in a rough semicircle approximately 1 @,@ 650 yards ( 1 @,@ 510 m ) from the shore . These shoals were too shallow to permit the passage of larger warships , and so Brueys ordered his thirteen ships of the line to form up in a line of battle following the northeastern edge of the shoals to the south of the island , a position that allowed the ships to disembark supplies from their port sides while covering the landings with their starboard batteries . Orders were issued for each ship to attach strong cables to the bow and stern of their neighbours , which would effectively turn the line into a long battery forming a theoretically impregnable barrier . Brueys positioned a second , inner line of four frigates approximately 350 yards ( 320 m ) west of the main line , roughly halfway between the line and the shoal . The van of the French line was led by Guerrier , positioned 2 @,@ 400 yards ( 2 @,@ 200 m ) southeast of Aboukir Island and about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) from the edge of the shoals that surrounded the island . The line stretched southeast , with the centre bowed seawards away from the shoal . The French ships were spaced at intervals of 160 yards ( 150 m ) and the whole line was 2 @,@ 850 yards ( 2 @,@ 610 m ) long , with the flagship Orient at the centre and two large 80 @-@ gun ships anchored on either side . The rear division of the line was under the command of Counter @-@ Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve in Guillaume Tell . 
 In deploying his ships in this way , Brueys hoped that the British would be forced by the shoals to attack his strong centre and rear , allowing his van to use the prevailing northeasterly wind to counterattack the British once they were engaged . However , he had made a serious misjudgement : he had left enough room between Guerrier and the shoals for an enemy ship to cut across the head of the French line and proceed between the shoals and the French ships , allowing the unsupported vanguard to be caught in a crossfire by two divisions of enemy ships . Compounding this error , the French only prepared their ships for battle on their starboard ( seaward ) sides , from which they expected the attack would have to come ; their landward port sides were unprepared . The port side gun ports were closed , and the decks on that side were uncleared , with various stored items blocking access to the guns . Brueys ' dispositions had a second significant flaw : The 160 @-@ yard gaps between ships were large enough for a British ship to push through and break the French line . Furthermore , not all of the French captains had followed Brueys ' orders to attach cables to their neighbours ' bow and stern , which would have prevented such a manoeuvre . The problem was exacerbated by orders to only anchor at the bow , which allowed the ships to swing with the wind and widened the gaps . It also created areas within the French line not covered by the broadside of any ship . British vessels could anchor in those spaces and engage the French without reply . In addition , the deployment of Brueys ' fleet prevented the rear from effectively supporting the van due to the prevailing winds . 
 A more pressing problem for Brueys was a lack of food and water for the fleet : Bonaparte had unloaded almost all of the provisions carried aboard and no supplies were reaching the ships from the shore . To remedy this , Brueys sent foraging parties of 25 men from each ship along the coast to requisition food , dig wells , and collect water . Constant attacks by Bedouin partisans , however , required escorts of heavily armed guards for each party . Hence , up to a third of the fleet 's sailors were away from their ships at any one time . Brueys wrote a letter describing the situation to Minister of Marine Étienne Eustache Bruix , reporting that " Our crews are weak , both in number and quality . Our rigging , in general , out of repair , and I am sure it requires no little courage to undertake the management of a fleet furnished with such tools . " 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Nelson 's arrival = = = 
 Although initially disappointed that the main French fleet was not at Alexandria , Nelson knew from the presence of the transports that they must be nearby . At 14 : 00 on 1 August , lookouts on HMS Zealous reported the French anchored in Aboukir Bay , its signal lieutenant just beating the lieutenant on HMS Goliath with the signal , but inaccurately describing 16 French ships of the line instead of 13 . At the same time , French lookouts on Heureux , the ninth ship in the French line , sighted the British fleet approximately nine nautical miles off the mouth of Aboukir Bay . The French initially reported just 11 British ships – Swiftsure and Alexander were still returning from their scouting operations at Alexandria , and so were 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) to the west of the main fleet , out of sight . Troubridge 's ship , HMS Culloden , was also some distance from the main body , towing a captured merchant ship . At the sight of the French , Troubridge abandoned the vessel and made strenuous efforts to rejoin Nelson . Due to the need for so many sailors to work onshore , Brueys had not deployed any of his lighter warships as scouts , which left him unable to react swiftly to the sudden appearance of the British . 
 As his ships readied for action , Brueys ordered his captains to gather for a conference on Orient and hastily recalled his shore parties , although most had still not returned by the start of the battle . To replace them , large numbers of men were taken out of the frigates and distributed among the ships of the line . Brueys also hoped to lure the British fleet onto the shoals at Aboukir Island , sending the brigs Alerte and <unk> to act as decoys in the shallow waters . By 16 : 00 , Alexander and Swiftsure were also in sight , although some distance from the main British fleet . Brueys gave orders to abandon the plan to remain at anchor and instead for his line to set sail . Blanquet protested the order on the grounds that there were not enough men aboard the French ships to both sail the ships and man the guns . Nelson gave orders for his leading ships to slow down , to allow the British fleet to approach in a more organised formation . This convinced Brueys that rather than risk an evening battle in confined waters , the British were planning to wait for the following day . He rescinded his earlier order to sail . Brueys may have been hoping that the delay would allow him to slip past the British during the night and thus follow Bonaparte 's orders not to engage the British fleet directly if he could avoid it . 
 Nelson ordered the fleet to slow down at 16 : 00 to allow his ships to rig " springs " on their anchor cables , a system of attaching the bow anchor that increased stability and allowed his ships to swing their broadsides to face an enemy while stationary . It also increased manoeuvrability and therefore reduced the risk of coming under raking fire . Nelson 's plan , shaped through discussion with his senior captains during the return voyage to Alexandria , was to advance on the French and pass down the seaward side of the van and centre of the French line , so that each French ship would face two British ships and the massive Orient would be fighting against three . The direction of the wind meant that the French rear division would be unable to join the battle easily and would be cut off from the front portions of the line . To ensure that in the smoke and confusion of a night battle his ships would not accidentally open fire on one another , Nelson ordered that each ship prepare four horizontal lights at the head of their mizzen mast and hoist an illuminated White Ensign , which was different enough from the French tricolour that it would not be mistaken in poor visibility , reducing the risk that British ships might fire on one another in the darkness . As his ship was readied for battle , Nelson held a final dinner with Vanguard 's officers , announcing as he rose : " Before this time tomorrow I shall have gained a peerage or Westminster Abbey , " in reference to the rewards of victory or the traditional burial place of British military heroes . 
 Shortly after the French order to set sail was abandoned , the British fleet began rapidly approaching once more . Brueys , now expecting to come under attack that night , ordered each of his ships to place springs on their anchor cables and prepare for action . He sent the Alerte ahead , which passed close to the leading British ships and then steered sharply to the west over the shoal , in the hope that the ships of the line might follow and become grounded . None of Nelson 's captains fell for the ruse and the British fleet continued undeterred . At 17 : 30 , Nelson hailed one of his two leading ships , HMS Zealous under Captain Samuel Hood , which had been racing Goliath to be the first to fire on the French . The admiral ordered Hood to establish the safest course into the harbour . The British had no charts of the depth or shape of the bay , except a rough sketch map Swiftsure had obtained from a merchant captain , an inaccurate British atlas on Zealous , and a 35 @-@ year @-@ old French map aboard Goliath . Hood replied that he would take careful soundings as he advanced to test the depth of the water , and that , " If you will allow the honour of leading you into battle , I will keep the lead going . " Shortly afterwards , Nelson paused to speak with the brig HMS Mutine , whose commander , Lieutenant Thomas Hardy , had seized some maritime pilots from a small Alexandrine vessel . As Vanguard came to a stop , the following ships slowed . This caused a gap to open up between Zealous and Goliath and the rest of the fleet . To counter this effect , Nelson ordered HMS Theseus under Captain Ralph Miller to pass his flagship and join Zealous and Goliath in the vanguard . By 18 : 00 , the British fleet was again under full sail , Vanguard sixth in the line of ten ships as Culloden trailed behind to the north and Alexander and Swiftsure hastened to catch up to the west . Following the rapid change from a loose formation to a rigid line of battle both fleets raised their colours ; each British ship added additional Union Flags in its rigging in case its main flag was shot away . At 18 : 20 , as Goliath and Zealous rapidly bore down on them , the leading French ships Guerrier and Conquérant opened fire . 
 Ten minutes after the French opened fire Goliath , ignoring fire from the fort to starboard and from Guerrier to port , most of which was too high to trouble the ship , crossed the head of the French line . Captain Thomas Foley had noticed as he approached that there was an unexpected gap between Guerrier and the shallow water of the shoal . On his own initiative , Foley decided to exploit this tactical error and changed his angle of approach to sail through the gap . As the bow of Guerrier came within range , Goliath opened fire , inflicting severe damage with a double @-@ shotted raking broadside as the British ship turned to port and passed down the unprepared port side of Guerrier . Foley 's Royal Marines and a company of Austrian grenadiers joined the attack , firing their muskets . Foley had intended to anchor alongside the French ship and engage it closely , but his anchor took too long to descend and his ship passed Guerrier entirely . Goliath eventually stopped close to the bow of Conquérant , opening fire on the new opponent and using the unengaged starboard guns to exchange occasional shots with the frigate Sérieuse and bomb vessel Hercule , which were anchored inshore of the battle line . 
 Foley 's attack was followed by Hood in Zealous , who also crossed the French line and successfully anchored next to Guerrier in the space Foley had intended , engaging the lead ship 's bow from close range . Within five minutes Guerrier 's foremast had fallen , to cheers from the crews of the approaching British ships . The speed of the British advance took the French captains by surprise ; they were still aboard Orient in conference with the admiral when the firing started . Hastily launching their boats , they returned to their vessels . Captain Jean @-@ François @-@ Timothée <unk> of Guerrier shouted orders from his barge for his men to return fire on Zealous . 
 The third British ship into action was HMS Orion under Captain Sir James Saumarez , which rounded the engagement at the head of the battle line and passed between the French main line and the frigates that lay closer inshore . As he did so , the frigate Sérieuse opened fire on Orion , wounding two men . The convention in naval warfare of the time was that ships of the line did not attack frigates when there were ships of equal size to engage , but in firing first French Captain Claude @-@ Jean Martin had negated the rule . Saumarez waited until the frigate was at close range before replying . Orion needed just one broadside to reduce the frigate to a wreck , and Martin 's disabled ship drifted away over the shoal . During the delay this detour caused , two other British ships joined the battle : Theseus , which had been disguised as a first @-@ rate ship , followed Foley 's track across Guerrier 's bow . Miller steered his ship through the middle of the melee between the anchored British and French ships until he encountered the third French ship , Spartiate . Anchoring to port , Miller 's ship opened fire at close range . HMS Audacious under Captain Davidge Gould crossed the French line between Guerrier and Conquérant , anchoring between the ships and raking them both . Orion then rejoined the action further south than intended , firing on the fifth French ship , Peuple Souverain , and Admiral Blanquet 's flagship , Franklin . 
 The next three British ships , Vanguard in the lead followed by HMS Minotaur and HMS Defence , remained in line of battle formation and anchored on the starboard side of the French line at 18 : 40 . Nelson focused his flagship 's fire on Spartiate , while Captain Thomas Louis in Minotaur attacked the unengaged Aquilon and Captain John Peyton in Defence joined the attack on Peuple Souverain . With the French vanguard now heavily outnumbered , the following British ships , HMS Bellerophon and HMS Majestic , passed by the melee and advanced on the so far unengaged French centre . Both ships were soon fighting enemies much more powerful than they and began to take severe damage . Captain Henry Darby on Bellerophon missed his intended anchor near Franklin and instead found his ship underneath the main battery of the French flagship . Captain George Blagdon Westcott on Majestic also missed his station and almost collided with Heureux , coming under heavy fire from Tonnant . Unable to stop in time , Westcott 's jib boom became entangled with Tonnant 's shroud . 
 The French suffered too , Admiral Brueys on Orient was severely wounded in the face and hand by flying debris during the opening exchange of fire with Bellerophon . The final ship of the British line , Culloden under Troubridge , sailed too close to Aboukir Island in the growing darkness and became stuck fast on the shoal . Despite strenuous efforts from the Culloden 's boats , the brig Mutine and the 50 @-@ gun HMS Leander under Captain Thomas Thompson , the ship of the line could not be moved , and the waves drove Culloden further onto the shoal , inflicting severe damage to the ship 's hull . 
 = = = Surrender of the French van = = = 
 At 19 : 00 the identifying lights in the mizzenmasts of the British fleet were lit . By this time , Guerrier had been completely dismasted and heavily battered . Zealous by contrast was barely touched : Hood had situated Zealous outside the arc of most of the French ship 's broadsides , and in any case Guerrier was not prepared for an engagement on both sides simultaneously , with its port guns blocked by stores . Although their ship was a wreck , the crew of Guerrier refused to surrender , continuing to fire the few functional guns whenever possible despite heavy answering fire from Zealous . In addition to his cannon fire , Hood called up his marines and ordered them to fire volleys of musket shot at the deck of the French ship , driving the crew out of sight but still failing to secure the surrender from Captain <unk> . It was not until 21 : 00 , when Hood sent a small boat to Guerrier with a boarding party , that the French ship finally surrendered . Conquérant was defeated more rapidly , after heavy broadsides from passing British ships and the close attentions of Audacious and Goliath brought down all three masts before 19 : 00 . With his ship immobile and badly damaged , the mortally wounded Captain Etienne <unk> struck his colours and a boarding party seized control . Unlike Zealous , these British ships suffered relatively severe damage in the engagement . Goliath lost most of its rigging , suffered damage to all three masts and suffered more than 60 casualties . With his opponents defeated , Captain Gould on Audacious used the spring on his cable to transfer fire to Spartiate , the next French ship in line . To the west of the battle the battered Sérieuse sank over the shoal . Its masts protruded from the water as survivors scrambled into boats and rowed for the shore . 
 The transfer of Audacious 's broadside to Spartiate meant that Captain Maurice @-@ Julien <unk> now faced three opponents . Within minutes all three of his ship 's masts had fallen , but the battle around Spartiate continued until 21 : 00 , when the badly wounded <unk> ordered his colours struck . Although Spartiate was outnumbered , it had been supported by the next in line , Aquilon , which , uniquely of the French van squadron , was fighting only one opponent , Minotaur . Captain Antoine René Thévenard used the spring on his anchor cable to angle his broadside into a raking position across the bow of Nelson 's flagship , which consequently suffered more than 100 casualties , including the admiral . At approximately 20 : 30 , an iron splinter fired in a langrage shot from Spartiate struck Nelson over his blinded right eye . The wound caused a flap of skin to fall across his face , rendering him temporarily completely blind . Nelson collapsed into the arms of Captain Edward Berry and was carried below . Certain that his wound was fatal , he cried out " I am killed , remember me to my wife " , and called for his chaplain , Stephen Comyn . The wound was immediately inspected by Vanguard 's surgeon Michael Jefferson , who informed the admiral that it was a simple flesh wound and stitched the skin together . Nelson subsequently ignored Jefferson 's instructions to remain inactive , returning to the quarterdeck shortly before the explosion on Orient to oversee the closing stages of the battle . Although Thévenard 's manoeuvre was successful , it placed his own bow under Minotaur 's guns and by 21 : 25 the French ship was dismasted and battered , Captain Thévenard killed and his junior officers forced to surrender . With his opponent defeated , Captain Thomas Louis then took Minotaur south to join the attack on Franklin . 
 Defence and Orion attacked the fifth French ship , Peuple Souverain , from either side and the ship rapidly lost the fore and main masts . Aboard the Orion , a wooden block was smashed off one of the ship 's masts , killing two men before wounding Captain Saumarez in the thigh . On Peuple Souverain , Captain Pierre @-@ Paul <unk> was badly wounded and ordered his ship 's anchor cable cut in an effort to escape the bombardment . Peuple Souverain drifted south towards the flagship Orient , which mistakenly opened fire on the darkened vessel . Orion and Defence were unable to immediately pursue . Defence had lost its fore topmast and an improvised fireship that drifted through the battle narrowly missed Orion . The origin of this vessel , an abandoned and burning ship 's boat laden with highly flammable material , is uncertain , but it may have been launched from Guerrier as the battle began . Peuple Souverain anchored not far from Orient , but took no further part in the fighting . The wrecked ship surrendered during the night . Franklin remained in combat , but Blanquet had suffered a severe head wound and Captain Gillet had been carried below unconscious with severe wounds . Shortly afterwards , a fire broke out on the quarterdeck after an arms locker exploded , which was eventually extinguished with difficulty by the crew . 
 To the south , HMS Bellerophon was in serious trouble as the huge broadside of Orient pounded the ship . At 19 : 50 the mizzenmast and main mast both collapsed and fires broke out simultaneously at several points . Although the blazes were extinguished , the ship had suffered more than 200 casualties . Captain Darby recognised that his position was untenable and ordered the anchor cables cut at 20 : 20 . The battered ship drifted away from the battle under continued fire from Tonnant as the foremast collapsed as well . Orient had also suffered significant damage and Admiral Brueys had been struck in the midriff by a cannonball that almost cut him in half . He died fifteen minutes later , remaining on deck and refusing to be carried below . Orient 's captain , Luc @-@ Julien @-@ Joseph Casabianca , was also wounded , struck in the face by flying debris and knocked unconscious , while his twelve @-@ year @-@ old son had a leg torn off by a cannonball as he stood beside his father . The most southerly British ship , Majestic , had become briefly entangled with the 80 @-@ gun Tonnant , and in the resulting battle , suffered heavy casualties . Captain George Blagdon Westcott was among the dead , killed by French musket fire . Lieutenant Robert Cuthbert assumed command and successfully disentangled his ship , allowing the badly damaged Majestic to drift further southwards so that by 20 : 30 it was stationed between Tonnant and the next in line , Heureux , engaging both . To support the centre , Captain Thompson of Leander abandoned the futile efforts to drag the stranded Culloden off the shoal and sailed down the embattled French line , entering the gap created by the drifting Peuple Souverain and opening a fierce raking fire on Franklin and Orient . 
 While the battle raged in the bay , the two straggling British ships made strenuous efforts to join the engagement , focusing on the flashes of gunfire in the darkness . Warned away from the Aboukir shoals by the grounded Culloden , Captain Benjamin Hallowell in Swiftsure passed the melee at the head of the line and aimed his ship at the French centre . Shortly after 20 : 00 , a dismasted hulk was spotted drifting in front of Swiftsure and Hallowell initially ordered his men to fire before rescinding the order , concerned for the identity of the strange vessel . Hailing the battered ship , Hallowell received the reply " Bellerophon , going out of action disabled . " Relieved that he had not accidentally attacked one of his own ships in the darkness , Hallowell pulled up between Orient and Franklin and opened fire on them both . Alexander , the final unengaged British ship , which had followed Swiftsure , pulled up close to Tonnant , which had begun to drift away from the embattled French flagship . Captain Alexander Ball then joined the attack on Orient . 
 = = = Destruction of Orient = = = 
 At 21 : 00 , the British observed a fire on the lower decks of the Orient ( the French flagship ) . Identifying the danger this posed to the Orient , Captain Hallowell directed his gun crews to fire their cannon directly into the blaze . Sustained British cannon fire spread the flames throughout the ship 's stern and prevented all efforts to extinguish it . Within minutes the flames had ascended the rigging and set the vast sails alight . The nearest British ships , Swiftsure , Alexander , and Orion , all stopped firing , closed their gunports , and began edging away from the blazing ship in anticipation of the detonation of the enormous ammunition supplies stored on board . In addition , they took crew away from the guns to form fire parties and soak the sails and decks in seawater to help contain any resulting blazes . Likewise the French ships Tonnant , Heureux and Mercure all cut their anchor cables and drifted southwards away from the blazing ship . At 22 : 00 the fire reached the magazines and the Orient was almost completely destroyed by a massive explosion . The concussion of the blast alone was sufficient to rip open the seams of the nearest ships , and flaming wreckage landed in a huge circle , much of it flying directly over the surrounding ships into the sea beyond . Falling wreckage started fires on Swiftsure , Alexander , and Franklin , although in each case teams of sailors with water buckets succeeded in extinguishing the flames , despite a secondary explosion on Franklin . 
 It has never been firmly established how the fire on Orient broke out , but one common account is that jars of oil and paint had been left on the poop deck , rather than properly stowed away after paintwork on the ship 's hull had been completed shortly before the battle . Burning wadding from one of the British ships is believed to have floated onto the poop deck and ignited the paint . The fire rapidly spread through the admiral 's cabin and into a ready magazine that stored carcass ammunition , which was designed to burn more fiercely in water than in air . Conversely , Fleet Captain Honoré Ganteaume later reported the cause as an explosion on the quarterdeck , preceded by a series of minor fires on the main deck among the ship 's boats . Whatever its origin , the fire spread rapidly through the ship 's rigging , unchecked by the fire pumps aboard , which had been smashed by British shot . A second blaze then began at the bow , trapping hundreds of sailors in the ship 's waist . Subsequent archaeological investigation found debris scattered over 500 metres ( 550 yd ) of seabed and evidence that the ship was wracked by two huge explosions one after the other . Hundreds of men dived into the sea to escape the flames , but fewer than 100 survived the blast . British boats picked up approximately 70 survivors , including the wounded staff officer Léonard @-@ Bernard Motard . A few others , including Ganteaume , managed to reach the shore on rafts . The remainder of the crew , numbering more than 1 @,@ 000 men , were killed , including Captain Casabianca and his son , <unk> . 
 For ten minutes after the explosion there was no firing ; sailors from both sides were either too shocked by the blast or desperately extinguishing fires aboard their own ships to continue the fight . During the lull , Nelson gave orders that boats be sent to pull survivors from the water around the remains of Orient . At 22 : 10 , Franklin restarted the engagement by firing on Swiftsure . Isolated and battered , Blanquet 's ship was soon dismasted and the admiral , suffering a severe head wound , was forced to surrender by the combined firepower of Swiftsure and Defence . More than half of Franklin 's crew had been killed or wounded . 
 By 24 : 00 only Tonnant remained engaged , as Commodore Aristide Aubert Du Petit Thouars continued his fight with Majestic and fired on Swiftsure when the British ship moved within range . By 03 : 00 , after more than three hours of close quarter combat , Majestic had lost its main and mizzen masts while Tonnant was a dismasted hulk . Although Captain Du Petit Thouars had lost both legs and an arm he remained in command , insisting on having the tricolour nailed to the mast to prevent it from being struck and giving orders from his position propped up on deck in a bucket of wheat . Under his guidance , the battered Tonnant gradually drifted southwards away from the action to join the southern division under Villeneuve , who failed to bring these ships into effective action . Throughout the engagement the French rear had kept up an arbitrary fire on the battling ships ahead . The only noticeable effect was the smashing of Timoléon 's rudder by misdirected fire from the neighbouring Généreux . 
 = = = Morning = = = 
 As the sun rose at 04 : 00 on 2 August , firing broke out once again between the French southern division of Guillaume Tell , Tonnant , Généreux and Timoléon and the battered Alexander and Majestic . Although briefly outmatched , the British ships were soon joined by Goliath and Theseus . As Captain Miller manoeuvred his ship into position , Theseus briefly came under fire from the frigate Artémise . Miller turned his ship towards Artémise , but Captain Pierre @-@ Jean <unk> struck his flag and ordered his men to abandon the frigate . Miller sent a boat under Lieutenant William Hoste to take possession of the empty vessel , but <unk> had set fire to his ship as he left and Artémise blew up shortly afterwards . The surviving French ships of the line , covering their retreat with gunfire , gradually pulled to the east away from the shore at 06 : 00 . Zealous pursued , and was able to prevent the frigate Justice from boarding Bellerophon , which was anchored at the southern point of the bay undergoing hasty repairs . 
 Two other French ships still flew the tricolour , but neither was in a position to either retreat or fight . When Heureux and Mercure had cut their anchor cables to escape the exploding Orient , their crews had panicked and neither captain ( both of whom were wounded ) had managed to regain control of his ship . As a result , both vessels had drifted onto the shoal . Alexander , Goliath , Theseus and Leander attacked the stranded and defenceless ships , and both surrendered within minutes . The distractions provided by Heureux , Mercure and Justice allowed Villeneuve to bring most of the surviving French ships to the mouth of the bay at 11 : 00 . On the dismasted Tonnant , Commodore Du Petit Thouars was now dead from his wounds and thrown overboard at his own request . As the ship was unable to make the required speed it was driven ashore by its crew . Timoléon was too far south to escape with Villeneuve and , in attempting to join the survivors , had also grounded on the shoal . The force of the impact dislodged the ship 's foremast . The remaining French vessels : the ships of the line Guillaume Tell and Généreux and the frigates Justice and Diane , formed up and stood out to sea , pursued by Zealous . Despite strenuous efforts , Captain Hood 's isolated ship came under heavy fire and was unable to cut off the trailing Justice as the French survivors escaped seawards . Zealous was struck by a number of French shot and lost one man killed . 
 For the remainder of 2 August Nelson 's ships made improvised repairs and boarded and consolidated their prizes . Culloden especially required assistance . Troubridge , having finally dragged his ship off the shoal at 02 : 00 , found that he had lost his rudder and was taking on more than 120 long tons ( 122 t ) of water an hour . Emergency repairs to the hull and fashioning a replacement rudder from a spare topmast took most of the next two days . On the morning of 3 August , Nelson sent Theseus and Leander to force the surrender of the grounded Tonnant and Timoléon . The Tonnant , its decks crowded with 1 @,@ 600 survivors from other French vessels , surrendered as the British ships approached while Timoléon was set on fire by its remaining crew who then escaped to the shore in small boats . Timoléon exploded shortly after midday , the eleventh and final French ship of the line destroyed or captured during the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 " [ I ] went on deck to view the state of the fleets , and an awful sight it was . The whole bay was covered with dead bodies , mangled , wounded and scorched , not a bit of clothes on them except their trousers . " 
 British casualties in the battle were recorded with some accuracy in the immediate aftermath as 218 killed and approximately 677 wounded , although the number of wounded who subsequently died is not known . The ships that suffered most were Bellerophon with 201 casualties and Majestic with 193 . Other than Culloden the lightest loss was on Zealous , which had one man killed and seven wounded . 
 The casualty list included Captain Westcott , five lieutenants and ten junior officers among the dead , and Admiral Nelson , Captains Saumarez , Ball and Darby , and six lieutenants wounded . Other than Culloden , the only British ships seriously damaged in their hulls were Bellerophon , Majestic , and Vanguard . Bellerophon and Majestic were the only ships to lose masts : Majestic the main and mizzen and Bellerophon all three . 
 French casualties are harder to calculate but were significantly higher . Estimates of French losses range from 2 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 , with a suggested median point of 3 @,@ 500 , which includes more than 1 @,@ 000 captured wounded and nearly 2 @,@ 000 killed , half of whom died on Orient . In addition to Admiral Brueys killed and Admiral Blanquet wounded , four captains died and seven others were seriously wounded . The French ships suffered severe damage : Two ships of the line and two frigates were destroyed ( as well as a bomb vessel scuttled by its crew ) , and three other captured ships were too battered ever to sail again . Of the remaining prizes , only three were ever sufficiently repaired for frontline service . For weeks after the battle , bodies washed up along the Egyptian coast , decaying slowly in the intense , dry heat . 
 Nelson , who on surveying the bay on the morning of 2 August said , " Victory is not a name strong enough for such a scene " , remained at anchor in Aboukir Bay for the next two weeks , preoccupied with recovering from his wound , writing dispatches , and assessing the military situation in Egypt using documents captured on board one of the prizes . Nelson 's head wound was recorded as being " three inches long " with " the cranium exposed for one inch " . He suffered pain from the injury for the rest of his life and was badly scarred , styling his hair to disguise it as much as possible . As their commander recovered , his men stripped the wrecks of useful supplies and made repairs to their ships and prizes . 
 Throughout the week , Aboukir Bay was surrounded by bonfires lit by Bedouin tribesmen in celebration of the British victory . On 5 August , Leander was despatched to Cadiz with messages for Earl St. Vincent carried by Captain Edward Berry . Over the next few days the British landed all but 200 of the captured prisoners on shore under strict terms of parole , although Bonaparte later ordered them to be formed into an infantry unit and added to his army . The wounded officers taken prisoner were held on board Vanguard , where Nelson regularly entertained them at dinner . Historian Joseph Allen recounts that on one occasion Nelson , whose eyesight was still suffering following his wound , offered toothpicks to an officer who had lost his teeth and then passed a snuff @-@ box to an officer whose nose had been torn off , causing much embarrassment . On 8 August the fleet 's boats stormed Aboukir Island , which surrendered without a fight . The landing party removed four of the guns and destroyed the rest along with the fort they were mounted in , renaming the island " Nelson 's Island " . 
 On 10 August , Nelson sent Lieutenant Thomas Duval from Zealous with messages to the government in India . Duval travelled across the Middle East overland via camel train to Aleppo and took the East India Company ship Fly from Basra to Bombay , acquainting Governor @-@ General of India Viscount Wellesley with the situation in Egypt . On 12 August the frigates HMS Emerald under Captain Thomas <unk> Waller , HMS Alcmene under Captain George Johnstone Hope , and the sloop HMS Bonne Citoyenne under Captain Robert <unk> arrived off Alexandria . Initially the British mistook the frigate squadron for French warships and Swiftsure chased them away . They returned the following day once the error had been realised . The same day as the frigates arrived , Nelson sent Mutine to Britain with dispatches , under the command of Lieutenant Thomas Bladen Capel , who had replaced Hardy after the latter 's promotion to captain of Vanguard . On 14 August , Nelson sent Orion , Majestic , Bellerophon , Minotaur , Defence , Audacious , Theseus , Franklin , Tonnant , Aquilon , Conquérant , Peuple Souverain , and Spartiate to sea under the command of Saumarez . Many ships had only jury masts and it took a full day for the convoy to reach the mouth of the bay , finally sailing into open water on 15 August . On 16 August the British burned and destroyed the grounded prize Heureux as no longer fit for service and on 18 August also burned Guerrier and Mercure . On 19 August , Nelson sailed for Naples with Vanguard , Culloden , and Alexander , leaving Hood in command of Zealous , Goliath , Swiftsure , and the recently joined frigates to watch over French activities at Alexandria . 
 The first message to reach Bonaparte regarding the disaster that had overtaken his fleet arrived on 14 August at his camp on the road between <unk> and Cairo . The messenger was a staff officer sent by the Governor of Alexandria General Jean Baptiste Kléber , and the report had been hastily written by Admiral Ganteaume , who had subsequently rejoined Villeneuve 's ships at sea . One account reports that when he was handed the message , Bonaparte read it without emotion before calling the messenger to him and demanding further details . When the messenger had finished , the French general reportedly announced " Nous n <unk> plus de <unk> : eh bien . Il faut <unk> en ces <unk> , ou en <unk> grands comme les anciens " ( " We no longer have a fleet : well , we must either remain in this country or quit it as great as the ancients " ) . Another story , as told by the general 's secretary , <unk> , claims that Bonaparte was almost overcome by the news and exclaimed " Unfortunate Brueys , what have you done ! " Bonaparte later placed much of the blame for the defeat on the wounded Admiral Blanquet , falsely accusing him of surrendering Franklin while his ship was undamaged . <unk> from Ganteaume and Minister Étienne Eustache Bruix later reduced the degree of criticism Blanquet faced , but he never again served in a command capacity . Bonaparte 's most immediate concern however was with his own officers , who began to question the wisdom of the entire expedition . Inviting his most senior officers to dinner , Bonaparte asked them how they were . When they replied that they were " marvellous , " Bonaparte responded that it was just as well , since he would have them shot if they continued " fostering mutinies and preaching revolt . " To quell any uprising among the native inhabitants , Egyptians overheard discussing the battle were threatened with having their tongues cut out . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Nelson 's first set of dispatches were captured when Leander was intercepted and defeated by Généreux in a fierce engagement off the western shore of Crete on 18 August 1798 . As a result , reports of the battle did not reach Britain until Capel arrived in Mutine on 2 October , entering the Admiralty at 11 : 15 and personally delivering the news to Lord Spencer , who collapsed unconscious when he heard the report . Although Nelson had previously been castigated in the press for failing to intercept the French fleet , rumours of the battle had begun to arrive in Britain from the continent in late September and the news Capel brought was greeted with celebrations right across the country . Within four days Nelson had been elevated to Baron Nelson of the Nile and Burnham Thorpe , a title with which he was privately dissatisfied , believing his actions deserved better reward . King George III addressed the Houses of Parliament on 20 November with the words : 
 The unexampled series of our naval triumphs has received fresh splendour from the memorable and decisive action , in which a detachment of my fleet , under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Lord Nelson , attacked , and almost totally destroyed a superior force of the enemy , strengthened by every advantage of situation . By this great and brilliant victory , an enterprise , of which the injustice , perfidy , and extravagance had fixed the attention of the world , and which was peculiarly directed against some of the most valuable interests of the British empire , has , in the first instance , been turned to the confusion of its authors and the blow thus given to the power and influence of France , has afforded an opening , which , if improved by suitable exertions on the part of other powers , may lead to the general deliverance of Europe . 
 Saumarez 's convoy of prizes stopped first at Malta , where Saumarez provided assistance to a rebellion on the island among the Maltese population . It then sailed to Gibraltar , arriving on 18 October to the cheers of the garrison . Saumarez wrote that , " We can never do justice to the warmth of their applause , and the praises they all bestowed on our squadron . " On 23 October , following the transfer of the wounded to the military hospital and provision of basic supplies , the convoy sailed on towards Lisbon , leaving Bellerophon and Majestic behind for more extensive repairs . Peuple Souverain also remained at Gibraltar : The ship was deemed too badly damaged for the Atlantic voyage to Britain and so was converted to a guardship under the name of HMS Guerrier . The remaining prizes underwent basic repairs and then sailed for Britain , spending some months at the Tagus and joining with the annual merchant convoy from Portugal in June 1799 under the escort of a squadron commanded by Admiral Sir Alan Gardner , before eventually arriving at Plymouth . Their age and battered state meant that neither Conquérant nor Aquilon were considered fit for active service in the Royal Navy and both were subsequently hulked , although they had been bought into the service for £ 20 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 1 @,@ 772 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) each as HMS <unk> and HMS Aboukir to provide a financial reward to the crews that had captured them . Similar sums were also paid out for Guerrier , Mercure , Heureux and Peuple Souverain , while the other captured ships were worth considerably more . Constructed of Adriatic oak , Tonnant had been built in 1792 and Franklin and Spartiate were less than a year old . Tonnant and Spartiate , both of which later fought at the Battle of Trafalgar , joined the Royal Navy under their old names while Franklin , considered to be " the finest two @-@ decked ship in the world " , was renamed HMS Canopus . The total value of the prizes captured at the Nile and subsequently bought into the Royal Navy was estimated at just over £ 130 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 11 @,@ 520 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 Additional awards were presented to the British fleet : Nelson was awarded £ 2 @,@ 000 ( £ 189 @,@ 870 as of 2016 ) a year for life by the Parliament of Great Britain and £ 1 @,@ 000 per annum by the Parliament of Ireland , although the latter was inadvertently discontinued after the Act of Union dissolved the Irish Parliament . Both parliaments gave unanimous votes of thanks , each captain who served in the battle was presented with a specially minted gold medal and the first lieutenant of every ship engaged in the battle was promoted to commander . Troubridge and his men , initially excluded , received equal shares in the awards after Nelson personally interceded for the crew of the stranded Culloden , even though they did not directly participate in the engagement . The Honourable East India Company presented Nelson with £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 949 @,@ 340 as of 2016 ) in recognition of the benefit his action had on their holdings and the cities of London , Liverpool and other municipal and corporate bodies made similar awards . Nelson 's own captains presented him with a sword and a portrait as " proof of their esteem . " Nelson publicly encouraged this close bond with his officers and on 29 September 1798 described them as " We few , we happy few , we band of brothers " , echoing William Shakespeare 's play Henry V. From this grew the notion of the <unk> Band of Brothers , a cadre of high @-@ quality naval officers that served with Nelson for the remainder of his life . Nearly five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 Other rewards were bestowed by foreign states , particularly the Ottoman Emperor Selim III , who made Nelson the first Knight Commander of the newly created Order of the Crescent , and presented him with a <unk> , a diamond studded rose , a sable fur and numerous other valuable presents . Tsar Paul I of Russia sent , among other rewards , a gold box studded with diamonds , and similar gifts in silver arrived from other European rulers . On his return to Naples , Nelson was greeted with a triumphal procession led by King Ferdinand IV and Sir William Hamilton and was introduced for only the third time to Sir William 's wife Emma , Lady Hamilton , who fainted violently at the meeting , and apparently took several weeks to recover from her injuries . Lauded as a hero by the Neapolitan court , Nelson was later to dabble in Neapolitan politics and become the Duke of Bronté , actions for which he was criticised by his superiors and his reputation suffered . British general John Moore , who met Nelson in Naples at this time , described him as " covered with stars , medals and ribbons , more like a Prince of Opera than the Conqueror of the Nile . " 
 Rumours of a battle first appeared in the French press as early as 7 August , although credible reports did not arrive until 26 August , and even these claimed that Nelson was dead and Bonaparte a British prisoner . When the news became certain , the French press insisted that the defeat was the result both of an overwhelmingly large British force and unspecified " traitors . " Among the anti @-@ government journals in France , the defeat was blamed on the incompetence of the French Directory and on supposed lingering Royalist sentiments in the Navy . Villeneuve came under scathing attack on his return to France for his failure to support Brueys during the battle . In his defence , he pleaded that the wind had been against him and that Brueys had not issued orders for him to counterattack the British fleet . Writing many years later , Bonaparte commented that if the French Navy had adopted the same tactical principles as the British : 
 " Admiral Villeneuve would not have thought himself blameless at Aboukir , for remaining inactive with five or six ships , that is to say , with half the squadron , for twenty four hours , whilst the enemy was overpowering the other wing . " 
 By contrast , the British press were jubilant ; many newspapers sought to portray the battle as a victory for Britain over anarchy , and the success was used to attack the supposedly pro @-@ republican Whig politicians Charles James Fox and Richard Brinsley Sheridan . 
 There has been extensive historiographical debate over the comparative strengths of the fleets , although they were ostensibly evenly matched in size , each containing 13 ships of the line . However , the loss of Culloden , the relative sizes of Orient and Leander and the participation in the action by two of the French frigates and several smaller vessels , as well as the theoretical strength of the French position , leads most historians to the conclusion that the French were marginally more powerful . This is accentuated by the weight of broadside of several of the French ships : Spartiate , Franklin , Orient , Tonnant and Guillaume Tell were each significantly larger than any individual British ship in the battle . However inadequate deployment , reduced crews , and the failure of the rear division under Villeneuve to meaningfully participate , all contributed to the French defeat . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The Battle of the Nile has been called " arguably , the most decisive naval engagement of the great age of sail " , and " the most splendid and glorious success which the British Navy gained . " Historian and novelist C. S. Forester , writing in 1929 , compared the Nile to the great naval actions in history and concluded that " it still only stands rivalled by Tsu @-@ Shima as an example of the annihilation of one fleet by another of approximately equal material force " . The effect on the strategic situation in the Mediterranean was immediate , reversing the balance of the conflict and giving the British control at sea that they maintained for the remainder of the war . The destruction of the French Mediterranean fleet allowed the Royal Navy to return to the sea in force , as British squadrons set up blockades off French and allied ports . In particular , British ships cut Malta off from France , aided by the rebellion among the native Maltese population that forced the French garrison to retreat to Valletta and shut the gates . The ensuing Siege of Malta lasted for two years before the defenders were finally starved into surrender . In 1799 , British ships harassed Bonaparte 's army as it marched east and north through Palestine , and played a crucial part in Bonaparte 's defeat at the Siege of Acre , when the barges carrying the siege train were captured and the French storming parties were bombarded by British ships anchored offshore . It was during one of these latter engagements that Captain Miller of Theseus was killed in an ammunition explosion . The defeat at Acre forced Bonaparte to retreat to Egypt and effectively ended his efforts to carve an empire in the Middle East . The French general returned to France without his army late in the year , leaving Kléber in command of Egypt . 
 The Ottomans , with whom Bonaparte had hoped to conduct an alliance once his control of Egypt was complete , were encouraged by the Battle of the Nile to go to war against France . This led to a series of campaigns that slowly sapped the strength from the French army trapped in Egypt . The British victory also encouraged the Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire , both of whom were mustering armies as part of a Second Coalition , which declared war on France in 1799 . With the Mediterranean undefended , a Russian fleet entered the Ionian Sea , while Austrian armies recaptured much of the Italian territory lost to Bonaparte in the previous war . Without their best general and his veterans , the French suffered a series of defeats and it was not until Bonaparte returned to become First Consul that France once again held a position of strength on mainland Europe . In 1801 a British Expeditionary Force defeated the demoralised remains of the French army in Egypt . The Royal Navy used its dominance in the Mediterranean to invade Egypt without the fear of ambush while anchored off the Egyptian coast . 
 In spite of the overwhelming British victory in the climactic battle , the campaign has sometimes been considered a strategic success for France . Historian Edward Ingram noted that if Nelson had successfully intercepted Bonaparte at sea as ordered , the ensuing battle could have annihilated both the French fleet and the transports . As it was , Bonaparte was free to continue the war in the Middle East and later to return to Europe personally unscathed . The potential of a successful engagement at sea to change the course of history is underscored by the list of French army officers carried aboard the convoy who later formed the core of the generals and marshals under Emperor Napoleon . In addition to Bonaparte himself , Louis @-@ Alexandre Berthier , Auguste de Marmont , Jean Lannes , Joachim Murat , Louis Desaix , Jean Reynier , Antoine @-@ François <unk> , Jean @-@ <unk> Junot , Louis @-@ Nicolas Davout and Dumas were all passengers on the cramped Mediterranean crossing . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Battle of the Nile remains one of the Royal Navy 's most famous victories , and has remained prominent in the British popular imagination , sustained by its depiction in a large number of cartoons , paintings , poems , and plays . One of the best known poems about the battle is Casabianca , which was written by Felicia Dorothea Hemans in 1826 and describes a fictional account of the death of Captain Casabianca 's son on Orient . Monuments were raised , including Cleopatra 's Needle in London . Muhammad Ali of Egypt gave the monument in 1819 in recognition of the battle of 1798 and the campaign of 1801 but Great Britain did not erect it on the Victoria Embankment until 1878 . Another memorial , the Nile Clumps near Amesbury , consists of stands of beech trees purportedly planted by Lord Queensbury at the bequest of Lady Hamilton and Thomas Hardy after Nelson 's death . The trees form a plan of the battle ; each clump represents the position of a British or French ship . A similar arboreal memorial is thought to have been planted near Alnwick by Nelson 's agent Alexander Davison . The Royal Navy commemorated the battle with the ship names HMS Aboukir and HMS Nile , and in 1998 commemorated the 200th anniversary of the battle with a visit to Aboukir Bay by the modern frigate HMS Somerset , whose crew laid wreaths in memory of those who lost their lives in the battle . 
 Although Nelson biographer Ernle Bradford assumed in 1977 that the remains of Orient " are almost certainly unrecoverable , " the first archaeological investigation into the battle began in 1983 , when a French survey team under Jacques Dumas discovered the wreck of the French flagship . Franck <unk> later took over the work , leading a major project to explore the bay in 1998 . He found that material was scattered over an area 500 metres ( 550 yd ) in diameter . In addition to military and nautical equipment , <unk> recovered a large number of gold and silver coins from countries across the Mediterranean , some from the 17th century . It is likely that these were part of the treasure taken from Malta that was lost in the explosion aboard Orient . In 2000 , Italian archaeologist Paolo Gallo led an excavation focusing on ancient ruins on Nelson 's Island . It uncovered a number of graves that date from the battle , as well as others buried there during the 1801 invasion . These graves , which included a woman and three children , were relocated in 2005 to a cemetery at <unk> in Alexandria . The reburial was attended by sailors from the modern frigate HMS Chatham and a band from the Egyptian Navy , as well as a descendant of the only identified burial , Commander James Russell . 
 = = In Popular Culture = = 
 Author Julian <unk> features this battle in detail in his novel " Tenacious " ISBN <unk> 
 = St. Boniface General Hospital ( Winnipeg ) = 
 St. Boniface General Hospital ( also called St. Boniface Hospital or St. B ) is Manitoba 's second @-@ largest hospital , located in the St. Boniface neighbourhood of Winnipeg . It was founded by the Sisters of Charity ( Grey Nuns ) of Montreal in 1871 , and was the first hospital in Western Canada . The hospital was incorporated in 1960 , and as of 2003 has 554 beds and 78 bassinets . 
 St. Boniface Hospital is a tertiary health care facility , employing nearly 700 doctors and around 1 @,@ 500 nurses . The hospital buildings cover about 120 @,@ 774 m2 ( 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The St. Boniface Hospital & Research Foundation is the primary fundraising organization for the hospital . The general admissions program cares for 4 @,@ 000 patients per year in @-@ hospital , and about 40 @,@ 000 as outpatients . Over 5 @,@ 000 births per year occur at the hospital . St. Boniface is a regional centre for cardiac care , and is one of two specialized laboratory testing facilities . It also provides diagnostic imaging and hemodialysis for the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority . 
 Besides patient care , St. Boniface Hospital also carries out medical research and offers practicum positions for university students through its affiliation with the University of Manitoba . The hospital 's primary research mandate is in cardiovascular studies , imaging ( especially MRI ) , neurodegenerative disorders , and nutraceuticals . The hospital also participates in clinical trials of research discoveries . 
 = = Location = = 
 St. Boniface General Hospital is located between the Red and Assiniboine Rivers in the St. Boniface neighbourhood of Winnipeg , which is home to a large proportion of Manitoba 's Francophone population . It lies across the river from downtown and The Forks . The hospital has a parking structure and three parking lots . It also has an ambulance bay . 
 = = History = = 
 St. Boniface Hospital was established by the Grey Nuns in 1871 , the first hospital west of Quebec . At that time , it was a small facility with four beds . An operating room was added in 1894 . The Grey Nuns opened a school of nursing in 1897 and used the hospital to teach patient care . By the early 1900s , the hospital was treating approximately 2 @,@ 500 patients per year . An isolation hospital and nurse 's residence was added in 1900 . Due to overcrowding , a new addition was built in 1905 , effectively doubling the patient capacity of the hospital . It was awarded provisional approval by the American College of Surgeons ( ACS ) in 1944 , later becoming the office of the Manitoba Chapter of the ACS . As of 2003 , the hospital has 554 beds and 78 bassinets . 
 The hospital order was incorporated in 1960 under the name St. Boniface General Hospital , giving it the right to invest and borrow money , own property , and collect fees for services . St. Boniface Hospital , along with the Royal Victoria Hospital , Montreal , opened the first hospice programs in Canada in 1975 . The Hospital Research Centre opened in 1987 , becoming the first Canadian free @-@ standing medical research facility . During the 1997 Red River Flood , the hospital had to be evacuated , and has since created a disaster plan to cope any future evacuations or closures . 
 The Institute for stained glass in Canada has documented the stained glass at St Boniface Hospital . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Basic medical care is a benefit provided to all Canadians through Canada 's publicly funded health system . However , significant additional funding is required for medical research , improvements in patient services , and the clinical programs found at St. Boniface Hospital . The hospital ended the 2008 fiscal year with a C $ 900 @,@ 000 deficit . The St. Boniface Hospital & Research Foundation , founded in 1971 , is the primary fundraising organization for St. Boniface Hospital and the Research Centre . By the end of 2006 , the Foundation had raised over C $ 100 million for patient care and research . 
 = = Research = = 
 The St. Boniface Hospital Research Centre is the hospital 's main research facility . It comprises three separate units : the G. Campbell MacLean Building , the Dr. Andrei Sakharov MRI Centre , and the I. H. Asper Clinical Research Institute , which are operated with research grants , industry contracts , fundraising , and funding from the University of Manitoba . The centre opened in 1987 . Its primary research mandate addresses three main areas : cardiovascular sciences , magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) and spectroscopy , and degenerative disorders associated with aging . In addition , the Centre undertakes research in anesthesia , epidemiology , family medicine , infectious diseases , nephrology , nursing , nutraceuticals , pharmaceuticals , sleep disorders , and surgery . 
 = = = Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences = = = 
 St. Boniface Hospital 's Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences researches heart disease at the cellular and molecular levels . It also hosts the Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology , the journal Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry , the International Academy of Cardiovascular Sciences , and its journal Experimental & Clinical Cardiology . The Institute was created as the Division of Cardiovascular Sciences in 1987 by Dr. <unk> <unk> . Its researchers have been published in such academic journals as the New England Journal of Medicine and Cardiovascular Research . 
 = = = Division of Neurodegenerative Disorders = = = 
 The Division of Neurodegenerative Disorders ( DND ) was established in 1999 . The DND is a neurodegenerative research team working to identify causes and treatments for disorders like Alzheimer ’ s , strokes , traumatic brain injury , and central nervous system degeneration , to study the effect of diabetes on neurodegeneration , and to conduct sleep studies . As of 2011 , the principal investigators collectively have over 150 journal publications . 
 = = = Canadian Centre for Agri @-@ Food Research in Health and Medicine = = = 
 The Canadian Centre for Agri @-@ food Research in Health and Medicine ( <unk> ) investigates nutraceuticals and health food in partnership with Agriculture and Agri @-@ food Canada . <unk> ’ s mandate is to research natural health products and give the results to the scientific community and the general public . The results of their research have been published in numerous academic journals , including the European Journal of Clinical Nutrition and the Journal of Biological Chemistry . 
 = = = MRI centre = = = 
 The Dr. Andrei Sakharov Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI ) Facility , the first of its kind in Manitoba , has three MRI scanners . The facility allows radiologists to diagnose abnormalities of the brain , spinal cord , internal organs and joints . St. Boniface Hospital Research Centre is a recognized leader in the MRI field and has one of the largest MRI research facilities in Canada . An MRI was first installed at St. Boniface in 1990 ; this MRI was eventually replaced by a more modern version , which is primarily used for clinical purposes . The other two MRIs are research @-@ oriented : they are an interventional scanner and a head @-@ only functional unit . The clinical scanner enables the Centre to do echo @-@ planar imaging , producing images at video rates ; the interventional MRI gives physicians access to the patient during imaging , which supports research into robotics @-@ guided laser surgery . Research carried out at the centre has been published in the Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging . 
 = = = Clinical research = = = 
 The I. H. Asper Clinical Research Institute facilitates clinical trials of the discoveries made at the Research Centre . The Institute is the third research facility in Canada to conduct tests on new drugs and medical devices . The I. H. Asper Clinical Research Institute was opened in 2004 . 
 = = Education = = 
 St. Boniface Hospital is affiliated with the University of Manitoba 's education and research branches , providing internship and practicum positions for students . The hospital works with multiple University of Manitoba faculties , including medicine , nursing , pharmacy , social work , respiratory therapy , physiotherapy and occupational therapy , as well as with Red River College and Collège <unk> de Saint @-@ Boniface . St. Boniface Hospital also hosts the Winnipeg Critical Care Nursing Education Program . 
 = = Services = = 
 St. Boniface is one of Manitoba 's two tertiary care centres . Patients are usually referred to the hospital by their doctors or clinics for specialized care , but may also be admitted through the emergency department . The Medicine Program is the adult general admissions program . This program admits around 4 @,@ 000 patients per year , and treats around 40 @,@ 000 through outpatient clinics . Services include : internal medicine , endocrinology , rheumatology , respiratory medicine , gastroenterology , hematology , oncology , pathology and neurology . The outreach program also includes at @-@ home intravenous therapy and nutrition . The hospital has 14 operating rooms ; there is also a surgical intensive care unit available for recovery . The surgical department treats over 14 @,@ 000 patients per year . St. Boniface 's emergency department provides acute care for an average of over 100 patients per day . The emergency room has recently been renovated , and the department is currently working to reduce patient wait times . 
 The Family Medicine Program is designed to encourage disease prevention and health maintenance . It also includes a palliative care unit , the first nationally accredited palliative residency program in Canada . The Rehabilitation Program provides inpatient and outpatient physiotherapy . The Mental Health program provides psychological and counselling services to adult and adolescent patients . It also maintains an inpatient program , and provides stress counselling to hospital staff . 
 = = = Cardiac Sciences Program = = = 
 The Cardiac Sciences Program ( including the departments of Cardiac Surgery , Cardiology , Cardiac Anesthesiology and Critical Care ) is an integrated heart health unit designed to treat cardiac problems . The Bergen Cardiac Care Centre provides access to tertiary cardiology care and hosts cardiac operations and diagnostics , the only hospital in Manitoba to offer certain specialized services . It includes three cardiac angiography rooms , one pacemaker and cardiac defibrillator room , one room for procedures in electrophysiology , 17 recovery beds , cardiology clinics , echocardiography rooms , and office space . 
 = = = Diagnostic imaging = = = 
 St. Boniface is one of eight hospitals in Winnipeg providing diagnostic imaging services , and is part of the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority 's diagnostic imaging program . It provides : angiography , bone density imaging , CT scans , MRIs , mammography , nuclear medicine tests , ultrasounds and X @-@ rays . St. Boniface was the home of Manitoba 's first MRI scanner , and is one of the largest diagnostic MRI facilities in Western Canada . 
 = = = Laboratories = = = 
 The laboratories at the St. Boniface Hospital operate under the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority 's Laboratory Medicine Program ; St. Boniface is one of the two main referral sites in the <unk> for specialty tests . They run tests in biochemistry , hematology , immunology , microbiology , cytology and pathology for patients and doctors in Manitoba . They also provide some specialized testing facilities for educational institutions . 
 = = = Manitoba Renal Program = = = 
 St. Boniface Hospital provides acute and chronic hemodialysis as part of the Manitoba Renal Program . It also has a renal health clinic to assess patients with kidney problems . 
 = = = Woman & Child Program = = = 
 The Woman & Child Program cares for 11 @,@ 500 patients annually , providing gynecological and obstetrical services , outpatient pediatric care and women 's services . Over 5 @,@ 000 births per year occur at St. Boniface Hospital . The Labour and Delivery department includes services for high @-@ risk deliveries . The family care unit includes fifteen beds for obstetrical patients . The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit ( <unk> ) cares for 600 premature or ill infants per year ; 10 % of the births at St. Boniface involve ill or premature babies . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 St. Boniface reports 80 % patient satisfaction with its services , according to internal inpatient surveys . Mortality rates for inpatients stand at around 2 @.@ 4 % . Unlike the United Kingdom and the United States , Canada does not publish national ratings of individual hospitals . 
 According to internal reviews , the hospital reduced average wait times for acute care surgical patients from 10 hours to 3 between October 2008 and February 2009 . As of 2009 , the hospital is trying to reduce wait times for emergency room patients . Wait times for scheduled diagnostic services range from 4 weeks for bone density tests to 20 weeks for a myocardial perfusion study . The median wait time for cardiac surgery is 26 days . 
 = Huw Edwards ( conductor ) = 
 Huw Edwards is a Welsh conductor currently serving as music director of Olympia , Washington 's Olympia Symphony Orchestra and orchestra conductor at the University of Puget Sound . Edwards ' conducting career began at age seventeen when he became music director of the Maidstone Opera Company in England . He later attended the University of Surrey , where he conducted the college orchestra along with an ensemble that he formed himself . At age twenty @-@ three , he won a conducting competition which sent him to Southern Methodist University in Dallas , Texas . He then held a lecturer position at Northwestern University in Chicago , where he was also a doctoral candidate . Edwards was conductor and music director of the Portland Youth Philharmonic from 1995 to 2002 followed by the Seattle Youth Symphony from 2002 to 2005 . He served as music director of the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra from 2000 to 2012 and has been with the Olympia Symphony Orchestra since 2002 . In May 2012 Edwards accepted a position as orchestra conductor at the University of Puget Sound . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born in South Wales , Edwards moved with his parents to England and sang in choirs as a child . He witnessed his first opera ( Giuseppe Verdi 's Un ballo in maschera ) at eleven years old when his parents took him to the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden . Seven years later , he was conducting Gilbert and Sullivan 's operetta H.M.S. Pinafore on that same podium . Edwards played violin and trumpet through grammar school and high school but abandoned performance for conducting . 
 Edwards has been conducting since age seventeen when he became music director of the Maidstone Opera Company in England , a position he held for six years . Edwards attended the University of Surrey , where he conducted the college orchestra along with an ensemble that he formed himself . He won a conducting competition in 1988 which sent him to Southern Methodist University in Dallas , Texas at twenty @-@ three years old . There he experienced " culture shock " , being " accustomed to the rolling hills of England and the cosmopolitan buzz of London " . He held a lecturer position at Northwestern University in Chicago , where he was also a doctoral candidate . Four years later he moved to the Pacific Northwest . Throughout his lifetime , Edwards has received instruction from <unk> <unk> ( Dallas ) , chorus leader Simon Johnson ( London ) , Eduardo Mata , Barry Wordsworth , and Victor <unk> ( Northwestern University ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 Prior to joining the Portland Youth Philharmonic , Edwards had written extensively about music . He contributed to <unk> in Chicago , Dallas , London and Washington , D.C. and wrote program notes for Daniel Barenboim , Yo @-@ Yo Ma and the <unk> Quartet . He had also conducted opera and orchestras throughout Australia , Canada , Hong Kong , Japan , New Zealand , the United Kingdom , and the United States . Edwards has performed with the Annas Bay Opera , Dallas Symphony Orchestra , Eugene Symphony , Memphis Symphony Orchestra , Oregon Symphony , Rose City Chamber Orchestra , Vancouver Symphony Orchestra , Wisconsin Chamber Orchestra , and Yakima Symphony . He has been invited to speak at the American Symphony Orchestra League convention in Boston and assisted with the organisation 's " Meet for the Millennium " project . 
 = = = Portland Youth Philharmonic = = = 
 Edwards became conductor and music director of the Portland Youth Philharmonic ( PYP ) in 1995 , following Jacob Avshalomov 's forty @-@ year tenure to become the orchestra 's third conductor . He was selected unanimously by a twelve @-@ person committee from a field of more than one hundred candidates , and was officially handed the baton by Avshalomov at the season opening Riverside Classics concert on 30 August . After Avshalomov conducted the first half of the concert , Edwards completed PYP 's set with performances of works by Ludwig van Beethoven , Johannes Brahms , Franz Schubert , and Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . The program for the first subscription series concert , which received positive reception , included : Giuseppe Verdi 's Nabucco Overture , Ralph Vaughan Williams 's Serenade to Music , and Paul Hindemith 's Symphonic Metamorphosis on Themes of Carl Maria von Weber . In addition to the four season subscription concerts performed at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall , the 1995 – 1996 season included performances at the Newport Performing Arts Center in Newport and The Resort at the Mountain near Mount Hood , as well as in Eugene , Salem , and Newberg . In 1996 the first interactive Children 's Concert was broadcast live via satellite across Oregon . The collaboration between PYP and Multnomah Community TV continued beyond 1996 ; in 1998 concerts were streamed as far away as Tucson , Arizona , and a 1999 recording became a finalist in the national Hometown Video Festival . 
 Released on 27 March 1998 , Fountain of Youth became the orchestra 's sixth commercial recording on Compact Disc ( previous recordings were vinyl or cassette ) . The compilation album included works recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall during seasons seventy @-@ three and seventy @-@ four . In January 1999 , Portland Parent published an article by Edwards titled " The Role of Classical Music in the Lives of Young People " , which discussed the benefits of classical music to child learning development . The 1998 – 1999 season included performances in Salem , Newberg , Welches , St. Helens , and Milwaukie and Longview , Washington in addition to the regular subscription series . On 10 February 1999 the orchestra opened a Portland Trail Blazers game at the Rose Garden performing The Star @-@ Spangled Banner . 
 During Edwards ' seven years with the orchestra , he and other PYP representatives established a peer mentor program which partnered orchestra musicians with low @-@ income students with little access to music education , and earned the ensemble its second ASCAP award for " Adventurous Programming and Commitment to Contemporary Music " . He made five recordings and led the orchestra on two tours : in April 1998 the Philharmonic represented the United States at the Banff International Festival of Youth Orchestras in Canada , and the orchestra toured Australia and New Zealand in 2000 . The tour included performances in Auckland , Brisbane , Canberra , Armidale , Newcastle , Sydney , and Melbourne . Edwards also recorded Gabriel Fauré 's Requiem at St. Mary 's Cathedral as a collaboration with <unk> in Ecclesia . Edwards left PYP in 2002 and was succeeded by Mei @-@ Ann Chen . Guest conductors during PYP 's 2007 – 2008 season included Ken Selden , director of orchestral studies at Portland State University , former Seattle Symphony conductor Alastair Willis , along with former PYP conductors Edwards and Chen . 
 = = = Seattle Youth Symphony Orchestra = = = 
 He became music director of the Seattle Youth Symphony at the start of its sixtieth season ( 2002 – 2003 ) , putting him in charge of 1 @,@ 000 young musicians participating in the symphony and its four preparatory orchestras as well as the organisation 's outreach programs and the <unk> Music Festival program . Edwards increased the Seattle orchestra 's repertoire by performing works by British composers of the 20th century and by premiering works by American composers such as John Mackey . One Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer contributor wrote that Edwards made a " fine choice " for the ensemble , noting that he " nurture [ d ] , <unk> [ d ] and encourage [ d ] his musicians " . Furthermore , she claimed that his program notes were a " model of clarity and fascinating detail " . Edwards remained music director of the Seattle Youth Symphony Orchestra until 2005 . He has stated the following about working with young musicians : 
 [ With young musicians ] You have to teach and explain more . You have to fire their imagination . With professionals , you look for clarity and consistency . With students , you have to motivate and explain , using different approaches . Their attention span can come and go . It is unpredictable . From first rehearsal to performance , they will come a long way . I am very big on team work , and I tell them they are part of a team and individual egos are less important . 
 = = = Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra , Olympia Symphony Orchestra = = = 
 Edwards began serving as music director of the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra in 2000 . His year @-@ long audition process for the music director position with the Olympia Symphony Orchestra began during the 2002 – 2003 season . The season also marked his fifth with the <unk> Summer Music program , where he remained until 2005 . In 2010 , Edwards was one of four finalists for the conductor position with the Yakima Symphony Orchestra . 
 In April 2012 Edwards announced his resignation at the end of his twelfth season with the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra , citing exhaustion from the commutes between Olympia and Portland as the reason . He has been named Conductor Emeritus and Principal Guest Conductor and returned for the 2012 – 2013 season finale concert . 
 During the final performance of the Olympia Symphony Orchestra 's 2014 – 15 season it was announced that Edwards had signed a ten @-@ year contract extension as its conductor . 
 = = = University of Puget Sound = = = 
 In May 2012 , Edwards accepted the orchestra conductor position at the University of Puget Sound , a private liberal arts college located in Tacoma , Washington . 
 = = Interests = = 
 Dedicated to music education , Edwards enjoys conducting Beethoven for youth orchestras . He has admitted that he did not envision a career conducting youth orchestras but also that he " did not rule them out " . His favourite composition is Parsifal by Richard Wagner ; other favourites include unaccompanied choral music , cello suites by Bach , quartets by Beethoven and jazz , including Nat King Cole . Apart from music , Edwards likes the Chicago Bears , CrossFit , golf , kayaking , Masterpiece Theater , poetry , and Rhône wine along with the winemaking process . Edwards is an avid sports fan and fitness advocate ; he is a former rugby player , enjoys running and playing squash , and believes there are similarities between how music and sports affect the community . He was sometimes referred to as " coach " by musicians of the Portland Youth Philharmonic . Edwards has shared that he would want to work at a vineyard or winery , or be a sports radio host or travel correspondent for a publication if he were not a conductor . 
 = The Forge ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " The Forge " is the seventh episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television Star Trek : Enterprise , and originally aired on November 19 , 2004 on UPN . Directed by Michael Grossman , the script was written by Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens , and formed the first part of a three @-@ episode arc which continued in " Awakening " and concluded in " Kir 'Shara " . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , the crew investigates the bombing of the Earth embassy on Vulcan . The evidence lead them to suspect a group called the Syrrannites , and Captain Archer and Commander T 'Pol seek to cross an unforgiving Vulcan desert , known as " The Forge " , in order to find them . Meanwhile on the ship , the crew discover that the evidence was planted by elements linked to Vulcan High Command . 
 The episode picks up on several references from Star Trek : The Original Series and The Animated Series . Scenes were filmed in Simi Valley , California to represent the Vulcan Forge itself , which was augmented with additional CGI to represent the firestorm and a Vulcan animal called the sehlat . The ratings for " The Forge " saw a decrease from the previous two episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Enterprise is ordered to Vulcan after 31 humans die in the bombing of the United Earth Embassy , including Vice @-@ Admiral Forrest , who is killed saving the life of Ambassador Soval . Captain Archer meets with the head of the Vulcan High Command , Administrator V 'Las , who concedes that the Syrrannites , a Vulcan faction , might have been responsible . This is possible since although they claim peaceful tenets , they follow a " corrupted " form of the teachings of the Vulcan philosopher and father of Vulcan logic , Surak . Further , initial video and DNA evidence lead to a Vulcan named T 'Pau , a known Syrrannite . 
 Koss arrives on board Enterprise to speak to his wife , T 'Pol . He gives her an <unk> pendant from her mother , who he explains is also a Syrrannite . The pendant projects a map showing a path across a desert on Vulcan called “ the Forge , ” which Archer believes will lead them to both T 'Pau and T 'Pol 's mother . T 'Pol and Archer leave the ship and begin to make the crossing , following the map . They soon encounter another traveller , calling himself <unk> , who assists but remains distrustful of them . A sand @-@ fire storm kills <unk> , but before he dies , he forcefully performs a mind @-@ meld with Archer to transfer his katra . After burying him , a focussed Archer leads T 'Pol directly to the concealed T <unk> Sanctuary , where they are quickly captured . 
 Back on Enterprise , Doctor Phlox discovers that the DNA was planted . He and Commander Tucker then examine security scans near a checkpoint in the Embassy and single out a hooded man holding a suspicious package . Furthermore they notice that the guard at the checkpoint seems to already know who the bomber is . Unfortunately , the guard is in a coma from the blast , and Archer and T 'Pol are incommunicado . Even though it violates standard Vulcan ethics , Phlox and Tucker consider a mind @-@ meld , and Soval decides to perform it himself . To his surprise , he discovers that the suspect is <unk> , a Vulcan investigator attached to V 'Las . Soval then resolves to inform the High Command . 
 = = Production = = 
 Production on the episode began on September 14 , 2004 and ran through to September 22 . The standing sets were used for the first three days of filming . Further sets were created to represent the Vulcan Embassy and portions of the Forge . The final two days were filmed on site in Simi Valley in southern California , which doubled as the main areas of the Forge . The property used in the valley was owned by mining company P.W. Gillibrand , which was nearby property owned by Vulcan Materials Company . Optical effects were added to represent the firestorm and the sehlat . The CGI sehlat was based on one which previously appeared in Star Trek : The Animated Series episode " Yesteryear " . Visual effects producer Dan Curry said that the team " looked at the animated series and it just looked nice and pleasant , so I did a couple of sketches to do a reinterpretation of it to make it look scary , but not be too radical a departure from the original " . Eden FX modelled the CGI under supervision by staff visual effects supervisor Art <unk> . Additional care was taken to create the fur so that close @-@ ups could be used if required . The only physical portion of the sehlat to be created was a single paw . " Yesteryear " was set in the Vulcan city Shi <unk> , which reappears in " The Forge " , and it is also the first mention of the area on Vulcan called the Forge . A further reference was made to " Vulcan 's Forge " in the Deep Space Nine episode " Change of Heart " . 
 " The Forge " and the following two episodes make reference to a time of savagery in Vulcan history known as the " Time of Awakening " . This had been previously mentioned in The Original Series episodes " Balance of Terror " , " All Our Yesterdays " and " The Savage Curtain " as well as The Next Generation episode " Gambit " . The story mentioned the Vulcan T 'Pau , who had previously appeared in The Original Series episode " Amok Time " presiding over the fight between Kirk and Spock , with the elder T 'Pau portrayed by Celia <unk> . Michael Reilly Burke returns as Koss , having previously appeared in the role in the season four episode " Home " . Robert Foxworth appears as Administrator V 'Las , having previously appeared as Admiral Leyton in the Deep Space Nine episodes " Homefront " and " Paradise Lost " . 
 Husband and wife duo Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens had previously written a number of Star Trek related novels and books , including a series of collaborations with William Shatner and the novel Federation . They had also written several non @-@ fiction books on the behind the scenes productions of the Star Trek series such as Star Trek : Phase II - The Lost Series and Star Trek : The Next Generation - The Continuing Mission . " The Forge " was their first script together for a Star Trek series , but they had previously written scripts for other shows including Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's The Lost World and Once a Thief . They joined the Enterprise writing team shortly before working on the story for this episode which formed the first part of a planned " Vulcan arc " . The arc was created to address the differences between Vulcans seen in the early seasons of Enterprise and those seen in Star Trek series set in later periods . Executive producer Manny Coto said that during the storyline " we will begin to see Vulcans approaching what they were in the later eras " . In Enterprise , Vulcans were more emotional and deceptive than they had been seen in earlier aired series . The storyline was one of several in the fourth season of Enterprise which Coto sought to connect the series to The Original Series . " The Forge " was director Michael Grossman 's second episode of Enterprise , having previously directed the third season episode " Hatchery " . He went on to direct the episode " Affliction " later in season four . 
 = = Reception and home media = = 
 " The Forge " received a 1 @.@ 9 / 3 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 percent of all households , and 3 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast . This resulted in UPN placing last out of the major networks with NBC leading during the timeslot with a 6 @.@ 3 / 11 % rating for Dateline . Joan of Arcadia on CBS was close to NBC 's numbers with a rating of 6 @.@ 2 / 11 % . " The Forge " saw a decrease from the 2 @.@ 1 / 4 % share received by the previous two episodes " Cold Station 12 " and " The Augments " . 
 Michelle Erica Green of TrekNation approved of the episode with some reservations . She said that it " beautifully melds together threads from every Star Trek series in a way that 's deeply satisfying to this lifelong Trekker " , However , she was disappointed at the lack of anything for Hoshi Sato or Travis Mayweather to do , and the obviousness of the use of some green screens in some scenes . Jamahl Epsicokhan of the website " Jammer 's Reviews " described the episode as a " jam @-@ packed story that cares about the history of Star Trek " . He gave it a score of 3 @.@ 5 / 4 , saying that it was " an intriguing outing . It 's like a cross between Enterprise , The Original Series , and Deep Space Nine , all at once . " When later summarising the fourth season , he described " The Forge " as " easily Enterprise 's best episode of the season " . 
 The first home media release of " The Forge " was in the season three DVD box set of Enterprise , originally released in the United States on November 1 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = Everything Has Changed = 
 " Everything Has Changed " is a song written and performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift and English singer @-@ songwriter Ed Sheeran , taken from Swift 's fourth studio album Red ( 2012 ) . Produced by Butch Walker , the track was released as the sixth single from the album on July 16 , 2013 . " Everything Has Changed " is a guitar ballad combining folk and pop genres about " wanting to get to know a new lover better " . 
 The single gained mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards its composition . " Everything Has Changed " peaked at number 32 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and entered the top ten charts of countries including Belgium , Ireland and the United Kingdom . A music video for " Everything Has Changed " was released of Swift 's VEVO channel on June 6 , 2013 . Swift performed " Everything Has Changed " with Sheeran on Britain 's Got Talent on June 8 , 2013 . Swift also performed the track on her Red Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 It was reported that English singer @-@ songwriter Ed Sheeran would appear as a guest artist on American recording artist Taylor Swift 's then @-@ upcoming album Red . On October 18 , 2012 , " Everything Has Changed " by Swift featuring Sheeran was leaked online . The song was written by Swift and Sheeran in Swift 's backyard . " Everything Has Changed " is a guitar ballad , blending folk @-@ pop genres . Written in the key of G @-@ flat major , it has a moderate tempo of 84 beats per minute . The duo 's vocal range spans from G ♭ 3 to D ♭ 5 . Lyrically , the track talks about " wanting to get to know a new lover better " . Swift further explained the song 's theme , " Everything looks different to you because of this one person , because one new person came into your life . It ’ s really cool " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Everything Has Changed " received generally lukewarm reviews from music critics . A writer from Billboard gave the song a mixed review , criticizing its composition yet complimenting Sheeran 's appearance . Robert Cospey of Digital Spy gave the song a three stars out of five rating , praising the song 's musical style as " cutesy " but felt that " their exchanges leave us with a warm and fuzzy feeling that is all too rare these days " . Sian Rowe , a writer from NME provided " Everything Has Changed " a negative review , writing that the track is " disappointing in every way " . 
 In the United States , " Everything Has Changed " peaked at number 32 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ; it eventually charted at number eight on the Adult Pop Songs , number 11 on the Adult Contemporary and number 14 on the Mainstream Top 40 . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the single peaked at number 28 . " Everything Has Changed " was more commercially successful in several European territories , peaking at number five in Ireland , number seven in Sheeran 's native United Kingdom , and number eight in Belgium ( Flanders region ) . It was certified gold by the Recorded Music NZ , and Recording Industry Association of America , and double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Everything Has Changed " was released on Swift 's VEVO channel on YouTube on June 6 , 2013 . It was directed by Philip Andelman and filmed in Los Angeles and San Antonio . The video begins with two children who initially appear to be Swift and Sheeran when they were much younger , meeting each other on a bus to elementary school . Young Taylor is played by Ava Ames . Throughout the video , the two children have their " youthful play " including painting their faces with crayons , pretending to be a princess and knight , and dancing with each other in the empty school gym . At the end , Swift and Sheeran appear and we realize that they are actually two different parents , arriving at the school to pick up their kids and take each of the children back to their respective homes . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard labelled the video as " impossibly adorable " , while Ray Rahman from Entertainment Weekly compared the video 's synopsis to Forrest Gump , but " much more gentle than that " . To date , it has 186 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On June 8 , 2013 , Swift and Sheeran performed " Everything Has Changed " together on season finale of the seventh series of Britain 's Got Talent . Swift also sang the song on her Red Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Everything Has Changed ( Remix ) [ feat . Ed Sheeran ] " – 4 : 06 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 1909 Velasco hurricane = 
 The 1909 Velasco hurricane was an intense tropical cyclone that devastated areas of the Texas coast in July of the 1909 Atlantic hurricane season . The fourth tropical storm , second hurricane , and first major hurricane of the season , it formed from an area of disturbed weather east of the Leeward Islands on July 13 , 1909 . Remaining weak for much of its early existence , the system began to intensify after nearing Jamaica . Curving towards the northwest , it reached hurricane strength on July 18 near the western tip of Cuba . Intensification stalled as it moved westwards across the Gulf of Mexico , but resumed as the hurricane approached the Texas coast . The storm intensified to a major hurricane on July 21 and subsequently reached its peak intensity with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) prior to making landfall near Velasco , Texas . Once over land , the system began to quickly weaken , and dissipated near the Rio Grande on July 22 . 
 The hurricane caused 41 deaths and $ 2 million in damages , all of which were in Texas . Strong waves caused several offshore shipping incidents , and storm surge inundated areas of the Texas coast , though damage in Galveston was mostly mitigated by the Galveston Seawall . In Velasco , only eight buildings remained intact after the hurricane . Strong winds forced train closures and destroyed and downed various infrastructure . Heavy rains further inland peaked at 8 @.@ 5 in ( 220 mm ) in Hallettsville . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical depression was first noted at 1200 UTC on July 13 , northeast of Grenada in the Windward Islands , with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , though whether it had a closed circulation at the time remains unclear . Nonetheless , the system remained a weak tropical depression for much of its early existence as it moved to the west @-@ northwest through the eastern Caribbean Sea . Weather reports throughout the Caribbean during this time were sparse and according to José Partagás , a former meteorologist at the National Hurricane Center , the system still may have not formed a closed circulation . This meant that the low was not classifiable , though the lack of data also meant that there was no evidence to support this claim and the system was kept as a tropical depression in HURDAT , the Atlantic Hurricane Database . However , once the depression was located south of Jamaica , it began to slowly strengthen and curve more towards the northwest , reaching tropical storm intensity by 0000 UTC on July 17 . At the time , the system was expected to make landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula . Ships in the vicinity of the storm reported strong breezes associated with low barometric pressure . Despite predictions , the system curved from its initial west @-@ northwest movement and more towards the northwest , towards the central Gulf of Mexico . The tropical storm continued to intensify , attaining hurricane strength as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale at 1800 UTC on July 18 after skirting past the Guanahacabibes Peninsula . 
 Once in the Gulf of Mexico , intensification substantially lessened as the storm maintained its Category 1 intensity throughout July 19 and July 20 . The hurricane curved in the gulf back to a more westerly direction , while moving at about 10 mph ( 15 km / h ) . A minimum pressure reading of 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) was reported offshore south of Louisiana by the ship S.S. Paraguay at 1800 UTC on July 20 . Strengthening resumed on July 21 as the hurricane tracked almost parallel to the Louisiana coastline towards Texas . Later that day , the storm attained its peak intensity as a modern @-@ day Category 3 major hurricane , with sustained winds of 115 mph ( 175 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 959 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 32 inHg ) . The hurricane made landfall at this intensity almost directly over Velasco , Texas , with maximum wind speeds stretching 22 mi ( 35 km ) from the hurricane 's center . Over the following 24 hours , the system rapidly weakened over land and lost tropical <unk> near the Rio Grande during the afternoon of July 22 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As the hurricane approached Texas , the Weather Bureau issued hurricane warnings for potentially affected areas beginning on July 18 . Ships and ports were also continuously notified on the oncoming storm , which helped to keep offshore shipping accidents to a minimum . Inland , as a precautionary measure , rail operations along the coast were halted for a duration of the storm 's passage . 
 At its landfall in Velasco , the hurricane caused a wide swath of damage along the Texas coast and areas further inland . Despite previously issued warnings , rough seas produced by the hurricane still caused several ship accidents . Strong waves forced several ships near Galveston to either become grounded or sunk . The derrick barge Miller and other craft were grounded along Galveston 's West Bay . A large dredge was swept into the Galveston Causeway , snapping telegraph cables that ran along the length of the causeway . The Miriam was sunken by a submerged log , while the schooner Ed Gibbs was broken into pieces near La Porte . The steamboat El Siglo ( The Century ) remained stranded offshore for twelve hours in winds estimated at 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Off of Mobile , Alabama , the high waves prevented ships from entering the Port of Mobile . Closer to the coast , the hurricane produced a storm surge of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in Galveston and Velasco . However , due to the Galveston Seawall , much of the potential storm surge @-@ related damage in Galveston was mitigated , though the seawall forced spray to rise 60 ft ( 18 m ) in the air . Areas outside the seawall on the Galveston beach , including two fishing piers and pavilions were destroyed . On Galveston 's Tarpon Pier , ten members of a fishing party perished after the pier collapsed , though six were rescued by the yacht Mayflower . In western areas of Galveston , where there was no seawall , inland areas were inundated under 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of water . However , Galveston 's primary streets were submerged to a lesser extent , under 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water . In Velasco , the tide was reported to have been 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) higher than during the 1900 Galveston hurricane , which inundated the city under 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water . Areas of Sabine Pass were also inundated by the high waves , and the Southern Pacific Railroad was submerged in water . 
 In Velasco , where the hurricane made landfall , only eight buildings remained intact after the storm 's passage . Quintana , Columbus , and Columbia were also heavily affected , with all houses experiencing some form of severe damage . In Austin , homes were unroofed , and the storm was considered as the worst hurricane to affect Austin at the time . Heavy rains caused large amounts of driftwood to float down the Colorado River . In Austin , the driftwood struck the newly constructed Congress Avenue Bridge , carrying away 200 ft ( 61 m ) of trestle and resulting in $ 10 @,@ 000 in damages . Other cities also reported severely damaged homes and businesses . Galveston suffered minor damage , with reports of chimney damage and broken windows . Three sections of the Galveston Causeway were blown down by the strong winds . As a result , tug boats were forced to carry people and cargo to and from Galveston along West Bay . The Western Union Telegraph Company reportedly lost all direct communication with Galveston for a temporary period of time . Other telegraph companies in Dallas and Chicago also lost communications with the city . Property damage in Galveston was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 . Strong winds and gusts from the storm were reported as far inland as Eagle Pass . The winds uprooted trees and extensively damaged various crops , as well as downed power lines . In the Galveston Jetty , Rosenburg , and Brazoria , strong winds blew trains off of their tracks . Train stations and train depots along the coast also experienced considerable damage , with some depots being completely leveled . Maize fields which had been previously burned by wildfires caused by an ongoing drought in Kingsville were swept down , while cotton crops withstood the hurricane well . Oil <unk> near Markham were blown down , and water wells were stripped of their machinery . In Alvin , barns and windmills were destroyed . Richmond also reported destroyed barns , as well as downed chimneys . Six prisoners escaped from the city 's local jail after windows were blown in . Rice mills were downed in Eagle Pass . 
 Damage was comparatively light in Louisiana . Heavy rains and storm surge inundated marshes , resulting in hundreds of reported cattle drownings . Cotton crops from Grand Chenier , Louisiana to Sabine Pass was destroyed by the rains and wind . Two deaths in Louisiana were reported in Cameron Parish , Louisiana . 
 Further inland , the hurricane produced heavy rainfall in many areas , peaking at 8 @.@ 5 in ( 220 mm ) in Hallettsville , Texas , with rainfall totals of at least 3 in ( 76 mm ) common in along the hurricane 's track . Boerne , <unk> , and Columbia all set monthly records for 24 ‑ hour rainfall totals on July 21 and 22 , with all three cities reporting totals of 5 in ( 130 mm ) or greater . While the heavy rains caused damage in areas , it provided beneficial drought relief in other regions . 
 = The Last Theorem = 
 The Last Theorem is a 2008 science fiction novel by Arthur C. Clarke and Frederik Pohl . It was first published in the United Kingdom by <unk> in July 2008 , and in the United States by Del Rey Books in August 2008 . The book is about a young Sri Lankan mathematician who finds a short proof of Fermat 's Last Theorem , while an alien invasion of Earth is in progress . 
 The novel began as Clarke 's , but when ill health and a psychological ( or possibly neurological ) form of writer 's block prevented him from making progress , he handed over his notes and the incomplete manuscript to Pohl , who , in close consultation with Clarke , completed the novel . Clarke reviewed the final manuscript in early March 2008 , just days before he died . 
 In general The Last Theorem was not well received by critics . Entertainment Weekly in their review of the novel said that " uneven pacing and tone mar an intriguing cautionary tale . " The Los Angeles Times wondered how stable the manuscript was when it was published , adding that it does nothing to " burnish the legacy of either of its authors . " The San Francisco Chronicle , however , described the novel as a " fitting valedictory for Clarke , [ ... ] and a reminder of Pohl 's great relevance to a genre he has championed for more than 70 years . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Science fiction Grand Masters , Sir Arthur C. Clarke and Frederik Pohl collaborated for the first time on The Last Theorem . The novel initially was Clarke 's , and he began working on it in early 2004 . But in 2006 , at the age of 88 , ill health brought on by complications from post @-@ polio syndrome , and writer 's block , impeded his progress , and he asked Pohl for help . Pohl explained : " Arthur said to me that he woke up one morning and didn 't know how to write any of the books he had contracted . The stories had just gone out of his head . " Clarke gave Pohl a 40 – 50 page manuscript plus roughly 50 pages of notes , and over the next two years , Pohl wrote the book . Pohl said that " Everything in the novel is something he either suggested or wrote or I discussed with him . " Some of Clarke 's notes were so obscure that even Clarke himself could not understand them . Pohl , only two years younger than Clarke , had health problems of his own : he could no longer type and wrote the book out in longhand , leaving it up to his wife to translate his " indecipherable scribbles " . Clarke reviewed and approved the final manuscript of The Last Theorem in early March 2008 , just days before he died . Pohl died five years later in September 2013 . 
 Some of the concepts that appear in The Last Theorem originally appeared in Clarke 's earlier works . The space elevator that is built in Sri Lanka originally featured in The Fountains of Paradise ( 1979 ) where it was also built in Sri Lanka ( then Ceylon ) . Because the elevator will work only on or near the equator , Clarke " moved " Ceylon south to the equator in The Fountains of Paradise , and the equator north to Sri Lanka in The Last Theorem . The solar powered space yacht race was first featured in a short story of Clarke 's , " The Wind from the Sun " ( 1964 ) , and the concept of a " mysterious Elder Race " deciding our fate , in this case the Grand Galactics , has appeared in several of Clarke 's previous novels , including Childhood 's End ( 1953 ) and the Space Odyssey Series ( 1968 – 1997 ) . Some of Pohl 's earlier themes also appear here , including his human @-@ machine hybrid which featured in Man Plus ( 1976 ) . 
 Clarke wrote over 30 science fiction novels and over 100 works of short fiction , winning both the Hugo and Nebula Awards several times . He moved to Sri Lanka ( then Ceylon ) in 1956 and remained there for the rest of his life . One of his greatest wishes was for peace in Sri Lanka . The Last Theorem is set in his adopted country , and Pohl said that tensions between the Sinhalese Sri Lankan government and the Tamil liberation army ( the Tamil Tigers ) were " major inspirations for the novel " . 
 Pohl 's writing career spans 70 years , and includes over 50 science fiction novels and numerous short stories . He also won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards several times . One of Pohl 's fascinations has been mathematics , in particular number theory . He would often spend his spare time " playing " with prime numbers , and even tried to write a formula for generating primes . But he did invent several mathematical parlour tricks , some of which are featured in The Last Theorem . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The Last Theorem is set in Sri Lanka in the early- to mid @-@ 21st century and follows the life of a mathematician , Ranjit Subramanian . While studying at Colombo University , he becomes obsessed with Fermat 's Last Theorem , a conjecture made by Pierre de Fermat in 1637 , for which he claimed to have conceived a proof that he never wrote down . The proof eluded mathematicians across the world for over 350 years , until in 1995 British mathematician Andrew Wiles published a 100 @-@ page proof of the theorem . But not everyone was " satisfied " with Wiles 's proof because it used twentieth century mathematical techniques not available in Fermat 's time . 
 In the novel 's back @-@ story , extraterrestrial <unk> , the " Grand Galactics " , are alarmed when they detect the photon shock waves from nuclear bomb detonations on Earth . The Grand Galactics monitor and control the destinies of a number of high @-@ performance sapient races and order one of these races , the " Nine Limbeds " , to send " cease and desist " messages to Earth . When these messages have no effect , the Grand Galactics order another race , the " One Point Fives " , to launch an armada to Earth to exterminate the undesirable species . 
 Back on Earth , regional conflicts escalate and the United Nations struggles to contain them . In Sri Lanka , Ranjit unwittingly boards a cruise ship that is hijacked by pirates . When unknown security forces free the ship , Ranjit is arrested on suspicion of terrorism . For six months he is interrogated and tortured , but he cannot supply the information his captors want so he is locked up and " forgotten " for a further 18 months . During this period of incarceration , Ranjit dwells on Fermat 's Last Theorem and , after several months , solves it with a three @-@ page proof . Later Ranjit is rescued by a friend from University , Gamini Bandara , who will not reveal whom he is working for or where Ranjit was held captive . 
 Ranjit submits his proof for publication and achieves worldwide fame . He marries Myra de Soyza , an artificial intelligence specialist , and embarks on a speaking tour of the world . In the United States , he is briefly recruited by the CIA to work on cryptography . Gamini later reveals that he is working for Pax per Fidem ( Peace through Transparency ) , an undercover United Nations organization established to bring about world peace . To achieve this end , Pax per Fidem has developed " Silent Thunder " , a non @-@ lethal EMP nuclear superweapon that renders all electrical equipment in its path inoperable . Silent Thunder is deployed in North Korea and later in South America , and regional conflicts subside . Gamini invites Ranjit to join Pax per Fidem , but the authoritarian nature of Pax per Fidem and its " new world order " worry Ranjit and Myra , and Ranjit turns down the offer . He does , however , accept a position on the advisory board of an international consortium building a space elevator in Sri Lanka , chosen because of its position on the equator . 
 As the One Point Five fleet enters the Solar System , the Nine Limbeds orbit and observe Earth in cigar @-@ shaped craft , sparking numerous UFO sightings . A Grand Galactic member , who happens to be passing by , stops to observe the effects of Silent Thunder and returns to the Grand Galactic collective , who immediately suspend the One Point Fives 's destruct orders pending further investigation . 
 The space elevator is completed and , for the first time , people and materials can be lifted into Earth orbit without the need of rockets . Natasha , Ranjit and Myra 's daughter , competes in the first solar powered space yacht race from <unk> to Moon @-@ orbit . But soon after the start of the race , Natasha 's yacht malfunctions and she is abducted by the Nine Limbeds , who use a projection of her to interrogate prominent people on Earth , including Ranjit and Gamini , about Silent Thunder . Satisfied that Earth has " reformed " , Natasha is returned and the Nine Limbeds broadcast a message to Earth in which they announce that the Grand Galactics have decided not to sterilize Earth , and that the One Point Fives , with their Machine Stored navigators , cannot return home and will land and occupy unused areas of Earth . 
 The One Point Fives land in the desolate Qattara Depression in the Libyan Desert , which they find quite habitable compared to their ruined homeworld . The Americans send B52 bombers to attack the One Point Fives ' base , but the aliens electronically disable the aircraft , causing them to crash short of their target . When the US President demands reparations , the One Point Fives provide gold distilled from seawater by way of compensation . With the Grand Galactics absent , the aliens make decisions for themselves : the One Point Fives provide Earth with new forms of power and the Machine Stored reveal mind uploading technology . When Myra dies in a scuba diving accident , her mind is uploaded into cyberspace , with Ranjit joining her later . 
 After 13 @,@ 000 years the Grand Galactics finally return to Earth and are astounded to see how fast the planet has developed . They had always interfered with the evolution of sentient species they had discovered , believing they could not be trusted to evolve on their own . Impressed with Earth 's progress , the Grand Galactic relieve themselves of the burden of watching over intelligent life and hand the task over to Earth . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Sri Lankans = = = 
 These characters come from three of Sri Lanka 's ethnic groups : the Sinhalese , the Tamils and the Portuguese Burghers . 
 Ranjit Subramanian ( Tamil ) – a mathematical prodigy and son of a Hindu priest ; he achieves worldwide fame after proving Fermat 's Last Theorem without recourse to methods not available to Fermat in his day 
 Myra Subramanian ( née de Soyza ) ( Burgher ) – an artificial intelligence and prosthetic specialist and wife of Ranjit 
 Natasha de Soyza Subramanian – solar wind yacht race contestant and daughter of Ranjit and Myra 
 Gamini Bandara ( Sinhalese ) – a United Nations undercover operative and freshman friend of Ranjit 's at Colombo University 
 = = = Aliens = = = 
 Grand Galactics – a sentient entity with the ability to subdivide itself into fragments , each capable of appearing " instantaneously " anywhere in the galaxy ; monitors other life and follows the principle of " Protect the harmless . Quarantine the dangerous . Destroy the malevolent – after storing a backup in a secure location " 
 Grand Galactic client ( subordinate ) races : 
 One Point Fives – a diminutive cat @-@ sized race who all but destroyed their world 20 light @-@ years from Earth and now wear shields and prostheses to protect themselves from their toxic environment , increasing their body size 1 @.@ 5 times ; they are the Grand Galactics 's " hit men " used to destroy recalcitrant planets 
 Nine Limbeds – a nine @-@ limbed race with good language skills ; used by the Grand Galactics to communicate with other races 
 Machine Stored – a " demonic " looking race whose neglect of their planet left it uninhabitable , forcing them to upload themselves into the memory of machines ; used by the Grand Galactics as ship navigators and to " backup " other races 
 = = Reception and analysis = = 
 In spite of the publicity The Last Theorem received , that it was Arthur C. Clarke 's " last novel " , and that it was written by two science fiction Grand Masters , in general it has not been well received by critics . 
 Entertainment Weekly in their review said that " uneven pacing and tone mar an intriguing cautionary tale . This collaboration , completed before Clarke 's death last March , would 've made a better solo project for either author . " The Washington Post said that " The Last Theorem reads like a dog @-@ eared album of favorite themes from yesteryear " , referring to Clarke and Pohl topics from the authors ' earlier works . Thomas M. Wagner at SF Reviews wrote that " The Last Theorem is a book I really resent not liking , because there 's so much about it that deserves to be liked . " He said that the first two @-@ thirds is " so good [ ... ] it almost , but doesn 't quite , make up for the nonsense that overtakes the whole affair at the climax . " Wagner felt that the meeting of " two disparate storytelling sensibilities " was " far less harmonious and compatible " than Clarke and Pohl may have imagined . Wagner summed up by saying that " The Last Theorem is not simply an uneven novel . It 's a deeply disjointed one , a book that introduces a host of wonderful ideas and sympathetic , believable characters , only to decide it doesn 't trust them to carry off the story in the end , ultimately falling back – disastrously – on dated and dubious formula . " Sheila Merritt at SciFi Dimensions said that while it should have been " a fine tribute and a fitting farewell to this master of science fiction " , it turned out to be an " easy book to put down . " She said that the plot " meanders in fits and starts " and that the book is too long for the story it tells . Ed Park of the Los Angeles Times enjoyed the first third of the book , but said that for the rest , its " winning and winking self @-@ consciousness evaporates . " He wondered how stable the manuscript was when it was published , and added that it does nothing to " burnish the legacy of either of its authors . " 
 A common criticism amongst many reviewers was that in spite of its title , no connection is made between Fermat 's Last Theorem and the alien invasion . Alex <unk> at Mathematical Fiction complained about errors in some of the author 's descriptions of the mathematical problems , and in particular their unfair treatment of Wiles 's proof of Fermat 's Last Theorem . Some reviewers felt that the characters had not been developed sufficiently . Michael Sims of The Washington Post said that " these characters are so thin you can see through them . " The aliens are depicted as cartoon @-@ like figures , and Ranjit does not appear to be affected by his lengthy incarceration , interrogation and torture . Some critics also felt that the book ended " somewhat precipitously " , that after the aliens arrived , the crisis was resolved too quickly , giving the impression " that there was at least a good , long chapter missing . " 
 Not all reviews , however , were negative . Nader <unk> at Strange Horizons described the book as " an interesting experiment " . He said that Pohl deserves the credit for " capturing Clarke 's voice " , and that Clarke also deserves credit for doing something completely different . While he would not recommend the book to readers new to Clarke 's work , <unk> said that fans would not regret reading the book . Mark Yon at SFF World said that while this is not one of Clarke 's best works , " it is still very good " . He said that even though it is a collaboration , the book is still recognisably Clarke , " with the same humour , the same enthusiasm , the great flashes of inspiration , the big ideas and the same curious positivism that underlines most of Sir Arthur ’ s work . [ ... ] There is a joy throughout here : a joy of learning , of opening up new opportunities and experiences , and a love of mathematics and science . " Michael Berry at the San Francisco Chronicle said that the novel does a " stellar job of conveying some of the intellectual fun that can be had by manipulating math . " He said that Sri Lanka , Clarke 's home for most of his life , is brought " vividly to life " , and that despite some minor flaws , The Last Theorem is a " fitting valedictory for Clarke , one of science fiction 's most acclaimed authors , and a reminder of Pohl 's great relevance to a genre he has championed for more than 70 years . " 
 = = Work cited = = 
 Clarke , Arthur C. ; Pohl , Frederik C. ( 2009 ) [ 2008 ] . The Last Theorem . London : Harper Voyager . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = John Day ( printer ) = 
 John Day ( or Daye ) ( c . 1522 – 23 July 1584 ) was an English Protestant printer . He specialised in printing and distributing Protestant literature and pamphlets , and produced many small @-@ format religious books , such as ABCs , sermons , and translations of psalms . He found fame , however , as the publisher of John Foxe 's Actes and Monuments , also known as the Book of Martyrs , the largest and most technologically accomplished book printed in sixteenth @-@ century England . 
 Day rose to the top of his profession during the reign of Edward VI ( 1547 – 1553 ) . At this time , restrictions on publishers were relaxed , and a wave of propaganda on behalf of the English Reformation was encouraged by the government of the Lord Protector , Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset . During the reign of the Catholic Queen Mary I , many Protestant printers fled to the continent , but Day stayed in England and continued to print Protestant literature . In 1554 , he was arrested and imprisoned , presumably for these illicit printing activities . Under Queen Elizabeth I , Day returned to his premises at Aldersgate in London , where he enjoyed the patronage of high @-@ ranking officials and nobles , including William Cecil , Robert Dudley , and Matthew Parker . With their support , he published the Book of Martyrs and was awarded monopolies for some of the most popular English books , such as The ABC with Little Catechism and The Whole Booke of Psalmes . Day , whose technical skill matched his business acumen , has been called " the master printer of the English Reformation " . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Day 's origins and the events of his early life remain obscure . Scholars have assumed that Day was born and raised in Dunwich , but there is no direct evidence that proves this claim . He may have been in London by 1540 , as his name is mentioned in a city deposition as being a former servant of the printer and physician Thomas <unk> . In 1546 , he was probably one of twenty men who were granted the freedom of the city by redemption to work for the <unk> ' Company of London . 
 The next year , he began printing with a partner , William Seres ; the two based their operations at the parish of St Sepulchre in London . Day and Seres specialised in religious works , such as those by Robert Crowley , which were largely related to theological controversies of the time . The Protestant Reformation was advancing rapidly , and the laws against the publication of heretical works were being relaxed . In 1548 , ten of the twenty works that the two men published were devoted to criticizing the Catholic belief of transubstantiation . One of those publications , a satirical poem by Luke Shepherd titled Iohn Bon and Mast Person , almost landed Day in jail . Day and Seres also translated important works of Continental Protestantism for the English market , notably Herman von Wied 's A Simple and Religious Consultation in 1547 . 
 In 1549 , Day opened a new shop in Cheapside , and the next year , he and Seres were successful enough to amicably separate their businesses . Day set up his new home and printing establishment at Aldersgate in the parish of St Anne and St Agnes and transferred from the <unk> ' to the Stationers ' Company . Day found Aldersgate 's foreigner @-@ friendly attributes helpful in attracting skilled Dutch workers , whom he relied on throughout his career . He soon established himself as a quality printer , and in 1551 , he reprinted an elaborate edition of the Bible that he had previously produced with Seres . The next year , he secured a valuable patent to print the works of John Ponet and Thomas <unk> . This enraged one of his competitors , Reginald Wolfe , who already held a patent to print Ponet 's Catechism in Latin . Eventually , a compromise patent was issued which allowed Wolfe to continue printing the Catechism in Latin and Day to print the work in English . Day reaped more benefits from the deal than Wolfe : the English printings were used far more extensively than the Latin ones , and the ABC was eventually appended with Ponet 's Catechism . 
 With a reputation for Protestant godliness and connections to people like John Dudley , William Cecil , and Catherine Willoughby , a successful career seemed assured for Day . Unfortunately for Day , Queen Mary ascended the throne in 1553 and the entire religious climate of the country changed . For years , it was thought that at the accession of Mary , Day fled to the Continent to avoid persecution . However , typographical and other evidence has convinced scholars that Day set up a clandestine press in premises connected to William Cecil in Lincolnshire , and that he continued to print Protestant polemical works under the pseudonym Michael Wood . The " Michael Wood " pamphlets included Protestant writings by Lady Jane Grey , John Hooper , and Stephen Gardiner , and attacks on Mary and her advisors . 
 On 16 October 1554 , according to the diary of Henry <unk> , Day was caught and sent to the Tower of London for printing " naughty books " . In the Book of Martyrs , Foxe records statements made in prison to Day by the future martyr John Rogers , " spake being then in prison , to the Printer of this present booke , who then also was <unk> up for lyke cause of religion " . Perhaps because the flight of foreign Protestant workers under Mary was causing a shortage of printers , Day was released the next year and allowed to work again , but only as a jobbing printer . He reunited with Seres ( also recently released from prison ) to produce works of Catholicism for Catholic printer John Wayland , a far cry from the Protestant polemics he printed prior to imprisonment . He also served as the official printer of the City of London for two years . 
 = = Elizabethan period = = 
 With the death of Mary and the accession of Elizabeth I in 1558 , Day 's business blossomed once more . Day was already close to Cecil , who had now become one of the new Queen 's top advisors . Through Cecil , Day was awarded the valuable monopoly on printing ABCs . He also befriended Robert Dudley ( son of John Dudley ) , another of Elizabeth 's favorites . With the help of his connections , Day was able to obtain a lucrative patent to print William Cuningham 's <unk> Glasse . He produced the first edition in 1559 using a new italic font of the highest quality ( probably cut by François Guyot ) and a large number of impressive woodcuts . Day absorbed the high production costs himself , since he knew the work would solidify his reputation as a master printer . Day 's patent to print Cuningham — his first under Elizabeth — gave him exclusive rights to the work for life ; it also allowed him to retain a monopoly for seven years on any other original works that were not covered by other patents , were " compiled at Day 's expense " , and were " not repugnant to Holy Scripture or the law " . This stipulation would be an important source of income for the rest of his life . 
 Day took advantage of the monopoly clause , reestablishing his Edwardian patent for The ABC with Little Catechism . In 1559 , he obtained a patent for The Whole Booke of Psalmes , Collected into English Meter , a metrical psalter , compiled mostly by Thomas <unk> and John Hopkins , that Day first published in 1562 . The Stationers ' Company guaranteed Day the right to print all " <unk> in metre with note " , in other words , psalms with music . Despite the fact that <unk> had usually been learned by rote , the business proved lucrative , reflecting a rise in musical literacy during the period . The Whole Booke of Psalmes became the period 's best @-@ selling book and the standard English psalter of its time . Day 's monopolies on these perennially popular works would be the basis of great wealth over the years and a good deal of conflict between him and his fellow stationers . In legal proceedings towards the end of Day 's life , it was estimated that these particular patents were worth between £ 200 and £ 500 per year . 
 = = = Actes and Monuments = = = 
 In 1563 , Day undertook the work for which he is best known , John Foxe 's Actes and Monuments ( also called The Book of Martyrs ) . Day and Foxe probably met through Cecil , and the two became close collaborators . Foxe was among those who seized on the advances in the printing trade as a tool for the spread of the Protestant Reformation . There is a tradition that Foxe , who revised and added material while the book was being set in type , actually lived at Day 's shop at Aldersgate during the production of the book ; he certainly received correspondence there and visited regularly . Day heavily invested time and money in the production of Foxe 's book , the largest publishing project undertaken in England to that time , and he took an active part in the compilation of the material . Day used changes in type sizes or fonts to distinguish Foxe 's editorial insertions from texts of his sources . The resulting lavish folio filled with woodcuts was an expensive luxury item , but it sold well and Day profited from his investment . 
 Day continued to take on challenging and difficult projects . He had already printed the first English book of church music in 1560 . In 1567 , Matthew Parker , the Archbishop of Canterbury , commissioned Day to print a collection of writings attributed to the tenth @-@ century Aelfric of Eynsham . For this work , Day , known for his fine and varied fonts , had the first @-@ ever font of Anglo @-@ Saxon type cut . The cost was borne by Parker , perhaps Day 's most important patron . The font may have been designed by François Guyot , a French type @-@ founder known to have worked for Day and lived in his household . Day used the same font to print Lambarde 's <unk> ( a collection of Anglo @-@ Saxon laws ) in 1568 . In 1570 , he printed Billingsley and Dee 's English Euclid , which included folding and movable diagrams — one of the first printed books ever to do so . In the same year , he printed Ascham 's <unk> . 
 Day and Foxe completed a second edition of the Book of Martyrs in 1570 . It was even larger than the first — a total of 2 @,@ 300 pages in two enormous folio volumes — and at one point , Day ran out of paper ( which he imported ) and had to paste smaller sheets together to make do . This edition received official recognition : William Cecil and the Privy Council directed the church to ensure that copies were available to parishioners , and in 1571 , the Convocation ordered that every cathedral church and the household of every senior member of the clergy should own a copy . The edition has been recorded as costing sixteen shillings , roughly equivalent to two months ' wages for a skilled London <unk> at the time . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 By the late 1570s , there was open discontent among the less wealthy members of the Stationers ' Company about Day 's extensive patents . He was compelled to go to court against printers who pirated works to which he owned the rights . Among those brought to trial was Roger Ward , who admitted to pirating 10 @,@ 000 copies of ABC with Catechisms in a font which imitated Day 's . Day 's former apprentice and sub @-@ contractor John Wolfe admitted in court that he had pirated The Whole Booke of Psalmes but justified his actions on the grounds that Day 's monopolies were a restraint of trade . It was Wolfe who led a group of " poor printers " , as they called themselves , in a campaign against the patents in the late 1570s . As a result of an official investigation , Day was eventually obliged to concede certain titles to the Company for the benefit of the poorer printers , but he kept the titles he printed most . 
 In 1580 , Day became Master of the Stationers ' Company , and focused vigorously on defending the industry against piracy . His official powers included the right of " search and seizure " , which he did not hesitate to exercise on behalf of the trade or to further his own interests . In 1584 , he sent men to break into Wolfe 's premises and destroy any materials relating to suspected piracy . Four years before , he had even destroyed his son Richard 's printing equipment after Richard had printed the ABC and the Psalmes without his permission . Though Richard was technically co @-@ patentee of these titles , John Day pursued him into the courts and all but destroyed his printing career . 
 In 1582 , Day 's health began to deteriorate quickly . Though weakening , he raced to complete another edition of Actes and Monuments in 1583 , printing it on at least four presses . It was unusual for books of this size and ambition to go beyond one or two printings . Holinshed 's Chronicles , the only book of the time to rival the Book of Martyrs in scope and reputation , never went into a third edition . 
 Day died in 1584 at Walden in Essex . He married twice and fathered thirteen children in each marriage . Day 's printer 's device showed a sleeper awakening , with the motto " Arise for it is Day , " both a play on his name and an allusion to the new era of religious reform , in which he was a significant figure . 
 = U.S. Route 1 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) is a United States highway which parallels the East Coast of the United States , running from Key West , Florida in the south to Fort Kent , Maine at the Canadian border in the north . Of the entire length of the route , 66 @.@ 06 miles ( 106 @.@ 31 km ) of it runs through New Jersey . It enters the state from Pennsylvania on the Trenton – Morrisville Toll Bridge over the Delaware River in the state capital of Trenton , running through the city on the Trenton Freeway . From here , US 1 continues northeast as a surface divided highway through suburban areas continuing into Middlesex County and passing through New Brunswick and Edison . US 1 merges with US 9 in Woodbridge , and the two routes continue through northern New Jersey as US 1 / 9 to the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River in Fort Lee . At this point , the road continues into New York City along with I @-@ 95 . 
 The current alignment of US 1 between Trenton and New Brunswick was chartered as the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike in 1803 and struggled throughout its 100 @-@ year existence . In 1913 , the Lincoln Highway across the United States was created and connected Trenton to Newark within New Jersey . The Lincoln Highway was legislated as Route 13 between Trenton and New Brunswick in 1917 and as part of Route 1 between New Brunswick and Elizabeth , later extended to Jersey City . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , US 1 was designated to follow the Lincoln Highway between Trenton and Newark and the current alignment of US 1 / 9 Truck to Jersey City , where it continued to the Holland Tunnel . In 1927 , the Lincoln Highway portion of US 1 became Route 27 . The current alignment of US 1 between Trenton and Newark was legislated as Route 26 , Route S26 and Route 25 , while the current route north from Jersey City to the George Washington Bridge became Route 1 and Route 6 . In subsequent years , US 1 was moved onto its current routing between Trenton and the George Washington Bridge . The state highways running concurrent with US 1 were removed in 1953 , around the same time the route was moved to the Trenton Freeway within Trenton and the old alignment became US 1 Alternate , part of which is now US 1 Business . By 1969 , the Trenton Freeway was extended north to Whitehead Road in Lawrence Township , and that segment became Route 174 . When the Trenton Freeway was completed north to US 1 , the US 1 designation was shifted to the freeway , replacing Route 174 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Mercer County = = = 
 U.S. Route 1 crosses the Delaware River into New Jersey on the Trenton – Morrisville Toll Bridge , which is maintained by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission . Once in Trenton , US 1 becomes the Trenton Freeway and is maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation . US 1 meets Route 29 at a partial diamond interchange just north of the river . As the road heads through the downtown area with Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor running next to the route on the east side , it has a southbound exit and entrance with Warren Street that provides access to the New Jersey State House . It then comes to an interchange with the northern terminus of Route 129 as well as the western terminus of Route 33 near the Trenton Transit Center . 
 At this point , the Trenton Freeway turns onto a depressed alignment and comes to an interchange with Perry Street . The route turns northeast directly over the Delaware and Raritan Canal , which still flows underneath , and has an exit for Olden Avenue . The freeway has a northbound ramp for Mulberry Street before there is a northbound exit and southbound entrance from the median that provides access to US 1 Business and US 206 . Past this interchange , US 1 continues into Lawrence Township , where the surroundings become more wooded as the freeway has an exit for Whitehead Road . Along this stretch , the freeway closely parallels the canal , which emerges from under the freeway just north of Mulberry Street . The Trenton Freeway ends at the point US 1 Business merges back into US 1 . 
 Here , US 1 becomes a four @-@ lane divided surface road with jughandles called the Herbert Highway that is lined with suburban businesses . Continuing northeast , the first intersection along this road is with the eastern terminus of CR 546 ( Franklin Corner Road ) . After this intersection , the road crosses the Delaware & Raritan Canal again prior to a modified cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 295 . Past this point , US 1 widens to six lanes as it has an interchange providing access to the Quaker Bridge Mall to the east of the route . A short distance later , there is a cloverleaf interchange with CR 533 ( <unk> Road ) . Upon crossing CR 533 , the road enters West Windsor Township . After an interchange with Meadow Road , US 1 continues past corporate parks prior to an interchange with Alexander Road . Following this interchange , the road comes to CR 571 ( also signed as CR 526 ) at the modified Penns Neck Circle , which US 1 runs straight through . Past this intersection , the road passes near farmland . 
 Studies are being conducted to implement the Central New Jersey Route 1 BRT , a bus rapid transit system utilizing the highway that would radiate from Princeton Junction . 
 = = = Middlesex County = = = 
 Upon crossing the Millstone River , US 1 enters Plainsboro Township , where it passes more business parks and comes to an interchange with Scudders Mill Road . Past Scudders Mill Road , the road runs to the west of the James Forrestal Campus of Princeton University before passing to the east of Forrestal Village . An interchange with College Road a short distance later provides access to both places . The route continues into South Brunswick Township , where it narrows to four lanes and runs through a mix of rural areas and development . US 1 briefly widens back to six lanes as it reaches an intersection with CR 522 . Past CR 522 , the surroundings of the four @-@ lane road become more forested , with a few commercial establishments . The road briefly forms the border between South Brunswick Township to the northwest and North Brunswick Township to the southeast before fully entering North Brunswick Township . 
 Here , the route widens to six lanes again and comes to an interchange with the southern terminus of Route 91 ( Jersey Avenue ) , where US 1 makes a turn to the east @-@ northeast . Immediately after this interchange , the route passes over Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor and comes to an exit for the south end of Route 26 ( Livingston Avenue ) . The road reaches the northern terminus of US 130 and the southern terminus of Route 171 ( Georges Road ) at an interchange . A short distance later , US 1 has access to Milltown Road through an interchange . The road passes by Rutgers University college farm before turning northeast and coming to a cloverleaf interchange with Ryders Lane . After this interchange , US 1 crosses into New Brunswick , where it has an interchange with Route 18 / CR 527 . 
 Upon crossing the Raritan River on the Donald and Morris <unk> Bridges , US 1 enters Edison and continues north into developed suburban areas before turning northeast and meeting CR 514 ( Woodbridge Avenue ) at an interchange . A short distance later , the route crosses CR 529 ( Plainfield Avenue ) at an at @-@ grade intersection . Lined with businesses , the road continues to two close interchanges with CR 531 ( Main Street ) and I @-@ 287 . Past here , US 1 comes to an interchange with CR 501 ( Amboy Avenue ) . In this area , US 1 passes to the east of the Menlo Park Mall , with an interchange providing access . The route continues northeast into Woodbridge Township , where it comes to a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway . Following this interchange , US 1 comes to the Woodbridge Center shopping mall on the east side of the road . US 1 crosses Green Street ( CR 604 ) prior to merging with US 9 . 
 = = = US 1 / 9 concurrency = = = 
 US 1 and US 9 become concurrent upon merging in Woodbridge Township and continue through developed areas , interchanging with Route 35 . Upon entering Union County , US 1 / 9 pass through Rahway and Linden , interchanging with I @-@ 278 in Linden . The road continues into urban Elizabeth , crossing Route 439 before turning into a freeway prior to meeting Route 81 near Newark Liberty International Airport . US 1 / 9 continue along the west end of the airport into Newark , Essex County , reaching the Newark Airport Interchange with I @-@ 78 , US 22 , and Route 21 . 
 From this interchange , the road continues northeast through industrial areas to an interchange with US 1 / 9 Truck that provides access to the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) . US 1 / 9 continue onto the Pulaski Skyway , which carries the route over the Passaic River into Hudson County , crossing over Kearny and the Hackensack River before coming into Jersey City . Trucks are banned from the Pulaski Skyway and must use US 1 / 9 Truck to bypass it . 
 The Pulaski Skyway ends at the Tonnele Circle with US 1 / 9 Truck and Route 139 , and US 1 / 9 continue north along at @-@ grade Tonnelle Avenue toward North Bergen , where the road intersects Route 3 and Route 495 . Crossing into Bergen County , Broad Avenue carries US 1 / 9 through Fairview and Ridgefield before heading into Palisades Park . Here , the two routes join US 46 , and the combined road heads north into Fort Lee . US 1 / 9 / 46 come to an interchange with I @-@ 95 , US 9W , and Route 4 , where it joins I @-@ 95 to head east to the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River . At this point , US 46 ends and I @-@ 95 and US 1 / 9 continue into Manhattan , New York City on the Trans @-@ Manhattan Expressway . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now US 1 between Trenton and New Brunswick was originally chartered as the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike in 1803 . Throughout its history , the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike faced stiff competition from canals such as the Delaware & Raritan Canal and railroads such as the Camden and Amboy Railroad . In the later part of the 19th century , the turnpike company folded and the Pennsylvania Railroad took over ownership of the turnpike . When the charter for the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike expired in 1903 , it became a public road . When the first numbered highways were legislated in New Jersey in 1916 , the present day US 1 between New Brunswick and Elizabeth was to become a part of Route 1 , a route that was to connect Trenton and Elizabeth . Between Trenton and New Brunswick , this route was to follow present @-@ day Route 33 and US 130 . In 1922 , an extension of Route 1 was legislated to continue north from Elizabeth to the Holland Tunnel in Jersey City . 
 When the U.S. Highway System was established in 1926 , the routing of US 1 in New Jersey was to follow the Lincoln Highway from the Lower Trenton Bridge in Trenton to Newark , which was Route 13 between Trenton and New Brunswick and Route 1 north of there . From Newark , the route followed present @-@ day US 1 / 9 Truck east toward Jersey City , where it was to head to the Holland Tunnel . The Lincoln Highway the first transcontinental highway in the United States created in 1913 to link New York City to San Francisco . Route 13 had been legislated along the Trenton to New Brunswick portion in 1917 . 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the alignment of US 1 between Trenton and Newark became Route 27 , while the proposed Route 1 Extension became part of Route 25 . In addition , Route 26 was designated along the former Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike , while the current US 1 between Route 26 and US 130 became Route S26 . North of current US 130 , present @-@ day US 1 to Newark also became a part of Route 25 . The current US 1 / 9 between the Tonnele Circle and the George Washington Bridge meanwhile became parts of Route 1 and Route 6 . The Route 1 Extension , now designated Route 25 , was complete in 1928 with the exception of the Pulaski Skyway . This road was considered the first superhighway in the United States . After the Pulaski Skyway opened in 1932 , US 1 along with US 9 was rerouted to use it . By the 1930s , US 1 was routed to use Route 26 , Route S26 , and Route 25 between Trenton and Newark instead of Route 27 . US 1 and US 9 were routed to use the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River instead of the Holland Tunnel by the 1940s , following Route 1 and US 46 / Route 6 between the Tonnele Circle and the George Washington Bridge . 
 The Trenton Freeway , a freeway through the city of Trenton , was first planned in 1950 to provide a bypass of Trenton and a connection to the new Trenton – Morrisville Toll Bridge . This freeway opened in December 1952 and became part of both US 1 and Route 26 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering that followed a month later , all the state highways running concurrent with US 1 were removed . In addition , US 1 / 9 Truck was designated as a bypass of the Pulaski Skyway ( replacing Route 25T ) and US 1 / 9 Business ( now Route 139 ) was designated on the former Route 25 between the Tonnele Circle and the Holland Tunnel . Also , after the US 1 designation was moved to the Trenton Freeway , the former route through Trenton would become US 1 Alternate . 
 During the development of the Interstate Highway System , New Jersey and Pennsylvania considered having I @-@ 95 cross over the Trenton – Morrisville Toll Bridge , and continue north on the existing US 1 . The project was opposed due to inadequate highway standards ( lack of shoulder ramps , and only two lanes in each direction ) . During this time , both states sought alternate routes for the proposed I @-@ 95 . In 1960 , New Jersey and Pennsylvania decided to designate the Scudder Falls Bridge as I @-@ 95 . By 1969 , an extension of the Trenton Freeway from the current left @-@ hand exit to US 1 Business / US 206 to Whitehead Road was completed and received the Route 174 designation . 
 In 1967 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation recommended an extension of the Trenton Freeway from Whitehead Road to the traffic light at Bakers Basin Road and Franklin Corner Road . Once the extension was completed by the 1980s , the route number was then changed from Route 174 to US 1 . The former alignment of US 1 along surface streets in Trenton was renumbered to US 1 Business , while the US 1 Alternate was dropped . 
 There had been plans to create a west – east spur of the New Jersey Turnpike called Route 92 . It was to begin just north of the intersection of Ridge Road and U.S. Route 1 in South Brunswick and terminate at the mainline of the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) at Exit 8A in Monroe Township . This proposal was cancelled on December 1 , 2006 , after the New Jersey Turnpike Authority decided to use funds to widen the mainline turnpike instead . 
 By the 1990s , many traffic lights along the segment of US 1 in West Windsor and Plainsboro were removed and replaced with exit ramps and overpasses . As a result , the traffic lights at Scudders Mill Road , Plainsboro Road , Alexander Road , and Meadow Road were eliminated . This was followed by building ramps to replace the traffic light at US 130 and US 1 located North Brunswick Township , completed in 2003 . An environmental impact study has been conducted by Rutgers University ’ s Transportation Policy Institute and Center for Negotiation and Conflict Resolution to improve US 1 through the Penns Neck area . This project would eliminate the Penns Neck Circle where US 1 meets Washington Road ( CR 571 ) and move US 1 onto a new freeway alignment in the area . In addition , CR 571 is planned to be realigned to intersect US 1 further to the north . In 2009 , the segment of US 1 between I @-@ 287 in Edison and the Garden State Parkway in Woodbridge was rebuilt to include new ramps at several intersections and removed access to a couple of roads in a $ 53 @.@ 9 million project that was intended to alleviate traffic and make this section safer . 
 In 2013 , the road was one of three that tied for the # 1 ranking on the Tri @-@ State Transportation Campaign 's list of the top ten most dangerous roads for pedestrians in New Jersey , New York and Connecticut . The route , along with U.S. Route 40 / U.S. Route 322 in Atlantic County and U.S. Route 130 ( Burlington Pike ) in Burlington County , were so ranked due to the nine pedestrian deaths that occurred on each of those roads from 2009 to 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 There are two remaining bannered spurs of US 1 in the state of New Jersey : 
 U.S. Route 1 Business in Trenton 
 U.S. Route 1 @-@ 9 Truck in Jersey City 
 The following state highway was also formerly designated as a bannered spur of US 1 : 
 Route 139 in Jersey City was formerly U.S. Route 1 @-@ 9 Business . 
 = Romerike Tunnel = 
 The Romerike Tunnel ( Norwegian : Romeriksporten ) is a 14 @.@ 580 @-@ kilometre ( 9 @.@ 060 mi ) railway tunnel in Norway between Oslo and Lillestrøm . It is the longest railway tunnel in Norway and forms the first section of the Gardermoen Line . It is double track and electrified , permitting speeds of 210 kilometres per hour ( 130 mph ) . 
 Construction started in 1994 , with plans to open with the rest of the Gardermoen Line and Oslo Airport , Gardermoen on 8 October 1998 . Due to serious leakage from Lutvann and several other lakes , it did not open until 22 August 1999 . The leaks increased the cost of the tunnel from NOK 0 @.@ 5 billion to NOK 1 @.@ 8 billion . The main contractor was Scandinavian Rock Group . The tunnel was originally owned by NSB Gardermobanen but is now owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . The tunnel allows long @-@ distance , regional and Flytoget Airport Express Trains to bypass the old Hoved Line , reducing journey times between Oslo and Lillestrøm from 29 to 12 minutes . 
 = = Background = = 
 The tunnel was constructed as part of the high @-@ speed Gardermoen Line which runs from Oslo to Eidsvoll via Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . The tunnel makes up most of the 18 @-@ kilometre ( 11 mi ) section between Oslo Central Station and Lillestrøm Station and was built to bypass the meandering Trunk Line which dates from 1854 . Despite the older line being double track , capacity had reached its limit due to a combination of some trains making many stops and others none until Lillestrøm . The Romerike Tunnel would also be straighter and allow higher through speeds , decreasing travel time from 29 to 12 minutes . The decision to build the Gardermoen Line and Romerike Tunnel was taken by the Norwegian Parliament on 8 October 1992 , with the opening planned for six years later on 8 October 1998 . 
 An alternative airport site to Gardermoen was proposed at Hurum , south @-@ west of Oslo . Had Hurum been chosen , the Gardermoen Line would not have been necessary for the airport express train , but the planning documents recommended that construction still proceed to ease traffic congestion north of Oslo . The tunnel is used by all trains on the Gardermoen Line , including the Flytoget airport express , and the regional and express trains which continue via the Dovre Line . Local trains on the Hoved Line and Kongsvinger Line to the north also use the tunnel . Use of the Hoved Line is limited to freight trains and commuter trains which make stops along the route . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction started in August 1994 , after a tender had been won by Scandinavian Rock Group ( SRG ) , a collaboration between <unk> Anlegg , Nor Entreprenør and Peab . The original contract price was NOK 541 million . An average of 388 man @-@ years were expended during construction , and the work involved the removal of 1 @.@ 62 million tonnes of rock . There were three excavation points ( headings ) , located at Bryn , <unk> on the Oslo – Lørenskog border , and at <unk> , outside Lillestrøm . 
 The tunnel is 14 @.@ 580 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 060 mi ) long with a 105 m2 ( 1 @,@ 130 sq ft ) cross @-@ section , making it the longest tunnel in Norway when it opened , and the second longest since the opening of the Lærdal road tunnel . It allows speeds of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) , with a slope of 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 % slanting upwards towards Lillestrøm . This provides a natural updraft in the direction of Lillestrøm , but a horizontal ventilation system was needed to work in the opposite direction . This is supplemented with vertical ventilation shafts at Bryn and <unk> . The tunnel is between 6 metres ( 20 ft ) and 120 metres ( 390 ft ) below ground , being at its deepest in the vicinity of Bryn . Trains using the tunnel must be capable of a minimum speed of 160 kilometres per hour ( 99 mph ) . The tunnel has overhead wires with 15 kV AC railway electrification ( 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The tunnel needed to pass under Østmarka , a recreational area east of Oslo . The geology of this area is unstable , and was not ideal for tunnel boring . Pressure for its completion to coincide with the opening of the new airport resulted in tunnel excavation proceeding at maximum speed , without adequate measures to exclude water , which resulted in leaks . Houses above the route of the tunnel in <unk> were damaged and the water levels of many lakes in Østmarka were reduced , including lakes Lutvann and Nordre Puttjern . 
 After the damage was discovered on 3 February 1997 , legal actions were initiated by the Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate requiring remedial measures to halt the leakage . At its worst , the rate of leakage into the tunnel was 3 @,@ 000 litres ( 660 imp gal ; 790 US gal ) of water per minute . The Rhoca @-@ Gil proprietary sealant process was used to stop the leaks . On investigation , Rhoca @-@ Gil was revealed to contain a toxic substance called acrylamide , which caused health problems for the tunnel workers . The removal of Rhoca @-@ Gil and its replacement with concrete resulted in additional delays . In addition , an extensive permanent pumping system was installed to restore and maintain lake levels in Østmarka . 
 <unk> the leaks and cleaning up the contamination delayed the tunnel 's completion by a year , and it was finally opened on 22 August 1999 . The entire process was further complicated by conflicts between NSB Gardermobanen and the Scandinavian Rock Group . Retrospective surveys showed a lack of control and reporting procedures during the incidents , which should have been addressed in 1995 , but were never taken seriously . Compensation was paid for approximately 60 houses which were damaged as a result of tunnel construction . An evaluation by the Ministry of Transport and Communications showed that NOK 500 million was spent fixing the leaks , but the report claimed that this was to a large extent a waste of money , resulting from inefficient engineering procedures . The same report criticized the planning and organization of the construction of the entire railway . In total the extraordinary additional costs for the tunnel totaled NOK 1 @.@ 3 billion . 
 = = = Delay = = = 
 When the new airport opened on 8 October 1998 the Flytoget airport express trains started operating immediately , as did the Gardermoen Line from Lillestrøm to the airport and onwards to Eidsvoll . Because the tunnel was not finished , trains were required to use the old Trunk Line from Oslo Central Station to Lillestrøm . After this diversion the express trains switched to the completed section of the new Gardermoen Line between Lillestrøm and Oslo Airport . Regular operations using the Romerike Tunnel started on 22 August 1999 . 
 = Slow ( Kylie Minogue song ) = 
 " Slow " is a song recorded by Australian singer Kylie Minogue for her ninth studio album Body Language ( 2003 ) . It was released as the lead single from the album by Parlophone on 3 November 2003 . The song was written by Minogue , Dan Carey , Emilíana Torrini , and produced by Carey , Torrini , and <unk> . " Slow " is a synthpop song in which Minogue invites a man to " slow down " and dance with her . 
 Upon its release , " Slow " was acclaimed by music critics , many of whom praised Minogue 's sensual and seductive vocals . At the 47th Grammy Awards ceremony , the song received a nomination in the category of " Best Dance Recording " . Commercially , the song was a success and peaked at number one on the charts of countries like Australia , Denmark , Spain and the United Kingdom . The song also reached number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs in the United States . In Australia , the song was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 70 @,@ 000 units . 
 An accompanying music video for the song was shot in Barcelona , Spain , and features Minogue singing the song while sunbathing next to the Piscina Municipal de Montjuïc swimming pool . For additional promotion , Minogue performed the song on a number of television shows . Since its release , the song has been performed by Minogue on all of her concert tours till date , with the exception of the Anti Tour . In 2012 , Minogue named " Slow " as her favourite song from her music career . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Slow " was written by Kylie Minogue , Dan Carey , and Emilíana Torrini , and produced by Carey , Torrini , and <unk> . In 2009 , Torrini explained how she was approached for writing the song , saying " It was like I had just accidentally walked into the line of fire with , " Hey ! You There ! It was all quite surreal . I still think Kylie 's people were trying to call Jamelia , and they just got the wrong number . It 'd be much more funny if that is how it actually happened " . Musically , the song is an eighties @-@ inspired synthpop track . It utilises a very simple and " minimalist " style of production and was described as an " electro @-@ pop / disco fusion with percolating crackle @-@ and @-@ pop beats and sugary vocal overdubs " by Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine . Additionally , it contains elements of electroclash and club music . Through the lyrics of the song , Minogue urges a man , whom she meets at a club , to " slow down " and dance with her . According to Minogue , the lyrics of the song are about " how time and space have a different meaning when you meet someone " . She further said that she " loved the way the song had this push @-@ pull effect ; the musical and lyrical combination gives you a sense of that " . 
 In late 2012 , " Slow " was re @-@ recorded by Minogue for inclusion in her orchestral compilation album The Abbey Road Sessions . On the album , Minogue reworked 16 of her past songs with an orchestra , which , according to Nick Levine from BBC Music , " re @-@ imagine them without the disco glitz and vocal effects " . " Slow " is approached with a more jazz and trip hop influenced take , with Minogue again delivering sultry and seductive vocals . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 " Slow " was released as the lead single from Minogue 's ninth studio album Body Language , by Parlophone , on 3 November 2003 . The cover art of the single , as well as other promotion shoots related to the album , show Minogue striking a pose in a black and white striped crop top , which reveals her midriff , and low @-@ cut pants . Her appearance is similar to that of French actress and singer Brigitte Bardot , who was regarded as the " first foreign @-@ language star ever to attain a level of international success comparable to America 's most popular homegrown talents " and one of the best known sex symbols of the 1950s and 1960s , frequently cited as the " archetypal sex kitten " and " sex goddess " . Minogue described the promotion shoots as " the perfect mix of coquette , kitten and rock ' n ' roll " , and revealed that " We shot it on location in the South of France , so it was [ easy to ] channel the spirit of [ Brigitte ] Bardot . She 's a great iconic reference , particularly that period where she was working with Serge Gainsbourg " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Slow " was critically acclaimed by music critics . Ethan Brown from New York praised the production of the song and commented " Everything at the top of the pops should sound as good as Kylie Minogue 's " Slow " " . He further felt that most of the songs on Body Language " mimic its sound , [ though ] none of the other songs on Body Language come close to the achievement of " Slow " and concluded that " " Slow " should be a template for pop singers who fancy themselves aesthetes " . Adrien Begrand from PopMatters commented that the song was " one of the strongest singles " of Minogue ’ s career , praising her minimalistic approach on the song and its simple arrangement . The Spin magazine review of the song complimented Minogue 's vocals , saying that they will " bring all the boys to the yard " . Eric <unk> from Stylus Magazine favoured Minogue 's demanding vocals , saying that the listener " is open to Kylie ’ s demands , and willing to resort to any means necessary to impress her " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt that the song is one the " few of the tracks on Body Language approach ( ing ) the club @-@ thumping zeal of Fever " . Chris True from AllMusic picked the song as an album highlight of Body Language . 
 The Abbey Road Sessions ' version of the song also generated a favourable response . Tim Sendra from AllMusic enjoyed the " sultry trip @-@ hop take " on the song and picked it as a highlight on the album . Nick Levine from BBC Music felt that " Slow " received the " most startling makeover " on the album , and described it as a " slinky jazz shuffle , complete with <unk> vocal performance " . Annie Zaleski from The A.V. Club appreciated the song 's graceful nature , calling it a " slinky come @-@ on " . Philip Matusavage from MusicOMH appreciated the song 's jazz influences , noting that it " suggests that Kylie and jazz could make for great things " . Jeff Katz from Idolator singled out the song as the " Most Surprising <unk> " on the album . Jude Rogers from The Quietus , however , felt that the song does not " respond well to this ( orchestral ) treatment " . 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine included " Slow " on his list of " Top 10 Singles & Videos of 2004 " at number five , calling it " one of the hottest tracks of the year . " At the 2004 Ivor Novello Awards ceremony , " Slow " received a nomination in the categories " Best Contemporary Song " and " International Hit Of The Year " , but lost the awards to Amy Winehouse 's song " Stronger Than Me " and Dido 's song " White Flag " , respectively . At the 47th Grammy Awards ceremony held in the year 2005 , " Slow " was nominated for " Best Dance Recording " , but lost to Britney Spears 's song " Toxic " . In order to celebrate Valentine 's Day on 14 February 2012 , UK copyright collection society and performance rights organisation PRS for Music compiled a list of the top ten " sexy songs " and placed " Slow " on the top of the list . In 2012 , Minogue picked " Slow " as her all @-@ time favourite song from her 25 years in music . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Minogue 's native country Australia , " Slow " entered and peaked at number one on the Australian Singles Chart , spending a total of 11 weeks on the chart . In this territory , the song was later certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for sales of 70 @,@ 000 units . In Austria , the song entered the Austrian Singles Chart at number 24 and peaked at number 20 , spending a total of 13 weeks on the chart . In the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders region of Belgium , the song entered the Ultratop chart at number 15 and peaked at number nine , spending a total of 10 weeks on the chart . In Canada , the song peaked at number six on the Canadian Singles Chart . In Denmark , the song entered and peaked at number one on the Danish Singles Chart , spending a total of nine weeks on the chart . In France , the song entered and peaked at number 45 on the French Singles Chart , spending a total of 18 weeks on the chart . In Germany , the song peaked at number eight on the German Singles Chart . In Italy , the song entered the Italian Singles Chart at number nine and peaked at number six , spending a total of eight weeks on the chart . In New Zealand , the song entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 10 and peaked at number nine , spending a total of six weeks on the chart . " Slow " also debuted at number one in Spain . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , becoming Minogue 's seventh number one single in the region . It earned her a record for being the female artist for spending the longest duration as a UK chart topper . As of today , it is her last single to reach number one in the country . The single remained in the top ten for two weeks and in the top hundred for fourteen weeks . In the United States , " Slow " peaked at numbers 91 and one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and Hot Dance Club Songs chart , respectively . It is Minogue 's last entry on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , to date . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Slow " was directed by Baillie Walsh and choreographed by Michael Rooney . The video was shot in Barcelona , Spain , and begins with a scene of a man diving into the Piscina Municipal de Montjuïc swimming pool and coming out of its edge , where a number of very lightly beachwear @-@ clad people are sunbathing . Minogue stands out in a series of different zoom central shots lying on a sky @-@ blue towel wearing a dark blue <unk> Balenciaga dress . The next scenes of the video capture her singing the song through different camera angles , particularly during the chorus when the camera angle shifts to a " bird 's eye " view and show Minogue amid beach models performing synchronised choreography to the dance beats . Used for promoting the song , the video premiered earlier than the song 's release date , on 21 October 2003 . Minogue talked about the video , saying : 
 " The video is set in Barcelona at the Olympic Diving site . I lie down for the whole video , which I thought was a very cunning plan . But then I ended up having to sing directly into the camera when the sun was right next it , so tears were streaming down my face ! Videos always have a painful moment . It 's either too hot or it 's too cold or there 's always something . That 's part of the fun , I guess " 
 A reviewer from District MTV commented that the video showed that " synchronised sun bathing is more fun than it sounds " . Ben Taylor from <unk> Magazine included the video in his list of Minogue ’ s " Best Music Video Moments " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Minogue performed " Slow " on 6 November 2003 , at the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards . " Slow " has also been featured on all of Minogue 's concert tour setlists , with the exception of the Anti Tour . In 2003 , she performed the song on the one @-@ night only concert Money Can 't Buy , which was used to promote Body Language and was held at major entertainment venue Hammersmith Apollo in London . In 2005 , she performed the song on her Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour . Minogue was unable to complete the tour as she was diagnosed with early breast cancer and had to cancel the Australian leg of the tour . After undergoing treatment and recovery , she resumed the concert tour in the form of Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour in 2007 . In 2008 , she performed the song on the KylieX2008 tour , which was launched to promote her tenth studio album X. The show was split in five acts and " Slow " was featured on the fourth act entitled " <unk> " . In 2009 , she performed the song on the For You , For Me tour , which was her first concert tour in North America . In 2011 , she performed a jazz @-@ oriented version of the song on the Aphrodite : Les Folies Tour , which was launched to promote her eleventh studio album Aphrodite . In 2012 , Minogue promoted The Abbey Road Sessions by performing on the BBC Proms in the Park at Hyde Park , London . During the event , she sang the orchestral version of " Slow " . In 2014 and 2015 , Minogue performed the song during her Kiss Me Once Tour and Kylie Summer 2015 Tour <unk> . The performances employed a laser lighting display and featured a " Matrix @-@ style " break @-@ dance routine . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Slow " . 
 CD single 
 " Slow " - 3 : 15 
 " Soul on Fire " - 3 : 32 
 Maxi single 
 " Slow " - 3 : 15 
 " Sweet Music " - 3 : 32 
 " Slow " ( Medicine 8 Remix ) - 6 : 57 
 " Slow " ( Video ) - 3 : 55 
 12 @-@ inch maxi single 
 " Slow " ( Extended Mix ) - 6 : 25 
 " Slow " ( Radio Slave Remix ) - 6 : 34 
 " Slow " ( Medicine 8 Remix ) - 6 : 57 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = State Shinto = 
 State <unk> ( <unk> , Kokka <unk> ) describes Imperial Japan 's ideological use of the native folk traditions of Shinto . The state strongly encouraged Shinto practices to emphasize the Emperor as a divine being . This was exercised through control of finances and training regimes for priests . 
 The State Shinto ideology emerged at the start of the Meiji era , as government officials defined freedom of religion within the Meiji Constitution . Scholars believed that Shinto reflected the historical fact of the Emperor 's divine origins , not religious belief , and that it should enjoy a privileged relationship with the Japanese state . For the state , Shinto was seen as a non @-@ religious moral tradition and patriotic practice . 
 Early Meiji @-@ era attempts to unite Shinto and state failed , but this non @-@ religious concept of ideological Shinto was incorporated into state bureaucracy . Shrines were defined as patriotic , not religious , institutions , which served state purposes such as honoring the war dead . The state also integrated local shrines into political functions , occasionally spurring local opposition and resentment . With fewer shrines financed by the state , nearly 80 @,@ 000 closed or merged with neighbors . Many shrines and shrine organizations began to independently embrace these state directives , regardless of funding . By 1940 , Shinto priests risked persecution for performing traditionally " religious " Shinto ceremonies . 
 Imperial Japan did not draw a distinction between ideological Shinto and traditional Shinto . US military leaders introduced the term " State Shinto " to differentiate the state 's ideology from traditional Shinto practices in the 1945 Shinto Directive . That decree established Shinto as a religion , and banned further ideological uses of Shinto by the state . Controversy continues to surround the use of Shinto symbols in state functions . 
 = = Origins of the term = = 
 Shinto is a blend of indigenous Japanese folk practices , court manners , and spirit @-@ worship which dates back to at least 600 AD . These beliefs were first unified as " Shinto " during the Meiji era ( 1868 @-@ 1912 ) , though the Chronicles of Japan ( <unk> , Nihon Shoki ) referenced the term in the eighth century . Shinto has no set of doctrines or founder , but draws from a set of creation myths described in books such as the Kojiki . 
 The 1945 " Shinto Directive " of the United States General Headquarters introduced the " State Shinto " distinction as it began governing Japan after the second world war . The Shinto Directive , ( officially the " Abolition of Governmental Sponsorship , Support , Perpetuation , Control and Dissemination of State Shinto " ) defined State Shinto as " that branch of Shinto ( Kokka Shinto or Jinja Shinto ) which , by official acts of the Japanese government , has been differentiated from the religion of Sect Shinto ( <unk> Shinto or <unk> Shinto ) and has been classified a non @-@ religious national cult . " 
 The " State Shinto " term was thus used to categorize , and abolish , Imperial Japanese practices that relied on Shinto to support nationalistic ideology . By refusing to ban Shinto practices outright , Japan 's post @-@ war constitution was thus able to preserve full Freedom of Religion . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The definition of State Shinto requires distinction from the term " Shinto , " which was one aspect of a set of nationalist symbols integrated into the State Shinto ideology . Though some scholars , such as Woodard and <unk> , and the Shinto Directive itself , use the terms " Shrine Shinto " and " State Shinto " interchangeably , most contemporary scholars use the term " Shrine Shinto " to refer to the majority of Shinto shrines which were outside of State Shinto influence , leaving " State Shinto " to refer to shrines and practices deliberately intended to reflect state ideology . 
 = = = Interpretations = = = 
 Most generally , State Shinto refers to any use of Shinto practices incorporated into the national ideology during the Meiji period starting in 1868 . It is often described as any state @-@ supported , Shinto @-@ inspired ideology or practice intended to inspire national integration , unity , and loyalty . State Shinto is also understood to refer to the state rituals and ideology of Emperor @-@ worship , which was not a traditional emphasis of Shinto — of the 124 Japanese emperors , only 20 have dedicated shrines . 
 " State Shinto " was not an official designation for any practice or belief in Imperial Japan during this period . Instead , it was developed at the end of the war to describe the mixture of state support for non @-@ religious shrine activities and immersive ideological support for the <unk> policy in education , including the training of all shrine priests . This permitted a form of traditional religious Shinto to reflect a State Shinto position without the direct control of the state . The extent to which Emperor worship was supported by the population is unclear , though scholars such as <unk> <unk> , Sakamoto <unk> , and Nitta Hitoshi argue that the government 's funding and control of Shrines was never adequate enough to justify a claim to the existence of a State Shinto . The extent of popular support for the actions categorized as " State Shinto " is the subject of debate . 
 Some contemporary Shinto authorities reject the concept of State Shinto , and seek to restore elements of the practice , such as naming time periods after the Emperor . This view often sees " State Shinto " purely as an invention of the United States ' " Shinto Directive . " 
 = = Shinto as political ideology = = 
 " Religious " practice , in its Western sense , was unknown in Japan prior to the Meiji restoration . " Religion " was understood to encompass a series of beliefs about faith and the afterlife , but also closely associated with Western power . The Meiji restoration had re @-@ established the Emperor , a " religious " figure , as the head of the Japanese state . 
 Religious freedom was initially a response to demands of Western governments . Japan had allowed Christian missionaries under pressure from Western governments , but viewed Christianity as a foreign threat . The state was challenged to establish a suprareligious interpretation of Shinto that incorporated , and promoted , the Emperor 's divine lineage . By establishing Shinto as a unique form of " suprareligious " cultural practice , it would be exempted from Meiji laws protecting freedom of religion . 
 The " State Shinto " ideology presented Shinto as something beyond religion , " a unity of government and teaching ... not a religion . " Rather than a religious practice , Shinto was understood as a form of education , which " consists of the traditions of the imperial house , beginning in the age of gods and continuing through history . " 
 Scholars , such as Sakamoto <unk> , argue that the " State Shinto " system existed only between 1900 and 1945 , corresponding to the state 's creation of the Bureau of Shrines . That bureau distinguished Shinto from religions managed by the Bureau of Shrines and Temples , which became the Bureau of Religions . Separated through this state bureaucracy , Shinto was distinguished from Buddhist temples and Christian churches , which were formulated as religious . This marked the start of the state 's official designation of Shinto shrines as " suprareligious " or " non @-@ religious " . 
 State Shinto was thus not recognized as a " state religion " during the Meiji era . Instead , State Shinto is considered an appropriation of traditional Shinto through state financial support for ideologically aligned shrines . 
 = = Implementation of Shinto ideology = = 
 The Empire of Japan endeavored , through education initiatives and specific financial support for new shrines , to frame Shinto practice as a patriotic moral tradition . From the early Meiji era , the divine origin of the Emperor was the official position of the state , and taught in classrooms not as myth , but as historical fact . Shinto priests were hired to teach in public schools , and cultivated this teaching , alongside reverence for the Emperor and compulsory class trips to shrines . State Shinto practitioners also emphasized the ritual aspect as a traditional civic practice that did not explicitly call on faith to participate . 
 By balancing a " suprareligious " understanding of Shinto as the source of divinity for both Japan and the Emperor , the state was able to compel participation in rituals from Japanese subjects while claiming to respect their freedom of religion . The state was thus able to enshrine its place in civic society in ways religions could not . This included teaching its ideological strand of Shinto in public schools , including ceremonial recitations to the Emperor and rites involving the Emperor 's portrait . 
 In 1926 , the government organized the <unk> Seido <unk> ( <unk> ? , Religious System Investigative Committee ) and then the Jinja Seido <unk> ( <unk> ? , Shrine System Investigative Committee ) , which further established the suprareligious " <unk> " ideology . 
 To protect this non @-@ religious distinction , practices which did not align with state functions were increasingly prohibited . This included preaching at shrines and conducting funerals . The use of the symbolic torii gate was restricted to government @-@ supported shrines . As religious rituals without state functions were restricted , practitioners were driven underground and frequently arrested . Alternative Shinto movements , such as <unk> , were hampered by the imprisonment of its priests in 1921 . The status of separation of so @-@ called " State Shinto " shrines changed in 1931 ; from that point , shrines were pressured to focus on the divinity of the Emperor Hirohito or shrine priests could face persecution . 
 Some intellectuals at the time , such as <unk> Kunio , were critics of Imperial Japan 's argument at the time that Shinto was not religious . In 1936 , the Catholic Church 's Propaganda Fide agreed with the state definition , and announced that visits to shrines had " only a purely civil value " . 
 = = State control of shrines = = 
 Though the government 's ideological interest in Shinto is well @-@ known , there is debate over how much control the government had over local shrines , and for how long . Shrine finances were not purely state @-@ supported . Shinto priests , even when state @-@ supported , had tended to avoid preaching on ideological matters until the establishment of the Wartime Shrine board in 1940 . 
 In 1906 , the government issued a policy to limit its financial support to one shrine per village . This state supported shrines that followed its specific guidelines for funding , and encouraged unfunded shrines to become partners with the larger shrines . As a result of this initiative to consolidate Shinto beliefs into state @-@ approved practices , Japan 's 200 @,@ 000 shrines had been reduced to 120 @,@ 000 by 1914 , consolidating control to shrines favorable to the state interpretation of Shinto . 
 In 1910 , graduates of state @-@ run Shinto schools , such as <unk> University and <unk> University , were implicitly allowed to become public school teachers . A greater number of better @-@ trained priests with educations at state @-@ supported schools , combined with a rising patriotic fervor , is believed by some to have seeded an environment in which grassroots Emperor worship was possible , even without financial support for local shrines . 
 In 1913 , official rules for Shrine priests — <unk> ika jinja <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) — specifically called upon " a duty to observe festivals conforming to the rituals of the state . " Some shrines did adopt State Shinto practice independent of financial support from the government . Several Shrine Associations advocated for support of " State Shinto " directives independently , including the Shrine Administration Organization , the Shrine Priest Collaboration Organization , and the Shrine Priest Training Organization . 
 In 1940 , the state created the wartime shrine board , which expanded control over state shrines and expanded the state 's role . Up to that point , individual priests had been limited in their political roles , delegated to certain rituals and shrine upkeep , and rarely encouraged Emperor worship , or other aspects of state ideology , independently . No shrine priest , or member of the Wartime Shrine board , had previously sought public office , which some scholars , such as Sakamoto , suggest is evidence of the state 's use of Shinto to its own ends , rather than the Shinto priest 's attempt to achieve political power . 
 = = Ideological origins = = 
 Scholar <unk> Nobuhiro suggests the " suprareligious " frame on State Shinto practices drew upon the state 's previous failures to consolidate religious Shinto for state purposes . 
 <unk> ( " National Learning " ) was an early attempt to develop ideological interpretations of Shinto , many of which would later form the basis of " State Shinto " ideology . <unk> was an Edo @-@ period educational philosophy which sought a " pure " form of Japanese Shinto , stripped of foreign influences — particularly Buddhism . 
 In the Meiji era , scholar Hirata Atsutane advocated for a return to " National Learning " as a way to eliminate the influence of Buddhism and distill a nativist form of Shinto . From 1870 to 1884 , Atsutane , along with priests and scholars , lead a " Great Promulgation Campaign " advocating a fusion of nationalism and Shinto through worship of the Emperor . There had been no previous tradition of absolute obedience to the Emperor in Shinto . This initiative failed to attract public support , and intellectuals dismissed the idea . Author Fukuzawa <unk> dismissed the campaign at the time as an " insignificant movement . " 
 Despite its failure , Atsutane 's nativist interpretation of Shinto would encourage a later scholar , <unk> Takamasa . Takamasa advocated control and standardization of Shinto practice through a governmental " Department of Divinity . " These activists urged leaders to consolidate diverse , localized Shinto practices into a standardized national practice , which they argued would unify Japan in support of the Emperor . 
 The state responded by establishing the Department of Divinity ( " <unk> " ) in 1869 . This government bureaucracy encouraged the segregation of Kami spirits from Buddhist ones , and emphasized the divine lineage of the Emperor from the Sun Goddess , Amaterasu . This action sought to reverse what had been a blending of Buddhist and Shinto practices in Japan . That department was unsuccessful , and demoted to a Ministry . In 1872 , policy for Shrines and other religions was taken over by the Ministry of Education . The Ministry intended to standardize rituals across shrines , and saw some small success , but fell short of its original intent . 
 = = = National Teaching = = = 
 In calling for the return of the Department of Divinity in 1874 , a group of Shinto priests issued a collective statement calling Shinto a " National Teaching . " That statement advocated for understanding Shinto as distinct from religions . Shinto , they argued , was a preservation of the traditions of the Imperial house and therefore represented the purest form of Japanese state rites . These scholars wrote , 
 National Teaching is teaching the codes of national government to the people without error . Japan is called the divine land because it is ruled by the heavenly deities descendants , who consolidate the work of the deities . The Way of such consolidation and rule by divine descendants is called Shinto . 
 Signatories of the statement included Shinto leaders , practitioners and scholars such as Tanaka <unk> , chief priest of Ise shrine ; <unk> <unk> , head of Kanda shrine ; and Hirayama <unk> , head of a major tutelary shrine in Tokyo . Nonetheless , this concept of Shinto as a " National Learning " failed to take hold in most popular conceptions of Shinto . 
 = = = Great Promulgation Campaign = = = 
 The Bureau of Shinto Affairs attempted to standardize the training of priests in 1875 . This created a division between state actors and local priests , who disagreed over the content of that standardized training . This debate concerned which kami , or spirits , to include in rituals — particularly , whether state kami should be included . This debate marked the rise of the Ise sect , which was open to a stronger state presence in Shinto , and the Izumo sect , which was not . The Izumo sect advocated for recognition of the god <unk> as an equal to Amaterasu , which had theological consequences for emperor @-@ worship . This debate , the " enshrinement debate , " posed a serious ideological threat to the Meiji era government . 
 A result of the enshrinement debate was that the Ministry of the Interior concentrated on distinctions of " religion " and " doctrine " , stating that " Shinto rituals ( <unk> ) are performed by the state whereas religious doctrines ( <unk> ) are to be followed by individuals and families . " Through this logic , Shinto rituals were a civic responsibility which all Japanese subjects were expected to participate in , whereas " religious " Shinto was a matter of personal faith and subject to freedom of religion . This debate marked an early failure in crafting of a unified national Shinto practice , and led to a sharp decline in both state grants to Shinto shrines and to the appointment of Shinto priests to government positions . The Ministry of Home Affairs took responsibility for shrines in 1877 , and began to separate Shinto religious practices from indoctrination . In 1887 , the Ministry stopped financial support for most shrines , aside from select Imperial shrines tied to state functions . 
 = = = Yasukuni Shrine = = = 
 In 1879 , Yasukuni Shrine was built to enshrine the war dead . The emperor visited and performed rites for the war dead at Yasukuni , the highest possible honor in Shinto . Around this time , the state began to assign shrines with meanings rooted in patriotic nationalism ; including a network of shrines dedicated to soldiers killed in battle . These assignments had no connection to the history of these local shrines , which led to resentment . 
 In contemporary times , the shrine has become a controversial symbol for Japanese nationalists . While many citizens of various political persuasions visit the site to honor relatives killed in battle , whose kami ( spirit ) are said to be enshrined there , so too are the kami of several class @-@ A war criminals . These criminals were enshrined in a secret ceremony in 1978 , which has raised the ire of Japanese pacifists and the international community . 
 No Emperor has visited the shrine since , and visits by prime ministers and government officials to the shrine have been the subject of lawsuits and media controversy . 
 = = In occupied territories = = 
 As the Japanese extended their territorial holdings , shrines were constructed with the purpose of hosting Japanese kami in occupied lands . This practice began with a shrine in Taiwan in 1900 . Major shrines built across Asia included Karafuto Shrine in Sakhalin in 1910 and Chosen Shrine , Korea , in 1919 ; these shrines were designated just under Ise Shrine in national importance . Other shrines included <unk> Shrine in Singapore , San 'a Shrine in Hainan Island ( China ) , Akatsuki Shrine in Saigon , and <unk> Shrine in Java . 
 The Japanese built almost 400 shrines in occupied Korea , and worship was mandatory for Koreans . A statement from the head of the Home Office in Korea wrote about the shrines in a directive : " ... they have an existence totally distinct from religion , and worship at the shrines is an act of patriotism and loyalty , the basic moral virtues of our nation . " 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 On 1 January 1946 , Emperor Shōwa issued a statement , sometimes referred to as the Humanity Declaration , in which he quoted the Five Charter Oath of Emperor Meiji , announced that he was not an <unk> ( a divinity in human form ) and that Japan was not built on myths . The U.S. General Headquarters quickly defined and banned practices it identified as " State Shinto " , but because the U.S. saw freedom of religion as a crucial aspect of post @-@ war Japan it did not place a full ban on Japanese religious ceremonies involving the Emperor . General Douglas MacArthur and the State Department sought to maintain the authority of the Emperor to avoid " lasting resentment " among the Japanese people during the occupation and reconstruction of Japan . 
 The Shinto Directive stated it was established to " free the Japanese people from direct or indirect compulsion to believe or profess to believe in a religion or cult officially designated by the state " and " prevent a recurrence of the perversion of Shinto theory and beliefs into militaristic and <unk> propaganda " . 
 Today , while the Imperial House continues to perform Shinto rituals as " private ceremonies " , participation and belief are no longer compelled from Japanese citizens , nor funded by the state . 
 Other aspects of the government 's " suprareligious " enforcement of Shinto practices , such as school trips to Shinto shrines , were forbidden . Many innovations of Meiji @-@ era Shinto are present in contemporary Shinto , such as a belief among priests that Shinto is a non @-@ religious cultural practice that encourages national unity . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Controversy has emerged during the funerals and weddings of members of the Japanese Imperial Family , as they present a merging of Shinto and state functions . The Japanese treasury does not pay for these events , which preserves the distinction between state and shrine functions . 
 The Association of Shinto Shrines is politically active in encouraging support for the Emperor , including campaigns such as distributing amulets from Ise Shrine . Ise shrine was one of the most important shrines in State Shinto , symbolizing Amaterasu 's presence and connection to the Emperor . In contrast , the Meiji @-@ era <unk> shrine is frequently the target of State Shinto controversies , likely owing to its enshrinement of Japanese soldiers killed in warfare . 
 Conservative politicians and nationalist interest groups continue to advocate for returning the Emperor to a central political and religious position , which they believe will restore a national sense of unity . 
 = Messers Run = 
 Messers Run is a tributary of Catawissa Creek in Schuylkill County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 5 @.@ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) long and flows through Kline Township and East Union Township . The only named tributary of the stream is Negro Hollow , but it has two unnamed tributaries . The creek has some alkalinity , but is slightly acidic . The main rock formations in the watershed of it are the Mauch Chunk Formation and the Pottsville Formation . The main soils in the watershed are the Leck Kill soil and the Hazleton soil . 
 The watershed of Messers Run has an area of 5 @.@ 98 square miles ( 15 @.@ 5 km2 ) . There are two reservoirs on the stream . It is difficult to access the stream as most of it is several hundred meters from any road . The creek is a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery and Class A Wild Trout Waters in some places . There are many species of fish inhabiting the creek , including brook , brown trout , and others . The creek has been surveyed by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . 
 = = Course = = 
 Messers Run is approximately 5 @.@ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) long . It begins near Interstate 81 on a mountain known as Spring Mountain in Kline Township . It flows southwest for several tenths of a mile before entering a valley and turning west @-@ southwest . After approximately a mile , the stream passes through the Lofty Reservoir . It exits the Lofty Reservoir via the reservoir 's southwestern edge and continues west and slightly south . After more than a mile , it turns west and slightly north , receiving an unnamed tributary several tenths of a mile downstream . The stream then continues west , receiving another unnamed tributary after several tenths of a mile . A few tenths of a mile later , it exits Kline Township and enters East Union Township . In East Union Township , the stream turns northwest and receives the tributary Negro Hollow . It then turns northeast for a few hundred feet and passes near the Blue Head Reservoir . The stream then turns northwest and flows for slightly less than a mile until it reaches its confluence with Catawissa Creek . Messers Run joins Catawissa Creek 33 @.@ 90 miles ( 54 @.@ 56 km ) upstream of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Messers Run has three tributaries , only one of which is named . The named tributary is known as Negro Hollow and it flows through Delano Township , Kline Township , and East Union Township . The unnamed tributaries are known as " Trib <unk> To Messers Run " and " Trib <unk> To Messers Run " . The former is entirely in Kline Township , while the latter flows through Delano Township and Kline Township . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Messers Run is infertile and acidic upstream of the Lofty Reservoir . The stream has the potential to be affected by acid precipitation in this part of it . The stream also has these attributes from the Lofty Reservoir downstream to the Blue Head Reservoir and from the Blue Head Reservoir downstream to the mouth . 
 The pH of Messers Run upstream of the Lofty Reservoir is 6 @.@ 3 . The total concentration of alkalinity in this part of the stream is 3 milligrams per liter . These values are similar to those measured in a similar area during a 1990 survey of the stream . The concentration of water hardness in this part of the stream is 47 milligrams per liter . A 1997 report noted that this value was very high considering the concentration of alkalinity . 
 The pH of Messers Run between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir is 6 @.@ 6 . The concentration of alkalinity in this portion of the stream is 4 milligrams per liter and the total water hardness is 18 milligrams per liter . The pH of the stream below the Blue Head Reservoir is 6 @.@ 6 . The concentration of alkalinity in this part of the stream is 5 milligrams per liter and the water hardness is 13 milligrams per liter . 
 The air temperature in the vicinity of Messers Run 3 @.@ 94 miles ( 6 @.@ 34 km ) upstream of its mouth was measured to be 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) at 3 : 40 P.M. on July 23 , 1997 . The water temperature at that time and location was 15 @.@ 1 ° C ( 59 @.@ 2 ° F ) . The air temperature near the stream 1 @.@ 85 miles ( 2 @.@ 98 km ) upstream of its mouth was measured to be 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) at 2 : 55 P.M. on July 22 , 1997 and the water temperature was measured to be 16 @.@ 8 ° C ( 62 @.@ 2 ° F ) . The air temperature in the vicinity of the stream was measured to be 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) at 4 : 20 P.M. on July 23 , 1997 at a point 0 @.@ 50 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) upstream of its mouth . The water temperature at this time and location was measured to be 16 @.@ 5 ° C ( 61 @.@ 7 ° F ) . 
 The specific conductivity of the waters of Messers Run 3 @.@ 94 miles ( 6 @.@ 34 km ) upstream of its mouth is 223 micromhos . The specific conductivity of the stream 's waters 1 @.@ 85 miles ( 2 @.@ 98 km ) upstream of its mouth is 71 micromhos and the specific conductivity 0 @.@ 50 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) upstream of its mouth is 45 micromhos . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Messers Run is 1 @,@ 053 feet ( 321 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the stream 's source is just under 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 490 m ) above sea level . 
 Most of the watershed of Messers Run is on rock of the Mauch Chunk Formation . This rock formation consists of siltstone , sandstone , grayish @-@ red shale , and conglomerate . However , areas that are on the Pottsville Formation are scattered throughout the watershed , mainly along its southern and northern edges . This rock formation is especially common in the sub @-@ watershed of Negro Hollow and near the upper reaches of " Trib <unk> To Messers Run " . The Pottsville Formation contains claystone , limestone , conglomerate , shale , and gray sandstone . 
 The main soils in the watershed of Messers Run are the Leck Kill soil and the Hazleton soil . The Leck Kill soil occurs in the northwestern part of the watershed ( in its lower reaches ) . The Hazleton soil is found throughout the rest of the watershed . 
 Messers Run is flanked by areas prone to flooding during a 100 year flood from the mouth of Negro Hollow upstream to its headwaters . Negro Hollow and its unnamed tributaries are also surrounded by areas prone to flooding during a 100 @-@ year flood for much of their length . Both of the unnamed tributaries of Messers Run are surrounded by such areas for the majority of their length . 
 Messers Run has a width of 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) upstream of the Lofty Reservoir . The gradient of the stream at this location is 194 feet per mile ( 36 @.@ 7 m / km ) . Its width between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir is 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) . The gradient of the stream at this location is 106 feet per mile ( 20 @.@ 0 m / km ) . Its width below the Blue Head Reservoir is 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) . The gradient of the stream at this location is 84 feet per mile ( 16 @.@ 0 m / km ) . 
 A mountain known as Spring Mountain is at the headwaters of Messers Run . A mountain known as Locust Mountain is also found in the watershed . 
 = = Watershed and history = = 
 The watershed of Messers Run has an area of 5 @.@ 98 square miles ( 15 @.@ 5 km2 ) . The stream passes through the United States Geological Survey quadrangles of Conyngham and Delano . Much of the watershed is in Kline Township . However , significant areas in the western part of the watershed are in East union Township , Delano Township , and Mahanoy Township . Interstate 81 passes through the watershed in its easternmost part . 
 A reservoir known as the Lofty Reservoir is situated on Messers Run . It is owned by the Pennsylvania Game Commission and is used as a supply of drinking water . Additionally , the Blue Head Reservoir is in the watershed . 
 There is some agricultural land in the lower reaches of the watershed of Messers Run . A large part of the watershed is on land that is part of a Nature Conservancy Priority Forest Hub . The stream flows through Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 308 for most of its length . There are 1 @,@ 070 acres ( 432 ha ) of forested land in Pennsylvania State Game Lands number 308 . The watershed of the stream is almost entirely on forested land . 
 Between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir , Messers Run is mostly accessible by State Game Lands roads , which are only open seasonally . It is also difficult to access the stream upstream of the Lofty Reservoir or downstream of the Blue Head Reservoir . No part of Messers Run upstream of the Lofty Reservoir is within 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 500 m ) of a road . 18 percent of the stream 's length between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir is within 330 feet ( 100 m ) of a road , 95 percent is within 980 feet ( 300 m ) of a road , and 100 percent is within 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 500 m ) of one . 16 percent of the its length between the Blue Head Reservoir and the mouth is within 330 feet ( 100 m ) of a road , 23 percent is within 980 feet ( 300 m ) of a road , and 31 percent is within 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 500 m ) of one . 
 In 1990 , the population density of the watershed of Messers Run upstream of the Lofty Reservoir was 140 people per square mile ( 54 people per square kilometer ) . The population density of the watershed between the Lofty and Blue Head Reservoirs was 80 people per square mile ( 31 people per square kilometer ) . The population density of the watershed downstream of the Blue Head Reservoir was 52 people per square mile ( 20 people per square kilometer ) . 
 The Mahanoy Water Company sought permission to construct a dam on Messers Run as early as 1913 . The stream was used as a water supply as early as the early 1900s . Messers Run was surveyed once by the environmental services branch of the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . This survey was carried out by Young in November 1990 . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Messers Run is considered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to be a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery , as is its tributary Negro Hollow . Both Messers Run ( from Lofty Reservoir downstream to Blue Head Reservoir ) and Negro Hollow ( between its headwaters and its mouth ) are also considered by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission to be Class A Wild Trout Waters . A 1997 report advised against stocking Messers Run . 
 Seven species of fish inhabit Messers Run . These include a highly substantial population of brook trout . Upstream of the Lofty Reservoir , there are two species of fish inhabiting the stream : brook trout , blacknose dace . The 1990 survey observed these two species as well as white suckers and pumpkinseeds . Three species of fish inhabit the stream between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir . These species are brook trout , brown trout , and blacknose dace . Six species of fish inhabit the stream below the Blue Head Reservoir : brook trout , blacknose dace , tessellated darters , brown trout , white suckers , and sculpins . However , only the first three species were observed during the 1990 survey of the stream . 
 The biomass of wild brook trout in Messers Run upstream of the Lofty Reservoir is estimated to be 26 pounds per acre ( 29 kg / ha ) , including 54 @.@ 1 pounds ( 24 @.@ 55 kg ) per hectare of brook trout less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 3 @.@ 97 pounds per acre ( 4 @.@ 45 kg / ha ) of brook trout more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . These trout range from 0 @.@ 98 to 8 @.@ 82 inches ( 25 to 224 mm ) in length . 
 The biomass of wild brook trout in the stream between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir is 34 @.@ 25 pounds per acre ( 38 @.@ 39 kg / ha ) , including 20 @.@ 40 pounds per acre ( 22 @.@ 87 kg / ha ) of brook trout less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 13 @.@ 85 pounds per acre ( 15 @.@ 52 kg / ha ) of brook trout more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . These trout range from 0 @.@ 98 to 10 @.@ 79 inches ( 25 to 274 mm ) in length . The biomass of wild brown trout in this part of the stream is 0 @.@ 080 pounds per acre ( 0 @.@ 09 kg / ha ) , of which all is from brown trout less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . These trout range from 2 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 9 inches ( 50 to 74 mm ) in length . The total biomass of wild trout between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir is 34 @.@ 33 pounds per acre ( 38 @.@ 48 kg / ha ) . 
 The biomass of brook trout in the stream below the Blue Head Reservoir is 13 @.@ 18 pounds per acre ( 14 @.@ 77 kg / ha ) , including 8 @.@ 32 pounds per acre ( 9 @.@ 33 kg / ha ) of brook trout less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 4 @.@ 85 pounds per acre ( 5 @.@ 44 kg / ha ) of brook trout more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . The biomass of brown trout in this part of the stream is 2 @.@ 44 pounds per acre ( 2 @.@ 73 kg / ha ) , including 0 @.@ 42 pounds per acre ( 0 @.@ 47 kg / ha ) of brown trout less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 2 @.@ 02 pounds per acre ( 2 @.@ 26 kg / ha ) of brown trout more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . The brook trout in this part of the stream range from 2 @.@ 0 to 8 @.@ 8 inches ( 50 to 224 mm ) in length and the brown trout range from 2 @.@ 0 to 10 @.@ 8 inches ( 50 to 274 mm ) in length . 
 Upstream of the Lofty Reservoir , there are 484 brook trout per mile ( 300 per kilometer ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 13 per mile ( 8 per kilometer ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . There are 728 per acre ( 1800 per hectare ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 20 per acre ( 50 per hectare ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . Between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir , there are 1848 brook trout per mile ( 1146 per kilometer ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , 110 per mile ( 68 per kilometer ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , 16 brown trout per mile ( 10 per kilometer ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , and none that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . This section of the stream has 1406 brook trout per acre ( <unk> per hectare ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 84 per acre ( 207 per hectare ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . It has 12 brown trout per acre ( 30 per hectare ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and none that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . Between the Blue Head Reservoir and the stream 's mouth , there are 1153 brook trout per mile ( 715 per kilometer ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , 65 per mile ( 40 per kilometer ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , 118 brown trout per kilometer ( 73 per mile ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long , and 9 that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . This section of the stream has 579 brook trout per acre ( 1430 per hectare ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 32 per acre ( 80 per hectare ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . It has 59 brown trout per acre ( 147 per hectare ) that are less than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long and 8 per acre ( 21 per hectare ) that are more than 6 @.@ 9 inches ( 175 mm ) long . 
 Brook trout and sculpins are present in the tributary Negro Hollow . The biomass of brook trout in this tributary is 49 @.@ 76 pounds per acre ( 55 @.@ 77 kg / ha ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 A 1997 report stated that Messers Run was a poor site for angling upstream of the Lofty Reservoir . The same report stated that the stream was an excellent site for angling between the Lofty Reservoir and the Blue Head Reservoir . Additionally , the Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 308 are in the stream 's watershed . These state game lands contain 432 hectares of forested land . 
 = The Rocky Horror Picture Show = 
 The Rocky Horror Picture Show is a 1975 British @-@ American musical horror comedy film directed by Jim Sharman . The screenplay was written by Sharman and Richard O 'Brien based on the 1973 musical stage production The Rocky Horror Show , music , book and lyrics by O 'Brien . The production is a parody tribute to the science fiction and horror B movies of the 1930s through early 1970s . The film stars Tim Curry , Susan Sarandon and Barry Bostwick along with cast members from the original Royal Court Theatre , Roxy Theatre and Belasco Theatre productions . 
 The story centres on a young engaged couple whose car breaks down in the rain near a castle where they seek a telephone to call for help . The castle is occupied by strangers in elaborate costumes celebrating an annual convention . They discover the head of the house is Frank N. Furter , an apparent mad scientist who actually is an alien transvestite who creates a living muscle man in his laboratory . The couple is seduced separately by the mad scientist and eventually released by the servants who take control . 
 The film was shot in the United Kingdom at Bray Studios and on location at an old country estate named Oakley Court , best known for its earlier use by Hammer Film Productions . A number of props and set pieces were reused from the Hammer horror films . Although the movie is both a parody and tribute to many of the kitsch science fiction and horror films , costume designer Sue Blane conducted no research for her designs . Blane stated that costumes from the film have directly impacted the development of punk music fashion trends such as ripped fishnets and dyed hair . 
 Although largely critically panned on initial release , it soon became known as a midnight movie when audiences began participating with the film at the Waverly Theater in New York City in 1976 . Audience members returned to the cinemas frequently and talked back to the screen and began dressing as the characters , spawning similar performance groups across the United States . At almost the same time , fans in costume at the King 's Court Theater in Pittsburgh began performing alongside the film . This " shadow cast " mimed the actions on screen above and behind them , while lip @-@ syncing their character 's lines . Still in limited release four decades after its premiere , it is the longest @-@ running theatrical release in film history . Today , the film has a large international following . It was selected for preservation in the US National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 2005 . 
 The film 's creative team also produced Shock Treatment in 1981 , a standalone feature using the characters of Brad and Janet and featuring some of the same cast . This second film was produced as a musical stage production for a 2015 premier on the London stage . A modern @-@ day reimagining of the film , directed by Kenny Ortega and tentatively titled The Rocky Horror Picture Show Event , is set to air on television in the fall of 2016 . The special will feature an ensemble cast starring Laverne Cox as Dr. Frank N. Furter , Ryan <unk> and Victoria Justice as Brad and Janet , and Tim Curry as The Criminologist . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A criminologist narrates the tale of the newly engaged couple Brad Majors and Janet Weiss who find themselves lost and with a flat tire on a cold and rainy late November evening , somewhere near Denton , Ohio . Seeking a telephone , the couple walk to a nearby castle where they discover a group of strange and outlandish people who are holding an Annual Transylvanian Convention . They are soon swept into the world of Dr. Frank N. Furter , a self @-@ proclaimed " sweet transvestite from Transsexual , Transylvania " . The ensemble of convention attendees also includes servants Riff Raff , his sister Magenta , and a groupie named Columbia . 
 In his lab , Frank claims to have discovered the " secret to life itself " . His creation , Rocky , is brought to life . The ensuing celebration is soon interrupted by Eddie ( an ex @-@ delivery boy , both Frank and Columbia 's ex @-@ lover , as well as partial brain donor to Rocky ) who rides out of a deep freeze on a motorcycle . In a jealous rage , Frank corners him and kills him with an ice axe . He then departs with Rocky to a bridal suite . 
 Brad and Janet are shown to separate bedrooms where each is visited and seduced by Frank , who poses as Brad ( when visiting Janet ) and then as Janet ( when visiting Brad ) . Janet , upset and emotional , wanders off to look for Brad , who she discovers , via a television monitor , is in bed with Frank . She then discovers Rocky , cowering in his birth tank , hiding from Riff Raff , who has been tormenting him . While tending to his wounds , Janet becomes intimate with Rocky , as Magenta and Columbia watch from their bedroom monitor . 
 After discovering that his creation is missing , Frank returns to the lab with Brad and Riff Raff , where Frank learns that an intruder has entered the building . Brad and Janet 's old high school science teacher , Dr. Everett Scott , has come looking for his nephew , Eddie . Frank suspects that Dr. Scott investigates UFOs for the government . Upon learning of Brad and Janet 's connection to Dr. Scott , Frank suspects them of working for him . Frank , Dr. Scott , Brad , and Riff Raff then discover Janet and Rocky together under the sheets in Rocky 's birth tank , upsetting Frank and Brad . Magenta interrupts the reunion by sounding a massive gong and stating that dinner is prepared . 
 Rocky and the guests share an uncomfortable dinner , which they soon realize has been prepared from Eddie 's mutilated remains . Janet runs screaming into Rocky 's arms and is slapped and chased through the halls of the castle by a jealous Frank . Janet , Brad , Dr. Scott , Rocky and Columbia all meet in Frank 's lab , where Frank captures them with the Medusa <unk> , transforming them into nude statues . After dressing them in cabaret costume , Frank " <unk> " them , from which they spontaneously perform a live cabaret floor show with Frank as the leader . 
 Riff Raff and Magenta interrupt the performance , revealing themselves and Frank to be aliens from the planet Transsexual in the galaxy of Transylvania . They stage a coup and announce a plan to return to their homeworld . In the process , they kill Columbia , Rocky and Frank , who has " failed his mission " . They release Brad , Janet and Dr. Scott , then depart by lifting off in the castle itself . The survivors are then left crawling in the dirt , and the narrator concludes that the human race is equivalent to insects crawling on the planet 's surface . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Tim Curry as Dr. Frank N. Furter , a scientist 
 Susan Sarandon as Janet Weiss , a heroine 
 Barry Bostwick as Brad Majors , a hero 
 Richard O 'Brien as Riff Raff , a handyman 
 Patricia Quinn as Magenta , a domestic 
 Nell Campbell as Columbia , a groupie 
 Jonathan Adams as Dr. Everett V. Scott , a rival scientist 
 Peter <unk> as Rocky Horror , a creation 
 Meat Loaf as Eddie , an ex @-@ delivery boy 
 Charles Gray as The Criminologist , an expert 
 Jeremy Newson as Ralph <unk> 
 Hilary <unk> as Betty <unk> ( née Munroe ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Concept and development = = = 
 Richard O 'Brien was living as an unemployed actor in London during the early 1970s . He wrote most of The Rocky Horror Show during one winter just to occupy himself . Since his youth , O 'Brien had loved science fiction and B horror movies . He wanted to combine elements of the unintentional humour of B horror movies , portentous dialogue of schlock @-@ horror , Steve Reeves muscle flicks and fifties rock and roll into his musical . 
 O 'Brien showed a portion of the unfinished script to Australian director Jim Sharman , who decided to direct it at the small experimental space Upstairs at the Royal Court Theatre , Sloane Square , Chelsea , London , which was used as a project space for new work . O 'Brien had appeared briefly in Andrew Lloyd Webber 's Jesus Christ Superstar , directed by Sharman and the two also worked together in Sam Shepard 's The Unseen Hand . Sharman would bring in production designer Brian Thomson . The original creative team was then rounded out by costume designer Sue Blane and musical director Richard Hartley , and stage producer Michael White was also brought in to produce . As the musical went into rehearsal , the working title , They Came from Denton High , was changed just before previews at the suggestion of Sharman to The Rocky Horror Show . 
 Having premiered in the small sixty @-@ seat Royal Court Theatre , it quickly moved to larger venues in London , transferring to the 230 @-@ seat Chelsea Classic Cinema on Kings Road on 14 August 1973 , before finding a quasi @-@ permanent home at the 500 @-@ seat King 's Road Theatre from 3 November 1973 , running for six years . The musical made its U.S. debut in Los Angeles in 1974 before being played in New York City as well as other cities . Producer and Ode Records owner Lou Adler attended the London production in the winter of 1973 , escorted by friend Britt Ekland . He immediately decided to purchase the U.S. theatrical rights . His production would be staged at his Roxy Theatre in L.A. In 1975 , The Rocky Horror Show premiered on Broadway at the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Belasco Theatre . 
 = = = Filming and locations = = = 
 The film was shot at Bray Studios , and Oakley Court , a country house near Maidenhead , Berkshire , England and Elstree Studios for post production , from 21 October to 19 December 1974 . Oakley Court , built in 1857 in the Victorian Gothic style , is known for a number of Hammer films . Much of the location shooting took place there , although at the time the manor was not in good condition . Fox insisted on casting the two characters of Brad and Janet with American actors , Barry Bostwick and Susan Sarandon . Filming took place during autumn , which made conditions worse , and during filming , Sarandon fell ill with pneumonia . Filming of the laboratory scene and the title character 's creation occurred on 30 October 1974 . 
 The film is both a parody and tribute to many of the science fiction and horror movies from the 1930s up to the 1970s . The film production retains many aspects from the stage version such as production design and music , but adds new scenes not featured in the original stage play . The film 's plot , setting , and style echo those of the Hammer Horror films , which had their own instantly recognizable style ( just as Universal Studios ' horror films did ) . The originally proposed opening sequence was to contain clips of various films mentioned in the lyrics , as well as the first few sequences shot in black and white , but this was deemed too expensive , and scrapped . 
 = = = Costumes , make @-@ up and props = = = 
 In the stage productions , actors generally did their own make @-@ up ; however , for the film , the producers chose Pierre La Roche , who had previously been a make @-@ up artist for Mick Jagger , to redesign the make @-@ up for each character . Production stills were taken by rock photographer Mick Rock , who has published a number of books from his work . In Rocky Horror ; From Concept to Cult , designer Sue Blane discusses the Rocky Horror costumes ' influence on punk music style . " [ It was a ] big part of the build @-@ up [ to punk ] . " She states that ripped fishnet stockings , glitter and coloured hair were directly attributable to Rocky Horror . 
 Some of the costumes from the film had been originally used in the stage production . Props and set pieces were reused from old Hammer horror productions and others . The tank and dummy used for Rocky 's birth originally appeared in The Revenge of Frankenstein ( 1958 ) . These references to earlier productions , in addition to cutting costs , enhanced the cult status of the film . 
 Costume designer Sue Blane was not keen on working for the film until she became aware that Curry , an old friend , was committed to the project . Curry and Blane had worked together in Glasgow 's Citizens Theatre in a production of The Maids , where Curry had worn a woman 's corset in the production . Blane arranged it with the theatre to loan her the corset from the other production for Rocky Horror . Blane admits that she did not conduct research for her designing and had never seen a science fiction film , and is acutely aware that her costumes for Brad and Janet may have been generalizations . 
 " When I designed Rocky , I never looked at any science fiction movies or comic books . One just automatically knows what spacesuits look like , the same way one intuitively knows how Americans dress . I had never been to the United States , but I had this fixed idea of how people looked there . Americans wore polyester so their clothes wouldn 't crease , and their trousers were a bit too short . Since they 're very keen on sports , white socks and white T @-@ shirts played an integral part in their wardrobe . Of course , since doing Rocky I have been to the United States and admit it was a bit of a generalization , but my ideas worked perfectly for Brad and Janet . " 
 The budget for the film 's costumes was $ 1 @,@ 600 , far more than the stage production budget , but having to double up on costumes for filming was expensive . For filming , corsets for the finale had to be doubled for the pool scene , with one version drying while the other was worn on set . While many of the costumes are exact replicas from the stage productions , other costumes were new to filming , such as Columbia 's gold sequined swallow @-@ tail coat and top hat and Magenta 's maid 's uniform . 
 Blane was amazed by the recreation and understanding of her designs by fans . When she first heard that people were dressing up , she thought it would be tacky , but she was surprised to see the depth to which the fans went to recreate her designs . Rocky Horror fan Mina <unk> , who designs costumes and performed as Columbia for Houston ’ s performance group , states that " the best part is when everyone leaves with a big smile on their face " , noting that there 's " such a <unk> and campiness that it seems to be winking at you " . The film still plays at many theatre locations , and Rocky Horror costumes are often made for Halloween , although many require much time and effort to make . 
 = = = Title sequence = = = 
 The film starts with the screen fading to black and over @-@ sized , disembodied female lips appear overdubbed with a male voice , establishing the androgynous theme to be repeated as the film unfolds . The opening scene and song , " Science Fiction / Double Feature " , consists of the lips of Patricia Quinn ( who appears in the film later as the character Magenta ) , but has the vocals of actor and Rocky Horror creator , Richard O 'Brien ( who appears as Magenta 's brother Riff Raff ) . The lyrics reference science fiction and horror films of the past and list several film titles from the 1930s to the 1970s , including The Day the Earth Stood Still , Flash Gordon , The Invisible Man , King Kong , It Came from Outer Space , Doctor X , Forbidden Planet , Tarantula , The Day of the Triffids , Curse of the Demon and When Worlds Collide . The disembodied lips are featured on posters and other merchandise for the film , with the tagline " A Different Set of Jaws " , a spoof of the poster for the film Jaws , which was also produced in 1975 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack was released in 1975 by Ode Records and produced by Richard Hartley . The album peaked at # 49 on the Billboard 200 in 1978 . It reached No. 40 on the Australian albums chart and No. 11 on the New Zealand albums chart . The album is described as the " definitive version of the [ Rocky Horror ] score . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The film opened in the United Kingdom at Rialto Theater in London 14 August 1975 and in the United States on 26 September , premiering at the UA Westwood in Los Angeles , California . It did well at that location , but not elsewhere . Prior to the midnight screenings ' success , the film was withdrawn from its eight opening cities due to very small audiences , and its planned New York City opening on Halloween night was cancelled . Fox re @-@ released the film around college campuses on a double @-@ bill with another rock music film parody , Brian De Palma 's Phantom of the Paradise , but again it drew small audiences . 
 With Pink Flamingos ( 1972 ) and Reefer Madness ( 1936 ) making money in midnight showings nationwide , a Fox executive , Tim Deegan , was able to talk distributors into midnight screenings , starting in New York City on April Fools ' Day of 1976 . The cult following started shortly after the film began its midnight run at the Waverly Theater in New York <unk> Horror was not only found in the larger cities but throughout the United States where many attendees would get in free if they arrived in costume . The western division of the film 's release included The <unk> Cinema in Fresno and Merced , The Cinema J in Sacramento , California and the Covell in Modesto . In New Orleans , an early organized performance group was active with the release there as well as in such cities as Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , and Chicago ( at the Biograph Theater ) . Before long nearly every screening of the film was accompanied by a live fan cast . 
 The film is considered to be the longest @-@ running release in film history . It has never been pulled by 20th Century Fox from its original 1975 release , and it continues to play in cinemas . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A Super 8 version of selected scenes of the film was made available . In 1983 , Ode Records released " The Rocky Horror Picture Show , Audience Par @-@ Tic @-@ I @-@ <unk> Album " , recorded at the 8th Street Playhouse . The recording consisted of the film 's audio and the standardized call @-@ backs from the audience . 
 A home video release was made available in 1987 in the UK . In the US , the film ( including documentary footage and extras ) was released on VHS in 1990 , retailing for $ 89 @.@ 95 and had its US broadcast premiere on the Fox Broadcasting Company , including audience participation edited into the film , on October 25 , 1993 . 
 The film was released on DVD in 2000 for the film 's 25th anniversary . A 35th Anniversary edition Blu @-@ ray was released in the US on October 19 , 2010 . The disc includes a newly created 7 @.@ 1 surround sound mix , the original theatrical mono sound mix , and a 4K / 2K image transfer from the original camera negative . In addition , new content featuring karaoke and a fan performance were included . 
 = = Reception and reaction = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Chicago Sun @-@ Times critic Roger Ebert noted that when first released , The Rocky Horror Picture Show was " ignored by pretty much everyone , including the future fanatics who would eventually count the hundreds of times they 'd seen it " . He considered it more a " long @-@ running social phenomenon " than a movie , rating it 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars . Bill <unk> noted that Variety thought that the " campy hijinks " of the film seemed labored , and also mentioned that the San Francisco Chronicle 's John Wasserman , who had liked the stage play in London , found the film " lacking both charm and dramatic impact " . Newsweek called the film " tasteless , plotless and pointless " in 1978 . 
 Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 80 % based on 41 reviews . A number of contemporary critics find it compelling and enjoyable because of its offbeat and bizarre qualities ; the BBC summarized : " for those willing to experiment with something a little bit different , a little bit outré , The Rocky Horror Picture Show has a lot to offer " . The New York Times called it a " low @-@ budget freak show / cult classic / cultural institution " and considered the songs featured in the film to be " catchy " . Geoff Andrew of Time Out noted that the " string of hummable songs gives it momentum , Gray 's admirably straight @-@ faced narrator holds it together , and a run on black lingerie takes care of almost everything else " , rating it 4 out of 5 stars . Dave Kehr of Chicago Reader on the other hand considered the wit to be " too weak to sustain a film " , and thought that the " songs all sound the same " . 
 In 2005 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = = = Cult phenomenon = = = 
 = = = = New York City origins = = = = 
 The Rocky Horror Picture Show helped shape conditions of cult film 's transition from art @-@ house to grind @-@ house style . The film developed a cult following in 1976 at the Waverly Theatre in New York , which developed into a standardized ritual . According to J. Hoberman , author of Midnight Movies , it was after five months into the film 's midnight run when lines began to be shouted by the audience . Louis <unk> Jr . , a normally quiet teacher who , upon seeing the character Janet place a newspaper over her head to protect herself from rain yelled , " Buy an umbrella you cheap bitch " . Originally Louis and along with the other Rocky Horror pioneers Amy Lazarus , Theresa <unk> and Bill O 'Brian who all sat in the balcony , did this to entertain each other . Each week trying to come up with something new to make each other laugh . This quickly caught on with other theater goers and thus began this self @-@ proclaimed " counter point dialogue " became standard practice and was repeated nearly verbatim at each screening . Performance groups became a staple at Rocky Horror screenings due in large part to the prominent New York City fan cast , and fans are credited with the talk back lines . The cast was originally run by former schoolteacher and stand @-@ up comic , Sal <unk> and friend Dori Hartley . Dori was one of several performers in a flexible , rotating cast to portray the character of Frank N. Furter , shadowing the film above . The performances of the audience was scripted and actively discouraged improvising , being conformist in a similar way to the repressed characters . 
 On Halloween in 1976 , people attended in costume and talked back to the screen , and by mid @-@ 1978 , Rocky Horror was playing in over 50 locations on Fridays and Saturdays at midnight . Newsletters were published by local performance groups , and fans gathered for Rocky Horror conventions . By the end of 1979 , there were twice @-@ weekly showings at over 230 theatres . The National Fan Club was established in 1977 and later merged with the International Fan Club . The fan publication The Transylvanian printed a number of issues , and a semi @-@ regular poster magazine was published as well as an official magazine . 
 = = = = Los Angeles , Hollywood = = = = 
 The Los Angeles area performance groups originated in 1977 at the Fox Theatre , where Michael Wolfson won a look @-@ alike contest as Frank N. Furter , and won another at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard . Wolfson 's group eventually performed in all of the LA area theaters screening Rocky Horror , including the Balboa Theater in Balboa , The Cove at Hermosa Beach and The Sands in Glendale . He was invited to perform at the Sombrero Playhouse in Phoenix , Arizona . 
 At the Tiffany Theatre , the audience performance cast had the theater 's full cooperation ; the local performers entered early and without charge . The fan playing Frank for this theatre was a transgender performer , D. Garret Gafford , who was out of work in 1978 and trying to raise enough funds for a sex change operation while spending the weekends performing at the Tiffany . 
 = = = = San Francisco = = = = 
 In San Francisco , Rocky Horror moved from one location to the Strand Theatre located near the Tenderloin on Market Street . The performance group there would act out and perform almost the entire film , unlike the New York cast at that time . The Strand cast was put together from former members of the Berkeley group , disbanded due to less than enthusiastic management . Their Frank N. Furter was portrayed by Marni Scofidio , who , in 1979 , attracted many of the older groups from Berkeley . Other members included <unk> Erickson and her twin sister Denise Erickson who portrayed Columbia and Magenta , Kathy Dolan playing Janet and Linda Woods as Riff Raff . The Strand group had performed at two large science fiction conventions in Los Angeles and San Francisco . They were offered a spot at The Mabuhay , a local punk club , and even performed for children 's television of Argentina . 
 = = = = Fan following = = = = 
 Rocky Horror is one of the last few western rites left that pertain to the carnivalesque . Annual Rocky Horror conventions are held in varying locations lasting days . Tucson , Arizona has been host a number of times , including 1999 with “ El <unk> Fiesta ” , and “ Queens of the Desert ” held in 2006 . To the fans , Rocky Horror is ritualistic and comparable to a religious event , with a compulsive , repeated cycle of going home and coming back to see the film each weekend . The audience call backs are similar to responses in church during a mass . Many theatre troupes exist across the United States that produce shadow @-@ cast performances where the actors play each part in the film in full costume and props , and the movie plays on the big screen in a movie theatre . These showings are typically once a week or once a month on a Saturday at midnight . 
 The film has a global following and remains popular well into the 21st century . Sub cultures such as Rocky Horror have also found a place on the internet . Audience participation scripts for many cities are available to download on the Internet . The internet has a number of Rocky Horror fan run websites with various quizzes and information specializing in different content allowing fans to participate at a unique level . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 In 1981 , Sharman reunited with O 'Brien to do Shock Treatment , a stand @-@ alone feature that was not a direct sequel to the original film . This film reunites characters Brad and Janet and was originally conceived and written to depict the characters filmed in normal settings until the production changed to work around a Screen Actor 's Guild strike . The eventual production would now entail the full film being shot entirely within a sound stage and purposely blending that into the story line . Shock Treatment has a cult following but not nearly as strong as the first film , and was a commercial failure in no small part due to the principal cast of Curry , Sarandon and Bostwick not returning . 
 Ten years later , O 'Brien wrote another script intended as a direct sequel to the cult classic entitled Revenge of the Old Queen . Producer Michael White had hoped to begin work on the production and described the script as being " in the same style as the other one . It has reflections of the past in it . " Although the script has not been published , bootleg copies can be read on the Internet . The script is currently owned by Fox , which produced the two original films . Most individuals associated with the project , including O 'Brien , agree that the film will probably never be made , owing to the failure of Shock Treatment and the aging of the cast . 
 In 2014 , it was announced that O 'Brien would produce Shock Treatment for the theatrical stage . The production will premiere at the King ’ s Head theatre in Islington , London in the United Kingdom in the spring of 2015 . 
 = = Remake = = 
 On 10 April 2015 , it was announced that the Fox Broadcasting Company would air a modern @-@ day reimagining of the film , tentatively titled The Rocky Horror Picture Show Event . On 22 October 2015 , it was announced that the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter will be played by actress Laverne Cox . Ryan <unk> and Victoria Justice will play the roles of Brad and Janet , alongside Reeve Carney as Riff Raff and singer / model Staz Nair as Rocky . Adam Lambert will portray Eddie . Tim Curry , who portrayed Dr. Frank N. Furter in the film , will portray The Criminologist . On 1 February 2016 , it was announced that Broadway veteran Annaleigh Ashford will portray Columbia . On 5 February 2016 , Ben Vereen joined the cast as Dr. Everett von Scott . 
 Kenny Ortega , best known for the High School Musical franchise and Michael Jackson 's This Is It , will direct , choreograph and executive @-@ produce ; Lou Adler , who was an executive producer on the original film , will have the same role on the new film , which is set to air on Fox in the fall of 2016 . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The Rocky Horror Picture Show has been featured in a number of other feature films and television series over the years . Episodes of The Venture Bros. Glee , The Drew Carey Show , That ' 70s Show and American Dad ! spotlight Rocky Horror , as well as films like Vice Squad , Halloween II and The Perks of Being a Wallflower . The 1980 film Fame featured the audience reciting their callback lines to the screen and dancing the Time Warp , the dance from the stage show and film , which has become a common novelty dance at parties . 
 " The Rocky Horror Glee Show " aired on October 26 , 2010 as part of the second season of the TV series Glee , which recreated several scenes from the film , including the opening credits , and featured Barry Bostwick and Meat Loaf in cameo roles . 
