 American zoologist and ethnographer Clinton Hart Merriam first formally described the Olympic marmot in 1898 , as <unk> olympus , from a specimen he and Vernon Orlando Bailey collected on the Sol Duc River . The species name olympus ( Olympic in Greek ) was given because this species is native to the Olympic Peninsula . The species now is classified with all other marmots in the genus Marmota . Zoologist R. L. Rausch classified the Olympic marmot as the subspecies olympus of Marmota <unk> ( he included all North American marmots in this species , which now only includes the Eurasian Alpine marmot ) in 1953 , but it has usually been treated as a distinct species , a classification supported by taxonomic reviews starting with that of zoologist Robert S. Hoffmann and colleagues in 1979 . 
 Within Marmota , the Olympic marmot is grouped with species such as the hoary marmot ( M. <unk> ) in the subgenus <unk> . Among this grouping , mitochondrial DNA analyses suggest that the Olympic marmot could be the most basal species . The Olympic marmot is thought to have originated during the last glacial period as an isolated relict population of the hoary marmot in the Pleistocene ice @-@ free refugia . The Olympic marmot deviates from the typical <unk> marmots in the shape and large size of its mandible ( jawbone ) , in differences of the dorsal ( back ) region , and having 40 chromosomes instead of 42 , all of which are characteristics that resemble the subgenus Marmota . Some of the differences of the Olympic marmot 's jawbone from the typical <unk> are also evident in the Vancouver Island marmot ( M. vancouverensis ) , which evolved separately , but also occurs in a restricted range with a small population . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Olympic marmot 's head is wide with small eyes and ears ; the body is stocky with stubby legs and sharp , rounded claws that facilitate digging ; the tail is bushy and ranges from 18 to 24 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 4 in ) long . The Olympic marmot is about the size of a domestic cat ; adults weigh from 3 @.@ 1 to 11 kg ( 6 @.@ 8 to 24 @.@ 3 lb ) and are from 67 to 75 cm ( 26 to 30 in ) in length , with the average being 71 cm ( 28 in ) . It is the largest marmot , about 7 % longer than the hoary and Vancouver Island marmots . This species has the most pronounced sexual dimorphism found in marmots , with adult males weighing on average 9 @.@ 3 kg ( 21 lb ) and adult females weighing 7 @.@ 1 kg ( 16 lb ) . 
 The Olympic marmot has a double @-@ layered coat consisting of soft thick underfur , for warmth , and coarser outer hairs . Infant marmots ' fur is dark gray in color ; this changes in the yearling period to grayish brown with lighter patches . The adult coat is brown on the body with some smaller white or pale brown patches for most of the year , becoming darker overall as the year progresses . The first molt of the year occurs in June , commencing with two black patches of fur forming on the back of the shoulders . This black coloration then spreads to the rest of the body , and by the fall the coat is almost black . A second molt is thought to occur during hibernation , and upon emergence from hibernation in the spring Olympic marmots may be tan or yellowish . The Olympic marmot 's muzzle is almost always white , with a white band in front of the eyes . 
 The Olympic marmot can be readily distinguished from the hoary marmot , with which it shares almost every other physical trait , by the lack of contrasting black feet and a black spot on the head . The Vancouver Island marmot has a similar coat color , chocolate brown with white patches . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Olympic marmots are native to the Olympic Mountains in the Olympic Peninsula of Washington state . About 90 % of Olympic marmots ' total habitat is located in Olympic National Park , where they are often sighted , especially on Hurricane Ridge . Marmots are in decline in some areas of the park due to the encroachment of trees into meadows as well as predation by coyotes , and they are seldom seen in the wetter southwestern part . 
 Within the park , Olympic marmots inhabit lush sub @-@ alpine and alpine meadows , fields , and montane scree slopes . They live in colonies spread out in various locations in the mountains and containing the burrows of differing numbers of marmot families . Some meadows can contain as few animals as one marmot family , and some can have multiple families adding up to 40 marmots in total . There is a higher risk of inbreeding and death from random events in meadows with fewer marmots , making migration essential to the survival of the species . Burrows can be found at various elevations , ranging from 920 m ( 3 @,@ 020 ft ) to 1 @,@ 990 m ( 6 @,@ 530 ft ) ; they are most often found in the range of 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) to 1 @,@ 750 m ( 5 @,@ 740 ft ) . Burrows are more frequently located on south @-@ facing slopes , which generally receive more precipitation , 75 cm ( 30 in ) per year ( mostly snow ) , and thus have more available flora . The home range of a family of marmots usually covers from half an acre to five acres ( 0 @.@ 2 – 2 hectares ) . The Olympic marmot is well @-@ adapted to its generally cold natural habitat , where there is snowfall almost every month of the year on the mountain slopes and barren grasslands . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Olympic marmots eat meadow flora such as avalanche and glacier lilies , heather blossoms , sub @-@ alpine lupine , mountain buckwheat , <unk> , sedges , and mosses . They prefer green , tender , flowering plants over other sources of food , but roots are a large part of their diets in the early spring when other plants have not yet appeared . During May and June , they may resort to gnawing on trees for food . They also occasionally eat fruits and insects . Their water requirements are met from the juice in the vegetation they eat and dew on the plants ' surfaces . 
 When snowfall covers vegetation , marmots have a more carnivorous diet , consuming carrion encountered while digging for roots and possibly killing late hibernating chipmunks . At this time , they also obtain water from melted snow . <unk> Olympic marmots do not keep food in their burrows ; instead , they gain fat before hibernating and can double their body weight to survive eight months without eating . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 The Olympic marmot 's predators are mostly terrestrial mammals such as coyotes , cougars , and bobcats ; however , it is also preyed on by avian raptors such as golden eagles . Black bears probably rarely prey on marmots , as evidenced by the fact that their presence close to colonies generally does not generate alarm calls unless the bear advances to within 6 m ( 20 ft ) of the colony . The coyote is the primary predator and studies have shown that marmots make up approximately 20 % of coyotes ' diet during the summer months . During a study in the Olympic Mountains , 36 coyote droppings were collected and two of them contained marmot hairs . 
 In common with all other marmots , Olympic marmots use the trill as an alarm call to alert other marmots to predators . Continuing alarm calls indicate that a predator is close , and thus increase vigilance in the marmots ; a single alarm call results in the marmots curiously looking around for the predator . Sightings of land predators , coyotes in particular , receive more alarm calls than aerial predators . Fishers are viewed as predators by Olympic marmots , eliciting alarm calls when just passing by a colony . It has also been observed that these trills can be used as a mechanism to trick and frustrate predators . An additional behavior that takes place when a marmot becomes nervous or bothered by a predator is that it retracts its top lip to show its upper incisors . It is almost like a greeting for predators . 
 It was reported during a study by David P. Barash that when hunting Olympic marmots as prey , coyotes and cougars approach the marmot within about 15 m ( 49 ft ) , advance to an alpine fir close to the victim , and then chase the marmot downhill to its colony . If the marmot is able to flee into a burrow and sound an alarm call , other marmots will scurry to their burrows for safety . But the predator does not stop here ; it is usually persistent and will scratch outside the entrance to try to dig out its prey . Minutes later , when a marmot from a nearby burrow peers out to see if the predator has gone , it will sometimes sound another alarm call , which summons the predator to its burrow . It dives back underground and the predator usually remains frustrated as these alarm calls continue and force it to run around from burrow to burrow , getting tired and aggravated , and finally giving up . 
 As humans in the Olympic National Park do not hunt the marmot , but simply observe them , they do not pose a threat . When researchers intrude on colonies to observe behavior , the families living in burrows there initially vocalize ascending calls , showing surprise , but later adjust to the presence of humans , allowing studies to proceed . 
 The ectoparasites of the Olympic marmot include the cestode <unk> <unk> , and fleas of the genus <unk> . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Colonies = = = 
 Olympic marmots are gregarious burrowing animals , living in colonies typically containing multiple burrows . Activity varies with the weather , time of day , and time of year ; owing to rainfall and fog cover during June , July , and August , the marmots spend most of the day inside their burrows , and forage for food mostly in the morning and evening . In between these times , Olympic marmots can sometimes be found lying on rocks where they sun themselves for warmth , grooming each other , playing , chirping , and feeding together . Burrows are multi @-@ purpose structures , used for hibernation , protection from bad weather and predators , and to raise newborn pups . 
 A typical colony of marmots consists of a male , two to three females , and their young , sometimes living in groups of more than a dozen animals ; young marmots stay with their family for at least two years , so a burrow is often home to a newly born litter and a litter of two @-@ year @-@ olds . Marmots seldom move to other colonies with the exception of sub @-@ adults of two to three years old , which may leave the home colony to start a new family elsewhere ; females move only a few hundred meters , though males often move several kilometers away from their birth burrow . 
 A colony may have a subordinate or " satellite " male , smaller and younger than the colony male , who may take over as the dominant male if the incumbent dies . The satellite male lives in a separate burrow , 55 to 150 m ( 200 to 500 ft ) away from the rest of the colony . After emergence from hibernation , if the satellite male and the colony male are both still living in the same colony , the dominant colony male may chase the satellite around multiple times per day . The satellite male 's feeding area is limited to areas far from the rest of the marmots in the colony , and he must stay away from the other marmots ' burrows as long as the colony male is near . While the satellite male does not approach the other marmots in the colony , they sometimes make trips over to the satellite male 's burrow , often about two times an hour . After more time has passed since hibernation , males will become less hostile towards each other , and less avoidance and chasing will occur . Male @-@ male competition ends around the same time that the reproductive season does . The diminution of hostile behavior is only temporary , as the satellite male becomes assigned to its subordinate status again the following spring after emergence from hibernation and the ritual begins again . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 When greeting each other , these very sociable animals will usually touch noses or nose to cheek ; in courtship rituals they may inter @-@ lock teeth and nibble each other 's ears and necks . They may also engage in play fighting , in which two marmots on their hind legs push each other with their paws ; this play fighting is more aggressive between older marmots . In fights that have been observed during a study , only about 10 % of fights had distinct outcomes . 
 When communicating vocally , they have four different types of whistles , differing in this from their close relatives , the hoary marmot and the Vancouver Island marmot . The Olympic marmot 's whistles include flat calls , ascending calls , descending calls , and trills ; all of these are in a small frequency range of about 2 @,@ 700 Hz . Flat , ascending , and descending calls are most often voiced singly . The ascending call has a duration of about half a second , starting with a " yell " on one note and ending with a " chip " on a higher note ; it is often used as a distress or warning call for unfamiliar smells and noises . These same " <unk> " are heard when Olympic marmots are play fighting , along with low growls and chattering of teeth . The descending call ends on a lower note than it started on . The trill , which sounds like multiple ascending calls put together as one longer sound , consists of multiple ranging notes and is voiced as an alarm call to communicate to other marmots in the area that danger may be approaching and they should return to their burrows . Females with young have the responsibility to watch out for their young and other relatives near the burrow , and therefore voice the trill more often than other Olympic marmots . If marmots are not accustomed to human contact in a certain area , they may also sound a trill when seeing a person , in order to alert other marmots . At places like Hurricane Ridge , where seeing humans is a frequent occurrence , most marmots will not acknowledge human presence at all . 
 Olympic marmots also communicate through the sense of smell . A gland located in their cheek exudes chemicals which they rub on scenting points , such as shrubs and rocks , which can be smelt by other marmots in the area . 
 = = = Hibernation = = = 
 Olympic marmots start to enter hibernation in early September . Before hibernating , the marmots bring dry grasses into the burrow for bedding or food . Sometimes in early September marmots will stay in their burrows for a few consecutive days , with only brief outings that allow for a little foraging . During this period , they do not play fight or socialize with other marmots ; they limit themselves to peeking out and casually sitting outside their burrows . <unk> females ( those who have not given birth yet ) and adult males become inactive first , because they do not need to store as much fat beforehand . The parous females , yearlings , and young of the year become inactive a few weeks later , because they have to gain more weight . The marmots of a colony hibernate in a single burrow space , which they keep closed with dirt . Adults emerge in May , and the young in June . Marmots do not eat during hibernation , so they have to store fat before becoming inactive . 
 Olympic marmots are " deep <unk> " ; they cannot easily be awoken ; their body temperature drops to below 40 ° F ( 4 ° C ) and heart rate can slow to three beats per minute . Marmots warm their bodies about every ten days . Olympic marmots lose 50 % of their body mass over the seven to eight months of winter hibernation . Hibernation is the most dangerous time for the Olympic marmot as , in years of light snowfall , as many as 50 % of the young born that year will die from the cold because of the lack of insulation that is provided by good snow cover . When Olympic marmots emerge in early May , thick snow cover is still present from the preceding winter , so they are not very active at this time . Sometimes they are so disoriented after awaking from hibernation that they have to relearn the colony 's landmarks ( which are now covered in snow , which obscures them even more ) ; they wander around aimlessly until they find their burrows . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 The Olympic marmot , along with the hoary marmot , has the lowest reproductive rate of any rodent . A female Olympic marmot has a litter of from one to six young ( 3 @.@ 3 on average ) in alternate years . In a given year , a third of females will have a litter . Half of the pups die before the following spring . Those pups that survive the following spring can live into their teens . Both males and females mature sexually at three years , but females generally do not reproduce until they are four and a half years old . The marmot comes out from hibernation at the beginning of May , and estrus ( heat ) occurs about two weeks later . After hibernation ends , both male and female Olympic marmots attempt to entice the opposite sex with courtship rituals . Females who have never produced a litter before tend to be more aggressive and will chase or instigate fights with males ; females which have already produced young tend to greet the male with nasal to nasal or nasal to genital contact , with copulation following shortly afterwards . This approach is more successful than the aggressive manner of the non @-@ parous female , with mating taking place within 11 to 20 days after hibernation . The relationship between a sexually mature male and female Olympic marmot is polygynous ; males tend to breed with three or four females in each mating season . 
 Approximately four weeks after mating , the female gives birth to her young in a grass @-@ lined burrow underground . Newborn pups cannot see , have no fur , and are pink in color . At first , the young exhibit no sexual dimorphism . It is about a month before the young Olympic marmots first leave the burrow ; around the same time , they begin to be weaned . Even after they are allowed to emerge , the young initially stay within the immediate vicinity of the burrow , where they can be found chasing each other and wrestling playfully . Within a few weeks after first emerging from the burrow , the young are fully weaned and can feed themselves . Olympic marmots are not completely independent from their mothers until they reach two years of age . Breeding @-@ age female marmots are extremely important to marmot populations . If a female of breeding age dies it can take years to replace her ; marmots are usually limited to six pups in a litter , the maturation period is long , and many marmots die before reaching maturity . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 The Olympic marmot is the second @-@ rarest North American marmot , behind the critically endangered Vancouver Island marmot . Marmots were first sighted in the Olympic Peninsula in the 1880s . In the 1960s , David P. Barash conducted a three @-@ year study of Olympic marmots after which he reported that there was an abundance of marmots in the mountains . In 1989 , the total Olympic marmot population was calculated to be only about 2 @,@ 000 , but this low number was due to poor data collection . Other than this population census , little further research was done on the Olympic marmot until the late 1990s , when concerns arose about population status . 
 Rangers and frequent visitors to the Olympic National Park had noticed that some populations of Olympic marmots had disappeared from their usual habitats . In response to this , the University of Michigan began a population study in 2002 , in which the marmot population continued to decline by about 10 % a year until 2006 . Predation by coyotes that had not been present in the area before the 20th century was found to be the main cause of death of females , inhibiting population re @-@ growth . By 2006 , numbers had dropped to 1 @,@ 000 individuals ; this figure increased to around 4 @,@ 000 from 2007 to 2010 , when colonies stabilized and survival rates rose . In 2010 , volunteers started to collect and store data about marmot populations in the park through a monitoring program . The Olympic marmot has been considered a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List since first being included in 1996 . Its range is small , but 90 % of its total habitat is protected due to being in Olympic National Park . The park , which holds multiple other endemic species , has been designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve and a World Heritage Site . State law declares that the Olympic marmot is a protected wildlife species and cannot be hunted . 
 Olympic marmots are readily affected by climate change because of their sensitivity to changed habitats . When meadows in Olympic National Park dried out , marmots there died or moved . In the long term , meadows may be superseded by forests . Climate change will alter the timing , composition , and quality of the marmots ' food . Olympic marmots can become more vulnerable to predators when daytime temperatures rise too high for foraging , causing them to forage in the cooler evenings when predators are more difficult to notice . In warm winters , there is heavier predation by coyotes . Marmots become more accessible to coyotes as lower banks of snow allow coyotes to move up higher on mountains where marmots dwell , into areas which they could not usually reach during an average cold winter . Climate change could also have positive effects ; a warmer climate would result in a longer growing season in which marmots could mature more quickly and thus breed more often . 
 In 2009 , the Olympic marmot was designated a state symbol of Washington : the official " endemic mammal . " Governor Chris Gregoire 's signing of Senate Bill <unk> was the result of a two @-@ year effort by the fourth and fifth graders of Wedgwood Elementary School in Seattle . The students researched the marmot 's habits , and answered legislators ' questions to overcome initial bipartisan opposition to another state symbol . 
 = Felt Mountain = 
 Felt Mountain is the debut studio album by English electronic music duo Goldfrapp , released on 11 September 2000 by Mute Records . The album takes influence from a variety of music styles such as 1960s pop , cabaret , folk and electronica . 
 Felt Mountain peaked at number 57 in Goldfrapp 's native United Kingdom , and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in October 2001 . It was generally well received by music critics , and it was described as " simultaneously smarmy and seductive , yet elegant and graceful " . In 2001 , the album was shortlisted for the Mercury Prize , an annual music prize awarded for the best British or Irish album from the previous year . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Goldfrapp signed a recording contract with London @-@ based record label Mute Records in August 1999 . The pair began recording their debut album over a six @-@ month period , beginning in September 1999 , in a rented bungalow in the Wiltshire countryside . The recording process was difficult for Alison Goldfrapp , who was often alone and disturbed by the mice and insects in the bungalow . Gregory described their recording sessions as intense because he was unaccustomed to composing with others . Goldfrapp contributed the album 's lyrics , and Gregory and Goldfrapp composed the music together . The lyrics are abstract obsessional tales inspired by films , Goldfrapp 's childhood , and the loneliness she felt while recording the album . Musically , the album takes influence from a variety of styles including 1960s pop , cabaret , folk , and electronica . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Lovely Head " , Felt Mountain 's opening track , features high lonesome whistling and heavily processed vocals . The song was described as influenced by Shirley Bassey and released as the album 's lead single . The second track , " Paper Bag " , is about being obsessed with someone and not being able to have them . It is followed by the third single " Human " , a track with a mambo @-@ style beat . The fourth song , " Pilots " , which describes travelers floating in the atmosphere above the earth , was inspired by John Barry 's James Bond theme songs . In the United Kingdom , a remixed version of the song was released as a single , reaching number 68 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 The ballad " Deer Stop " features childlike vocals and sexually suggestive lyrics . The title track was influenced by Goldfrapp 's " idea of a wolf being whipped in this little Tudor house overlooking a snowy landscape " . " Oompa Radar " , the seventh track , was inspired by Roman Polanski 's 1966 film Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac . The cabaret @-@ influenced song uses a flugelhorn and a cuckoo clock to switch between tempos . " Utopia " was released as the album 's second single . The album closes with " Horse Tears " , a minimalist piano ballad with filtered vocals . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 AllMusic reviewer Heather Phares referred to the album as a " strange and beautiful mix of the romantic , eerie , and world @-@ weary " and named it " one of 2000 's most impressive debuts " . Eric <unk> of Flak Magazine called Felt Mountain " an enchanting , accessible debut " , citing " Human " and " Deer Stop " as its best songs . In a review for Pitchfork , Matt LeMay described the album as " elegant and graceful " , but felt that the " songs aren 't all that different from one another . " Sacha <unk> of musicOMH compared Felt Mountain to Portishead and wrote that it could be a " contender for the year 's best album " . Yahoo ! Music 's Ken Micallef commented that the duo " make elegiac music as elegant as ' Diamonds Are Forever ' and as haunting as Bobbie Gentry 's ' Ode to Billie Joe ' " , concluding that the album 's " dark night of the soul is mostly bleak , beautiful , and deliciously bizarre . " Andrew Lynch of entertainment.ie noted that " [ a ] lthough at times it feel [ sic ] a little contrived , for the most part this is stylishly decadent music that should appeal to all fans of film noir . " The NME viewed the album as " cold , desolate and old @-@ fashioned " and argued that Felt Mountain was not a " bad concept " except that " Portishead got there first , and managed to update the spy @-@ film vibe with a hefty dose of break @-@ driven twilight melancholia . " 
 Q magazine included the album on its list of the top 50 albums of 2000 . The following year , Felt Mountain was shortlisted for the Mercury Prize , an annual music prize awarded for the best British or Irish album from the previous year . In 2006 , the album was included in Robert Dimery 's book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . In November 2009 , The Times ranked Felt Mountain at number 16 on its list of the 100 best pop albums of the 2000s . The album was placed at number 94 on Slant Magazine 's list of the best albums of the 2000s . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Felt Mountain debuted at number 144 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 914 copies in its first week . In September 2001 , the album peaked at number 57 , and had sold 177 @,@ 096 copies by August 2005 . Felt Mountain was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on 12 October 2001 . In France , the album reached number 48 , and remained on the albums chart for 11 weeks . It reached the top 40 in Germany and the top 50 in Australia and Austria . Despite not appearing on any major charts in North America due to limited promotion , Felt Mountain had sold 52 @,@ 000 copies in the United States as of August 2006 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Felt Mountain . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = United States Bill of Rights = 
 The Bill of Rights is the collective name for the first ten amendments to the United States Constitution . Proposed following the oftentimes bitter 1787 – 88 battle over ratification of the U.S. Constitution , and crafted to address the objections raised by Anti @-@ Federalists , the Bill of Rights amendments add to the Constitution specific guarantees of personal freedoms and rights , clear limitations on the government 's power in judicial and other proceedings , and explicit declarations that all powers not specifically delegated to Congress by the Constitution are reserved for the states or the people . The concepts codified in these amendments are built upon those found in several earlier documents , including the Virginia Declaration of Rights and the English Bill of Rights 1689 , along with earlier documents such as Magna Carta ( 1215 ) . 
 On June 8 , 1789 , Representative James Madison introduced nine amendments to the constitution in the House of Representatives . Among his recommendations Madison proposed opening up the Constitution and inserting specific rights limiting the power of Congress in Article One , Section 9 . Seven of these limitations would become part of the ten ratified Bill of Rights amendments . Ultimately , on September 25 , 1789 , Congress approved twelve articles of amendment to the Constitution and submitted them to the states for ratification . Contrary to Madison 's original proposal that the articles be incorporated into the main body of the Constitution , they were proposed as supplemental additions ( codicils ) to it . Articles Three through Twelve were ratified as additions to the Constitution on December 15 , 1791 , and became Amendments One through Ten of the Constitution . Article Two became part of the Constitution on May 7 , 1992 , as the Twenty @-@ seventh Amendment . Article One is technically still pending before the states . 
 Although Madison 's proposed amendments included a provision to extend the protection of some of the Bill of Rights to the states , the amendments that were finally submitted for ratification applied only to the federal government . The door for their application upon state governments was opened in the 1860s , following ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment . Since the early 20th century both federal and state courts have used the Fourteenth Amendment to apply portions of the Bill of Rights to state and local governments . The process is known as incorporation . 
 There are several original engrossed copies of the Bill of Rights still in existence . One of these is on permanent public display at the National Archives in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = The Philadelphia Convention = = = 
 Prior to the ratification and implementation of the United States Constitution , the thirteen sovereign states followed the Articles of Confederation , created by the Second Continental Congress and ratified in 1781 . However , the national government that operated under the Articles of Confederation was too weak to adequately regulate the various conflicts that arose between the states . The Philadelphia Convention set out to correct weaknesses of the Articles that had been apparent even before the American Revolutionary War had been successfully concluded . 
 The convention took place from May 14 to September 17 , 1787 , in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Although the Convention was purportedly intended only to revise the Articles , the intention of many of its proponents , chief among them James Madison of Virginia and Alexander Hamilton of New York , was to create a new government rather than fix the existing one . The convention convened in the Pennsylvania State House , and George Washington of Virginia was unanimously elected as president of the convention . The 55 delegates who drafted the Constitution are among the men known as the Founding Fathers of the new nation . Thomas Jefferson , who was Minister to France during the convention , characterized the delegates as an assembly of " demi @-@ gods . " Rhode Island refused to send delegates to the convention . 
 On September 12 , George Mason of Virginia suggested the addition of a Bill of Rights to the Constitution modeled on previous state declarations , and Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts made it a formal motion . However , the motion was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations after only a brief discussion . Madison , then an opponent of a Bill of Rights , later explained the vote by calling the state bills of rights " parchment barriers " that offered only an illusion of protection against tyranny . Another delegate , James Wilson of Pennsylvania , later argued that the act of enumerating the rights of the people would have been dangerous , because it would imply that rights not explicitly mentioned did not exist ; Hamilton echoed this point in Federalist No. 84 . Because Mason and Gerry had emerged as opponents of the proposed new Constitution , their motion — introduced five days before the end of the convention — may also have been seen by other delegates as a delaying tactic . The quick rejection of this motion , however , later endangered the entire ratification process . Author David O. Stewart calls the omission of a Bill of Rights in the original Constitution as " a political blunder of the first magnitude " while historian Jack N. <unk> calls it " the one serious miscalculation the framers made as they looked ahead to the struggle over ratification " . 
 Thirty @-@ nine delegates signed the finalized Constitution . Thirteen delegates left before it was completed , and three who remained at the convention until the end refused to sign it : Mason , Gerry , and Edmund Randolph of Virginia . Afterward , the Constitution was presented to the Articles of Confederation Congress with the request that it afterwards be submitted to a convention of delegates , chosen in each State by the people , for their assent and ratification . 
 = = = The Anti @-@ Federalists = = = 
 Following the Philadelphia Convention , some leading revolutionary figures such as Patrick Henry , Samuel Adams , and Richard Henry Lee publicly opposed the new frame of government , a position known as " Anti @-@ Federalism " . Elbridge Gerry wrote the most popular Anti @-@ Federalist tract , " Hon. Mr. Gerry 's Objections " , which went through 46 printings ; the essay particularly focused on the lack of a bill of rights in the proposed constitution . Many were concerned that a strong national government was a threat to individual rights and that the president would become a king . Jefferson wrote to Madison advocating a Bill of Rights : " Half a loaf is better than no bread . If we cannot secure all our rights , let us secure what we can . " The pseudonymous Anti @-@ Federalist " Brutus " wrote , 
 We find they have , in the ninth section of the first article declared , that the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless in cases of rebellion — that no bill of attainder , or ex post facto law , shall be passed — that no title of nobility shall be granted by the United States , etc . If every thing which is not given is reserved , what propriety is there in these exceptions ? Does this Constitution any where grant the power of suspending the habeas corpus , to make ex post facto laws , pass bills of attainder , or grant titles of nobility ? It certainly does not in express terms . The only answer that can be given is , that these are implied in the general powers granted . With equal truth it may be said , that all the powers which the bills of rights guard against the abuse of , are contained or implied in the general ones granted by this Constitution . 
 He continued with this observation : 
 Ought not a government , vested with such extensive and indefinite authority , to have been restricted by a declaration of rights ? It certainly ought . So clear a point is this , that I cannot help suspecting that persons who attempt to persuade people that such reservations were less necessary under this Constitution than under those of the States , are wilfully endeavoring to deceive , and to lead you into an absolute state of vassalage . 
 = = = The Federalists = = = 
 Supporters of the Constitution , known as Federalists , opposed a bill of rights for much of the ratification period , in part due to the procedural uncertainties it would create . Madison argued against such an inclusion , suggesting that state governments were sufficient guarantors of personal liberty , in No. 46 of The Federalist Papers , a series of essays promoting the Federalist position . Hamilton opposed a bill of rights in The Federalist No. 84 , stating that " the constitution is itself in every rational sense , and to every useful purpose , a bill of rights . He stated that ratification did not mean the American people were surrendering their rights , making protections unnecessary : " Here , in strictness , the people surrender nothing , and as they retain everything , they have no need of particular reservations . " Patrick Henry criticized the federalist point of view , writing that the legislature must be firmly informed " of the extent of the rights retained by the people ... being in a state of uncertainty , they will assume rather than give up powers by implication . " Other anti @-@ federalists pointed out that earlier earlier political documents , in particular the Magna Carta had protected specific rights . In response , Hamilton argued that the Constitution was inherently different : 
 Bills of rights are in their origin , stipulations between kings and their subjects , abridgments of prerogative in favor of privilege , reservations of rights not surrendered to the prince . Such was the Magna Charta , obtained by the Barons , swords in hand , from King John . 
 = = = Massachusetts compromise = = = 
 In December 1787 and January 1788 , five states — Delaware , Pennsylvania , New Jersey , Georgia , and Connecticut — ratified the Constitution with relative ease , though the bitter minority report of the Pennsylvania opposition was widely circulated . In contrast to its predecessors , the Massachusetts convention was angry and contentious , at one point erupting into a fistfight between Federalist delegate Francis Dana and Anti @-@ Federalist Elbridge Gerry when the latter was not allowed to speak . The impasse was resolved only when revolutionary heroes and leading Anti @-@ Federalists Samuel Adams and John Hancock agreed to ratification on the condition that the convention also propose amendments . The convention 's proposed amendments included a requirement for grand jury indictment in capital cases , which would form part of the Fifth Amendment , and an amendment reserving powers to the states not expressly given to the federal government , which would later form the basis for the Tenth Amendment . 
 Following Massachusetts ' lead , the Federalist minorities in both Virginia and New York were able to obtain ratification in convention by linking ratification to recommended amendments . A committee of the Virginia convention headed by law professor George Wythe forwarded forty recommended amendments to Congress , twenty of which enumerated individual rights and another twenty of which enumerated states ' rights . The latter amendments included limitations on federal powers to levy taxes and regulate trade . 
 A minority of the Constitution 's critics , such as Maryland 's Luther Martin , continued to oppose ratification . However , Martin 's allies , such as New York 's John Lansing , Jr . , dropped moves to obstruct the Convention 's process . They began to take exception to the Constitution " as it was , " seeking amendments . Several conventions saw supporters for " amendments before " shift to a position of " amendments after " for the sake of staying in the Union . The New York Anti @-@ Federalist " circular letter " was sent to each state legislature proposing a second constitutional convention for " amendments before " , but it failed in the state legislatures . Ultimately , only North Carolina and Rhode Island waited for amendments from Congress before ratifying . 
 Article Seven of the proposed Constitution set the terms by which the new frame of government would be established . The new Constitution would become operational only when ratified by at least nine states ( three @-@ quarters of the thirteen states ) , and would only be established between the states ratifying it . 
 The new Constitution would be inoperative unless ratified by at least nine states ( three @-@ quarters of the thirteen states ) . Only then would it replace the existing government under the Articles of Confederation . It would apply only to those states that ratified it , and it would be valid for all states joining after . Following contentious battles in several states , the proposed Constitution reached that nine state ratification plateau in June 1788 . On September 13 , 1788 , the Articles of Confederation Congress certified that the new Constitution had been ratified by more than enough states for the new system to be implemented and directed the new government to meet in New York City on the first Wednesday in March the following year . On March 4 , 1789 , the new frame of government came into force with eleven of the thirteen states participating . 
 = = Proposal and ratification = = 
 = = = Anticipating amendments = = = 
 The 1st United States Congress , which met in New York City 's Federal Hall , was a triumph for the Federalists . The Senate of eleven states contained 20 Federalists with only two Anti @-@ Federalists , both from Virginia . The House included 48 Federalists to 11 Anti @-@ Federalists , the latter of whom were from only four states : Massachusetts , New York , Virginia and South Carolina . Among the Virginia delegation to the House was James Madison , Patrick Henry 's chief opponent in the Virginia ratification battle . In retaliation for Madison 's victory at that convention , Henry and other Anti @-@ Federalists , who controlled the Virginia House of Delegates had gerrymandered a hostile district for Madison 's planned congressional run and recruited Madison 's future presidential successor , James Monroe , to oppose him . Madison defeated Monroe after offering a campaign pledge that he would introduce constitutional amendments comprising a Bill of Rights at the First Congress . 
 Originally opposed to the inclusion of a bill of rights in the Constitution , he had gradually come to understand the importance of doing so during the often contentious ratification debates . By taking the initiative to propose amendments himself through the Congress , he hoped to preempt a second constitutional convention that might , it was feared , undo the difficult compromises of 1787 , and open the entire Constitution to reconsideration , thus risking the dissolution of the new federal government . Writing to Jefferson , he stated , " The friends of the Constitution , some from an approbation of particular amendments , others from a spirit of conciliation , are generally agreed that the System should be revised . But they wish the <unk> to be carried no farther than to supply additional guards for liberty . " He also felt that amendments guaranteeing personal liberties would " give to the Government its due popularity and stability " . Finally , he hoped that the amendments " would acquire by degrees the character of fundamental maxims of free government , and as they become incorporated with the national sentiment , counteract the impulses of interest and passion " . Historians continue to debate the degree to which Madison considered the amendments of the Bill of Rights necessary , and to what degree he considered them politically expedient ; in the outline of his address , he wrote , " Bill of Rights — useful — not essential — " . 
 On the occasion of his April 30 , 1789 inauguration as the nation 's first president , George Washington addressed the subject of amending the Constitution . He urged the legislators , 
 whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger the benefits of an united and effective government , or which ought to await the future lessons of experience ; a reverence for the characteristic rights of freemen , and a regard for public harmony , will sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question , how far the former can be <unk> fortified or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted . 
 = = = Crafting amendments = = = 
 James Madison introduced a series of Constitutional amendments in the House of Representatives for consideration . Among his proposals was one that would have added introductory language stressing natural rights to the preamble . Another would apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the states as well as the federal government . Several sought to protect individual personal rights by limiting various Constitutional powers of Congress . Like Washington , Madison urged Congress to keep the revision to the Constitution " a moderate one " , limited to protecting individual rights . 
 Madison was deeply read in the history of government and used a range of sources in composing the amendments . The English Magna Carta of 1215 inspired the right to petition and to trial by jury , for example , while the English Bill of Rights of 1689 provided an early precedent for the right to keep and bear arms ( although this applied only to Protestants ) and prohibited cruel and unusual punishment . 
 The greatest influence on Madison 's text , however , was existing state constitutions . Many of his amendments , including his proposed new preamble , were based on the Virginia Declaration of Rights drafted by Anti @-@ Federalist George Mason in 1776 . To reduce future opposition to ratification , Madison also looked for recommendations shared by many states . He did provide one , however , that no state had requested : " No state shall violate the equal rights of conscience , or the freedom of the press , or the trial by jury in criminal cases . " He did not include an amendment that every state had asked for , one that would have made tax assessments voluntary instead of contributions . 
 James Madison 's proposed amendments to the Constitution : 
 First . That there be prefixed to the constitution a declaration that all power is originally vested in , and consequently derived from the people . 
 That government is instituted , and ought to be exercised for the benefit of the people ; which consists in the enjoyment of life and liberty , with the right of acquiring and using property , and generally of pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety . 
 That the people have an indubitable , unalienable , and <unk> right to reform or change their government , whenever it be found adverse or inadequate to the purposes of its institution . 
 Secondly . That in article 1st , section 2 , clause 3 , these words be struck out , to wit : " The number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand , but each State shall have at least one Representative , and until such enumeration shall be made ; " and in place thereof be inserted these words , to wit : " After the first actual enumeration , there shall be one Representative for every thirty thousand , until the number amounts to — , after which the proportion shall be so regulated by Congress , that the number shall never be less than — , nor more than — , but each State shall , after the first enumeration , have at least two Representatives ; and prior thereto . " 
 Thirdly . That in article 2nd , section 6 , clause 1 , there be added to the end of the first sentence , these words , to wit , " But no law varying the compensation last ascertained shall operate before the next ensuing election of representatives . " 
 Fourthly . That in article 2nd , section 9 , between clauses 3 and 4 , be inserted these clauses , to wit , The civil rights of none shall be abridged on account of religious belief or worship , nor shall any national religion be established , nor shall the full and equal rights of conscience by in any manner , or on any pretext infringed . 
 The people shall not be deprived or abridged of their right to speak , to write , or to publish their sentiments ; and the freedom of the press , as one of the great bulwarks of liberty , shall be inviolable . 
 The people shall not be restrained from peaceably assembling and consulting for their common good , nor from applying to the legislature by petitions , or remonstrances for redress of their grievances . 
 The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed ; a well armed , and well regulated militia being the best security of a free country : but no person religiously scrupulous of bearing arms , shall be compelled to render military service in person . 
 No soldier shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner ; nor at any time , but in a manner warranted by law . 
 No person shall be subject , except in cases of impeachment , to more than one punishment , or one trial for the same office ; nor shall be compelled to be a witness against himself ; nor be deprived of life , liberty , or property without due process of law ; nor be obliged to relinquish his property , where it may be necessary for public use , without a just compensation . 
 Excessive bail shall not be required , nor excessive fines imposed , nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted . 
 The rights of the people to be secured in their persons , their houses , their papers , and their other property from all unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated by warrants issued without probable cause , supported by oath or affirmation , or not particularly describing the places to be searched , or the persons or things to be seized . 
 In all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , to be informed of the cause and nature of the accusation , to be confronted with his accusers , and the witnesses against him ; to have a compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor ; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense . 
 The exceptions here or elsewhere in the constitution , made in favor of particular rights , shall not be so construed as to diminish the just importance of other rights retained by the people ; or as to enlarge the powers delegated by the constitution ; but either as actual limitations of such powers , or as inserted merely for greater caution . 
 Fifthly . That in article 2nd , section 10 , between clauses 1 and 2 , be inserted this clause , to wit : No state shall violate the equal rights of conscience , or the freedom of the press , or the trial by jury in criminal cases 
 Sixthly . That article 3rd , section 2 , be annexed to the end of clause 2nd , these words to wit : but no appeal to such court shall be allowed where the value in controversy shall not amount to — dollars : nor shall any fact triable by jury , according to the course of common law , be otherwise re @-@ examinable than may consist with the principles of common law . 
 <unk> . That in article 3rd , section 2 , the third clause be struck out , and in its place be inserted the classes following , to wit : 
 The trial of all crimes ( except in cases of <unk> , and cases arising in the land or naval forces , or the militia when on actual service in time of war or public danger ) shall be by an impartial jury of freeholders of the vicinage , with the requisite of unanimity for conviction , of the right of challenge , and other accustomed requisites ; and in all crimes punishable with loss of life or member , presentment or indictment by a grand jury shall be an essential preliminary , provided that in cases of crimes committed within any county which may be in possession of an enemy , or in which a general insurrection may prevail , the trial may by law be authorized in some other county of the same State , as near as may be to the seat of the offence . 
 In cases of crimes committed not within any county , the trial may by law be in such county as the laws shall have prescribed . In suits at common law , between man and man , the trial by jury , as one of the best securities to the rights of the people , ought to remain inviolate . 
 <unk> . That immediately after article 6th , be inserted , as article 7th , the clauses following , to wit : 
 The powers delegated by this constitution , are appropriated to the departments to which they are respectively distributed : so that the legislative department shall never exercise the powers vested in the executive or judicial ; nor the executive exercise the powers vested in the legislative or judicial ; nor the judicial exercise the powers vested in the legislative or executive departments . 
 The powers not delegated by this constitution , nor prohibited by it to the states , are reserved to the States respectively . 
 <unk> . That article 7th , be numbered as article 8th . 
 Federalist representatives were quick to attack Madison 's proposal , fearing that any move to amend the new Constitution so soon after its implementation would create an appearance of instability in the government . The House , unlike the Senate , was open to the public , and members such as Fisher Ames warned that a prolonged " dissection of the constitution " before the galleries could shake public confidence . A procedural battle followed , and after initially forwarding the amendments to a select committee for revision , the House agreed to take Madison 's proposal up as a full body beginning on July 21 , 1789 . 
 The eleven @-@ member committee made some significant changes to Madison 's nine proposed amendments , including eliminating most of his preamble , adding the phrase " freedom of speech , and of the press " , and adding what would become the Tenth Amendment , reserving powers to the states . The House debated the amendments for eleven days . Roger Sherman of Connecticut persuaded the House to place the amendments at the Constitution 's end so that the document would " remain inviolate " , rather than adding them throughout , as Madison had proposed . The amendments , revised and condensed from twenty to seventeen , were approved and forwarded to the Senate on August 24 , 1789 . 
 The Senate edited these amendments still further , making 26 changes of its own . Madison 's proposal to apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the states as well as the federal government was eliminated , and the seventeen amendments were condensed to twelve , which were approved on September 9 , 1789 . The Senate also eliminated the last of Madison 's proposed changes to the preamble . 
 On September 21 , 1789 , a House – Senate Conference Committee convened to resolve the numerous differences between the two Bill of Rights proposals . On September 24 , 1789 , the committee issued this report , which finalized 12 Constitutional Amendments for House and Senate to consider . This final version was approved by joint resolution of Congress on September 25 , 1789 , to be forwarded to the states on September 28 . 
 By the time the debates and legislative maneuvering that went into crafting the Bill of Rights amendments was done , many personal opinions had shifted . A number of Federalists came out in support , thus silencing the Anti @-@ Federalists ' most effective critique . Many Anti @-@ Federalists , in contrast , were now opposed , realizing that Congressional approval of these amendments would greatly lessen the chances of a second constitutional convention . Anti @-@ Federalists such as Richard Henry Lee also argued that the Bill left the most objectionable portions of the Constitution , such as the federal judiciary and direct taxation , intact . 
 Madison remained active in the progress of the amendments throughout the legislative process . Historian Gordon S. Wood writes that " there is no question that it was Madison 's personal prestige and his dogged persistence that saw the amendments through the Congress . There might have been a federal Constitution without Madison but certainly no Bill of Rights . " 
 = = = Ratification process = = = 
 The twelve articles of amendment approved by congress were officially submitted to the Legislatures of the several States for consideration on September 28 , 1789 . The following states ratified some or all of the amendments : 
 New Jersey — November 20 , 1789 • Articles One and Three through Twelve ( Ratified Article Two on May 7 , 1992 ) 
 Maryland — December 19 , 1789 • Articles One through Twelve 
 North Carolina — December 22 , 1789 • Articles One through Twelve 
 South Carolina — January 19 , 1790 • Articles One through Twelve 
 New Hampshire — January 25 , 1790 • Articles One and Three through Twelve ( Ratified Article Two on March 7 , 1985 ) 
 Delaware — January 28 , 1790 • Articles Two through Twelve 
 New York — February 24 , 1790 • Articles One and Three through Twelve 
 Pennsylvania — March 10 , 1790 • Articles One and Three through Twelve 
 Rhode Island — June 7 , 1790 • Articles One and Three through Twelve ( Ratified Article Two on June 10 , 1993 ) 
 Vermont — November 3 , 1791 • Articles One through Twelve 
 Virginia — December 15 , 1791 • Articles One through Twelve 
 Having been approved by the requisite three – fourths of the several states , there being 14 States in the Union at the time ( as Vermont had been admitted into the Union on March 4 , 1791 ) , the ratification of Articles Three through Twelve was completed and they became Amendments 1 through 10 of the Constitution . Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson certified their adoption on March 1 , 1792 . 
 As they had not yet been approved by 11 of the 14 states , the ratification of Article One ( ratified by 10 ) and Article Two ( ratified by 6 ) remained incomplete . The ratification plateau they needed to reach soon rose to 12 of 15 states when Kentucky joined the Union ( June 1 , 1792 ) . On June 27 , 1792 , the Kentucky General Assembly ratified all 12 amendments , however this action did not come to light until 1997 . 
 Article One came within one state of the number needed to become adopted into the Constitution on two occasions between 1789 and 1803 . Despite coming close to ratification early on , it has never received the approval of enough states to become part of the Constitution . As Congress did not attach a ratification time limit to the article , it is still technically pending before the states . Since no state has approved it since 1792 , ratification by an additional 27 states would now be necessary for the article to be adopted . 
 Article Two , initially ratified by seven states through 1792 ( including Kentucky ) , was not ratified by another state for eighty years . The Ohio General Assembly ratified it on May 6 , 1873 in protest of an unpopular Congressional pay raise . A century later , on March 6 , 1978 , the Wyoming Legislature also ratified the article . Gregory Watson , a University of Texas at Austin undergraduate student , started a new push for the article 's ratification with a letter @-@ writing campaign to state legislatures . As a result , by May 1992 , enough states had approved Article Two ( 38 of the 50 states in the Union ) for it to become the Twenty @-@ seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution . The amendment 's adoption was certified by Archivist of the United States Don W. Wilson and subsequently affirmed by a vote of Congress on May 20 , 1992 . 
 Three states did not complete action on the twelve articles of amendment when they were initially put before the states . Connecticut and Georgia found a Bill of Rights unnecessary and so refused to ratify . Both chambers of the Massachusetts General Court ratified a number of the amendments ( the Senate adopted 10 of 12 and the House 9 of 12 ) , but failed to reconcile their two lists or to send official notice to the Secretary of State of the ones they did agree upon . All three later ratified the Constitutional amendments originally known as Articles 3 through 12 as part of the 1939 commemoration of the Bill of Rights ' sesquicentennial : Massachusetts on March 2 , Georgia on March 18 , and Connecticut on April 19 . Connecticut and Georgia would also later ratify Article Two , on May 13 , 1987 and February 2 , 1988 respectively . 
 = = Application = = 
 The Bill of Rights had little judicial impact for the first 150 years of its existence ; in the words of Gordon S. Wood , " After ratification , most Americans promptly forgot about the first ten amendments to the Constitution . " The Court made no important decisions protecting free speech rights , for example , until 1931 . Historian Richard Labunski attributes the Bill 's long legal dormancy to three factors : first , it took time for a " culture of tolerance " to develop that would support the Bill 's provisions with judicial and popular will ; second , the Supreme Court spent much of the 19th century focused on issues relating to intergovernmental balances of power ; and third , the Bill initially only applied to the federal government , a restriction affirmed by Barron v. Baltimore ( 1833 ) . In the twentieth century , however , most of the Bill 's provisions were applied to the states via the Fourteenth Amendment — a process known as incorporation — beginning with the freedom of speech clause , in Gitlow v. New York ( 1925 ) . In Talton v. Mayes ( 1896 ) , the Court ruled that Constitutional protections , including the provisions of the Bill of Rights , do not apply to the actions of American Indian tribal governments . 
 = = = First Amendment = = = 
 Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ; or abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press ; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble , and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances . 
 The First Amendment prohibits the making of any law respecting an establishment of religion , impeding the free exercise of religion , abridging the freedom of speech , infringing on the freedom of the press , interfering with the right to peaceably assemble or prohibiting the petitioning for a governmental redress of grievances . Initially , the First Amendment applied only to laws enacted by Congress , and many of its provisions were interpreted more narrowly than they are today . 
 In Everson v. Board of Education ( 1947 ) , the Court drew on Thomas Jefferson 's correspondence to call for " a wall of separation between church and State " , though the precise boundary of this separation remains in dispute . Speech rights were expanded significantly in a series of 20th- and 21st @-@ century court decisions that protected various forms of political speech , anonymous speech , campaign financing , pornography , and school speech ; these rulings also defined a series of exceptions to First Amendment protections . The Supreme Court overturned English common law precedent to increase the burden of proof for defamation and libel suits , most notably in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan ( 1964 ) . Commercial speech is less protected by the First Amendment than political speech , and is therefore subject to greater regulation . 
 The Free Press Clause protects publication of information and opinions , and applies to a wide variety of media . In Near v. Minnesota ( 1931 ) and New York Times v. United States ( 1971 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment protected against prior restraint — pre @-@ publication censorship — in almost all cases . The Petition Clause protects the right to petition all branches and agencies of government for action . In addition to the right of assembly guaranteed by this clause , the Court has also ruled that the amendment implicitly protects freedom of association . 
 = = = Second Amendment = = = 
 A well regulated Militia , being necessary to the security of a free State , the right of the people to keep and bear Arms , shall not be infringed . 
 The Second Amendment protects the right to keep and bear arms . The concept of such a right existed within English common law long before the enactment of the Bill of Rights . First codified in the English Bill of Rights of 1689 ( but there only applying to Protestants ) , this right was enshrined in fundamental laws of several American states during the Revolutionary era , including the 1776 Virginia Declaration of Rights and the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776 . Long a controversial issue in American political , legal , and social discourse , the Second Amendment has been at the heart of several Supreme Court decisions . 
 In United States v. Cruikshank ( 1875 ) , the Court ruled that " [ t ] he right to bear arms is not granted by the Constitution ; neither is it in any manner dependent upon that instrument for its existence . The Second Amendment means no more than that it shall not be infringed by Congress , and has no other effect than to restrict the powers of the National Government . " 
 In United States v. Miller ( 1939 ) , the Court ruled that the amendment " [ protects arms that had a ] reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia " . 
 In District of Columbia v. Heller ( 2008 ) , the Court ruled that the Second Amendment " codified a pre @-@ existing right " and that it " protects an individual right to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia , and to use that arm for traditionally lawful purposes , such as self @-@ defense within the home " but also stated that " the right is not unlimited . It is not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose " . 
 In McDonald v. Chicago ( 2010 ) , the Court ruled that the Second Amendment limits state and local governments to the same extent that it limits the federal government . 
 = = = Third Amendment = = = 
 No Soldier shall , in time of peace be quartered in any house , without the consent of the Owner , nor in time of war , but in a manner to be prescribed by law . 
 The Third Amendment restricts the quartering of soldiers in private homes , in response to Quartering Acts passed by the British parliament during the Revolutionary War . The amendment is one of the least controversial of the Constitution , and , as of 2016 , has never been the primary basis of a Supreme Court decision . 
 = = = Fourth Amendment = = = 
 The right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated , and no Warrants shall issue , but upon probable cause , supported by Oath or affirmation , and particularly describing the place to be searched , and the persons or things to be seized . 
 The Fourth Amendment guards against unreasonable searches and seizures , along with requiring any warrant to be judicially sanctioned and supported by probable cause . It was adopted as a response to the abuse of the writ of assistance , which is a type of general search warrant , in the American Revolution . Search and seizure ( including arrest ) must be limited in scope according to specific information supplied to the issuing court , usually by a law enforcement officer who has sworn by it . The amendment is the basis for the exclusionary rule , which mandates that evidence obtained illegally cannot be introduced into a criminal trial . The amendment 's interpretation has varied over time ; its protections expanded under left @-@ leaning courts such as that headed by Earl Warren and contracted under right @-@ leaning courts such as that of William Rehnquist . 
 = = = Fifth Amendment = = = 
 No person shall be held to answer for a capital , or otherwise infamous crime , unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury , except in cases arising in the land or naval forces , or in the Militia , when in actual service in time of War or public danger ; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb ; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself , nor be deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor shall private property be taken for public use , without just compensation . 
 The Fifth Amendment protects against double jeopardy and self @-@ incrimination and guarantees the rights to due process , grand jury screening of criminal indictments , and compensation for the seizure of private property under eminent domain . The amendment was the basis for the court 's decision in Miranda v. Arizona ( 1966 ) , which established that defendants must be informed of their rights to an attorney and against self @-@ incrimination prior to interrogation by police . 
 = = = Sixth Amendment = = = 
 In all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed , which district shall have been previously ascertained by law , and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation ; to be confronted with the witnesses against him ; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor , and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence . 
 The Sixth Amendment establishes a number of rights of the defendant in a criminal trial : 
 to a speedy and public trial 
 to trial by an impartial jury 
 to be informed of criminal charges 
 to confront witnesses 
 to compel witnesses to appear in court 
 to assistance of counsel 
 In Gideon v. Wainwright ( 1963 ) , the Court ruled that the amendment guaranteed the right to legal representation in all felony prosecutions in both state and federal courts . 
 = = = Seventh Amendment = = = 
 In suits at common law , where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars , the right of trial by jury shall be preserved , and no fact tried by a jury , shall be otherwise re @-@ examined in any court of the United States , than according to the rules of the common law . 
 The Seventh Amendment guarantees jury trials in federal civil cases that deal with claims of more than twenty dollars . It also prohibits judges from overruling findings of fact by juries in federal civil trials . In Colgrove v. Battin ( 1973 ) , the Court ruled that the amendment 's requirements could be fulfilled by a jury with a minimum of six members . The Seventh is one of the few parts of the Bill of Rights not to be incorporated ( applied to the states ) . 
 = = = Eighth Amendment = = = 
 Excessive bail shall not be required , nor excessive fines imposed , nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted . 
 The Eighth Amendment forbids the imposition of excessive bails or fines , though it leaves the term " excessive " open to interpretation . The most frequently litigated clause of the amendment is the last , which forbids cruel and unusual punishment . This clause was only occasionally applied by the Supreme Court prior to the 1970s , generally in cases dealing with means of execution . In Furman v. Georgia ( 1972 ) , some members of the Court found capital punishment itself in violation of the amendment , arguing that the clause could reflect " evolving standards of decency " as public opinion changed ; others found certain practices in capital trials to be unacceptably arbitrary , resulting in a majority decision that effectively halted executions in the United States for several years . Executions resumed following Gregg v. Georgia ( 1976 ) , which found capital punishment to be constitutional if the jury was directed by concrete sentencing guidelines . The Court has also found that some poor prison conditions constitute cruel and unusual punishment , as in Estelle v. Gamble ( 1976 ) . 
 = = = Ninth Amendment = = = 
 The enumeration in the Constitution , of certain rights , shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people . 
 The Ninth Amendment declares that there are additional fundamental rights that exist outside the Constitution . The rights enumerated in the Constitution are not an explicit and exhaustive list of individual rights . It was rarely mentioned in Supreme Court decisions before the second half of the 20th century , when it was cited by several of the justices in Griswold v. Connecticut ( 1965 ) . The Court in that case voided a statute prohibiting use of contraceptives as an infringement of the right of marital privacy . This right was , in turn , the foundation upon which the Supreme Court built decisions in several landmark cases , including , Roe v. Wade ( 1973 ) , which overturned a Texas law making it a crime to assist a woman to get an abortion , and Planned Parenthood v. Casey ( 1992 ) , which invalidated a Pennsylvania law that required spousal awareness prior to obtaining an abortion . 
 = = = Tenth Amendment = = = 
 The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution , nor prohibited by it to the States , are reserved to the States respectively , or to the people . 
 The Tenth Amendment reinforces the principles of separation of powers and federalism by providing that powers not granted to the federal government by the Constitution , nor prohibited to the states , are reserved to the states or the people . The amendment provides no new powers or rights to the states , but rather preserves their authority in all matters not specifically granted to the federal government . 
 = = Display and honoring of the Bill of Rights = = 
 George Washington had fourteen handwritten copies of the Bill of Rights made , one for Congress and one for each of the original thirteen states . The copies for Georgia , Maryland , New York , and Pennsylvania went missing . The New York copy is thought to have been destroyed in a fire . Two unidentified copies of the missing four ( thought to be the Georgia and Maryland copies ) survive ; one is in the National Archives , and the other is in the New York Public Library . North Carolina 's copy was stolen from the State Capitol by a Union soldier following the Civil War . In an FBI sting operation , it was recovered in 2003 . The copy retained by the First Congress has been on display ( along with the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence ) in the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom room at the National Archives Building in Washington , D.C. since December 13 , 1952 . 
 After fifty years on display , signs of deterioration in the casing were noted , while the documents themselves appeared to be well preserved . Accordingly , the casing was updated and the Rotunda rededicated on September 17 , 2003 . In his dedicatory remarks , President George W. Bush stated , " The true [ American ] revolution was not to defy one earthly power , but to declare principles that stand above every earthly power — the equality of each person before God , and the responsibility of government to secure the rights of all . " 
 In 1941 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt declared December 15 to be Bill of Rights Day , commemorating the 150th anniversary of the ratification of the Bill of Rights . In 1991 , the Virginia copy of the Bill of Rights toured the country in honor of its bicentennial , visiting the capitals of all fifty states . 
 = Intimacy ( Bloc Party album ) = 
 Intimacy is the third studio album by British indie rock band Bloc Party . It was recorded in two weeks at several locations in London and Kent during 2008 and was produced by Jacknife Lee and Paul Epworth . Inspired by the release options available in the Internet age , the band members made the album available for purchase on their website as a digital download on 21 August 2008 . Minimal promotion was undertaken in the UK . The record was released in compact disc form on 24 October 2008 , with Wichita Recordings as the primary label . It peaked at number 8 on the UK Albums Chart and entered the Billboard 200 in the United States at number 18 . 
 Bloc Party wanted to create an album that further distanced the band from the traditional rock set @-@ up by incorporating more electronic elements and unconventional musical arrangements . As the record 's title suggests , its tracks are about personal relationships and are loosely based on one of frontman Kele Okereke 's break @-@ ups in 2007 . Three songs were released as singles : " Mercury " , " Talons " , and " One Month Off " ; the first two tracks entered the UK Top 40 . Intimacy was generally well received by critics . Reviewers often focused on its rush @-@ release and central theme , and considered them either bold steps or poor choices . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 Bloc Party 's second album A Weekend in the City , released in 2007 , allowed the quartet to evolve sonically by including more electronically tampered soundscapes , but the band members were not entirely comfortable with more daring musical arrangements when making the record . According to multi @-@ instrumentalist Gordon Moakes , the impromptu November 2007 single " Flux " " opened a door to the fact that we could go in any direction " in future works . After the NME Big Gig in February 2008 , the band members took a month off from touring and did not interact with each other during that period . Moakes felt that there were no rules when the band re @-@ assembled for studio work . Chief lyricist Okereke completed most of the songwriting before the recording process . 
 In mid @-@ 2008 , Bloc Party attended secret sessions at studios in the south @-@ east of England . The band aimed to use a similar process to the creation of " Flux " , which was crafted in a week . Paul Epworth and Jacknife Lee — from Bloc Party 's previous albums , Silent Alarm and A Weekend in the City , respectively — returned to the production staff for Intimacy , because the band members felt that they had " unfinished business " with both . Okereke has stated that having two producers allowed for musical experimentation . Epworth focused on capturing the dynamic of a live band by working on fully developed songs and emphasising the rhythm section in the mix . Lee aided the band members ' evolution towards a more electronic style by creating tracks with them . Each producer worked on five of the record 's original ten tracks . 
 According to Okereke , Bloc Party wanted to make something as stylised as R & B or electronica , combining the rawness of Silent Alarm and the recording experience gained from A Weekend in the City . The frontman drew inspiration from Siouxsie and the Banshees ' 1988 song " Peek @-@ a @-@ Boo " and aimed to create " rock interpretations of dance " . The band worked by initially performing sound checks with only guitar chords , keyboard notes , and drum beats . Discussing the interplay between rhythm guitarist Okereke and lead guitarist Russell Lissack , Epworth has stated that " Kele will do one thing that creates a great deal of impact , whereas Russell 's very good at subtle embellishments and leading the melodic side of things outside of the vocal " . The band members decided to record the first ten tracks crafted after judging first ideas to often be the best . They " thrived " under the pressure of timed sessions , which lasted only two weeks . 
 Moakes has indicated that there was no worry about whether a song could be recreated live in concert in the same way as it would appear on record . A brass section and a chamber choir were hired as additional musicians . Drum machines and distorted guitars were used more extensively than in Bloc Party 's previous works to create a sense of manipulation to the basic rock palette . Drummer Matt Tong was initially sceptical of moulding songs with programmed drums , as opposed to using his physical output , but agreed to the idea when the band recorded some of the tracks in their entirety . On some songs , the guitars were disregarded and the band focused solely on the beat . Okereke 's voice was often used as an instrument by being looped , vocoded , or run through effects pedals . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 After the studio sessions , Bloc Party embarked on a tour of North American and European summer festivals . One of the recorded tracks , " Mercury " , was released as a single on 11 August 2008 and peaked at number 16 on the UK Singles Chart . At the time , the band confirmed the existence of further material , but noted that a record release date was scheduled for the end of 2008 at the earliest . Bloc Party unexpectedly announced the completion of Intimacy on 18 August 2008 via a webcast and confirmed a release within 60 hours . The band members wanted to revive the importance of a new album 's release in an era in which the excitement has dissipated because of extensive Internet coverage . They were inspired by Radiohead 's marketing of In Rainbows in 2007 , but did not consider a " free " sale option . Little press was undertaken in the UK to promote the record because of Okereke 's reluctance to discuss personal aspects of his life . 
 Intimacy was made available for download on Bloc Party 's website on 21 August 2008 . Ten MP3 tracks were sold with a plain black JPEG cover for £ 5 , and a £ 10 option for the online songs and the future expanded CD was also available . The album title was picked as a " double bluff " with regard to people 's expectations ; Okereke has explained , " You 'd think of wet balladeering . You don 't think it 's gonna be ugly or harsh . But that 's what relationships are really like . It 's not just about good times . " The release was called " rushed " by publications such as Billboard and The Independent . Tong disagreed with the label and stated that Bloc Party wanted to make a statement that was surprising to anyone interested in their work . 
 The band showcased tracks from Intimacy at Reading Festival at the end of August 2008 and embarked on a North American tour during September . UK appearances on the MTV2 Gonzo Tour and the release of the second single , " Talons " , preceded the physical release of the album in October , which entered the UK Albums Chart at number eight . In the U.S , the record sold 24 @,@ 000 copies during the first week of release and debuted at number 18 on the Billboard 200 . Comprehensive sales figures have not been published because the digital download data has not been publicly reported by Bloc Party . The chosen cover art is a stylised shot of a couple kissing , taken by freelance photographer Perry <unk> . It was ranked at number 23 on Gigwise 's list of The Best Album Covers of 2008 , in which the publication called it " intimate and rather ambiguous " . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The lyrics of Intimacy were inspired by a relationship break @-@ up Okereke went through at the end of 2007 . The lyricist told Rolling Stone , " I wouldn 't want anyone to think it 's the clichéd break @-@ up record but I haven 't written about true , personal experiences all that much in the past . " The move to more intimate subject matter was " semi @-@ conscious " because the band members did not want to focus on socio @-@ political issues as they had in their previous works . Three tracks allude to Greek mythology : " Ares " draws its name from the god of war , " Trojan Horse " is named after the Trojan War military ruse , and " Zephyrus " draws its name from the god of the west wind . The narrative in the songs occurs between two people and focuses on the relations between lovers , friends , and enemies ; Okereke indicated that " it 's about moments of shared vulnerability " . " Better Than Heaven " references the Garden of Eden and Corinthians ( 15 : 22 ) , because the lyricist wanted to explore the themes of sex and death , especially in a biblical context . 
 " Biko " means " Please " ( or more accurately " I implore you " ) in Igbo — a language spoken in Nigeria , the homeland of Okereke 's parents — and is used " when you 're beseeching someone to do something " . Okereke denied that it is about the murdered South African anti @-@ apartheid protester Steve Biko . The lyrics of " One Month Off " reference feelings of anger and are about being in love with someone younger and unfaithful , while " Zephyrus " concerns an apology following neglect . The lyrics in the chorus of " Ion Square " , the last track on the original download release , are based on E. E. Cummings ' poem " I Carry Your Heart with Me " . Okereke considers the song a personal favourite because it evokes the initial exciting stages of a new relationship when everything is going right . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Okereke has discussed a natural progression in Bloc Party 's compositional style to a more explorative , electronic direction . For the opening track on Intimacy , " Ares " , Okereke was inspired to rap his lyrics after listening to the old @-@ school hip hop of Afrika Bambaataa . According to Heather Phares of AllMusic , the song includes siren @-@ like guitar chords and loud , complex drumming in the vein of dance acts The Prodigy and The Chemical Brothers . " Mercury " continues the complex drumming theme by incorporating layered percussion and contains a vocally manipulated chorus . The track is an attempt at drum and bass and features brass dissonance , effects Okereke has called " harsh , glacial , layered and energetic " . " Zephyrus " begins with a solitary vocal line accompanied only by a drum machine pattern , while the Exmoor Singers provide background vocals in the rest of the composition . " Signs " is the only song that does not include guitars ; instead , it is made up of a synthesiser pulse and multitracked samples of glockenspiel and mbira resembling the work of minimalist composer Steve Reich . 
 Okereke has conceded that Intimacy covers Bloc Party 's typical indie rock elements , but noted that the guitars have an artificial and manipulated sound , " almost like all the humanity has been bleached out " . " Halo " has a fast tempo coupled with a guitar melody that uses only four chords , while " Trojan Horse " features syncopated guitars and distortion . " Talons " also incorporates distortion from both lead and rhythm guitars , while the final single " One Month Off " consists of tribal rhythms and sixteenth note guitar riffs . " Biko " has a slower tempo and includes guitar <unk> throughout , while " Ion Square " incorporates guitar overdubbing and the use of hi @-@ hat patterns throughout . According to Nick Southall of Drowned in Sound , " Better Than Heaven " encapsulates what Bloc Party had been trying to achieve in their previous works , " namely aligning all their different directional desires : to swoon , to rock , and to experiment all at once " . The track features broken beats and layered vocals . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Media response to Intimacy was generally favourable ; aggregating website Metacritic reports a normalised rating of 69 % based on 27 critical reviews . Steven <unk> of Alternative Press described the album as arguably Bloc Party 's finest career moment and noted that it offers " sweat and circuitry , savagery and submission , and a captivating energy that 's severely lacking in many music scenes on the planet " . Kyle Anderson of Rolling Stone claimed that by " replacing Bloc Party 's distant cool with vivid honesty , Okereke makes Intimacy a confident new peak for his band " , while PopMatters ' Ross Langager explained that the record " might not actually be all that intimate , but it is a thing of rough , recycled beauty " . Adam Mazmanian of The Washington Times commented that the album 's final mix showed that producers Epworth and Lee preserved the essence of Bloc Party 's signature sound — " minor key rock <unk> with rhythmic intensity " — while taking the band in new musical directions . Dave Simpson of The Guardian concluded that it would please old and new fans alike by being " brave , individual and heartfelt " . 
 Pitchfork Media 's Ian Cohen was less receptive and asserted that the record seems like a document of a band disconnected from its musical strengths . Josh Modell of Spin felt that Intimacy sometimes gets " sonically or lyrically precarious " , while John Robinson of Uncut commented that " there 's an air of slightly hedged bets " . Drowned in Sound 's Nick Southall claimed that the record is not quite the radical statement Bloc Party set out to achieve , but concluded that it is " definitely a little bit of invigorating redemption at a time when doubts were beginning to cloud what was , initially , a flawless reputation " . In its year @-@ end music review for 2008 , Under the Radar stated about the band members , " They are so solid and so confident that it seems inevitable that they will get many chances to slowly drift into more daring lands . But without more risk , they may be destined to make albums like Intimacy – accomplished and intriguing , but not life changing , not classic . " The record figured in several publications ' end @-@ of @-@ year best album lists for 2008 — notably , at number 14 by Gigwise , at number 36 by Drowned in Sound , and at number 49 by NME . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Bloc Party . 
 The download @-@ only release in August 2008 did not include " Talons " . 
 The iTunes version of the October release included an extra Bloc Party EP , Live from London , which contains six songs from Intimacy performed live . 
 The deluxe edition includes access to an online exclusive film , Live and Intimate , which contains footage of Bloc Party performing several Intimacy tracks plus " Banquet " live at The Pool , Miloco Studios . 
 In 2009 , the deluxe edition of Intimacy was remixed as Intimacy Remixed by artists including Mogwai , Armand Van Helden , and No Age . 
 The Gold Panda remix of " Letter to My Son " was erroneously labelled as being by Golden Panda on the Rolling Stone CD . 
 = = = Vinyl = = = 
 A standard black LP copy in a gatefold sleeve was released in October 2008 with the normal track listing , but with an original mix of " Mercury " instead of the CD version . The North American edition also included a code for the free online download of the tracks in MP3 format . 
 A limited edition picture disc vinyl version was additionally released in the UK ; it had the album cover printed on Side A and the track listing printed on Side B. 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The people involved in the making of Intimacy are the following : 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Deep vein thrombosis = 
 Deep vein thrombosis , or deep venous thrombosis , ( DVT ) is the formation of a blood clot ( thrombus ) within a deep vein , predominantly in the legs . Non @-@ specific signs may include pain , swelling , redness , <unk> , and engorged superficial veins . Pulmonary embolism , a potentially life @-@ threatening complication , is caused by the detachment ( embolization ) of a clot that travels to the lungs . Together , DVT and pulmonary embolism constitute a single disease process known as venous thromboembolism . Post @-@ thrombotic syndrome , another complication , significantly contributes to the health @-@ care cost of DVT . Prevention options for at @-@ risk individuals include early and frequent walking , calf exercises , anticoagulants , aspirin , graduated compression stockings , and intermittent pneumatic compression . 
 In 1856 , German pathologist Rudolf Virchow postulated the interplay of three processes resulting in venous thrombosis , now known as Virchow 's triad : a decreased blood flow rate ( venous stasis ) , increased tendency to clot ( hypercoagulability ) , and changes to the blood vessel wall . DVT formation typically begins inside the valves of the calf veins , where the blood is relatively oxygen deprived , which activates certain biochemical pathways . Several medical conditions increase the risk for DVT , including cancer , trauma , and antiphospholipid syndrome . Other risk factors include older age , surgery , immobilization ( as with bed rest , orthopedic casts , and sitting on long flights ) , combined oral contraceptives , pregnancy , the postnatal period , and genetic factors . Those genetic factors include deficiencies with antithrombin , protein C , and protein S , the mutation of Factor V Leiden , and the property of having a non @-@ O blood type . The rate of new DVTs increases dramatically from childhood to old age ; in adulthood , about 1 in 1000 adults develops it annually . 
 Individuals suspected of having DVT may be assessed using a clinical prediction rule such as the Wells score . A D @-@ dimer test may also be used to assist with excluding the diagnosis ( because of its high sensitivity ) or to signal a need for further testing . Diagnosis is most commonly done with ultrasound of the suspected veins . Anticoagulation is the standard treatment ; typical medications include a low @-@ molecular @-@ weight heparin and a vitamin K antagonist . Wearing graduated compression stockings appears to reduce the risk of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Common signs and symptoms of DVT include pain or tenderness , swelling , warmth , redness or discoloration , and distention of surface veins , although about half of those with the condition have no symptoms . Signs and symptoms alone are not sufficiently sensitive or specific to make a diagnosis , but when considered in conjunction with known risk factors can help determine the likelihood of DVT . In most suspected cases , DVT is ruled out after evaluation , and symptoms are more often due to other causes , such as cellulitis , Baker 's cyst , musculoskeletal injury , or lymphedema . Other differential diagnoses include hematoma , tumors , venous or arterial aneurysms , and connective tissue disorders . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> is a very large and dangerous type of DVT . It is characterized by an acute and almost total venous occlusion of the entire extremity outflow , including the iliac and femoral veins . The leg is usually painful , blue tinged in color , and swollen , which may result in venous gangrene . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The three factors of Virchow 's triad — venous stasis , hypercoagulability , and changes in the endothelial blood vessel lining ( such as physical damage or endothelial activation ) — contribute to DVT and are used to explain its formation . Other related causes include activation of immune system components , the state of microparticles in the blood , the concentration of oxygen , and possible platelet activation . Various risk factors contribute to DVT , though many at high risk never develop it . 
 Acquired risk factors include the strong risk factor of older age , which alters blood composition to favor clotting . Other important acquired risk factors include major surgery and trauma , both of which may increase the risk because of tissue factor from outside the vascular system entering the blood . In orthopedic surgery , venous stasis may be temporarily provoked by a cessation of blood flow as part of the procedure . Cancer can grow in and around veins , causing venous stasis , and can also stimulate increased levels of tissue factor . Pregnancy causes blood to favor clotting , and in the postpartum , placental tearing releases substances that favor clotting . Oral contraceptives and hormonal replacement therapy increase the risk through a variety of mechanisms , including altered blood coagulation protein levels and reduced fibrinolysis . 
 The disease term venous thromboembolism ( VTE ) includes the development of either DVT or pulmonary embolism ( PE ) . Genetic factors that increase the risk of VTE include deficiencies of three proteins that normally prevent blood from clotting — protein C , protein S , and antithrombin — in addition to non @-@ O blood type and mutations in the factor V and prothrombin genes . Deficiencies in antithrombin , protein C , and protein S are rare but strong , or moderately strong , risk factors . These three thrombophilia increase the risk of VTE by about 10 times . Factor V Leiden , which makes factor V resistant to inactivation by activated protein C , and the genetic variant prothrombin G20210A , which causes increased prothrombin levels , are predominantly expressed in Caucasians . They moderately increase risk for VTE , by three to eight times for factor V Leiden and two to three times for prothrombin G20210A . Having a non @-@ O blood type approximately doubles VTE risk . Non @-@ O blood type is common in all races , making it an important risk factor . Individuals without O blood type have higher blood levels of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII than those with O blood type , increasing the likelihood of clotting . 
 Some risk factors influence the location of DVT within the body . In isolated distal DVT , the profile of risk factors appears distinct from proximal DVT . Transient factors , such as surgery and immobilization , appear to dominate whereas thrombophilias and age do not seem to increase risk . In upper @-@ extremity DVT , the most important risk factor is having a central venous catheter , and thoracic outlet syndrome also increases risk . 
 = = = Risk factors = = = 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 DVT often develops in the calf veins and " grows " in the direction of venous flow , towards the heart . When DVT does not grow , it can be cleared naturally and dissolved into the blood ( fibrinolysis ) . Veins in the calf or thigh are most commonly affected , including the femoral vein , the popliteal vein , and the iliofemoral vein ( as with May – <unk> syndrome ) . Extensive lower @-@ extremity DVT can reach into the iliac vein of the pelvis or the inferior vena cava . Occasionally the veins of the arm are affected , as after central venous catheter placement and with the rare Paget – <unk> disease . 
 The mechanism behind arterial thrombosis , such as with heart attacks , is more established than the steps that cause venous thrombosis . With arterial thrombosis , blood vessel wall damage is required , as it initiates coagulation , but clotting in the veins mostly occurs without any such damage . The beginning of venous thrombosis is thought to be caused by tissue factor , which leads to conversion of prothrombin to thrombin , followed by fibrin deposition . Red blood cells and fibrin are the main components of venous <unk> , and the fibrin appears to attach to the blood vessel wall lining ( endothelium ) , a surface that normally acts to prevent clotting . Platelets and white blood cells are also components . Platelets are not as prominent in venous clots as they are in arterial ones , but they may play a role . Inflammation is associated with VTE , and white blood cells play a role in the formation and resolution of venous clots . 
 Often , DVT begins in the valves of veins . The blood flow pattern in the valves can cause low oxygen concentrations in the blood ( hypoxemia ) of a valve sinus . Hypoxemia , which is worsened by venous stasis , activates pathways — ones that include hypoxia @-@ inducible factor @-@ 1 and early @-@ growth @-@ response protein 1 . Hypoxemia also results in the production of reactive oxygen species , which can activate these pathways , as well as nuclear factor @-@ κB , which regulates hypoxia @-@ inducible factor @-@ 1 transcription . <unk> @-@ inducible factor @-@ 1 and early @-@ growth @-@ response protein 1 contribute to monocyte association with endothelial proteins , such as P @-@ <unk> , prompting monocytes to release tissue factor @-@ filled <unk> , which presumably begin clotting after binding to the endothelial surface . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 DVT diagnosis requires the use of imaging devices such as ultrasound . Clinical assessments , which predict DVT likelihood , can help determine if a D @-@ dimer test is useful . In those not highly likely to have DVT , a normal D @-@ dimer result can rule out a diagnosis . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Provoked DVTs occur in association with acquired risk factors , such as surgery , oral contraceptives , trauma , immobility , obesity , or cancer ; cases without acquired states are called unprovoked or idiopathic . Acute DVT is characterized by pain and swelling and is usually occlusive , which means that it obstructs blood flow , whereas non @-@ occlusive DVT is less symptomatic . The label of chronic has been applied to symptomatic DVT that persists longer than 10 or 14 days . DVT that has no symptoms , but is found only by screening , is labeled asymptomatic or incidental . 
 DVT in the legs is proximal ( or iliofemoral ) when above the knee and distal ( or calf ) when below the knee . DVT below the popliteal vein , a proximal vein behind the knee , is classified as distal and has limited clinical significance compared to proximal DVT . An initial episode of DVT is called incident and any subsequent DVT is termed recurrent . Bilateral DVT refers to clots in both legs while unilateral means that only a single leg is affected . 
 = = = Probability = = = 
 In those with suspected DVT , a clinical assessment of probability can be useful to determine which tests to perform . The most studied clinical prediction rule is the Wells score . 
 Wells score or criteria : ( possible score − 2 to 9 ) 
 Active cancer ( treatment within last 6 months or palliative ) : + 1 point 
 Calf swelling ≥ 3 cm compared to asymptomatic calf ( measured 10 cm below tibial tuberosity ) : + 1 point 
 Swollen unilateral superficial veins ( non @-@ varicose , in symptomatic leg ) : + 1 point 
 Unilateral pitting edema ( in symptomatic leg ) : + 1 point 
 Previous documented DVT : + 1 point 
 Swelling of entire leg : + 1 point 
 Localized tenderness along the deep venous system : + 1 point 
 Paralysis , paresis , or recent cast immobilization of lower extremities : + 1 point 
 Recently bedridden ≥ 3 days , or major surgery requiring regional or general anesthetic in the past 12 weeks : + 1 point 
 Alternative diagnosis at least as likely : − 2 points 
 Those with Wells scores of two or more have a 28 % chance of having DVT , those with a lower score have 6 % odds . Alternatively , Wells scores can be categorized as high if greater than two , moderate if one or two , and low if less than one , with likelihoods of 53 % , 17 % , and 5 % respectively . 
 = = = D @-@ dimer = = = 
 D @-@ dimers are a fibrin degradation product , and an elevated level can result from plasmin dissolving a clot — or other conditions . Hospitalized patients often have elevated levels for multiple reasons . When individuals are at a high @-@ probability of having DVT , diagnostic imaging is preferred to a D @-@ dimer test . For those with a low or moderate probability of DVT , a D @-@ dimer level might be obtained , which excludes a diagnosis if results are normal . An elevated level requires further investigation with diagnostic imaging to confirm or exclude the diagnosis . 
 For a suspected first leg DVT in a low @-@ probability situation , the American College of Chest Physicians ( ACCP ) recommends testing either D @-@ dimer levels with moderate or high sensitivity or compression ultrasound of the proximal veins . These options are suggested over whole @-@ leg ultrasound , and D @-@ dimer testing is the suggested preference overall . The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ( NICE ) recommends D @-@ dimer testing prior to proximal vein ultrasound . 
 For a suspected first leg DVT in a moderate @-@ probability scenario , a high @-@ sensitivity D @-@ dimer is suggested as a recommended option over ultrasound imaging , with both whole @-@ leg and compression ultrasound possible . The NICE guideline uses a two @-@ point Wells score and does not refer to a moderate probability group . 
 = = = Imaging = = = 
 Imaging tests of the veins are used in the diagnosis of DVT , most commonly either proximal compression ultrasound or whole @-@ leg ultrasound . Each technique has drawbacks : a single proximal scan may miss a distal DVT , while whole @-@ leg scanning can lead to distal DVT <unk> . Doppler ultrasound , CT scan venography , MRI venography , or MRI of the thrombus are also possibilities . 
 The gold standard for judging imaging methods is contrast venography , which involves injecting a peripheral vein of the affected limb with a contrast agent and taking X @-@ rays , to reveal whether the venous supply has been obstructed . Because of its cost , invasiveness , availability , and other limitations this test is rarely performed . 
 A fibrinogen uptake test was formerly used to detect deep vein thrombosis . [ move to history section ? ] 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Depending upon the risk for DVT , different preventive measures are used . Walking and calf exercises reduce venous stasis because leg muscle contractions compress the veins and pump blood up towards the heart . In immobile individuals , physical compression methods improve blood flow . Anticoagulation , which increases the risk of bleeding , might be used in high @-@ risk scenarios . The risk of major bleeding with long @-@ term anticoagulation is about 3 % per year , and the point where annual VTE risk is thought to warrant long @-@ term anticoagulation is estimated to be between 3 and 9 % . Usually , only when individuals exceed a 9 % annual VTE risk is long @-@ term anticoagulation a common consideration . <unk> deficiency , a strong or moderately strong risk factor , carries an annual risk of VTE of only 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 5 % ; as such , asymptomatic individuals with thrombophilia do not warrant long @-@ term anticoagulation . 
 Aside from anticoagulation , the anti @-@ platelet drug aspirin might be used in some people following orthopedic surgery and in those with a previous VTE . Statins might decrease the risk for people who are otherwise healthy , but the evidence is not clear . Following the completion of warfarin long term aspirin is useful to prevent re occurrence . 
 = = = Hospital = = = 
 In 2011 , the American College of Physicians ( ACP ) issued a clinical practice guideline making three strong recommendations based on moderate @-@ quality evidence : that hospitalized patients be assessed for their risk of thromboembolism and bleeding before prophylaxis is started ; that heparin or a related drug be used if potential benefits are thought to outweigh potential harms ; and that graduated compression stockings not be used . The ACP also drew attention to a lack of support for any performance measures encouraging physicians to apply universal prophylaxis without regard to the risks . 
 A 2014 Cochrane review found that using heparin in medical patients did not change the risk of death or pulmonary embolism . While its use decreased people 's risks of DVTs it also increased people 's risks of major bleeding . The review thus recommended the need to balance risks and benefits . 
 The 2012 ACCP guidelines for non @-@ surgical patients recommend anticoagulation for the acutely ill in cases of elevated risk when there is neither bleeding nor a high risk of bleeding . Mechanical prophylaxis is suggested when risks for bleeding and thrombosis are elevated . For the critically ill , either pharmacological or mechanical prophylaxis is suggested depending upon the risk . Heparin is suggested in outpatients with cancer who have solid tumors and additional risk factors for VTE — listed as " previous venous thrombosis , immobilization , hormonal therapy , angiogenesis inhibitors , thalidomide , and <unk> " — and a low risk of bleeding . 
 = = = Post @-@ surgery = = = 
 Major orthopedic surgery — total hip replacement , total knee replacement , or hip fracture surgery — has a high risk of causing VTE . If prophylaxis is not used after these surgeries , symptomatic VTE has about a 4 % chance of developing within 35 days . Options for VTE prevention in people follow non @-@ orthopedic surgery include early walking , mechanical prophylaxis ( intermittent pneumatic compression or graduated compression stockings ) , and drugs ( low @-@ molecular @-@ weight heparin [ LMWH ] and low @-@ dose @-@ unfractionated heparin [ <unk> ] ) depending upon the risk of VTE , risk of major bleeding , and person 's preferences . Following major orthopedic surgery , the ACCP recommends treatment with drugs that reduce the risk of clots ( such as fondaparinux and aspirin ) with LMWH suggested as a preference . Intermittent pneumatic compression is also an option . Graduated compression stockings are effective after both general and orthopedic surgery . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 The risk of VTE is increased in pregnancy by about five times because of a more hypercoagulable state , a likely adaptation against fatal postpartum hemorrhage . Additionally , pregnant women with genetic risk factors are subject to an approximate three to thirty times increased risk for VTE . Preventative treatments for pregnancy @-@ related VTE in hypercoagulable women were suggested by the ACCP . Homozygous carriers of factor V Leiden or prothrombin G20210A with a family history of VTE were suggested for <unk> LMWH and either LMWH or a vitamin K antagonist ( VKA ) for the six weeks following childbirth . Those with another thrombophilia and a family history but no previous VTE were suggested for watchful waiting during pregnancy and LMWH or — for those without protein C or S deficiency — a VKA . Homozygous carriers of factor V Leiden or prothrombin G20210A with no personal or family history of VTE were suggested for watchful waiting during pregnancy and LMWH or a VKA for six weeks after childbirth . Those with another thrombophilia but no family or personal history of VTE were suggested for watchful waiting only . Warfarin , a common VKA , can cause harm to the fetus and is not used for VTE prevention during pregnancy . 
 = = = Travelers = = = 
 The 2012 ACCP guidelines offered weak recommendations . For at @-@ risk long @-@ haul travelers — those with " previous VTE , recent surgery or trauma , active malignancy , pregnancy , estrogen use , advanced age , limited mobility , severe obesity , or known thrombophilic disorder " — suggestions included calf exercises , frequent walking , and aisle seating in airplanes to ease walking . The use of graduated compression stockings that fit below the knee and give 15 – 30 mm Hg of pressure to the ankle was suggested , while aspirin or anticoagulants were not . Compression stockings have sharply reduced the levels of asymptomatic DVT in airline passengers , but the effect on symptomatic VTE is unknown , as none of the individuals studied developed symptomatic VTE . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 = = = Anticoagulation = = = 
 Anticoagulation , which prevents further coagulation but does not act directly on existing clots , is the standard treatment for DVT . Balancing risk vs. benefit is important in determining the duration of anticoagulation , and three months is generally the standard length of treatment . In those with an annual risk of VTE in excess of 9 % , as after an unprovoked episode , extended anticoagulation is a possibility . Those who finish VKA treatment after idiopathic VTE with an elevated D @-@ dimer level show an increased risk of recurrent VTE ( about 9 % vs. about 4 % for normal results ) , and this result might be used in clinical decision @-@ making . Thrombophilia test results rarely play a role in the length of treatment . 
 For acute cases in the leg , the ACCP recommended a parenteral anticoagulant ( such as LMWH , fondaparinux , or unfractionated heparin ) for at least five days and a VKA , the oral anticoagulant , the same day . LMWH and fondaparinux are suggested over unfractionated heparin , but both are retained in those with compromised kidney function , unlike unfractionated heparin . The VKA is generally taken for a minimum of three months to maintain an international normalized ratio of 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 , with 2 @.@ 5 as the target . The benefit of taking a VKA declines as the duration of treatment extends , and the risk of bleeding increases with age . 
 The ACCP recommended treatment for three months in those with proximal DVT provoked by surgery . A three @-@ month course is also recommended for those with proximal DVT provoked by a transient risk factor , and three months is suggested over lengthened treatment when bleeding risk is low to moderate . <unk> DVT patients should have at least three months of anticoagulation and be considered for extended treatment . Those whose first VTE is an unprovoked proximal DVT are suggested for anticoagulation longer than three months unless there is a high risk of bleeding . In that case , three months is sufficient . Those with a second unprovoked VTE are recommended for extended treatment when bleeding risk is low , suggested for extended treatment when bleeding risk is moderate , and suggested for three months of anticoagulation in high @-@ risk scenarios . 
 = = = Home treatment , stockings , walking , and repeat imaging = = = 
 The ACCP recommended initial home treatment instead of hospital treatment for those with acute leg DVT . This applies as long as individuals feel ready for it , and those with severe leg symptoms or comorbidities would not qualify . An appropriate home environment is expected : one that can provide a quick return to the hospital if necessary , support from family or friends , and phone access . 
 In addition to anticoagulation , the ACCP suggested graduated compression stockings — which apply higher pressure ( 30 – 40 mm Hg ) at the ankles and a lower pressure around the knees — for those with symptomatic DVT . Use should begin as soon as possible after anticoagulation . Evidence however does not support that these stockings reduce the risk of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome nor do they indicate a reduction in recurrent VTE . Use is suggested for two years , though inconvenience and discomfort can reduce compliance . Walking is also suggested for those without severe pain or edema . 
 Unless a person has medical problems preventing movement , after a person starts anti @-@ coagulation therapy bed rest should not be used to treat acute deep vein thrombosis . There are clinical benefits associated with walking and no evidence that walking is harmful , but people with DVT are harmed by bed rest except when it is medically necessary . 
 Instead of anticoagulation , a follow @-@ up imaging test ( typically ultrasound ) about one @-@ week post @-@ diagnosis is an option for those with an acute isolated distal DVT without a high risk for extension ; if the clot does not grow , the ACCP does not recommend anticoagulation . This technique can benefit those at a high risk for bleeding . Patients may choose anticoagulation over serial imaging , however , to avoid the inconvenience of another scan if concerns about the risk of bleeding are insignificant . When applied to symptomatic patients with a negative initial ultrasound result , serial testing is inefficient and not cost effective . 
 = = = IVC filters , thrombolysis , and thrombectomy = = = 
 Inferior vena cava filters ( IVC filters ) are used on the presumption that they reduce PE , although their effectiveness and safety profile are not well established . In general , they are only recommended in some high risk scenarios . The ACCP recommended them for those with a contraindication to anticoagulant treatment but not in addition to anticoagulation , unless an individual with an IVC filter but without a risk for bleeding develops acute proximal DVT . In this case , both anticoagulation and an IVC filter are suggested . NICE recommends <unk> filters in settings where someone with an acute proximal DVT or PE cannot receive anticoagulation , and that the filter is removed when anticoagulation can be safely started . While IVC filters themselves are associated with a long @-@ term risk of DVT , they are not reason enough to maintain extended anticoagulation . 
 Thrombolysis is the administration of an enzyme ( intravenous or directly into the affected vein through a catheter ) , which acts to enzymatically break up clots . This may reduce the risk of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome by a third , and possibly reduce the risk of leg ulcers , but is associated with an increased risk of bleeding . The ACCP currently suggests anticoagulation rather than thrombolysis , but patients may choose thrombolysis if prevention of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome outweighs concerns over the complexity , bleeding risk , and cost of the procedure . NICE recommends that thrombolysis is considered in those who have had symptoms for less than two weeks , are normally well , have a good life expectancy and a low risk of bleeding . 
 A mechanical thrombectomy device can remove venous clots , although the ACCP considers it an option only when the following conditions apply : " iliofemoral DVT , symptoms for < 7 days ( criterion used in the single randomized trial ) , good functional status , life expectancy of ≥ 1 year , and both resources and expertise are available . " Anticoagulation alone is suggested over thrombectomy . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The most frequent complication of proximal DVT is post @-@ thrombotic syndrome , which is caused by a reduction in the return of venous blood to the heart . Some symptoms of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome are pain , edema , paresthesia , and in severe cases , leg ulcers . An estimated 20 – 50 % of those with DVT will develop it , and 5 – 10 % will develop the severe form . PE is the most serious complication of proximal DVT , and the risk of PE is higher when clots are present in the thigh and pelvis . <unk> DVT itself is hardly if ever associated with post @-@ thrombotic syndrome or PE . Untreated lower extremity DVT has a 3 % PE @-@ related mortality rate , while deaths associated with upper extremity DVT are extremely rare . The presence of a remaining thrombus after a DVT frequently occurs in a minority of people , and it increases the risk of recurrence , though to a lesser extent than an elevated D @-@ dimer . In the 10 years following a VTE , approximately a third of individuals will have a recurrent episode . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 About 1 in 1000 adults per year has DVT , but as of 2011 , available data is dominated by North American and European populations . VTE is rare in children , with an incidence of about 1 in 100 @,@ 000 a year . From childhood to old age , incidence increases by a factor of about 1000 , with almost 1 % of the elderly experiencing VTE yearly . During pregnancy and after childbirth , acute VTE occurs about once per 1000 deliveries . After surgery with preventative treatment , VTE develops in about 10 of 1000 people after total or partial knee replacement , and in about 5 of 1000 after total or partial hip replacement . About 300 @,@ 000 – 600 @,@ 000 Americans develop VTE each year , with about 60 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 deaths attributable to PE . In England , an estimated 25 @,@ 000 a year die from hospital @-@ related VTE . For unclear reasons , people of Asian descent have a lower VTE risk than whites . 
 In North American and European populations , around 4 – 8 % of people have a thrombophilia , most commonly factor V <unk> and prothrombin G20210A . For populations in China , Japan , and Thailand , <unk> in protein S , protein C , and antithrombin predominate . Non @-@ O blood type is present in around 50 % of the general population and varies with ethnicity , and it is present in about 70 % of those with VTE . Altogether , global data is incomplete . 
 = = Economics = = 
 Initial DVT costs for an average hospitalized patient in the U.S. are around $ 7 @,@ 700 – $ 10 @,@ 800 . VTE follow @-@ up costs at three months , six months , and a year are about $ 5 @,@ 000 , $ 10 @,@ 000 , and $ 33 @,@ 000 respectively ; in Europe , the three and six @-@ month figures are about € 1 @,@ 800 and € 3 @,@ 200 . Post @-@ thrombotic syndrome is a significant contributor to DVT follow @-@ up costs . Annual DVT costs in the U.S. are an estimated $ 5 billion or in excess of $ 8 billion , and the average annual cost per treated individual is thought to be about $ 20 @,@ 000 . As an example , if 300 @,@ 000 symptomatic DVT patients were treated at costs averaging $ 20 @,@ 000 annually , that would cost $ 6 billion a year . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest case of DVT was described by Sushruta in his book Sushruta Samhita around 600 – 900 BC . Another documented case is thought to have occurred in the 13th century , in the leg of a 20 @-@ year @-@ old male . At some point , the increased incidence of DVT in women after childbirth was noticed , and in the late 1700s , a public health recommendation was issued to encourage women to breastfeed as a means to prevent this phenomenon ; the DVT was called " milk leg " , as it was thought to result from milk building up in the leg . 
 In 1856 , German physician and pathologist Rudolf Virchow published what is referred to as Virchow 's triad , the three major causes of thrombosis . The triad provides the theoretical framework for the current explanation of venous thrombosis , although it was focused on the effect of a foreign body in the venous system and the conditions required for clot propagation . 
 Multiple pharmacological therapies for DVT were introduced in the 20th century : oral anticoagulants in the 1940s , subcutaneous <unk> in 1962 and subcutaneous LMWH in 1982 . Diagnoses were commonly performed by impedance <unk> in the 1970s and 1980s , but the use of Doppler ultrasound techniques , with their increased sensitivity and specificity , largely superseded this method . 
 = = Research directions = = 
 As of 2011 , three large randomized controlled trials — the Norwegian <unk> trial , the North American <unk> trial , and the Dutch <unk> trial — are studying the effectiveness and safety of catheter @-@ directed thrombolysis . In 2012 , two studies found a clinical benefit in taking aspirin to prevent recurrent VTE . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 = Dan Bain = 
 Donald Henderson " Dan " Bain ( February 14 , 1874 – August 15 , 1962 ) was a Canadian amateur athlete and merchant . Though he competed in and excelled in numerous sports , Bain is most notable for his ice hockey career . While a member of the Winnipeg Victorias hockey team , with whom he played for from 1894 until 1902 , Bain helped the team win the Stanley Cup thrice as champions of Canada . A skilled athlete , Bain won championships and medals in several other sports , and was the Canadian trapshooting champion in 1903 . In recognition of his play , Bain was inducted into multiple halls of fame , including the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1949 , and was also voted Canada 's top athlete of the last half of the 19th century . 
 In his professional life Bain was a prominent Winnipeg businessman and community leader . He became wealthy as a result of operating Donald H. Bain Limited , a grocery brokerage firm . Bain was an active member of numerous community associations , the president of the Winnipeg Winter Club and an avid outdoorsman . The Mallard Lodge , a building on the shores of Lake Manitoba built by Bain as a personal retreat , today serves as a research facility for the University of Manitoba . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of Scottish immigrants , Bain was born in Belleville , Ontario and moved with his family to Winnipeg , Manitoba , as a young child . His father , James Henderson Bain , was a horse buyer for the British government and upon his arrival in Canada lived in Montreal before moving west . His mother , Helen Miller , was a seamstress . Bain was the sixth of seven children , having four sisters and two brothers . 
 = = Sporting career = = 
 Bain 's first championship came in 1887 when he captured the Manitoba roller skating championship at the age of 13 by winning the three @-@ mile race . At the age of 17 he won the provincial gymnastics competition , and at 20 he won the first of three consecutive Manitoba cycling championships . In addition Bain was a top lacrosse player in his home province . 
 In 1895 Bain first played competitive ice hockey when he answered a classified ad placed in a newspaper by the Winnipeg Victorias , who were looking for new players . Though he played with a broken stick held together by wire , he made the team five minutes into his tryout . Bain quickly became a star centre and leader for the Victorias . This was exemplified during a February 14 , 1896 game against the Montreal Victorias for the Stanley Cup , given to the national hockey champion in Canada . It was a 2 – 0 victory for Winnipeg that gave them the Cup . This victory marked the first time a team outside of Quebec had won the trophy . The team was greeted by a huge crowd at the Canadian Pacific Railway station when their train , decorated with hockey sticks and the Union Jack , returned to Winnipeg . They were led to a feast in their honour in a parade of open sleighs as fans gathered to celebrate the championship . 
 The Montreal Victorias played Winnipeg in a challenge to reclaim the Cup in December 1896 , a game described by the local press as " the greatest sporting event in the history of Winnipeg " . Though Bain scored two goals in the game , Montreal recaptured the Cup with a 6 – 5 victory . Winnipeg was involved in numerous further Stanley Cup challenges with Bain serving as the team 's captain and manager . They again lost to their Montreal counterparts in 1898 before a record crowd of over 7 @,@ 000 fans . 
 During a 1900 challenge series against the Montreal Shamrocks Bain scored four goals in three games , but Winnipeg again lost the title . The Victorias challenged the Shamrocks again in 1901 in a best @-@ of @-@ three series . Winnipeg won the series in two games after Bain scored the clinching goal in overtime . It was the first time in Stanley Cup history that the winning goal was scored in extra time . Bain did so while playing with a broken nose that required him to wear a wooden face mask , earning the nickname " the masked man " as a result . When the Victorias defended their title in a series against the Toronto Wellingtons in January 1902 , Bain did not play in the series . The team lost their next challenge , against the Montreal Hockey Club , in March of that year , which marked the end of Bain 's hockey career . 
 Throughout his sporting career , Bain also earned medals in lacrosse and snowshoeing . He was the Canadian trapshooting champion in 1903 . An avid figure skater throughout much of his life , Bain won over a dozen titles , the last of which came at the age of 56 , and he continued to skate until the age of 70 ; he remained a competitive athlete until 1930 . On his skill in a variety of sports , Bain once said that " I couldn 't see any sense in participating in a game unless I was good . I kept at a sport just long enough to nab a championship , then I 'd try something else . " 
 In recognition of his sporting skill , Bain was inducted into several halls of fame . The first came in 1949 when he was elected a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame . This was followed in 1971 with his induction into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame , the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1981 , and the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame . He was also voted as Canada 's top sportsman of the last half of the 19th century . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Outside of sports , Bain was a well known businessman in Winnipeg . He served as the president of Donald H. Bain Limited , a grocery brokerage firm headquartered in Winnipeg and operated in numerous cities . It was through his firm that he amassed a large fortune . Known as a community leader , he helped found the Winnipeg Winter Club on land that is now the HMCS Chippawa naval reserve division , and after World War II he organized the current Winter Club . Bain also belonged to many community groups and was the life governor of the Winnipeg General Hospital . He was also one of Western Canada 's first automobile enthusiasts and owned many British vehicles . 
 As a result of his trap @-@ shooting career , Bain developed an appreciation for nature . He bought an ownership share of the Portage Country Club , on the Delta Marsh near the south shore of Lake Manitoba , and later donated the land to Ducks Unlimited . Bain built the Mallard Lodge as a personal retreat on land adjacent to the club . He strictly enforced his privacy , even building a road to his lodge that he allowed no one else to use ; members of the Portage Country Club were required to take a different route . Bain intended to donate his lodge to the government of Manitoba for preservation , though he died before he could do so . The lodge passed into the control of the government regardless , and was donated to the University of Manitoba as a research facility in 1966 that remains active today . Bain was also a member of the Manitoba Game and Fish Association and the Winnipeg Humane Society . 
 Bain never married and had no children . He was fond of his pets , in particular his Curly Coated Retriever dogs that he was said to value above human company . On August 15 , 1962 Bain died in Winnipeg , aged 88 . He left behind an estate in excess of C $ 1 million , ( $ 7 @.@ 97 million in 2016 dollars ) , the majority of which he donated to charity and former employees . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Landing at Scarlet Beach = 
 The Landing at Scarlet Beach ( Operation <unk> ) ( 22 September 1943 ) took place in New Guinea during the Huon Peninsula campaign of the Second World War , involving forces from Australia , the United States and Japan . Allied forces landed at Scarlet Beach , north of Siki Cove and south of the Song River , to the east of Katika and about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) north of Finschhafen . The capture of Finschhafen allowed the construction of air base and naval facilities to assist Allied air and naval forces to conduct operations against Japanese bases in New Guinea and New Britain . 
 After Lae had fallen sooner than the Allies had anticipated , they exploited the advantage . As a result of faulty intelligence , which underestimated the size of the Japanese force in the area , the assault force chosen consisted of only Brigadier Victor Windeyer 's 20th Infantry Brigade . The landing at Scarlet Beach that took place on 22 September 1943 was the first opposed amphibious landing that Australian forces had made since the Landing at Anzac Cove in the Gallipoli Campaign of 1915 . Navigational errors resulted in the troops being landed on the wrong beach , with some of them coming ashore at Siki Cove and taking heavy fire from the strong Japanese defences in pillboxes . After re @-@ organising , the Australians pushed inland . The Japanese put up stiff resistance on the high ground at Katika , but were forced back . By the end of the day , the Australians had secured their objectives . The Japanese launched a retaliatory air raid on the ships of the VII Amphibious Force , but US fighter aircraft defended the convoy and no ships were hit . Continued Japanese air attacks on the beachhead inflicted numerous casualties over the course of the battle . 
 The next day the Australians commenced their advance south towards the village of Finschhafen , about 5 @.@ 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 0 km ) south of the landing beach , with the 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion leading the way to the Bumi River . The Japanese had established strong defences along the river 's southern bank , which the Australians attempted to outflank by sending a force to the west , climbing through steep terrain . Once they had located a suitable place to cross the river , they began wading across but were fired upon by a group of Japanese naval infantry who were positioned on a high feature overlooking the river . Despite taking casualties , the Australians were able to establish themselves south of the Bumi and at that point the 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion began to advance on Finschhafen from the west . Meanwhile , the 2 / 15th attacked the left flank of the Japanese that had opposed their crossing . After advancing up the steep slope under fire , sometimes on their hands and knees , the 2 / 15th took the position at the point of the bayonet , killing 52 Japanese in close combat . 
 Australian fears of a Japanese counter @-@ attack grew and they requested reinforcements from General Douglas MacArthur . The request was denied as his intelligence staff believed that there were only 350 Japanese in the vicinity . Actually , there were already 5 @,@ 000 Japanese around Sattelberg and Finschhafen . The Australians received some reinforcements in the shape of the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion . The arrival of this unit meant that the entire 20th Infantry Brigade could concentrate on Finschhafen . The Japanese naval troops which were holding Finschhafen began to withdraw and Finschhafen fell to the Australians on 2 October . The 20th Infantry Brigade then linked up with the 22nd Infantry Battalion , a Militia infantry battalion that had cleared the coastal area in the south of the Huon Peninsula , advancing from Lae over the mountains . The Japanese withdrew into the mountains around Sattelberg . 
 = = Strategy = = 
 = = = Allied = = = 
 At the Pacific Military Conference in Washington , D.C. , in March 1943 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved plans by General Douglas MacArthur , the Supreme Commander , South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , for an advance on the Japanese base at Rabaul . On 13 June 1943 , MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) in Brisbane instructed General Sir Thomas Blamey 's New Guinea Force to 
 ... seize the Lae @-@ Salamaua @-@ Finschhafen @-@ Markham River Valley area and establish major elements of the [ Air Force ] therein to provide from the Markham Valley area general and direct air support of subsequent operations in northern New Guinea and western New Britain , and to control Vitiaz Strait and protect the north @-@ western flank of subsequent operations in western New Britain . 
 Following the successful seaborne landing at Lae and airborne landing at Nadzab , Salamaua , Lae , and the Markham River Valley were all in Allied hands by 16 September 1943 . Blamey then turned his attention to his next objective : Finschhafen . 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 The bombing of Wewak , in which 100 Japanese aircraft were lost in August 1943 , caused Imperial General Headquarters ( IGHQ ) in Tokyo to reconsider whether Eastern New Guinea and the Solomon Islands could be held . Concluding that it could not , IGHQ authorised the commander of the Japanese Eighth Area Army to conduct a fighting withdrawal to a new defensive position in Western New Guinea , which it hoped would be ready in 1944 . 
 Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi , the commander of the Japanese XVIII Army in New Guinea , recognised the importance of the Finschhafen area , and had placed Major General <unk> Yamada , the commander of the 1st Shipping Group , in charge of defending it . To strengthen the defences there , Adachi ordered the 80th Infantry Regiment and a battalion of field artillery from the 20th Division at Madang to move to Finschhafen on 7 August 1943 . The headquarters , artillery , and heavy weapons departed Bogadjim on 15 August , and travelled by sea , but the remainder marched along the coast . 
 On 26 August , he assigned the 2nd Battalion , 238th Infantry Regiment , part of the 41st Division , which was in the area en route to join the rest of the 238th Infantry Regiment at Salamaua , to remain in the Finschhafen area under Yamada 's command . The landing at Lae on 4 September made an Australian advance on Finschhafen appear imminent , and Adachi ordered the rest of the 20th Division , less the Nakai detachment in the Markham Valley , to move to Finschhafen . The main body , under Lieutenant General Shigeru Katagiri , left Bogadjim bound for Finschhafen on 10 September , but was not expected to arrive before October . In the event of an Allied attack before he arrived , Yamada was to hold the high ground around Sattelberg and prepare for a counter @-@ attack . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Huon Peninsula is situated along the north @-@ east coast of Papua New Guinea , and stretches from Lae in the south on the Huon Gulf to Sio in the north along the Vitiaz Strait . Along the coast , between these two points , numerous rivers and streams cut the terrain . Of these , the most prominent are the Song , Bumi , and Mape Rivers . These waterways flow from the mountainous interior , which is formed through the conglomeration of the Rawlinson Range in the south , with the Cromwell Mountains in the east . These meet in the centre of the peninsula to form the Saruwaged Range massif , which joins the Finisterre Range further west . Apart from a thin , flat coastal strip , at the time of the campaign , the area was thickly covered with dense jungle , through which very few tracks had been cut . 
 During planning , the Allies identified three areas as key and decisive terrain in the area : the beach north of Katika , which was later codenamed " Scarlet " by the Allies , the 3 @,@ 150 @-@ foot ( 960 m ) high peak called Sattelberg 5 miles ( 8 km ) to the south west , which dominated the area due to its height , and Finschhafen , possessing a small airfield and sitting on the coast in a bay which offered protected harbour facilities . Before the war , the town had a population of about 30 white and 60 native people . There were good anchorages for vessels of up to 5 @,@ 000 tons in Dreger Harbour , Langemak Bay , and Finsch Harbour . The flat coastal strip provided a number of potential airfield sites . German names abounded in the area because the Territory of New Guinea was a German colony from 1884 until it was occupied by Australia in 1914 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Allied estimates of the number of Japanese troops in the Finschhafen area varied . Brigadier General Charles A. Willoughby , the Assistant Chief of Staff ( G @-@ 2 ) , and therefore the head of the intelligence branch at MacArthur 's GHQ , considered Finschhafen to be primarily a transhipment point , and the troops there to be mainly from line of communication units . The fall of Lae ended its utility , so he reduced his estimate of the number of Japanese troops in the area to 350 . Based on this appreciation , GHQ believed that Finschhafen would be a " pushover " . 
 There was reason to believe otherwise . A ten @-@ man Allied Intelligence Bureau patrol that included three Australian officers , an American amphibian scout from the US Army 's 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment , a signaller from Z Special Unit , and native soldiers , was landed during the night of 11 / 12 September in rubber boats launched from two PT boats . The scouts were unable to obtain the hydrographic information they sought due to Japanese patrols in the area . A number of machine @-@ gun nests were identified during their reconnaissance of the enemy positions before they were extracted on 14 September . 
 As had happened during the Kokoda Track campaign and the Battle of Buna – Gona , estimates by Australian intelligence differed greatly from those at GHQ , as they used different methods . The intelligence staff at Blamey 's Allied Land Forces Headquarters ( LHQ ) , headed by Brigadier J. D. Rogers , had come up with a much higher figure of 3 @,@ 000 . I Corps produced an estimate of 1 @,@ 800 , which was passed on along with GHQ 's estimate . The Allies ' best source of intelligence , Ultra , shone no light on the matter . Finschhafen was mentioned in only five decrypted messages in the previous three months . Most of these were in the insecure Japanese Water Transport Code . Only after the capture of Japanese codebooks in the Battle of Sio in January 1944 were the Allies able to systematically break into the Japanese Army codes . In fact , Japanese strength in the area on 22 September was about 5 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Two contingency plans had been prepared by Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring 's I Corps . One was a ship @-@ to @-@ shore operation by the 6th Division 's 16th Infantry Brigade or the 7th Infantry Brigade , a Militia formation at Milne Bay ; the other was for a shore @-@ to @-@ shore operation by a brigade of Major General George Wootten 's 9th Division . The operation was codenamed " <unk> " , which was in fact that of Finschhafen itself . In the plan produced by I Corps on 24 August 1943 , Herring selected beaches immediately south of the Song River for the landing . Indications were that it was suitable for landing craft . Most of the Japanese defenders and defences were believed to be facing south in anticipation of an Australian overland advance from Lae . It avoided having to cross the Mape River , which was believed to be a significant obstacle . The landing beach became known as Scarlet Beach from the post @-@ landing red screens and lights used to guide landing craft . The left end of the beach was marked with a solid red panel mounted on tent poles , the right with one alternating red and white . At night , the left would have a red light , and the right one alternating red and white . This scheme had first been used at Red Beach during the landing at Lae . To avoid confusion of having two Red Beaches , the landing beach was called Scarlet Beach instead . 
 On 16 September , the day Lae fell , MacArthur ordered that Finschhafen be captured as soon as possible . The following day he held a conference at Port Moresby . He and Blamey selected the second contingency , a landing by a brigade of the 9th Division . Brigadier Victor Windeyer 's 20th Infantry Brigade was chosen as it was still relatively fresh , and had experience with amphibious operations from the landing at Lae . The 6th Division 's movement to New Guinea was postponed . Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey , the commander of the VII Amphibious Force , had originally counted on four weeks break between the fall of Lae and the Finschhafen operation . On 9 September , he had told Herring that it would require a minimum of ten days . Under pressure from MacArthur , Barbey cut that to three days . This was too soon for Herring to get the troops together , and 21 September was selected as the target date . Herring briefed Windeyer on the operation on 18 September . Windeyer felt that the schedule was still too tight , and it was postponed one more day to 22 September . 
 As at Lae , the first wave , consisting of two companies each from the 2 / 13th and 2 / 7th Infantry Battalions , would land in plywood LCP ( R ) s launched by the four destroyer transports , the USS Brooks , Gilmer , Humphreys , and Sands . The remainder of the assault would land in six LSTs , 15 LCIs , and six LCTs of the VII Amphibious Force , and 10 LCMs and 15 LCVPs of the 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment . The total force would number about 5 @,@ 300 . The 9th Division would be limited to taking 15 days ' supplies . One of the lessons of the Lae operation was the need for a naval beach party to take soundings , mark the beaches and channels , and handle communications between ship and shore . US Navy doctrine held that these should be composed of personnel drawn from the attack transports , but none were involved in the Lae or Finschhafen operations . For Finschhafen , an eight @-@ man Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) Beach Party was organised under Lieutenant Commander J. M. Band . 
 A set of oblique aerial photographs of Scarlet Beach were taken on 19 September by the USAAF 's 8th Photo Reconnaissance Squadron , the only unit in SWPA with the equipment to take them , that showed a shallow sand bar along the southern half of the beach , rendering it unsuitable for landing craft . This left beaching space for only three LSTs . The landing plan was changed so only three of the six LSTs would beach with the initial assault , the other three returning to Buna , and arriving on the beach at 23 : 00 that night . Herring considered that spreading the LST arrivals might make unloading easier . Wootten noted that this would mean that one battery of 25 @-@ pounders , one light antiaircraft battery , a quarter of the engineer stores , and the casualty clearing station would have to arrive with the second group . Ironically , soundings taken by the RAN Beach Party after the landing revealed that the " sand bar " was actually a white shingle bottom , and in fact the beach was ideally suited to LST operations . 
 The main point of disagreement between Herring and Barbey concerned the timing of the landing . Barbey and the Commander of Allied Naval Forces , Vice Admiral Arthur S. Carpender , did not want a repeat of what happened at Lae , when two LCIs were lost and two LSTs were badly damaged . Although the USAAF and RAAF attacked Japanese air bases in New Britain , this did not stop nine Japanese bombers and 10 fighters attacking Nadzab on 20 September . Moreover , some 23 Japanese warships were sighted in the harbour at Rabaul , and there were reports of Japanese submarines in the area . Accordingly , Barbey proposed landing at 02 : 00 under a quarter moon , which would allow his ships to unload and get away soon after dawn . Noting that it was the rainy season , and the sky would therefore likely be overcast , Herring doubted that the VII Amphibious Force would be able to locate the beach , and pressed for a dawn landing at 05 : 15 . In the end , a compromise was reached on 04 : 45 . Samuel Eliot Morison , the US Naval historian , noted that : " The Australians proved to be right ; ' Uncle Dan 's ' outfit was not prepared for a neat night landing . The usual snafu developed " . 
 = = Landing = = 
 = = = First wave = = = 
 USS <unk> @-@ 15 produced 140 mimeograph copies of the VII Amphibious Force operation order , which was distributed by PT boat . They then departed for G Beach , 14 miles ( 23 km ) east of Lae . While they were en route during the night , a Japanese raid on Buna sank an LCS ( S ) , and damaged a dock and two merchant ships ; nine people were killed and 27 wounded . USS LCI @-@ 31 developed engine trouble , and was forced to return to Buna . This left A Company of the 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion without its transport . The battalion commander , Lieutenant Colonel G. E. Colvin , arranged for them to travel on USS LCI @-@ 337 , LCI @-@ 338 , and LCI @-@ 342 . Around sunset , six Sally bombers attacked the escorting destroyers . They dropped their bombs but scored no hits . 
 The ships arrived off Scarlet beach on time , and the destroyers conducted a short 11 @-@ minute preliminary bombardment . It was doubtful if any Japanese positions were hit or any casualties inflicted . Low cloud trapped the smoke and dust produced by the bombardment . To the Australians , it was " dark as the inside of a cow " . Scarlet Beach and Siki Cove were covered by bunker @-@ type pillboxes made of logs , spaced about 50 yards ( 46 m ) apart , and connected by shallow trenches . They held about 300 Japanese defenders . Japanese tracer fire started pouring from the shore . At this point , one Australian recalled " I realised that this was not an unopposed landing . " It was the first opposed landing by Australian troops since the Landing at Anzac Cove in the Gallipoli Campaign of 1915 . 
 Almost all the LCP ( R ) s in the first wave veered off course to the left , landing between Siki Creek and the rocks of the headland between Siki Cove and Arndt Point . All the boats landed successfully except for one carrying 11 Platoon of the 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion , which had broken down and was towed by the LCP ( R ) carrying 10 Platoon , delaying both . Another LCP ( R ) appeared and took the platoon in . But only three of the sixteen landed on Scarlet Beach . In some ways this was good , as it meant that the plywood landing craft were not subjected to intense machine gun fire , which might have caused heavy casualties ; but there were still serious disadvantages to landing on the wrong beach . On the right , Captain T. C. Sheldon 's B Company , 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion , accompanied by the anti @-@ tank platoon and 10 Platoon the Papuan Infantry Battalion , landed roughly where they were supposed to , and pushed on to their objective , North Hill . 
 The rest of the first wave was jumbled up . Major <unk> Pike found his A Company of the 2 / 17th mixed up with Captain Paul Deschamps ' B Company of the 2 / 13th . Since the latter had further to travel , and there was no Japanese opposition , Pike agreed to hold his company back while Deschamps ' moved on to his objective . Pike then moved his men inland 100 yards ( 91 m ) and waited for daylight . C Company 's task was to seize Arndt Point , but part of it was already there , facing a steep cliff . The only platoon to encounter serious opposition was Lieutenant C. Huggett 's platoon , which had veered off to the right , and landed on Scarlet Beach near the mouth of the Song River . It came under fire from two Japanese machine gun posts there . With the help of an American Amphibian Scout , Lieutenant Herman A. <unk> , Huggett attacked the posts with grenades and small arms . Another Amphibian Scout , Lieutenant Edward K. Hammer , encountered a party of Japanese that he fired on . <unk> and Hammer were conspicuous because they were carrying the 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) red canvas signs to mark the beach . The beachmaster , Lieutenant Commander J. M. Band , was fatally wounded making his way to Scarlet Beach . He was posthumously awarded the US Navy Cross . 
 = = = Follow @-@ up = = = 
 The second wave came in LCIs . These were craft that had no ramps ; infantry disembarked from the down gangways . That they were not suitable for an assault landing was not overlooked , but they were all that was available . The first wave 's mission had been to capture Scarlet Beach and the foreshore . Since that had not been done , they came under fire from the Japanese bunkers . Despite explicit orders not to , they replied with their Oerlikon 20 mm cannon . Some helped to suppress the Japanese machine guns , while others fired wildly and caused casualties among the Australian troops ashore . Like the first wave , they veered off to the left , adding to the chaos . At least three of the LCIs grounded on a sand bar , but were able to retract and make better landings , although still on the wrong beach . 
 The Military Landing Officer , Major J. R. Broadbent landed with the first wave in the same LCP ( R ) as Pike . With him was an Amphibian Scout carrying the red signal light that was to mark the centre of the beach for later waves . They were unable to reach the correct location in time for the second wave , but were able to place it and switch it on in time for the third , so it was the first to land on Scarlet Beach . Although the first wave had landed seven minutes late , the second was fifteen , and the third was half an hour behind schedule . In the confusion , two LCIs collided , killing two soldiers and injuring eight . Some of the LCI captains were reluctant to drive their ships in hard enough , and many troops disembarked into water that was over their heads . Sergeant <unk> <unk> , of the Royal Papuan Constabulary , landing with 9 Platoon of the Papuan Infantry Battalion , was awarded the George Medal for attempting to save Captain A. B. <unk> , who was hit in deep water . The third wave found the Japanese bunkers still manned , and assaulted them . Most of the Japanese defenders withdrew rather than fight to the finish . 
 Four LCMs of Lieutenant Colonel E. D. Brockett 's Boat Battalion of the 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment carrying Bofors 40 mm guns were supposed to arrive with the second wave , but due to some navigational difficulties , they were an hour late . They came in with the six LCMs and four LCVPs of the fourth wave , which was itself 40 minutes late , arriving at 06 : 10 . The 11 LCVPs of the fifth wave reached the Scarlet Beach ten minutes later . By 06 : 30 , the beach and the foreshore were clear of Japanese , and the destroyer transports and LCIs were on their way back to Buna . The amphibian engineers set up a portable surgical hospital to treat the wounded . Windeyer and his brigade major , Major B. V. Wilson , arrived in a landing craft from the destroyer USS Conyngham , and he established brigade headquarters in a Kunai patch 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the beach . A Japanese soldier threw a hand grenade at them that killed one man and wounded the brigade intelligence officer , Captain Barton Maughan . The Japanese soldier was killed with an Owen gun . 
 The sixth and final wave consisted of USS LST @-@ 18 , LST @-@ 168 , and LST @-@ 204 . They had instructions to wait until the smaller craft had cleared the beach , and beached at 06 : 50 . Each carried an unloading party of 100 men , drawn from the 2 / 23rd and 2 / 48th Infantry Battalions , and 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion , who would return with the LSTs . The unloading proceeded at a rapid pace . All the cargo was unloaded from two of the three when they retracted at 09 : 30 , and headed off escorted by ten destroyers and the fleet tug USS Sonoma . The 2 / 3rd Field Company , 2 / 1st Mechanical Equipment Company , 2 / 3rd Pioneer Battalion , and the Shore Battalion of the 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment prepared four beach exits . Stores were quickly moved off the beach to inland dumps . Some 5 @,@ 300 troops , 180 vehicles , 32 25 @-@ pounders and Bofors 40 mm guns , and 850 measurement tons ( 960 m3 ) of bulk stores had been unloaded . 
 Fifth Air Force fighters provided air cover from 06 : 45 . A Japanese reconnaissance aircraft flew over the beachhead at 09 : 10 , and was shot down . A lone bomber showed up ten minutes later and attacked the LSTs on the beach , but missed . Two dive bombers attacked at 09 : 30 , and were driven off , but not before inflicting casualties . The Bofors guns of the 10th Light Anti Aircraft Battery were attacked , and five men were wounded , one fatally . Over the next two weeks there was at least one air raid on the beachhead every day . The air raids proved an effective way of clearing the beach . A large attack by 39 aircraft of the 4th Air Army ran into bad weather and had to return to Wewak , but a naval air forces attack with 38 Zeke fighters and eight Betty bombers found the LSTs and destroyers near the Tami Islands on their way back to Buna at 12 : 40 . The fighter cover was being changed over , so the Fifth Air Force fighter controller on board the destroyer USS Reid could deploy five squadrons instead of just three . They claimed to have shot down 29 fighters and 10 bombers . Antiaircraft gunners from the destroyers , LSTs , and Sonoma also engaged the bombers . While torpedo wakes were seen , no hits were suffered . Three Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning fighters were shot down , but at least one pilot was rescued . The Japanese pilots claimed to have sunk two cruisers , two destroyers , and two transports . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 A shortage of 9 mm ammunition for the Owen Guns was discovered , apparently because the ammunition was in the LST that had not been completely unloaded . An emergency airdrop was requested at 10 : 30 . In Port Moresby , the 1st Air Maintenance Company prepared 30 parachutes , each attached to two boxes containing 2 @,@ 560 rounds of 9 mm ammunition , a total of 153 @,@ 600 rounds . This was loaded onto three USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers at Wards Airfield that took off at 16 : 55 . They arrived over the Finschhafen area after dark at 19 : 15 , where a drop zone in a Kunai patch was marked by men holding hand torches . Of the 115 @,@ 000 rounds that were dropped , about 112 @,@ 000 were recovered . 
 Around daybreak , Pike 's A Company , 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion , reached the village of Katika , which turned out to be a clearing with some dilapidated huts . His company came under fire from Katika Spur , the high ground to the west , which was strongly held by the 9th Company , 80th Infantry Regiment and a company of the 238th Infantry Regiment . The Japanese attempted to outflank A Company on its left , but ran into Capitan L. Snell 's D Company , 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion . 
 The Japanese positions were well @-@ sited on the spur for an attack from the east along the track from Katika to Sattelberg , but at this point , Captain B. G. Cribb , the commander of D Company , 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion , came on the radio and announced that he was in contact with the Japanese to the west , and was going to attack from that direction . A furious fight ensured . The Japanese held their fire until the Australians were almost on top of them . Realising that the position was stronger than he had thought , Cribb withdrew after suffering eight dead and twenty wounded . Windeyer ordered the 2 / 17th to bypass the position and proceed to its objective , the high ground south of the Song River . The 2 / 15th was ordered to attack Katika Spur . The attack was delivered at 15 : 15 after a preliminary bombardment by 3 inch mortars , but the Japanese defenders had withdrawn , leaving behind eight dead . By nightfall , most of the brigade was on their objectives . 
 The seventh wave , made up of USS LST @-@ 67 , LST @-@ 452 , and LST @-@ 454 , arrived at Scarlet Beach at midnight . As with the previous wave , each carried an Australian labour force which unloaded the LSTs under the direction of the Shore Battalion . The LSTs retracted at 03 : 00 in order to be well clear before dawn . During the first day , Australian casualties were 20 killed , 65 wounded , and nine missing , all of whom were eventually found to be either dead or wounded . The VII Amphibious Force reported that three men had been wounded . 
 = = Reinforcement = = 
 Blamey relinquished command of New Guinea Force on 22 September , handing over to Lieutenant General Sir Iven Mackay . As one of his final actions before returning to LHQ in Brisbane , Blamey instructed Herring to arrange for the reinforcement of Finschhafen with an extra brigade and 9th Division Headquarters . That day , though , MacArthur , who also returned to Brisbane on 24 September , had issued an instruction that operations at Finschhafen were " to be so conducted as to avoid commitment of amphibious means beyond those allotted " . Barbey therefore declined to arrange for the reinforcement of Finschhafen . Mackay took up the matter with Carpender , who likewise demurred . MacArthur feared that committing additional resources would tie them up , and perhaps result in losses , that would delay upcoming operations , relinquishing the initiative to the Japanese . Ironically , the delay in reinforcing Finschhafen would cause just that . 
 Windeyer sent a signal on 27 September asking for another infantry battalion and a squadron of tanks , and Carpender agreed to ship the additional battalion . The following day Herring flew to Milne Bay to confer with Barbey about this . On takeoff from Dobodura , the B @-@ 25 Mitchell he was travelling in crashed . A flying fragment killed his chief of staff , Brigadier R. B. Sutherland , instantly . Everyone else on board escaped shaken but unscathed . The meeting was cancelled . Willoughby still clung to his original estimate of 350 Japanese in the Finschhafen area , but MacArthur authorised the extra battalion . It was arranged that the first LST departing Lae on the night of 28 / 29 September would stop at G Beach and collect the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion and a platoon of the 2 / 13th Field Company , a total of 838 men . They were taken to Buna where they transferred to the destroyer transports USS Brooks , Gilmer , and Humphreys . The next night they made a run to Scarlet Beach . The troops were landed and 134 wounded were taken back , but surf conditions prevented the most seriously wounded from being evacuated . 
 While the 20th Infantry Brigade was engaged at Finschhafen , the 22nd Infantry Battalion , a Militia infantry battalion from Victoria , advanced along the coast from the Hopoi Mission Station towards Finschhafen . This advance , " constituting a minor epic in New Guinea operations " , traversed increasing difficult terrain . Supply using vehicles was impossible ; the 22nd Infantry Battalion was supplied by boats of the 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment . Stores were dropped off at advanced beaches and then carried from there by native porters . The 22nd Infantry Battalion fought a number of skirmishes against the Japanese 2nd Battalion , 80th Infantry Regiment , which was under orders to withdraw . The 22nd Infantry Battalion therefore discovered a series of well @-@ prepared and strong positions which were either unmanned or soon abandoned . Along the way two Type 41 75 mm Mountain Guns that had been disabled were found , along with the bodies of the six natives who had hauled the guns , who had been bound and shot . The battalion reached Dreger Harbour on 1 October , where it made contact with the 20th Infantry Brigade . 
 = = Advance on Finschhafen = = 
 On 23 September , Windeyer ordered an advance on Finschhafen . Lieutenant Colonel Colin Grace 's 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion reached the Bumi River at 12 : 40 . It was 15 to 20 yards ( 14 to 18 m ) wide and appeared fordable , but the banks contained barbed wire and strongly fortified Japanese positions . While Yamada was withdrawing towards Sattelberg , the Japanese marines of the 85th Garrison Unit remained in place . Yamada had no authority over the marines , and its commander , Captain Tsuzuki , saw no reason to conform to Yamada 's actions . He intended to hold Finschhafen for as long as possible . Grace ordered Major Ron Suthers to outflank the Japanese position by moving through the foothills of the <unk> Range , as previously instructed by Windeyer . While not high , these were very steep and covered in thick vegetation . 
 Suthers halted on the ridge for the night but resumed his advance in the morning , reaching the Bumi at 10 : 00 . They again found the north bank defended but the south occupied , so attempted to find a crossing 150 yards ( 140 m ) upstream . A Japanese sniper with a light machine gun killed B Company 's commander , Captain E. Christie , and Lieutenant N. <unk> . Suthers then ordered Snell to make an assault crossing with D Company . This was done at 13 : 30 , with the company crossing in waist @-@ deep water . Only one man was killed in the crossing . During the afternoon , the 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion crossed the river to the bridgehead secured by B and D Companies . 
 A large Japanese air raid at 12 : 30 by 20 fighters and 12 bombers struck the Australian positions around Launch Jetty and the Finschhafen airstrip . About 60 bombs were dropped . There were heavy casualties . The 2 / 3rd Field Company lost 14 killed and 19 wounded ; the 2 / 12th Field Regiment lost two killed and 16 wounded , and the air liaison party 's headquarters was hit , knocking out its radio set and killing Captain Ferrel , its commander . Another eight men were killed and 40 wounded in air raids on 25 September . During the night of 25 / 26 September , Japanese barges and a submarine were spotted offshore . Windeyer had to bring a company of the 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion back to protect the brigade area . 
 Meanwhile , D Company of the 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion had moved along the track to Sattelberg with the intent of capturing that position . D Company reported that Sattelberg was unoccupied , but in fact had captured Jivevenang , not Sattelberg . When the mistake was realised and it attempted to take Sattelberg , it was found to be strongly defended . D Company therefore withdrew to Jivevenang . Unfortunately , the news of the capture of Sattelberg was passed all the way up the line to GHQ in Brisbane . 
 The advance on Finschhafen continued on 26 September . Since the Salankaua Plantation was still reported to be heavily defended , Windeyer attempted to force the defenders to withdraw . He started with attacks on two hills to the south west of the plantation . B and D Companies of the 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion attacked what came to be called Snell 's Hill . It was captured in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat using bayonets . The Australians captured three 13 mm heavy machine guns and seven light machine guns , and buried the bodies of 52 dead Japanese defenders . The other feature , which came to be called Starvation Hill , was taken by C Company . However , their capture did not prompt the Japanese to leave the Salankaua Plantation . 
 Windeyer realised that he needed to capture Kakakog Ridge . Torrential rain was falling , making it difficult to resupply the forward positions , particularly Starvation Hill . On 1 October eight Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc bombers of the US 89th Bombardment Squadron attacked the Japanese positions in the Salankaua Plantation and Kakakog Ridge area at 10 : 35 , followed by ten Vultee Vengeance dive bombers of No. 24 Squadron RAAF . This was followed by twenty 25 @-@ pounders of the 2 / 12th Field Regiment firing 30 rounds per gun . 
 The attack was delivered but the assault companies were soon pinned down . " When a situation seemed desperate " , historian David Dexter noted , " the Australian Army appeared to have the knack of producing a leader of the necessary character " . Sergeant G. R. Crawford led 11 and 12 Platoons of the 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion in a bayonet charge on the Japanese positions covering <unk> Creek . Private A. J. <unk> , firing a Bren gun from the hip , silenced one of the Japanese posts causing the most trouble . He went on to silence another , but was wounded trying to take out a third . Crawford 's furious assault swept all before it . One post remained on Crawford 's left , which was attacked with 2 @-@ inch mortars and attacked by 8 Platoon . The Japanese abandoned the post and withdrew into the Salankaua Plantation . Rolfe and Crawford were awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal . The 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion lost 10 killed and 70 ; between 80 and 100 Japanese marines died . 
 The arrival of the 2 / 43rd Infantry Battalion meant that the 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion could be reassembled for the advance on Finschhafen , thus enabling the entire 20th Infantry Brigade to concentrate on that objective . On 2 October the 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion crossed the Bumi without opposition , and found the Salankaua Plantation unoccupied . In mopping up the area , it captured two Japanese stragglers and killed three . By evening Finschhafen was in Australian hands . Between 22 September and 2 October , the 20th Infantry Brigade had taken its objectives . It had lost 73 dead , 276 wounded and nine missing , all of whom were later accounted for as dead or wounded . The 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment had eight dead and 42 wounded . Two Americans were also killed in the Air Liaison Party . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 MacArthur 's decision to move swiftly against Finschhafen , coupled with Blamey 's to envelop the Japanese defences by landing at Scarlet Beach , and Yamada 's to avoid a decisive engagement that might result in the loss of all or part of his force , gave Windeyer the time and space he needed to take Finschhafen . Blamey 's objective was therefore in Allied hands ; but it was of limited use without Sattelberg . The Allied intelligence failure and subsequent dithering meant that the Japanese reinforced their position faster , and thus were able to seize the initiative . 
 The Japanese launched a counter @-@ attack on the Allied lodgement around Scarlet Beach . A three @-@ pronged action , the counter @-@ attack saw a diversionary attack to the north , while the Sugino Craft Raiding Unit attacked from the sea , and two infantry regiments assaulted the centre aiming towards the beach and the Heldsbach plantation . It had been intended that once the beachhead was overwhelmed , that the 79th and 80th Infantry Regiments would link up and then clear the Finschhafen and <unk> Bay areas ; but the assault was poorly co @-@ ordinated and failed to achieve sufficient weight to overcome the Australians , while also suffering from a lack of artillery . The seaborne assault was interdicted by US Navy PT boats , which inflicted heavy casualties , and was destroyed by Allied machine gunners on the beach . In the centre , though , the Japanese were able to break through to Siki Cove , and in the process isolated several Australian units , including those fighting on the western flank around Jivevenang , forcing the Australians to resort to air drops to keep their forces supplied . 
 While the Japanese briefly managed to force the Australians to contract their forces around the beachhead , and Japanese aircraft were able to attack the Allied ground troops around the area over three successive nights between 19 and 21 October , the attack eventually ran out of momentum on 24 October , at which point the Japanese commander , Yamada , ordered his forces to concentrate around the high ground at Sattelberg , where they planned to make further attacks . Meanwhile , the Australians prepared for an assault against the Japanese strong hold that had been established around the abandoned Lutheran mission atop the Sattelberg heights before advancing towards the Wareo plateau to cut off key Japanese lines of communication . 
 = Animal House = 
 National Lampoon 's Animal House is a 1978 American comedy film from Universal Pictures , produced by Ivan Reitman and Matty Simmons , directed by John Landis , and starring John Belushi , Tim Matheson , John Vernon , Verna Bloom , Thomas Hulce , and Donald Sutherland . The film , a direct spin @-@ off from National Lampoon magazine , is about a misfit group of fraternity members who challenge the authority of the dean of Faber College . 
 The screenplay was adapted by Douglas Kenney , Chris Miller , and Harold Ramis from stories written by Miller and published in National Lampoon magazine . The stories were based on Ramis 's experience in the Zeta Beta Tau fraternity at Washington University in St. Louis , as well as Miller 's experience in the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity at Dartmouth College , and producer Ivan Reitman 's experiences at Delta Upsilon at McMaster University in Hamilton , Ontario . Of the younger lead actors , only John Belushi was an established star , but even he had not yet appeared in a film , having gained fame mainly from his Saturday Night Live television appearances . Several of the actors who were cast as college students , including Karen Allen , Tom Hulce , and Kevin Bacon , were just beginning their film careers , although Tim Matheson had recently appeared as one of the vigilante motorcycle cops in the second Dirty Harry film , Magnum Force . 
 Upon its initial release , Animal House received generally mixed reviews from critics , but Time and Roger Ebert proclaimed it one of the year 's best . Filmed for $ 2 @.@ 8 million , it is one of the most profitable movies in history , garnering an estimated gross of more than $ 141 million in the form of theatrical rentals and home video , not including merchandising . 
 The film , along with 1977 's The Kentucky Fried Movie , also directed by Landis , was largely responsible for defining and launching the gross @-@ out genre of films , which became one of Hollywood 's staples . It is also now considered one of the greatest comedy films ever made by many fans and critics . In 2001 the United States Library of Congress deemed Animal House " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . It was No. 1 on Bravo 's " 100 Funniest Movies " . It was No. 36 on AFI 's " 100 Years ... 100 Laughs " list of the 100 best American comedies . In 2008 Empire magazine selected it as one of " The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1962 , Faber College freshmen Lawrence " Larry " Kroger and Kent Dorfman seek to join a fraternity . Finding themselves out of place at the prestigious Omega Theta Pi house 's party , they visit the slovenly Delta Tau Chi house next door , where Kent is a " legacy " who cannot be rejected due to his brother having been a member . John " Bluto " Blutarsky welcomes them , and they meet other Deltas , including biker Daniel Simpson " D @-@ Day " Day , ladies ' man Eric " Otter " Stratton , and Otter 's best friend Donald " Boon " Schoenstein , whose girlfriend Katy is constantly pressuring him to stop drinking with the Deltas and do something with his life . Larry and Kent are invited to pledge and given the fraternity names " Pinto " and " Flounder " , respectively , by Bluto , Delta 's sergeant @-@ at @-@ arms . 
 College Dean Vernon Wormer wants to remove the Deltas , who are already on probation , so he invokes his emergency authority and places the fraternity on " double @-@ secret probation " due to various campus conduct violations and their abysmal academic standing . He directs the clean @-@ cut , smug Omega president Greg Marmalard to find a way for him to remove the Deltas from campus . Various incidents , including the prank @-@ related accidental death of a horse belonging to Omega member and ROTC cadet commander Douglas Neidermeyer , and an attempt by Otter to date Marmalard 's girlfriend , further increase the Dean 's and the Omegas ' animosity toward the Deltas . 
 Bluto and D @-@ Day steal the answers to an upcoming test from the trash , not realizing that the Omegas have planted a fake set of answers for them to find . The Deltas fail the exam , and their grade @-@ point averages fall so low that Wormer tells them he needs only one more incident to revoke their charter . To cheer themselves up , the Deltas organize a toga party and bring in Otis Day and the Knights to provide live music . Wormer 's wife attends at Otter 's invitation and has sex with him . Pinto hooks up with <unk> , a girl he met at the supermarket . They make out , but do not have sex because she passes out drunk . Pinto takes her home in a shopping cart and later discovers that she is the mayor 's daughter . 
 Outraged by his wife 's escapades and the mayor 's threat of personal violence , Wormer organizes a kangaroo court and revokes Delta 's charter . To take their minds off this action , Otter , Boon , Flounder , and Pinto go on a road trip . Otter is successful in picking up four young women from Emily Dickinson College as dates for himself and his Delta brothers . He elicits sympathy by posing as the fiancé of a young woman at the college who died in a recent kiln explosion . They stop at a roadhouse bar where Day 's band is performing , not realizing it has an exclusively African @-@ American clientele . A couple of hulking patrons intimidate the Deltas and they quickly exit , smashing up Flounder 's borrowed car and leaving their dates behind . 
 Marmalard and other Omegas lure Otter to a motel and beat him up , believing that Otter is having an affair with Marmalard 's girlfriend , Mandy . The Deltas ' midterm grades are so poor that an ecstatic Wormer expels them all , having already notified their local draft boards that they are now eligible for military service . The news shocks Flounder so badly that he vomits on Wormer . 
 The Deltas are despondent , but Bluto rallies them with an impassioned , if historically inaccurate , speech ( " Was it over when the Germans bombed Pearl Harbor ? Hell no ! " ) , and so they decide to take action against Wormer , the Omegas , and the college . They convert Flounder 's damaged car into an armored vehicle and hide it inside a cake @-@ shaped breakaway float in order to sneak into the annual homecoming parade . As they wreak havoc on the event , the futures of several of the student main characters are revealed using freeze @-@ frame labels . Most of the Deltas become respectable professionals , while their adversaries suffer less fortunate outcomes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Delta Tau Chi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 John Belushi as John " Bluto " Blutarsky : A drunken degenerate with his own style , in his seventh year of college , with a GPA of 0 @.@ 0 . He eventually became a United States senator and married Mandy Pepperidge , a sorority girl . 
 Tim Matheson as Eric " Otter " Stratton : A confident womanizer whose room is a hotel room look @-@ a @-@ like and a pristine seduction den amid the sheer filth of the rest of the Delta house . Otter is the fraternity 's rush chairman and essentially the fraternity 's unofficial leader . After graduation from Faber in 1963 , he became a gynecologist in Beverly Hills . 
 Peter Riegert as Donald " Boon " Schoenstein : Otter 's nice @-@ guy best friend , who has to decide between his Delta pals and girlfriend Katy . He marries Katy in 1964 , but they divorce in 1969 . ( In the book adaptation Boon becomes a taxi driver and part @-@ time writer in New York City . In Where Are They Now ? , he and Katy got married , divorced , and remarried a final time after a fling resulted in the conception of their son Otis . He also works as a documentarian . ) 
 Thomas Hulce as Lawrence " Pinto " Kroger : A shy but friendly guy and new pledge at Delta with a 1 @.@ 2 GPA . After graduating from Faber in 1966 , he became editor of National Lampoon magazine . ( " Pinto " was screenwriter Chris Miller 's nickname at his Dartmouth fraternity . ) 
 Stephen Furst as Kent " Flounder " Dorfman : An overweight , naive , clumsy legacy pledge who is Pinto 's best friend and roommate with a GPA of 0 @.@ 2 . After graduating from Faber in 1966 , he became a sensitivity trainer in Cleveland , Ohio . 
 Bruce McGill as Daniel Simpson " D @-@ Day " Day : A tough motorcycle biker with no grade point average ; all classes incomplete . Immediately after the Faber homecoming parade fiasco , he leaves town , his subsequent whereabouts unknown . 
 James Widdoes as Robert Hoover : The affable , level @-@ headed , reasonably clean @-@ cut president of the fraternity , who desperately struggles to maintain a façade of normality to placate the Dean . He is at the top of his fraternity with a 1 @.@ 6 GPA . After graduating from Faber in 1963 , he became a public defender in Baltimore . 
 Douglas Kenney as " Stork " : A Delta member whose real name is never revealed . He is often seen in the background alongside Bluto and other Deltas . During his first year , Stork was thought to be brain @-@ damaged . He speaks two lines in the entire film . ( In the book adaptation , Stork is revealed to be independently wealthy , a result of him holding several patents . ) 
 Chris Miller as Curtis Wayne " <unk> " Fuller : A Delta member who is often seen in the background . He is best friends with Stork , and has only one line in the film . ( He plays a larger role in the " Where Are They Now ? " short , which reveals his real name . " <unk> " is based on a member of Chris Miller 's fraternity , also sharing his nickname . ) 
 = = = Omega Theta Pi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 James <unk> as Gregory " Greg " Marmalard : The president of Omega House and boyfriend of Mandy Pepperidge . After graduation from Faber in 1963 , he became a Nixon White House aide and was subsequently raped in prison in 1974 after being convicted for his involvement in the Watergate scandal . 
 Mark Metcalf as Douglas C. Neidermeyer : The rush chairman of Omega as well as an Army ROTC cadet officer and scion of a military family who personally hates the Deltas . After graduation from Faber in 1963 , he was commissioned in the U. S. Army and later was killed by his own platoon in Vietnam . 
 Kevin Bacon as Chip Diller : A smarmy Omega pledge and ROTC cadet , who gets trampled into the pavement during the homecoming parade . ( In Where Are They Now ? he became a born @-@ again Christian missionary in Africa . ) 
 = = = Supporting characters = = = 
 John Vernon as Vernon Wormer : the Dean of Faber College . He wants to revoke the Deltas ' charter and kick them off campus because of their partying ways and poor grade point averages . He will do anything underhanded in his quest to do so . ( In Where Are They Now ? he was fired after the homecoming parade debacle and is now residing in a nursing home . ) 
 Verna Bloom as Marion Wormer : The Dean 's alcoholic and neglected wife who briefly hooks up with Otter . A newspaper article reports she has left on a trip to visit Sarasota Springs . ( Dean Wormer sends her there to " dry out " at treatment facility . ) 
 Donald Sutherland as Professor Dave Jennings : A bored English professor who tries to turn his students on to left @-@ wing politics and marijuana . ( In Where Are They Now ? , it is revealed he became Chairman of Faber 's English Department the same year that Dean Wormer entered the nursing home . ) 
 Karen Allen as Katy : Boon 's frustrated girlfriend who has a dalliance with Jennings but subsequently goes on to marry , then divorce , Boon . ( In Where Are They Now ? it is revealed that she and Boon got married , then divorced , and then remarried . ) 
 Sarah Holcomb as <unk> <unk> : The mayor 's 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter who hooks up with Pinto . ( She ends up getting pregnant by him as well . ) 
 DeWayne Jessie as Otis Day : The leader of a R & B band that plays at the toga party and later at the roadhouse bar . ( Jessie adopted the " Otis Day " name in his private life and toured with the band ) . 
 Mary Louise Weller as Mandy Pepperidge : A cheerleader and sorority girl who dates Greg , but is not satisfied with the relationship . She is later abducted by Bluto when he throws her into the convertible he uses to drive of town while the homecoming parade debacle unfolds . She ends up marrying Bluto . 
 Martha Smith as Barbara Sue " Babs " Jansen : A Southern belle cheerleader and Mandy 's best friend who secretly wants Greg for herself . An ally of the Omegas , she finds the Deltas repulsive . After being indecently exposed in public by the Deltas during their homecoming parade disruption , she becomes a tour guide at Universal Studios Hollywood . 
 Cesare <unk> as Mayor Carmine <unk> : The shady local mayor implied to be a crime boss . He controls the town 's police and business , and extorts Wormer in order for the latter to hold Faber 's homecoming parade in the town . ( The Animal House book states that he went missing in 1971 , and was rumored to have become " part of the Emil Faber Memorial Highway . " ) 
 Sean McCartin as " Lucky Boy " : The Playboy @-@ reading child who shouts " Thank you , God ! " after a Playboy Bunny flies through his bedroom window onto his bed during the homecoming parade disruption . ( McCartin later became pastor of a Eugene church . ) 
 Stephen Bishop as " a Charming Guy with a Guitar " on the stairs at the toga party , who gets his guitar smashed by folk music @-@ hating Bluto . 
 Blues musician Robert Cray had an uncredited , non @-@ speaking role as a bassist in Otis Day 's band . 
 Lisa Baur played Shelly Dubinsky , the naive college girl Otter dupes into a date . ( Lisa now uses her given name , Cynthia , and owns a candle shop in New Zealand . ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Animal House was the first film produced by National Lampoon , the most popular humor magazine on college campuses in the mid @-@ 1970s . The periodical specialized in humor , and satirized politics and popular culture . Many of the magazine ’ s writers were recent college graduates , hence their appeal to students all over the country . Doug Kenney was a Lampoon writer and the magazine ’ s first editor @-@ in @-@ chief . He graduated from Harvard University in 1969 and had a college experience closer to the Omegas in the film ( he had been president of the university 's elite Spee Club ) . Kenney was responsible for the first appearances of three characters that would appear in the film , Larry Kroger , Mandy Pepperidge , and Vernon Wormer . They made their debut in 1975 's National Lampoon ’ s High School Yearbook , a satire of a Middle America 1964 high school yearbook . Kroger 's and Pepperidge 's characters in the yearbook were effectively the same as their characters in the movie , whereas Vernon Wormer was a P. E. and civics teacher as well as an athletic coach in the yearbook . 
 However , Kenney felt that fellow Lampoon writer Chris Miller was the magazine 's expert on the college experience . Faced with an impending deadline , Miller submitted a chapter from his then @-@ abandoned memoirs entitled " The Night of the Seven Fires " about pledging experiences from his fraternity days in Alpha Delta ( associated with the national Alpha Delta Phi during Miller 's undergraduate years , the fraternity subsequently disassociated itself from the national organization and is now called Alpha Delta ) at the Ivy League 's Dartmouth College , in Hanover , New Hampshire . The antics of his fellow fraternities , coupled with experiences like that of a road trip to UMass Amherst and its Delta Chi Fraternity , became the inspiration for the Delta Tau Chis of Animal House and many characters in the film ( and their nicknames ) were based on Miller 's fraternity brothers . Filmmaker Ivan Reitman had just finished producing David Cronenberg 's first film , Shivers , and called the magazine 's publisher Matty Simmons about making movies under the Lampoon banner . Reitman had put together The National Lampoon Show in New York City featuring several future Saturday Night Live cast members , including John Belushi . When most of the Lampoon group moved on to SNL except for Harold Ramis , Reitman approached him with an idea to make a film together using some skits from the Lampoon Show . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Kenney met Lampoon writer Ramis at the suggestion of Simmons . Ramis drew from his own fraternity experiences as a member of Zeta Beta Tau fraternity at Washington University in St. Louis and was working on a film treatment about college called " Freshman Year " , but the magazine 's editors were not happy with it . Kenney and Ramis started working on a new film treatment together , positing Charles Manson in a high school , calling it Laser Orgy Girls . Simmons was cool to this idea so they changed the setting to a " northeastern college ... Ivy League kind of school " . Kenney was a fan of Miller ’ s fraternity stories and suggested using them as a basis for a movie . Kenney , Miller and Ramis began brainstorming ideas . They saw the film 's 1962 setting as " the last innocent year ... of America " , and the homecoming parade that ends the film as occurring on November 21 , 1963 , the day before President Kennedy 's assassination . They agreed that Belushi should star in it and Ramis wrote the part of Bluto specifically for the comedian , having been friends with him while at Chicago 's The Second City . 
 The writers were new to screenwriting , so their film treatment ran to 110 @-@ pages , the average was 15 pages . Reitman and Simmons pitched it to various Hollywood studios . Simmons met with Ned Tanen , an executive at Universal Studios . He was encouraged by younger executives Sean Daniel and Thom Mount who were more receptive to the Lampoon type of humor ; Mount had discovered the " Seven Fires " film treatment as Tanen 's assistant , while investigating projects left by a fired studio executive . Tanen hated the idea . Ramis remembers , " We went further than I think Universal expected or wanted . I think they were shocked and appalled . Chris ' fraternity had virtually been a vomiting cult . And we had a lot of scenes that were almost orgies of vomit ... We didn 't back off anything " . As the writers created more drafts of the screenplay ( nine in total ) , the studio gradually became more receptive to the project , especially Mount , who championed it . Surprisingly , the studio green @-@ lighted the film and set the budget at a modest $ 3 million . Simmons remembers , " They just figured , ' Screw it , it 's a silly little movie , and we ’ ll make a couple of bucks if we 're lucky — let them do whatever they want . ' " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initially , Reitman had wanted to direct but had made only one film , Cannibal Girls , for $ 5 @,@ 000 . The film 's producers approached Richard Lester and Bob Rafelson before considering John Landis , who got the director job based on his work on Kentucky Fried Movie . That film 's script and continuity supervisor was the girlfriend of Sean Daniel , an assistant to Mount . Daniel saw Landis ' movie and recommended him . Landis then met with Mount , Reitman and Simmons and got the job . Landis remembers , " When I was given the script , it was the funniest thing I had ever read up to that time . But it was really offensive . There was a great deal of projectile vomiting and rape and all these things " . There was also friction between Landis and the writers early on because Landis was a high @-@ school dropout from Hollywood and they were college graduates from the East Coast . Ramis remembers , " He sort of referred immediately to Animal House as ' my movie . ' We 'd been living with it for two years and we hated that " . According to Landis , he drew inspiration from classic Hollywood comedies featuring the likes of Buster Keaton , Harold Lloyd , and the Marx Brothers . 
 The initial cast was to feature Chevy Chase as Otter , Bill Murray as Boon , Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as Hoover , Dan Aykroyd as D @-@ Day , and John Belushi as Bluto , but only Belushi wanted to do it . Chase was a star from Saturday Night Live , which had recently become a cultural phenomenon . His name would have added credibility to the project , but he turned the film down to do Foul Play ; Landis , who wanted to cast unknown dramatic actors such as Bacon and Allen ( the first film for both ) instead of famous comedians , takes credit for subtly discouraging Chase by describing the film as an " ensemble " . Landis has also stated that he was not interested in directing a Saturday Night Live movie and that unknowns would be the better choice . The character of D @-@ Day was based on Aykroyd , who was a motorcycle aficionado . Aykroyd was offered the part , but he was already committed to Saturday Night Live . Belushi , who had worked on The National Lampoon Radio Hour before Saturday Night Live , was also committed to the show , but spent Monday through Wednesday making the film and then flying back to New York to do the show on Thursday through Saturday . Ramis originally wrote the role of Boon for himself , but Landis felt that he looked too old for the part and Riegert was cast instead . Landis did offer Ramis a smaller part , but he declined . Landis met with Jack Webb to play Dean Wormer and Kim Novak to play his wife . Webb ultimately backed out due to concerns over his clean @-@ cut image , and was replaced by John Vernon . 
 Belushi received only $ 35 @,@ 000 for Animal House , with a bonus after it became a hit . Landis also met with Meat Loaf in case Belushi did not want to play Bluto . Landis worked with Belushi on his character , who " hardly had any dialogue " ; they decided that Bluto was a cross between Harpo Marx and the Cookie Monster . Despite Belushi 's presence , he was considered a supporting actor and Universal wanted another star . 
 Landis had been a crew member on Kelly 's Heroes and had become friends with actor Donald Sutherland , sometimes babysitting his son Kiefer . Landis asked Sutherland , one of the biggest stars of the 1970s , to be in the film . For two days work , Sutherland declined the initial offer of $ 20 @,@ 000 plus " points " ( a percentage of the gross or net income ) . Universal then offered him either a set amount ( $ 25 @,@ 000 or $ 35 @,@ 000 ) or 2 % of the film 's gross , assuming that the movie would be quickly forgotten . Sutherland took the guaranteed money ; although this made him the highest @-@ paid member of the cast ( other than <unk> 's horse ) , the decision cost Sutherland what he estimates as $ 14 million . The star 's participation , however , was crucial ; Landis later said " It was Donald Sutherland who essentially got the film made . " 
 = = = Locations = = = 
 The filmmakers ' next problem was finding a college that would let them shoot the film on their campus . They submitted the script to a number of colleges and universities but " nobody wanted this movie " due to the script ; according to Landis , " I couldn 't find ' the look ' . Every place that had ' the look ' said , ' no thank you . ' " 
 The president of the University of Oregon in Eugene , William Beaty Boyd , had been a senior administrator of a major California university when his campus was considered for a location of the film The Graduate . After he consulted with other senior administrative colleagues who advised him to turn it down due to the lack of artistic merit , production moved to Berkeley and USC . The Graduate went on to become a classic , and Boyd was determined not to make the same mistake twice when the producers inquired about filming at Oregon . After consulting with student government leaders and officers of the Pan Hellenic Council , the Director of University Relations advised the president that the script , although raunchy and often tasteless , was a very funny spoof of college life . Boyd even allowed the filmmakers to use his office as Dean Wormer 's . 
 The actual house depicted as the Delta House was originally a residence in Eugene , the Dr. A.W. Patterson House . Around 1959 , it was acquired by the Psi Deuteron chapter of Phi Sigma Kappa fraternity and was their chapter house until 1967 , when the chapter was closed due to low membership . The house was sold and slid into disrepair , with the spacious porch removed and the lawn graveled over . At the time of the shooting , the Phi Kappa Psi and Sigma Nu fraternity houses sat next to the old Phi Sigma Kappa house . The interior of the Phi Kappa Psi house and the Sigma Nu house were used for many of the interior scenes , but the individual rooms were filmed on a soundstage . The Patterson house was demolished in 1986 . The site is now occupied by Northwest Christian University 's school of Education and Counseling . A large boulder placed to the west of the parking entrance displays a bronze plaque commemorating the Delta House location . The parade scene takes place in downtown Cottage Grove , Oregon on Main Street . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Landis brought the actors who played the Deltas up five days early in order to bond . Staying at the <unk> Inn they moved an old piano from the lobby into McGill 's room , which became known as " party central " . Actor James Widdoes remembers , " It was like freshman orientation . There was a lot of getting to know each other and calling each other by our character names " . This tactic encouraged the actors playing the Deltas to separate themselves from the actors playing the Omegas , helping generate authentic animosity between them on camera . Belushi and his wife , Judy , had a house in the suburbs in order to keep him away from alcohol and drugs . 
 Although the cast members were warned against mixing with the college students , one night , some girls invited several of the cast members to a fraternity party . They arrived assuming they had been invited and were greeted with open hostility . As they were leaving , Widdoes threw a cup of beer at a group of drunk football players and a fight " like a scene from the movie " broke out . Tim Matheson , Bruce McGill , Peter Riegert , and Widdoes narrowly escaped , with McGill suffering a black eye and Widdoes getting several teeth knocked out . 
 Other than Belushi 's opening yell , the food fight was filmed in one shot , with the actors encouraged to fight for real . Flounder 's groceries handling in the supermarket was another single shot ; Furst deftly caught the many items Landis and Matheson threw at him , amazing the director . By filming the long courtroom scene in one day Landis won a bet with Reitman . 
 The film 's budget was so small that during the 32 days of shooting in Eugene , Landis had no trailer or office and could not watch dailies for three weeks . His wife Deborah Nadoolman purchased most of the costumes at local thrift stores , and she and Judy Belushi made the party togas . Landis and Bruce McGill staged a scene for reporters visiting the set where the director pretended to be angry at the actor for being difficult on the set . Landis grabbed a breakaway pitcher and smashed it over McGill 's head . He fell to the ground and pretended to be unconscious . The reporters were completely fooled , and when Landis asked McGill to get up , he refused to move . 
 Black extras had to be bused in from Portland for the segment at the Dexter Lake Club due to their scarcity around Eugene . More seriously , the segment alarmed Tanen and other studio executives , who perceived it as racist and warned that " ' black people in America are going to rip the seats out of theaters if you leave that scene in the movie . ' " Richard Pryor 's approval helped retain the segment in the film . The studio became more enthusiastic about the film when Reitman showed executives and sales managers of various regions in the country a 10 @-@ minute production reel that was put together in two days . The reaction was positive and the studio sent 20 copies out to exhibitors . The first preview screening for Animal House was held in Denver four months before it opened nationwide . The crowd loved it and the filmmakers realized they had a potential hit on their hands . 
 Original cut of the movie was 175 minutes long . Some of the deleted scenes include ; John Landis cameo scene where he plays dishwasher who tries to stop Bluto from eating all the food and gets pulled across the table and thrown on the floor by Bluto who then says " You don 't fuck with the eagles unless you know how to fly . " Scene where Boon and Hoover tell Pinto the tales of legendary Delta House frat brothers from years before who had names like Tarantula , Bulldozer , Giraffe , and his girlfriend , Gross Kay . Two different deleted scenes with Otter and couple of his girlfriends , one was played by Sunny Johnson who is listed in the credits as " Otter 's Co @-@ Ed " although her scene was deleted , and other one was played by location scout Katherine Wilson and her deleted scene can be seen in theatrical trailer . Extended version of the scene where Bluto pours mustard on himself and starts singing " I am the Mustard Man . " Deltas going through a medical screening after having to register for the draft after being expelled , during the screening D @-@ Day turns his feet around backwards because his ankles are double @-@ jointed , this scene was removed a few months after release due to many young men hurting themselves while trying to emulate him . 
 = = Soundtrack and score = = 
 The soundtrack is a mix of rock and roll and rhythm and blues with the original score created by film composer Elmer Bernstein , who had been a Landis family friend since John Landis was a child . Bernstein was easily persuaded to score the film , but was not sure what to make of it . Similar to his preferring dramatic actors for the comedy , Landis asked Bernstein to score it as though it were serious . He adapted the " Faber College Theme " from the Academic Festival Overture by Brahms , and said that the film opened yet another door in his diverse career , to scoring comedies . 
 The soundtrack was released as a vinyl album in 1978 , and then as a CD in 1998 . 
 Soundtrack album listing 
 Additional music in the film 
 " Theme from A Summer Place " , composed by Max Steiner ; performed by Percy Faith and his Orchestra 
 " Who 's Sorry Now ? " , written by Ted Snyder , Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby ; performed by Connie Francis 
 " The Washington Post March " , composed by John Philip Sousa 
 " Tammy " , by Jay Livingston and Ray Evans 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its opening weekend , Animal House grossed $ 276 @,@ 538 in 12 theaters . It grossed $ 120 @.@ 1 million in North America and went on to achieve a domestic lifetime gross of $ 141 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 At the time of its release , Animal House received mixed reviews from critics but several immediately recognized its appeal , and it has since been recognized as one of the best films of 1978 . The film holds a 91 % positive rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four and wrote , " It 's anarchic , messy , and filled with energy . It assaults us . Part of the movie 's impact comes from its sheer level of manic energy . ... But the movie 's better made ( and better acted ) than we might at first realize . It takes skill to create this sort of comic pitch , and the movie 's filled with characters that are sketched a little more <unk> than they had to be , and acted with perception " . Ebert later placed the film on his 10 best list of 1978 , the only National Lampoon film to have received this honor . In his review for Time , Frank Rich wrote , " At its best it perfectly expresses the fears and <unk> of kids who came of age in the late ' 60s ; at its worst Animal House revels in abject silliness . The hilarious highs easily compensate for the puerile lows " . Gary Arnold wrote in his review for The Washington Post , " Belushi also controls a wicked array of conspiratorial expressions with the audience . ... He can seem irresistibly funny in repose or invest minor slapstick opportunities with a streak of genius " . David Ansen wrote in Newsweek , " But if Animal House lacks the inspired tastelessness of the Lampoon 's High School Yearbook Parody , this is still low humor of a high order " . Robert Martin wrote in The Globe and Mail , " It is so gross and tasteless you feel you should be disgusted but it 's hard to be offended by something that is so <unk> funny " . Time magazine proclaimed Animal House one of the year 's best . 
 When the film was released , Landis , Widdoes and Allen went on a national promotional tour . Universal Pictures spent about $ 4 @.@ 5 million promoting the film at selected college campuses and helped students organize their own toga parties . One such party at the University of Maryland attracted some 2 @,@ 000 people , while students at the University of Wisconsin – Madison tried for a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 people and a place in the Guinness Book of World Records . Thanks to the film , toga parties became one of the favorite college campus happenings during 1978 and 1979 . 
 = = = American Film Institute Lists = = = 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs — # 36 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 Shout — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Toga ! Toga ! " — # 82 
 " Over ? Did you say ' over ? ' Nothing is over until we decide it is ! Was it over when the Germans bombed Pearl Harbor ? Hell , no ! " — Nominated 
 " Fat , drunk , and stupid is no way to go through life , son . " — Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) — Nominated 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 The film inspired a short @-@ lived half @-@ hour ABC television sitcom , Delta House , in which Vernon reprised his role as the long @-@ suffering , malevolent Dean Wormer . The series also included Furst as Flounder , McGill as D @-@ Day , and Widdoes as Hoover . The pilot episode was written by the film 's screenwriters , Kenney , Miller , and Ramis . Michelle Pfeiffer made her acting debut in the series ( playing a new character , " Bombshell " ) , and Peter Fox was cast as Otter . Belushi 's character from the film , John " Bluto " Blutarsky , is in the army , but his brother , <unk> , played by Josh Mostel , transfers to Faber to carry on Bluto 's tradition . 
 Animal House inspired Co @-@ Ed Fever , another sitcom but without the involvement of the film 's producers or cast . Set in a dorm of the formerly all @-@ female Baxter College , the pilot of Co @-@ Ed Fever was aired by CBS on February 4 , 1979 , but the network canceled the series before airing any more episodes . NBC also had its Animal House @-@ inspired sitcom , Brothers and Sisters , in which three members of Crandall College 's Pi Nu fraternity interact with members of the Gamma Iota sorority . Like ABC 's Delta House , Brothers and Sisters lasted only three months . 
 The film 's writers planned a film sequel set in 1967 ( the so @-@ called " Summer of Love " ) , in which the Deltas have a reunion for Pinto 's marriage in Haight @-@ Ashbury , San Francisco . The only Delta to have become a hippie is Flounder , who is now called Pisces . Later , Chris Miller and John Weidman , another Lampoon writer , created a treatment for this screenplay , but Universal rejected it because the sequel to American Graffiti , which contained some hippie @-@ 1967 sequences , had not done well . When John Belushi died , the idea was indefinitely shelved . 
 A second attempt at a sequel was made in 1982 with producer Matty Simmons co @-@ authoring a script which saw some of the Deltas returning to Faber College five years after the events of the film . The project got no further than a first draft script dated May 6 , 1982 . 
 = = Where Are They Now ? = = 
 The 2003 " Double Secret Probation Edition " DVD included a short film , Where Are They Now ? : A Delta Alumni Update , a mockumentary purporting that the original film had been a documentary and Landis was catching up with some of the cast ( played by their original actors ) . It was never shown theatrically . 
 It shows the main Animal House characters 30 years on , following Landis to cities all over America in search of the former Deltas , Omegas , and Dean Wormer , and describes the various locales and professions the characters have settled into : 
 Donald Schoenstein – Film editor , New York City . Currently in his third marriage to Katy . He has a son named Otis . 
 Babs Jansen – Tour guide , Universal Studios Hollywood . She mentions to Landis that she is organizing an upcoming Faber reunion , and seems to be successful at her job . 
 Marion Wormer – Seemingly unemployed in Chicago . She tells Landis of how her husband Vernon accepted the blame for the parade debacle , and was subsequently fired , leading to their divorce . She becomes progressively more tipsy throughout the interview , eventually falling off her chair . 
 Kent Dorfman – Executive director , Encounter Groups of Cleveland , Inc . , Cleveland , Ohio . He recalls trying to diet during the 1970s with a special program requiring him to shoot up the urine of pregnant women . 
 Robert Hoover – Assistant district attorney , Baltimore , Maryland . Hoover tells the tale of how he quit being a public defender after he realized many of his clients were insane . He also boasts of how his legal advice was sought during the O.J. Simpson murder case . 
 Chip Diller – Landis receives a letter from Diller , who is currently serving as a missionary in Africa . He recalls how he was prevented from going to Vietnam as his father was a prime donor to several right @-@ wing political campaigns . When he learned of Doug Neidermeyer 's <unk> in Vietnam , he fell into alcoholism and despair . When he began seeing Jesus in his food , he became a born @-@ again Christian and fell into his current profession as minister and missionary . 
 Dean Vernon Wormer – Wormer is seen at a nursing home in Florida , under the watchful eye of a male nurse . He appears to be senile , not recognizing Landis at first ( calling him " Larry " ) , and not remembering his tenure as Dean of Faber . When Landis mentions the Deltas , Wormer erupts into a violent , profanity @-@ laced tirade against the boys who cost him his job . He lashes out against the nurse and then physically attacks Landis , knocking out the camera in the process . 
 Eric Stratton – <unk> , Beverly Hills , California . Otter is depicted as still being the affable , suave gentleman he was in his college days . He remarks that gynecology has been very enjoyable for him and that he has straightened up a bit since leaving Faber . An attractive , blonde patient in her underwear then tells Otter she 's ready for her examination . Otter politely cuts the interview off and goes into the exam room . 
 Daniel Simpson Day – Landis remarks in a voiceover that D @-@ Day has been the hardest to track down for the documentary , saying that rumors have flown around , with his whereabouts ranging from a Buddhist monastery in Nepal to the Yukon Territory . Landis eventually approaches a house in Modesto , California , where a man opens the door by a crack and claims , in a Hispanic accent , " I don 't know no D @-@ Day person ! I don 't know him ! " He slams the door in Landis ' face and then bursts out of the garage in a car . He pulls out onto the street to the strains of the William Tell Overture , gives a manic laugh exactly like D @-@ Day 's , and speeds off . 
 John Blutarsky – In a final voice @-@ over a shot of the White House , Landis remarks that the viewers all know what happened to Bluto and Mandy Pepperidge : they became the President of the United States and First Lady of the United States . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Animal House became one of the most profitable films in history . Since its initial release , the film has garnered an estimated return of more than $ 141 million in the form of video and DVDs , not including merchandising . 
 Animal House was released on <unk> in 1979 . It was released on VHS in 1980 , 1983 , 1988 , and 1990 . In 1992 , it was released in a 2 pack VHS Set that included The Blues Brothers . It was first released on DVD in February 1998 in a " bare bones " full screen presentation . A 20th anniversary widescreen Collector 's Edition DVD and a coinciding THX special edition VHS and a widescreen Signature Collection Laserdisc was released later that year , with a 45 @-@ minute documentary entitled " The Yearbook – An Animal House Reunion " by producer JM Kenny with production notes , theatrical trailer , and new interviews with director Landis , writers Harold Ramis and Chris Miller , composer Elmer Bernstein , and stars Tim Matheson , Karen Allen , Stephen Furst , John Vernon , Verna Bloom , Bruce McGill , James Widdoes , Peter Riegert , Mark Metcalf and Kevin Bacon . In 2000 , the collector 's edition DVD was packaged along with The Blues Brothers and 1941 in a John Belushi 3 pack box set . The " Double Secret Probation Edition " DVD released in 2003 features cast members reprising their respective roles in a " Where Are They Now ? " mockumentary , which posited the original film as a documentary . One major change shown in this mockumentary from the epilogue of the original film is that Bluto went on from his career in the U.S. Senate to become the President of the United States , with a voiceover on a shot of the north portico of the White House , since by then Belushi had died . This DVD also includes " Did You Know That ? Universal Animated Anecdotes " , a subtitle trivia track , the making of documentary from the Collector 's Edition , <unk> " Shout " music video , a theatrical trailer , production notes , and cast and filmmakers biographies . In August 2006 , the film was released on an HD DVD / DVD combo disc , which featured the film in a 1080p high @-@ definition format on one side , and a standard @-@ definition format on the opposite side . Along with the film Unleashed , Animal House was one of Universal 's first two HD / DVD combo releases , but was later discontinued in 2008 after Universal decided to switch to the Blu @-@ ray Disc format following the conclusion of the high definition optical disc format war . 
 It is currently available on Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Precursors and legacy = = 
 Animal House was a great box office success despite its limited production costs and started an industry trend , inspiring countless other comedies such as Porky 's , the Police Academy films , the American Pie films , and Old School among others . Belushi became the most successful male comedy star in the world until his 1982 death ; Bacon also became a star , and he , Matheson , and Allen are among those who have had lengthy acting careers . Reitman , Landis , and Ramis became successful filmmakers ; Landis ' use of dramatic actors and soundtrack to make the comedy believable became the traditional approach for film comedies . 
 On the left @-@ wing and counterculture side , the film included references to topical political matters like Kent State shootings , President Harry S. Truman 's decision to drop atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Richard Nixon , the Vietnam war , and the civil rights movement . Precursors of this counterculture subversive humor in film were two non- " college movies " , M * A * S * H , a 1970 satirical dark comedy , and The Kentucky Fried Movie , a 1977 formless comedy consisting of a series of sketches ( which was also directed by Landis ) . 
 In 2012 Universal Pictures Stage Productions announced it was developing a stage musical version of the movie . Barenaked Ladies were originally announced to write the score , but they were replaced by composer David <unk> . Casey <unk> will direct ; author Michael <unk> is also reportedly involved . 
 In 2001 the United States Library of Congress deemed the film culturally significant and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . Animal House is first on Bravo 's 100 Funniest Movies . In 2000 , the American Film Institute ranked the film No. 36 on 100 Years ... 100 Laughs , a list of the 100 best American comedies . In 2006 , Miller wrote a more comprehensive memoir of his experiences in Dartmouth 's AD house in a book entitled , The Real Animal House : The Awesomely <unk> Saga of the Fraternity That Inspired the Movie , in which Miller recounts hijinks that were considered too risqué for the movie . In 2008 , Empire magazine selected Animal House as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . The film was also selected by The New York Times as one of The 1000 Best Movies Ever Made . 
 = Walmer Castle = 
 Walmer Castle is an artillery fort originally constructed by Henry VIII in Walmer , Kent , between 1539 and 1540 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the strategically important Downs anchorage off the English coast . Comprising a keep and four circular bastions , the moated stone castle covered 0 @.@ 61 acres ( 0 @.@ 25 ha ) and had 39 firing positions on the upper levels for artillery . It cost the Crown a total of £ 27 @,@ 092 to build the three castles of Walmer , Sandown , and Deal , which lay adjacent to one another along the coast and were connected by earthwork defences . The original invasion threat passed , but during the Second English Civil War of 1648 – 49 , Walmer was seized by pro @-@ Royalist insurgents and was only retaken by Parliamentary forces after several months ' fighting . 
 In the 18th century , Walmer became the official residence of the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports and was gradually modified from a military fortification into a private residence . Various Prime Ministers and prominent politicians were appointed as Lord Warden , including William Pitt , the Duke of Wellington and Lord Granville , who adapted parts of the Tudor castle as living spaces and constructed extensive gardens around the property . By 1904 , the War Office agreed that Walmer had no remaining military utility and it passed to the Ministry of Works . Successive Lord Wardens continued to use the property but it was also opened to the public . Walmer was no longer considered a particularly comfortable or modern residence , however , and Lord Curzon blamed the poor condition of the castle for his wife 's death in 1906 . 
 Lord Wardens since the Second World War have included Winston Churchill , Robert Menzies and Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother , but they have made only intermittent use of Walmer Castle . In the 21st century , Walmer Castle is run as a tourist attraction by English Heritage . The interior of the castle displays a range of historical objects and pictures associated with the property and its Lord Wardens , protected since the 19th century by special legislation . The grounds include the Queen Mother 's Garden , designed by Penelope Hobhouse as a 95th birthday gift for Elizabeth in 1997 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 Walmer Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 Walmer and the adjacent castles of Deal and Sandown were constructed to protect the Downs in east Kent , an important anchorage formed by the Goodwin Sands which gave access to Deal Beach , on which enemy soldiers could easily be landed . The stone castles were supported by a line of four earthwork forts , known as the Great Turf , the Little Turf Bulwark , the Great White Bulwark of Clay and the Walmer Bulwark , and a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) defensive ditch and bank . Collectively the castles became known as the " castles of the Downs " and cost the Crown a total of £ 27 @,@ 092 to build . 
 Walmer was built between April 1539 and autumn 1540 , by a team including Richard <unk> as the surveyor , William Clement as the master carpenter , and Christopher Dickenson as the master mason . It was initially garrisoned by a captain , two lieutenants , two porters , ten gunners and three soldiers , at an annual cost of £ 174 . It was probably equipped with a range of brass and cast @-@ iron guns , along with arquebuses and bows for close defence . In 1597 , a report listed the castle 's artillery as comprising a cannon , a culverin , five demi @-@ culverins , a saker , a minion and a falcon . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Walmer Castle was left to decline in the early 17th century , with little money being made available for repairs and the garrison receiving low pay , leading some members to reside in nearby Deal rather the fort itself , and to take on additional employment to supplement their wages . Walmer Castle was seized by Parliamentary forces at the start of the first English Civil War between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament , but did not play a significant role in the remainder of the initial conflict . After the few years of unsteady peace after 1645 , the Second Civil War broke out in 1648 , this time with Charles ' Royalist supporters joined by Scottish allies . The Parliamentary navy was based in the Downs , protected by Walmer and the other Henrician castles , but by May a Royalist insurrection was under way across Kent . 
 Vice @-@ Admiral William Batten had been forced to resign from his post as Commander of the Fleet the previous year by Parliamentary officials , and he now encouraged the fleet to join the Royalist faction . Sir Henry Palmer , a former sailor , accompanied by other members of the Kentish gentry , also called on the fleet to revolt , taking advantage of the many fellow Kentish men in the crews . Walmer and Deal Castle declared for the King , shortly after the garrisons at Sandown . With both the coastal fortresses and the navy now under Royalist control , Parliament feared that foreign forces might be landed along the coast or aid sent to the Scots . 
 Parliament defeated the wider insurgency at the Battle of Maidstone at the start of June , and then sent a force under the command of Colonel Rich to deal with Walmer and the other castles along the Downs . Walmer Castle was the first to be besieged , and surrendered on 12 July . Deal was attacked in late July , and in August artillery assaults began on Sandown as well , leading to the surrender of both remaining fortifications . Walmer was badly damaged during the conflict and it was estimated by Rich , responsible for carrying out the repairs , that the work would cost at least £ 500 . 
 In 1649 , Parliament ordered new supplies of ammunition and powder be sent to Walmer and the other castles of the Downs , which were brought back into good order . The garrison at Walmer remained substantial during the period , with a governor , a corporal and 20 soldiers , but when Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 he reduced the numbers again to a captain , lieutenant , porter and 16 men . In the Glorious Revolution of 1688 against Charles ' brother , King James II , the townsfolk of Deal seized Walmer Castle on behalf of William III , the Prince of Orange . By the end of the century , however , the castle was increasingly regarded as out of date from a military perspective . 
 = = = 18th – 19th centuries = = = 
 = = = = 1700 – 1828 = = = = 
 In the 18th century , Walmer Castle became the official residence of the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports . The Lord Warden was originally a medieval title linked to five key ports along the coast of England ; the position 's prominence had faded , but it still retained important judicial and military functions . When Lionel Sackville , the Duke of Dorset , was appointed to the post in 1708 he decided that the existing residence in Dover Castle was unsatisfactory , probably because of the semi @-@ ruinous state of the castle , and moved into Walmer Castle instead . 
 The Duke occupied the post of Lord Warden until 1765 , save for two periods when it was filled by James Butler , the Duke of Ormonde and John Sidney , the Earl of Leicester . He carried out extensive work to make the castle more habitable , building extensions towards the north bastion and constructing a small house in the south bastion for the soldiers . Under the subsequent Lord Wardens , the politicians Robert Darcy , the Earl of Holderness , and Francis North , the Earl of Guildford , the castle continued to house artillery but it became increasingly less military in character . 
 The Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger was then made the Lord Warden in 1792 . Pitt was badly in debt and King George III believed that the post , which came with a salary of £ 3 @,@ 000 a year , would usefully supplement Pitt 's income . Pitt made extensive use of the castle and by 1803 he used it as his main residence in an effort to reduce his living costs . Pitt 's niece , Lady Hester Stanhope , joined him at Walmer between 1803 and 1806 ; together with Pitt , she carried out extensive work on the castle gardens , transforming them from a simple kitchen garden into a set of landscaped ornamental enclosures ; Stanhope enlisted the Dover militia to help with the landscaping and planting . 
 With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , Pitt became energetically involved in the protection of the ports along the coast , entertaining the local garrison commanders , naval captains and the local gentry at Walmer on a regular basis . After Pitt resigned as Prime Minister in 1801 , fears remained of a French invasion and he formed a volunteer cavalry unit at Walmer Castle , where he lived with his new officers . He also formed a unit of bombardier infantry and a fleet of 35 fishing boats called luggers , which he armed with 12 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) or 18 @-@ pound ( 8 @.@ 2 kg ) guns , reviewing them from the castle . Stanhope remarked on the constant drilling of army units around the castle during her time there . 
 Robert Jenkinson , the Earl of Liverpool , took possession of Walmer Castle following the death of Pitt in 1806 . Liverpool was a favourite of King George 's , and his appointment as Lord Warden was again intended to provide a valuable income and a country retreat . As Prime Minister , Liverpool used Walmer as a personal retreat and as a location for private political discussions with selected guests . 
 = = = = 1829 – 99 = = = = 
 On Lord Liverpool 's death , Arthur Wellesley , the Duke of Wellington and the current Prime Minister , asked King George IV for the post of Lord Warden , primarily because he was seeking the use of Walmer Castle . Wellington took up post in 1829 and considered Walmer to be " the most charming marine residence " . He made use of the castle each autumn , entertaining extensively there but living and sleeping in a single room . He was visited there twice by Victoria , once when she was still a princess and later as queen . Wellington let the gardens fall into a poor condition . Wellington died in his room at Walmer on 14 September 1852 . His body was kept in a death chamber in his room to lie in state until 10 November , and when the room was opened for public visitors during the final two days , around 9 @,@ 000 attended . The Duke 's body was finally removed to London via Deal , complete with a military escort . 
 James Broun @-@ Ramsay , the Marquess of Dalhousie became Lord Warden ; on his death , the Prime Minister Henry Temple , the Viscount Palmerston , took over the castle in 1861 . Palmerston initially declined to buy the contents of the castle from his predecessor 's estate on taking up the post , a practice which had become traditional for the Lords Warden , complaining about the high price being proposed . This raised the risk that the historical contents of the castle might be sold off at open auction ; and some of Wellington 's former belongings were therefore removed by his family for safekeeping . 
 The politician Lord Granville was offered the post of Lord Warden by the new Prime Minister , John Russell in 1865 . Russell noted that the role would be expensive for Granville to perform — the salary had been abolished in 1828 — but that it would provide him with a property by the sea , which Granville had been seeking to acquire for a while . Granville took over Walmer in 1865 . He expanded the gardens , built new kennels for a hunting pack and spent many years reassembling the furniture and other objects that Pitt and Wellington had used at the castle . He received large numbers of visitors , many of whom stopped off while travelling to or from France . The diplomat Baron de <unk> visited Granville and his family at Walmer , and later praised the homely atmosphere in the castle . He described how , after breakfast , the family and guests would all gather in the drawing room , which was the only large room in the house , and Granville would answer government correspondence amid the daily life of the rest of the household . 
 The businessman and politician William Smith was appointed Lord Warden in 1891 , but died in Walmer Castle during his first visit here in October of that year . Smith had proposed that the historical artefacts in the castle should be protected from being removed by later Lord Wardens and suggested that government pass an <unk> of <unk> Bill . The government carried out the plan after Smith 's death , protecting almost 70 pieces of furniture and 50 artworks at the castle and forbidding them being moved from the castle without the Secretary of State for War 's approval . Robert Gascoyne @-@ Cecil , the Marquess of Salisbury , became the next Lord Warden ; with adequate legal protection now in place , the 3rd Duke of Wellington suggested returning his grandfather 's possessions to the castle , but Lady Salisbury declined the offer . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 By 1904 the War Office had concluded that Walmer had no remaining military value and agreed to transfer the castle to the Office of Works , who accepted it on the condition that they were paid £ 2 @,@ 400 in order to carry out repairs . The Office 's survey noted that " the lower floor ... is very inconvenient , dark and not conducive to health while the women servants have to sleep in a sort of dormitory in the slopes of the roof ... The principal floor is , generally speaking , badly arranged and badly lighted and the Dining Room is very small " ; the report suggested that it would be best to demolish the building and rebuild it . 
 Proposals were made to find the next Lord Warden , George Curzon , the Marquess Curzon , alternative accommodation and the Royal Marines were approached as replacement tenants for the castle , but declined the offer . The Ministry acquired agreement for most of the castle to be opened to the public , with various historical objects related to the property being put on display , including some donated by King Edward VII . Lord Curzon moved into the castle when returned from India in 1905 . His wife , Mary , fell ill , which Curzon believed to be a result of their poor accommodation , and despite being moved to a new residence , she died shortly afterwards . As a result Curzon decided to resign the post of Lord Warden , leaving the castle , and subsequently the Prince of Wales , the future George V , took up the post . 
 William Lygon , the Earl Beauchamp , became the Lord Warden in 1913 , building a Roman Catholic chapel at the castle and holding large parties there each summer . His children later commented that they found the castle was chilly and cramped . The Prime Minister , Asquith , was invited by Beauchamp to use the castle during the First World War as a weekend retreat , as it had good communication links with the front line in France . Asquith 's wife , Margot , was not initially impressed by Walmer , noting in her diary that while it was " very distinguished " and had " great charm " , it was " terribly exposed " with " cold ... noisy corridors and small rooms " ; she later came to like the castle and noted that she was sad to finally leave it . 
 Lygon had sexual relations with men , which was illegal in England during this period . Rumours spread about the parties that he had held at Walmer Castle after the war , where , according to the historian Richard Davenport @-@ Hines , he had " behaved indiscreetly with young men " . The King was informed about his lifestyle and Lygon fled the country in 1931 , resigning the appointment of Lord Warden the following year . 
 Lygon 's successor , the politician Rufus Isaacs , the Marquess of Reading , became the Lord Warden in 1934 , holding jovial family gatherings there . His wife , Stella , attempted to restore Wellington 's old bedroom to its earlier appearance during the Duke 's tenure and , as part of this project , the 4th Duke of Wellington agreed to send the original contents of the room back to the castle , where they still remain . The politician Freeman Freeman @-@ Thomas , the Marquess of Willingdon , became Lord Warden in 1936 , followed by Sir Winston Churchill who followed him in 1941 during the Second World War . Churchill noted to the Minister of Works and Buildings that he had told King George V on taking up the position that he doubted that he would be able to live at Walmer Castle during the war , as it was within range of the German artillery along the French coast , or indeed that he would able to afford to live there afterwards , and for that reason he hoped that the state would maintain the castle and gardens , and decide what use it should be put to after the war . 
 Sir Robert Menzies , the Australian politician , became the Lord Warden in 1965 and visited the castle on an annual basis , staying in the flat there . Elizabeth the Queen Mother followed Menzies in 1978 , initially visiting the castle from the Royal Yacht , but from 1986 onwards taking over the entire castle for three days each July . This required moving furniture , silverware and other furnishings from London and caused difficulties for English Heritage , who managed the property . The current Lord Warden , Admiral the Lord Boyce , took up his post in 2004 . 
 In the 21st century , the property is managed by English Heritage , attracting 77 @,@ 828 visitors in 2014 . English Heritage carried out a £ 674 @,@ 000 programme of improvements to the castle in 2015 intended to improve the visitor experience . The castle is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument , while the surrounding gardens are protected with a grade II listing . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Castle = = = 
 Walmer Castle retains most of its original 16th @-@ century structure , with a tall keep , 83 feet ( 25 m ) across , at the centre , flanked by four rounded bastions , one of which served as a gatehouse , and a moat , surrounded in turn by a curtain wall . Its curved walls are 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) thick . It was nearly identical to its sister castle at Sandown and was approximately 167 by 167 feet ( 51 by 51 m ) across , covering 0 @.@ 61 acres ( 0 @.@ 25 ha ) . The historian John Hale considered the original castle to form a transitional design between older medieval English designs and newer Italian styles of defence . 
 The castle had three tiers of artillery – the heaviest and longest range weapons occupying the upper levels , including the keep – with a total of 39 firing positions , and 31 gunloops in the basement for handguns should close defence be required . The embrasures in the walls were all widely splayed to provide the maximum possible space for the guns to operate and traverse , and the interior of the castle was designed with vents to allow the smoke from its guns to escape . 
 From the 18th century onwards , the interior of the castle was converted to provide accommodation for the Lord Wardens , almost all of which is now open to visitors . The castle is still entered through the ground floor of the gatehouse in the western bastion , which contains the original porter 's lodge . In the middle of the castle is the keep , which originally housed the Servants ' Hall and now a set of tea rooms . In the southern bastion is a set of rooms which are reached through the Hall Room , originally built as gunners ' lodgings in the 18th century and converted into the entrance hall to the castle in the 1930s . On the far side of the bastion are the Sackville and Willingdon Rooms , built in the 18th century ; the Willingdon Room is now used as a museum for objects relating to William Pitt . The Lucas Room has been redecorated in a mid @-@ 19th century style and is used to present various items of Wellington memorabilia . The north and east bastions are filled in , providing solid foundations for the gun platforms above . 
 The second floor contains the Lord Warden 's private apartments in the west bastion and the western half of the keep . In the southern bastion is the Duke of Wellington 's Room and the Lucas Room , originally part of an apartment of rooms selected by William Pitt for his use , as they formed the warmest part of the castle . The corridor running across the castle through the keep was built by Pitt to link the north and south halves of the castle . 
 The Prince Consort 's and Queen Victoria 's rooms in the keep are named after their use during the royal visit of 1842 , although their decoration today dates from the interwar period . The Dining Room , Drawing Room and Ante Room , which overlook the northern bastion , date from the 1730s , when the Duke of Dorset constructed them to form a private set of chambers . These rooms feature a range of pink and purple window glass , which tradition says was installed by the Earl of Liverpool to protect his wife 's eyesight ; recent analysis shows that some of the pink @-@ tinted glass dates from the 1730s , and discoloured naturally over time , while other panes were intentionally purchased around 1800 in these hues , but probably as status symbols and not for any medical purpose . 
 = = = Gardens = = = 
 The gardens of Walmer Castle date mainly from the 1790s and 1860s and comprise around 32 acres ( 13 ha ) of land , split evenly between formal ornamental gardens and parkland . The main body of the gardens stretches away from the castle towards the north @-@ west , and is made up of protected , well @-@ drained , chalk @-@ based soil , forming a maritime microclimate . 
 The castle is approached through the castle meadow , an area of open parkland , lined with Holm oaks planted in the 1860s , and is surrounded by the dry moat , now a garden dating from at least the 1850s and planted with trees and shrubs . Adjacent to the castle are the Queen Mother 's Garden and the kitchen garden and glasshouses . The Queen Mother 's Garden was built by English Heritage as a 95th birthday gift for the then Lord Warden in 1997 , the site having been originally part of the wider kitchen gardens , before being turned into a tennis court in the 1920s . Designed by Penelope Hobhouse , the garden incorporates classical and Islamic themes , with a 92 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 28 m ) pool , a viewing mound and a classical pavilion . The two glasshouses have been restored , functioning as cold greenhouses , while the remainder of the kitchen garden is planted with a mixture of vegetables , fruit trees and flowers . 
 The 262 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 80 m ) Broadwalk is the main axis of the gardens and separates the glasshouses from the 328 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 100 m ) Oval Lawn , planted with lime trees and yews . The Broadwalk is lined by the " Cloud Hedge " , a formal 19th @-@ century yew hedge that grew out of control in the Second World War and was left in its current , undulating style . Two terraces in the middle of the garden , designed by William Masters in an Italianate style , separate the further half of the garden . On the other side are the paddock , planted with Holm oaks , and a curved belt of woodland of beech , ash and chestnut trees , badly damaged in the storms of 1987 and 1990 . At the far end is the Glen , a woodland hollow formed from an old chalk quarry in the 19th century . 
 = Traditions of Texas A & M University = 
 The traditions of Texas A & M University are a key aspect of the culture of Texas A & M University . Some of the school traditions date to the 1890s , shortly after the opening of the school , while others have been introduced more recently . These traditions encourage current students and alumni ( Aggies ) to cultivate the Aggie Spirit , a sense of loyalty and respect for the school , and dictate many aspects of student life , including how to greet others , how to act at an A & M sporting event , and what words a student may use in conversation . The most visible tradition among senior class students and alumni is the wearing of the Aggie Ring , whose design has been relatively unchanged since its introduction in 1894 . Not all Aggie traditions are recognized by the university , and some , like Bonfire , have been discontinued for safety reasons . Texas Monthly states that the students ' respect for school traditions and values is the university 's greatest strength . 
 Incoming students are generally first exposed to traditions when they are greeted with the official Texas A & M greeting " Howdy " . Since the 1950s , incoming students have been offered orientations , led by current students , which teach the various traditions , songs , and yells in current use . On campus , the Texas A & M University Corps of Cadets is known as the " Keepers of the Spirit " for its staunch defense of Aggie traditions . A subset of the Corps , the Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band , is the official marching band of the university . 
 Many school traditions revolve around sporting events , especially football . Before games , university yell leaders host yell practice , similar to other schools ' pep rallies . Instead of cheers , students learn yells . Since 1922 , students , known as the 12th Man , stand throughout football games , symbolizing their willingness to step in and assist the team . The official mascot , a dog named Reveille , is present at most official university activities , including sporting events . 
 = = Aggie Spirit = = 
 Current students and alumni at Texas A & M University , nicknamed Aggies after the school 's agricultural roots , are known for their loyalty and respect for their alma mater . They cultivate " the Aggie Spirit " through " an almost religious devotion to the traditions " of the school , some over 100 years old . As Texas Monthly noted , " Every Aggie is a self @-@ appointed guardian of the Aggie spirit , eternally on the alert for signs of slippage . " To Aggies , Texas A & M is " not just a university but a ... family , ... defined and united by a unique culture . " The school song is titled The Spirit of Aggieland , and proclaims in its first verse that the " spirit can ne 'er be told . " 
 The Texas A & M culture is a product of the university 's founding as a rural military and agricultural school . Although the school and surrounding community have grown , and military training is no longer required , the school 's history has instilled in students " the idealized elements of a small @-@ town life : community , tradition , loyalty , optimism , and unabashed sentimentality . " This respect for Aggie traditions and values is the university 's greatest strength . 
 Many of these traditions are part of what Aggies call " The Other Education " , activities designed to make students well @-@ rounded and " moral , ethical people " . Students who attend Texas A & M feel " that they receive ' more ' from Texas A & M than just the knowledge one acquires from the formal classroom and books . " Freshmen are introduced to these traditions and to the Aggie spirit at Fish Camp , a four @-@ day extended orientation retreat held during the summer . Current students organize and run Fish Camp , leading sessions on the Aggie Spirit , school yells , and other school traditions so that new students can " begin the process of feeling part of the extended Aggie family . " Fish Camp began in 1954 as a simple camping trip involving several new students and Gordon Gay , a former Student Activities director . The program has since evolved to accommodate approximately 70 % of incoming freshmen ; over 5 @,@ 600 Texas A & M students attended in 2008 . The program has been emulated by several schools , including Virginia Tech . In 1987 , Texas A & M established a parallel orientation for summer and fall transfer students called Transfer Camp , or T @-@ Camp . Howdy Camp also serves as a campus orientation program . Modeled after T @-@ Camp and Fish Camp , it is intended for freshman and transfer students who enter A & M in the spring semester . Students who choose not to participate in The Other Education are known on campus as " 2 Percenters , " because going to class is only a small portion of experiencing Texas A & M. 
 = = = Howdy = = = 
 Many incoming students at Texas A & M choose to attend the campus because they feel that the students are friendlier than those at other universities . This perception is created partly by the Aggie tradition " Howdy " , the official greeting of Texas A & M University . Students are encouraged to greet everyone they pass on campus with a smile and a <unk> . Howdy is the preferred method for a speaker to get a large group 's attention , as the members of the group are expected to return the " Howdy " back to the speaker . 
 = = = Gig ' em = = = 
 Aggies today will often end public addresses and emails to other Aggies with a hearty " Thanks and Gig ' em ! " . The " Gig ' em " tradition began at a 1930 Midnight Yell Practice held before the football game against the Texas Christian University Horned Frogs . In an attempt to excite the crowd , Pinky Downs , a 1906 Texas A & M graduate and member of the school 's Board of Regents , asked " What are we going to do to those Horned Frogs ? " Using a term for frog hunting , he answered his own question , " Gig ' em , Aggies ! " For emphasis , he made a fist with the thumb extended . The phrase and hand signal proved popular , and it became the first hand sign of the Southwest Conference . Gig ' em is also the name of one of the school yells , which is used during football kickoffs . 
 The university 's traditions council recognizes another possible origin for the expression . The word " gig " is used in the US Army to indicate an infraction of the uniform code , and the A & M cadets used the same vocabulary . New cadets would quickly learn to fear being " gigged " during inspection for having <unk> shoes , unpolished brass , or a non @-@ aligned " gig line " . 
 = = = Aggie Ring = = = 
 The most visible way for graduates of Texas A & M to recognize each other is by the Aggie Ring . The Aggie Ring is worn by current students and alumni , and is one of the most well @-@ known symbols of the Aggie Network . The first Aggie Ring was designed by E. C. Jonas in 1894 , and the design has remained relatively unchanged <unk> the only major change came when the school 's name was changed from the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas to Texas A & M University in 1963 . 
 The Aggie Ring cannot be purchased unless specific requirements are met : a current student must be in good standing with a minimum 2 @.@ 00 GPA on a 4 @.@ 00 scale . In addition , the student must have completed 90 hours of coursework , including at least 45 hours at A & M. Graduate students may receive a Ring after 75 % of their graduate coursework is completed . If your graduate degree requires a thesis , your Ring will be delivered on Aggie Ring Day if the thesis has been defended by the deadline set by the Office of Graduate Studies . If the thesis has not been defended by this date , the Aggie Ring will be held until the qualification is met . A Ph.D. student may receive their Ring if they have completed all formal coursework in the degree plan , has a cumulative GPA of 3 @.@ 0 or above , has successfully completed the residency requirement , has successfully passed the preliminary exam , and has an approved research proposal on file . A Ring may be purchased upon graduation if a student , either undergraduate or graduate , did not meet these criteria while pursuing the degree . 
 The top of the Ring depicts an eagle and shield . The shield at the top of the Ring symbolizes protection of the reputation of the alma mater . The thirteen stripes in the shield represent the thirteen original states and symbolize patriotism . The five stars in the shield refer to the facets of student development : mind , body , spiritual attainment , emotional poise , and integrity of character . The eagle denotes agility , power , and ability to reach great heights . 
 On one side of the Ring is a large star , borrowed from the seal of the state of Texas . The oak leaves symbolize strength . On the other side of the Ring are a cannon , a saber , and a rifle , symbolizing Aggies ' preparedness and valor in defending their land . The crossed flags of the United States and Texas symbolize allegiance to both nation and state . 
 Traditionally , students wear their Rings with the class year facing them to signify the fact that their time at A & M is not yet complete . At the annual Ring Dance , or at the end of the student 's collegiate career , the student turns his Ring around so that the class year faces away , symbolizing readiness to " face the world . " 
 Many students receive their Rings on Aggie Ring Day , which is held at the Clayton W. Williams , Jr . Alumni Center three times yearly . Aggie Ring Day is a special time for Aggies , their family and friends to celebrate being a part of the Aggie Network . The Association of Former Students gave out over 11 @,@ 000 Rings at Aggie Ring Days in 2012 . 
 For decades , though unsanctioned and discouraged by the University , an unofficial tradition among willing students involves " dunking " the newly acquired Aggie Ring . The Ring is dropped in a pitcher of beer and the student chugs the entire pitcher and catches the Ring in his or her teeth . The Dixie Chicken , among other bars , has been one of the more popular venues for dunking Aggie Rings , though it no longer endorses the activity . Some students choose to dunk their Rings in alternative substances , including ice cream or <unk> beverages . 
 = = Honoring the deceased = = 
 In keeping with the idea that all current students and alumni comprise a family , Aggies have created two traditions to honor members of the Aggie family who have died . Aggie Muster is held annually to honor any current students or alumni who died during the previous year , while Silver Taps is held monthly as a special tribute to deceased current students . 
 According to the Houston Chronicle , " perhaps the best , most meaningful Aggie tradition of all is one you wish never happened . " While students at many schools prize their individuality , " Aggies are all about unity and loyalty . When an Aggie falls , the family comes together to remember . " This remembrance occurs annually on April 21 as Aggies observe Muster , a solemn event to honor current students and alumni who died during the previous year . Over 300 Musters are held around the world , with the largest taking place at Reed Arena on the Texas A & M University campus . All Muster ceremonies feature the Roll Call for the Absent . As the names of the deceased Aggies are called , a family member or friend answers " Here , " and lights a candle , to symbolize that although their loved one is not present in body , his or her spirit will shine forever . 
 The first Aggie Muster was held June 26 , 1883 , seven years after the school opened . Rather than a memorial service , the event was intended as a reunion to allow alumni to gather and remember their college days . During the day , the alumni also established a " Roll Call for the Absent " to honor their classmates who could not attend . In 1889 , the gathering was moved to April 21 and became an official school holiday , set aside for the annual cadet track and field competition . On April 21 , 1903 , the tradition evolved into a celebration of Texas 's victory at the battle of San Jacinto . Gatherings would include field games and banquets so Aggies could reflect on their days in Aggieland . 
 The field day events were cancelled in 1922 , although alumni were still expected to congregate annually for camaraderie and to remember their fellow Aggies . The March 1923 Texas Aggie urged , " If there is an A & M man in one @-@ hundred miles of you , you are expected to get together , eat a little , and live over the days you spent at the A & M College of Texas . " The event received worldwide attention during World War II , when 25 Aggies " mustered " during the battle for the island of Corregidor . 
 Students who die while enrolled at Texas A & M are also honored at Silver Taps , a ceremony held , when necessary , on the first Tuesday of the month . This tradition began as a memorial for former Texas A & M president Lawrence Sullivan Ross . In the modern incarnation , on the morning of Silver Taps , a small card with the deceased student 's name , class , major , and birthdate is placed as a notice at the base of the flagpole in Academic Plaza . At 10 : 15 p.m. , all lights on campus are extinguished , and Albritton Tower begins to chime hymns . When the music begins , students gather in silence in front of the statue of Lawrence Sullivan Ross at Academic Plaza . At 10 : 30 pm , the Ross Volunteers march into the plaza and fire a 3 @-@ volley salute . <unk> stationed at the top of the Academic Building then play a special rendition of Taps , known as Silver Taps . The song is played three times ; once to the north , once to the south , and once to the west . It is never played to the east , " because the sun will never rise on that Aggie again . " Once the buglers have finished their tribute , the crowd disperses . Generally , students remain silent until reaching their homes . 
 = = Texas A & M Corps of Cadets = = 
 The Corps of Cadets ( or the Corps ) is known as the " Keepers of the Spirit " for its staunch defense of Aggie traditions . The Corps is a link to the early days of Texas A & M 's history , when all students were required to be members and receive military training . Although Corps membership became voluntary in 1965 , as of 2001 it was the United States ' largest uniformed student body outside the service academies , with an enrollment of 2 @,@ 318 cadets at the beginning of the 2006 – 2007 school year . 
 Members of the Corps have served in every armed conflict fought by the United States since 1876 , and over 225 have served as Generals or Flag Officers . Many members participate in ROTC programs and earn commissions in the United States Armed Forces upon graduation . As of fall 2012 , the Corps is composed of three Air Force Wings , three Army Brigades , and two Navy and Marine Regiments , in addition to veteran @-@ based outfits , as well as the Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band , whose members may be affiliated with any military branch . Among its notable units is Parson 's Mounted Cavalry , the only mounted ROTC unit in the United States . The Ross Volunteer Company , the oldest student @-@ run organization in the state , is the official honor guard for the Governor of Texas . The Fish Drill Team , a precision , close @-@ order rifle drill team composed entirely of Corps freshmen , represents the Corps and A & M in local and national competitions . They have won the national championship almost every year since their creation in 1946 , and have appeared in several Hollywood productions with prominent roles in the movies A Few Good Men and Courage Under Fire . 
 Members of the Corps are often referred to as " <unk> " or " <unk> " . While these terms originally stood for " Cadet in Training " and " Band Qualified " , respectively , they are more commonly and derisively used to abbreviate " Corps Turd " and " Band Queer " . Freshmen in the Corps are required to " whip out " to upperclassmen . This tradition requires the freshmen to extend their hand and introduce themselves to the upperclassman . From then on , they are expected to know the name of the person to whom they " whipped out . " The tradition applies only to upperclassmen in the Corps , and not to " non @-@ <unk> " , students who are not in the Corps . 
 One of a senior cadet 's " most cherished possessions " are his Senior Boots . Only seniors are allowed to wear these knee @-@ high riding boots , and most consider receiving their boots to be a rite of passage . All Senior Boots are custom @-@ made to fit the cadet and are a dark tan to brown color . Students wear their Senior Boots for the first time after Final Review as juniors while saluting the outgoing seniors . Final review is the last activity that Corps members participate in as a unit . This full military review takes place at the end of the spring semester on Simpson Drill Field , and is in two parts . The entire Corps march past a reviewing stand , which consists of high @-@ ranking military and university officials , for inspection . The Corps then returns to their dorms to change into the uniforms they will wear the following year , with the juniors donning their Senior Boots . The freshmen , sophomores , and juniors then march in formation past the reviewing stand , which is now filled with the senior cadets , saluting their former leaders . 
 = = Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band = = 
 The Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band ( also known as The Noble Men of Kyle , The Pulse of Aggieland or the Aggie Band ) is the official marching band of Texas A & M University . Composed of over 400 men and women from the school 's Corps of Cadets , it is the largest military marching band in the world . The band 's complex straight @-@ line marching maneuvers are performed exclusively to traditional marches . Some of these maneuvers are so complex , some computer programs used to create marching drills say they cannot be performed because they require two people to be in the same place at the same time . 
 Since its inception in 1894 , its members , known as BQs ( for Band Qualified or Band Queer ) , eat together , sleep in the same dormitories , and practice up to 40 hours per week on top of a full academic schedule . The Aggie Band performs at all home football games , some away games , and university and Corps functions throughout the year . Other events in which the band participated include inauguration parades for many United States Presidents and Texas Governors , major annual parades across the country , and the dedication ceremony for the George H. W. Bush Presidential Library . 
 = = Sports traditions = = 
 = = = 12th Man = = = 
 Aggie football fans call themselves the 12th Man , meaning they are there to support the 11 players on the field . To further symbolize their " readiness , desire , and enthusiasm " , the entire student body stands throughout the game . In a further show of respect , the students step " off the wood " ( step off of the bleachers onto the concrete ) whenever a player is injured or when the band plays the Aggie War Hymn or The Spirit of Aggieland . At the end of the Aggie War Hymn , fans sway back and forth , causing the upper deck of the stadium to move . The Aggie War Hymn was named the No. 1 college fight song by USA Today in 1997 . 
 The 12th Man tradition began in Dallas on January 2 , 1922 , at the Dixie Classic , the forerunner of the Cotton Bowl Classic . A & M played defending national champion Centre College in the first postseason game in the southwest . In this hard @-@ fought game , which produced national publicity , an underdog Aggie team was slowly defeating a team which had allowed fewer than six points per game . The first half produced so many injuries for A & M , Coach D. X. Bible feared he would not have enough men to finish the game . At that moment , he called into the Aggie section of the stands for E. King Gill , a student who had left football after the regular season to play basketball . Gill , who was spotting players for a Waco newspaper and was not in football uniform , donned the uniform of injured player Heine Weir and stood on the sidelines to await his turn . Although he did not actually play in the game , his readiness to play symbolized the willingness of all Aggies to support their team to the point of actually entering the game . When the game ended in a 22 @-@ 14 Aggie victory , Gill was the only man left standing on the sidelines for the Aggies . Gill later said , " I wish I could say that I went in and ran for the winning touchdown , but I did not . I simply stood by in case my team needed me . " A statue of E. King Gill stands to the north of Kyle Field to remind Aggies of their constant obligation to preserve the spirit of the 12th Man . 
 In the 1980s , the tradition was expanded as coach Jackie Sherrill created the 12th Man squad . Composed solely of walk @-@ on ( <unk> ) players , the squad would take the field for special teams performances . This squad only allowed one kick return for a touchdown by Texas Tech 's Rodney Blackshear . Sherrill 's successor , R. C. Slocum , amended the tradition in the 1990s to allow one walk @-@ on player , wearing the No. 12 jersey , to take the field for special teams plays . The player is chosen based on the level of determination and hard work shown in practices . Coach Dennis Franchione continued Slocum 's model , while also keeping an all @-@ walk @-@ on kickoff team that played three times in the 2006 season . 
 12th Man Towel The 12th Man Towel was created in the fall of 1985 by Rusty Riley and Kyle Harris , then president and vice president of the 12th Man Student Aggie Club , respectively , with the help of Gary Leach and Larry Leach , then club secretary and treasurer . The concept was presented to the Aggie Club faculty managers Harry Green Jr . , executive director of the 12th Man Foundation , and Jackie Sherrill , Texas A & M University athletic director and head football coach . Once their approval was given , Rusty and Kyle found a manufacturer in New York City through a local distributor in Bryan , Texas , and authorization was given to sell the towels on campus by school management and Chic Sell , who had the concession rights in Kyle Field . The first 1 @,@ 000 towels were purchased and delivered in time for the first home game of the 1985 college football season . Kyle and Rusty , along with a handful of Aggie Club members , sold the towels for $ 2 each in makeshift booths at strategic locations within Kyle Field . It was an immediate success , with all towels being sold at the first game . The A & M Yell Squad initially resisted the towels , claiming the Aggie Club was breaking tradition , but the Battalion staff supported the concept and began a successful selling and media campaign to help the towel gain acceptance throughout the A & M student body . Rusty worked with the Head Yell Leader on accepting the towel and once the Yell Squad accepted it , a press conference was held with Rusty , Coach Sherrill , and the Head Yell Leader . As the football season carried on , the 12th Man Towel continued selling in large quantities . The Aggie Club hired students to sell the towels at the MSC and on Aggie Club property , which at the time was located right outside of the main entrance to Kyle Field . The towel also gained an important supporting cast when Coach Sherrill 's 12th man kick @-@ off team squad began carrying them to motivate the student body in the stands . The 1985 regular college football season ended with a home game versus the Texas Longhorns . At that game , a sea of white 12th Man Towels filled the stadium , cheering the Aggies to a 42 @-@ 10 victory . The Aggies went on to win the Southwest Conference Title and defeat Auburn in the Cotton Bowl on January 1 , 1986 , with the 12th Man Towels proudly displayed to a national audience . During the 1988 Cotton Bowl Classic , which A & M played against Notre Dame , another towel was a point of contention . Twice during that game , Warren <unk> , a member of Sherrill 's 12th Man Kickoff Team , tackled Heisman Trophy winner Tim Brown , and then grabbed Brown 's towel and waved it over his head . An infuriated Brown tackled <unk> , earning himself a 15 @-@ yard <unk> @-@ like conduct penalty . 
 Because the students are always waiting for the opportunity to support their team , they are also willing to take the credit for the team 's good deeds . A popular Aggie tradition is that " when the team scores , everybody scores " . Whenever the Aggies score points during the game , students kiss their dates . 
 Seniors wearing either their Senior Boots or Aggie Rings are also encouraged to join the " Boot Line " . As the Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band leaves the field after their half @-@ time performances , seniors line up at the south end of Kyle Field to welcome the team back onto the field for the second half . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Unlike many schools , which have a large group of cheerleaders to rally their fans during sporting events , Texas A & M has five student Yell Leaders . Consisting of three seniors and two juniors , historically all male , the Yell Leaders are elected to their positions annually by the student body . These students do not perform gymnastic feats , but instead use hand signals , known as " pass backs " , to direct and intensify crowds . After the signals are passed through the crowd , the Yell Leaders give the signal to " hump it " , where the crowd leans forward and places their hands on their knees to maximize the noise . The Yell Leaders have a dozen yells that they can choose from depending on the situation . While some yells are designed to praise and motivate the team , others exist solely to make fun of the opposing side . 
 Students practice the yells at Midnight Yell Practice . Held at Kyle Field at midnight the night before a football game , Midnight Yell is similar to a pep rally . Over 20 @,@ 000 Aggies attend each session , practicing the yells that will be used in the following day 's game and generating an excitement for the game . At the conclusion of the yell practice , the stadium lights are extinguished and fans kiss their dates . This is also done as practice , because Aggies are expected to " mug down " , or kiss their dates , every time the football team scores on the field . Sports Illustrated named Midnight Yell as one of the " 100 Things You Gotta Do Before You Graduate . " 
 Aggies practice their yells again after each football game . If the team is victorious , the freshmen in the Corps of Cadets capture the Yell Leaders on Kyle Field and march them across campus to be dunked in Fish Pond . The wet Yell Leaders then make their way to the YMCA Building , where the Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band and members of the crowd join them for a short yell practice in preparation for the next week 's game . If the team is " outscored " or " runs out of time " ( Aggies never lose ) , a mini @-@ Yell Practice is held in Kyle Field before the crowd disperses . 
 The most well @-@ known Aggie yell is the simple " Beat the Hell Outta " the opposing school . In writing , this is often abbreviated as <unk> . For the annual game against the University of Texas at Austin ( no longer played after A & M 's 2012 move to the Southeastern Conference ) , students yell " Beat the Hell Outta t.u. " <unk> is strongly discouraged , and an upset Aggie will instead hiss their opponents or the referees . If a referee call is especially egregious in the minds of the Aggies , the Yell Leaders will call for the " Horse Laugh , " a yell that ends with a stadium wide hissing . 
 After each yell , students make a noise and a hand motion that is known as a wildcat . Each class has a separate wildcat , and students caught " pulling out , " or using the wildcat of a higher class , are often forced to do pushups as punishment . Freshmen raise their hands above their heads and yell " AAAA " . Sophomores , symbolically pushing back on the seniors , chant " A ! " five times , waving their hands up and down in front of the torso with their index fingers extended and thumbs perpendicular . Juniors yell " A ! A ! A ! Whoop ! " wrapping their left hand over their right fist , with both index fingers extended and pointing towards the ground , " shooting the ground " once for each " A " and holding the position on the " whoop ! " As a symbol of their expert marksmanship , seniors yell a single " A ! " and then " Whoop ! " while interlocking their fingers with their index fingers extended and pointed into the air . At the same time , the left foot is raised and tucked behind the right knee . The fingers are interlocked rather than covering the right hand so that the Aggie Ring is visible . 
 = = = Mascots = = = 
 Texas A & M 's official mascot is Reveille , now a purebred Rough collie . The first Reveille , a mixed breed dog , was adopted by students in 1931 after they found her on the side of the road . As of 2015 , the current mascot is Reveille IX . She is considered a Cadet General , the highest @-@ ranking member in the Corps of Cadets , and must be addressed by cadets as " Miss Reveille , ma 'am . " 
 Reveille accompanies her handlers , members of the E @-@ 2 unit of the Corps of Cadets , everywhere , including classes . It is a long @-@ held tradition that if Reveille decides to sleep on a cadet 's bed , that cadet is required to sleep on the floor . In truth , however , this only applied to the early mascots who were allowed to freely roam the campus . The contemporary mascots , certainly since the 1980s and likely earlier , are under the constant supervision of the Mascot Corporal and not allowed to freely roam about the cadet 's quarters . Another tradition is that if she chooses to bark in class , that session is cancelled . Upon the death of a current or former mascot , a full military funeral is held at Kyle Field , which usually attracts several thousand mourners . 
 Texas A & M also has an unofficial mascot , Ol ' Sarge , who is displayed only in graphics . Ol ' Sarge is portrayed as a tough @-@ looking corps drill sergeant and is considered one of the many icons representing Texas A & M 's long standing military history . The drawing was first seen in the 1940s , when The Battalion ran a caricature of one of the Yell Leaders . That caricature , of a rough and tough military man , quickly became used throughout campus . 
 = = = The Spirit of ' 02 = = = 
 The Corps of Cadets marks any Aggie scores during football games by firing The Spirit of ' 02 , a 3 @-@ inch M1902 field gun 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) . Issued to Field Artillery Units of the Reserve Officers ' Training Corps between the World Wars , the gun was believed to be one of several that were hidden by Corps members to prevent them from being scrapped during WWII . The Spirit of ' 02 was found buried in a ditch by students cutting wood for the annual Aggie Bonfire in the fall of 1974 . Only the rusted steel rims from the wooden wheels were showing above ground . Students mounted antique wagon wheels on the axles and brought the gun back to a place of honor in the Quad . Cadets later restored the gun , which has been fired to celebrate touchdowns since 1984 . 
 = = = Maroon Out = = = 
 One of Texas A & M 's newer traditions is Maroon Out , which began in 1998 . The football team had ended their 1997 season with a lopsided defeat to Nebraska in the Big 12 Championship Game . Kyle Valentine , Class of 2000 Junior President and a member within Class Councils , noticed how united the Nebraska fans seemed , all dressed in red . He proposed to Class Councils the idea to " Maroon Out " Kyle Field for the October 10 , 1998 rematch against Nebraska by selling a low @-@ cost , high @-@ quality maroon t @-@ shirt . This resulted in the sale of 31 @,@ 000 Maroon Out shirts , leading to a temporary national shortage of maroon colored t @-@ shirts . 
 The Aggies defeated Number 2 Nebraska 28 @-@ 21 , the first time in six seasons that Nebraska had lost a regular @-@ season conference game . The Daily Nebraskan noted that " A game that was dubbed a ' maroon @-@ out ' for Texas A & M fans proved to be lights out for Nebraska . The fans dressed themselves in maroon T @-@ shirts in an attempt to wash out the red and white that opponents have gotten used to . It worked . " 
 Since then , one football game each season is dubbed an official Maroon Out and discounted maroon t @-@ shirts are for sale for fans . Through 2010 , Texas A & M has been 7 @-@ 6 in Maroon Out games , beating 6 teams ranked in the Top 25 , despite being the underdog in each of the games . The basketball team has a similar tradition , called a " White Out , " where fans are encouraged to wear white t @-@ shirts . 
 Perhaps the most memorable Maroon Out moment was not maroon at all . After the events of September 11 , 2001 , five Aggie students wished to help honor America . They decided to ask the attendees of the next A & M football game , which would be held at Kyle Field on September 22 , 2001 , to wear patriotic colors . The colors would be divided by deck , with the upper deck wearing red , the middle deck wearing white , and the lower deck in blue . Within a five @-@ day period the students had contracted with several printers to create special t @-@ shirts which read " Standing for America " and the date . Despite initial concerns about not being able to sell enough shirts to be effective , the students sold about 70 @,@ 000 of these shirts , raising over $ 150 @,@ 000 for the relief efforts . 
 = = Aggie Bonfire = = 
 Aggie Bonfire was a long @-@ standing tradition at Texas A & M University as part of a college rivalry with the University of Texas at Austin , known as t.u. by Texas A & M students . For ninety years , Texas A & M students built and burned a large bonfire on campus each fall . Known within the Aggie community simply as Bonfire , the annual fall event symbolized the students ' " burning desire to beat the hell outta t.u. " The bonfire was traditionally lit around Thanksgiving in conjunction with the festivities surrounding the annual college football game between the schools . 
 The first on @-@ campus Aggie Bonfire was burned in 1909 , and the tradition continued for the next 90 years . For almost two decades , Bonfire was constructed from debris and pieces of wood that Aggies " found , " including lumber intended for a dormitory that students appropriated in 1912 . The event became school @-@ sanctioned in 1936 , and , for the first time , students were provided with axes , saws , and trucks and pointed towards a grove of dead trees on the edge of town . In the following years the Bonfire became more elaborate , and in 1967 the flames could be seen 25 miles ( 40 km ) away . In 1969 , the stack set the world record at 111 feet ( 30 m ) tall . 
 While the Bonfires of the 1960s were constructed in five to ten days , working primarily in daylight , by the late 1970s a more elaborate construction schedule had been implemented . Construction began in late October with " Cut " , with several weekends devoted to cutting down the logs with axes . The logs were brought to campus during " Load . " In early November , crews began " Stack " , a three @-@ week period in which the logs were wired together and Bonfire took shape . Near the end of stack , known as " Push " , students worked around the clock in rotating shifts . Although between two and five thousand students participated in the construction of Bonfire each year , most of them were unable to devote themselves full @-@ time to the task , and many worked only one or two shifts . While participating , the students wore " grodes , " old t @-@ shirts , jeans , and boots . By tradition , grodes were either not washed until after Bonfire burned or not washed at all . 
 In 1978 , Bonfire shifted to a wedding @-@ cake style , in which upper stacks of logs were wedged on top of lower stacks . The structure was built around a fortified <unk> , made from two telephone poles . Although tradition stated that if Bonfire burned through midnight A & M would win the following day 's game , with the introduction of the wedding cake design Bonfire began to fall quickly , sometimes burning for only 30 or 45 minutes . 
 At 2 : 42 AM on November 18 , 1999 , the partially completed Aggie Bonfire , standing 40 feet ( 10 m ) tall and consisting of about 5000 logs , collapsed during construction . Of the 58 students and alumni working on the stack , 12 were killed and 27 others were injured . On November 25 , 1999 , the date that Bonfire would have burned , Aggies instead held a vigil and remembrance ceremony . Over 40 @,@ 000 people , including former President George H.W. Bush and his wife Barbara and then @-@ Texas governor George W. Bush and his wife Laura , lit candles and observed up to two hours of silence at the site of the Bonfire collapse . The Bonfire Memorial was officially dedicated on November 18 , 2004 . 
 Bonfire was postponed until 2002 to restructure it to make it safer . Delays in the development of a safety plan and a high estimated cost ( mainly due to liability insurance ) , led A & M president Ray Bowen to postpone Bonfire indefinitely . Despite the university 's refusal to allow Bonfire to take place on campus , since 2002 a non @-@ university sanctioned Bonfire has burned annually . Known as Student Bonfire , the off @-@ campus event draws between 8 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 fans . 
 = = Elephant Walk = = 
 Every November , in the week of the football game against the University of Texas , the senior class gathers together for Elephant Walk . The seniors link arms and " wander aimlessly " through campus . The University of Texas game was always the last football game of the regular season , so Elephant Walk has come to symbolize the end of the seniors ' " usefulness " to the 12th Man and the passing of the torch to the junior class . In a reference to Elephant Walk , seniors in their last semester of study are often called " dead elephants . " 
 Elephant Walk began in 1926 , when a group of students decided to take one last walk around campus to remember their experiences at the school . Because they walked single file , with a hand on the shoulder of the person in front , an observer remarked that they " looked like elephants , about to die . " The day now begins at Kyle Field with a yell practice and speaker , and then the senior yell leaders lead the class through campus . Leaders of the graduating class also announce the class gift at Elephant Walk . 
 = = Service projects = = 
 Texas A & M provides many opportunities for students to participate in volunteer and service activities . Students at Texas A & M originated The Big Event , the largest one @-@ day student @-@ run service project in the nation . The annual event began in 1983 after the Texas A & M Student Government Association passed a resolution encouraging students to show their gratitude to the community by giving of their time . From its beginnings of six individual students wanting to contribute back to the local community , The Big Event has expanded to allow over twenty @-@ two thousand students to participate in over 2500 jobs , such as raking leaves , painting houses , and trimming trees . The concept for The Big Event has spread throughout the nation , and as of 2015 , 110 schools across the nation participate each year including 1 middle school , 2 high schools , and 68 universities . The 2008 Big Event attracted 10 @,@ 600 students who worked a record number of 1 @,@ 000 jobs . 
 Aggies also participate annually in Replant , a one @-@ day environmental service . In 2006 , 1 @,@ 000 students participated , planting 250 trees in three public parks . The event has been an annual tradition since 1991 , when the Texas A & M Environmental Issues Committee began planting trees to replace those that had been cut down for Bonfire . Although Bonfire has been officially disbanded , Replant continues . Its goals are now to beautify the Bryan @-@ College Station area and to " creat [ e ] harmony between students and the residents . " In 2000 , the group planted twelve live oak trees at the Texas A & M Polo Grounds in memory of the twelve victims of the 1999 Bonfire collapse . That year the group was awarded the Community Forestry Award from the Texas Forest Service . The group provides their own trees , grown at the Texas A & M Riverside campus in Bryan , Texas and has its own Student Government committee . 
 The Corps of Cadets annually conducts the March to the Brazos , a 14 miles ( 20 km ) round @-@ trip road march that serves as both a ceremony to transfer leadership as well as a fundraiser for the March of Dimes . The Corps hold various fundraisers and solicits donations throughout the year . On a Saturday morning , generally in April , each year , all members of the Corps gather at the Quadrangle , near their dormitories , and march en masse across campus and down Highway 60 to Texas A & M 's Animal Science Teaching , Research & Extension Complex near the east bank of the Brazos River . There , the cadets learn who will fill each leadership position for the following year . The current seniors are allowed to ride a bus back to campus while the newly promoted cadets lead their outfits back to campus . The event is the largest and most successful student @-@ run fundraising event in the United States for the March of Dimes . In its first 27 years , from 1977 through 2003 , the event raised a combined US $ 1 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = Asking for luck = = 
 Many students believe that they will do well on exams if they make an offering to Lawrence Sullivan " Sul " Ross . Ross , the president of Texas A & M in the 1890s , is credited with saving the school from closure . Affectionately known as " Sully , " many believe him to be " the embodiment of Aggie Spirit and tradition . " A & M legend states that Ross would often tutor students , and as payment would accept only a penny for their thoughts . At exam time his statue , located in Academic Plaza , is often covered in pennies . 
 Another spot in Academic Plaza is also believed to be lucky . Tradition says that if a couple walks together under the branches of the Century Tree , one of the oldest trees on campus , they will eventually marry . If the proposal takes place under the Century Tree , the marriage is supposed to last forever . 
 = = Privileged words = = 
 For much of its first 100 years , Texas A & M was a small , all @-@ male , military academy . The school became coeducational in the 1960s , and membership in the Corps of Cadets became voluntary . In military tradition , privileges are meted out as one climbs the ranks , and Texas A & M has several such traditions . The most obvious are the uniforms worn by the Corps of Cadets . Corps members wear different uniforms for each year , culminating in the prized Senior boots . 
 Vocabulary is also restricted by class . Freshmen may not say the word <unk> , a nickname for sophomores . Juniors are known as " Serge Butts " , so neither freshmen nor sophomores can say any form of either word ( accordingly , words such as " button " must be replaced with roundabout euphemisms , such as " circular fastener " ) . Juniors are also the first class to be allowed to say " Whoop ! " Seniors , known as " Zips " for the black and gold braid on their garrison caps , which resembles a zipper , have reserved the word elephant and all forms of the words " death , " " dying , " " shoot , " or " reload " in reference to the traditions surrounding Elephant Walk . However , saying the phrases " pass away , " " decease , " " fire , " " load again , " etc . , are all acceptable substitutes . 
 Students caught " pulling out " , or saying words that are reserved for other classes , are forced to " push . " Traditionally , this means the students must do a " class set " of pushups , one for each year of their class . The Class of 1945 did only 45 pushups and an extra <unk> has been added for each subsequent year ; the Fighting Texas Aggie Class of 2012 now does 112 . Pulling out privileges of the class directly above is considered " Good Bull " , but pulling out two classes or more is " Bad Bull . " Members of the Corps of Cadets generally take privileged words more seriously than non @-@ reg students . 
 = Hypertension = 
 Hypertension ( <unk> or HT ) , also known as high blood pressure ( HBP ) , is a long term medical condition in which the blood pressure in the arteries is persistently elevated . High blood pressure usually does not cause symptoms . Long term high blood pressure , however , is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease , stroke , heart failure , peripheral vascular disease , vision loss , and chronic kidney disease . 
 High blood pressure is classified as either primary ( essential ) high blood pressure or secondary high blood pressure . About 90 – 95 % of cases are primary , defined as high blood pressure due to nonspecific lifestyle and genetic factors . Lifestyle factors that increase the risk include excess salt , excess body weight , smoking , and alcohol . The remaining 5 – 10 % of cases are categorized as secondary high blood pressure , defined as high blood pressure due to an identifiable cause , such as chronic kidney disease , narrowing of the kidney arteries , an endocrine disorder , or the use of birth control pills . 
 Blood pressure is expressed by two measurements , the systolic and diastolic pressures , which are the maximum and minimum pressures , respectively . Normal blood pressure at rest is within the range of 100 – 140 millimeters mercury ( mmHg ) systolic and 60 – 90 mmHg diastolic . High blood pressure is present if the resting blood pressure is persistently at or above 140 / 90 mmHg for most adults . Different numbers apply to children . Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring over a 24 @-@ hour period appears more accurate than office best blood pressure measurement . 
 Lifestyle changes and medications can lower blood pressure and decrease the risk of health complications . Lifestyle changes include weight loss , decreased salt intake , physical exercise , and a healthy diet . If lifestyle changes are not sufficient blood pressure medications are used . Up to three medications controls blood pressure in 90 % of people . The treatment of moderately high arterial blood pressure ( defined as > 160 / 100 mmHg ) with medications is associated with an improved life expectancy . The effect of treatment of blood pressure between 140 / 90 mmHg and 160 / 100 mmHg is less clear , with some reviews finding benefit and others not finding benefit . High blood pressure affects between 16 and 37 % of the population globally . In 2010 hypertension was believed to have been a factor in 18 % ( 9 @.@ 4 million ) deaths . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Hypertension is rarely accompanied by any symptoms , and its identification is usually through screening , or when seeking healthcare for an unrelated problem . Some with high blood pressure report headaches ( particularly at the back of the head and in the morning ) , as well as lightheadedness , vertigo , tinnitus ( buzzing or hissing in the ears ) , altered vision or fainting episodes . These symptoms , however , might be related to associated anxiety rather than the high blood pressure itself . 
 On physical examination , hypertension may be associated with the presence of changes in the optic fundus seen by <unk> . The severity of the changes typical of hypertensive retinopathy is graded from I – IV ; grades I and II may be difficult to differentiate . The severity of the retinopathy correlates roughly with the duration and / or the severity of the hypertension . 
 = = = Secondary hypertension = = = 
 Hypertension with certain specific additional signs and symptoms may suggest secondary hypertension , i.e. hypertension due to an identifiable cause . For example , Cushing 's syndrome frequently causes <unk> obesity , glucose intolerance , moon face , a hump of fat behind the neck / shoulder , and purple abdominal stretch marks . Hyperthyroidism frequently causes weight loss with increased appetite , fast heart rate , bulging eyes , and tremor . Renal artery stenosis ( RAS ) may be associated with a localized abdominal bruit to the left or right of the midline ( unilateral RAS ) , or in both locations ( bilateral RAS ) . <unk> of the aorta frequently causes a decreased blood pressure in the lower extremities relative to the arms , and / or delayed or absent femoral arterial pulses . <unk> may cause abrupt ( " paroxysmal " ) episodes of hypertension accompanied by headache , palpitations , pale appearance , and excessive sweating . 
 = = = <unk> crisis = = = 
 Severely elevated blood pressure ( equal to or greater than a systolic 180 or diastolic of 110 ) is referred to as a hypertensive crisis . <unk> crisis is categorized as either hypertensive urgency or hypertensive emergency , according to the absence or presence of end organ damage , respectively . 
 In hypertensive urgency , there is no evidence of end organ damage resulting from the elevated blood pressure . In these cases , oral medications are used to lower the BP gradually over 24 to 48 hours . 
 In hypertensive emergency , there is evidence of direct damage to one or more organs . The most affected organs include the brain , kidney , heart and lungs , producing symptoms which may include confusion , drowsiness , chest pain and breathlessness . In hypertensive emergency , the blood pressure must be reduced more rapidly to stop ongoing organ damage , however , there is a lack of randomised controlled trial evidence for this approach . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 Hypertension occurs in approximately 8 – 10 % of pregnancies . Two blood pressure measurements six hours apart of greater than 140 / 90 mm Hg is considered diagnostic of hypertension in pregnancy . High blood pressure in pregnancy can be classified as pre @-@ existing hypertension , gestational hypertension or pre @-@ eclampsia . 
 Pre @-@ eclampsia is a serious condition of the second half of pregnancy and following delivery characterised by increased blood pressure and the presence of protein in the urine . It occurs in about 5 % of pregnancies and is responsible for approximately 16 % of all maternal deaths globally . Pre @-@ eclampsia also doubles the risk of perinatal mortality . Usually there are no symptoms in pre @-@ eclampsia and it is detected by routine screening . When symptoms of pre @-@ eclampsia occur the most common are headache , visual disturbance ( often " flashing lights " ) , vomiting , pain over the stomach , and swelling . Pre @-@ eclampsia can occasionally progress to a life @-@ threatening condition called eclampsia , which is a hypertensive emergency and has several serious complications including vision loss , brain swelling , seizures , kidney failure , pulmonary edema , and disseminated intravascular coagulation ( a blood clotting disorder ) . 
 In contrast , gestational hypertension is defined as new @-@ onset hypertension during pregnancy without protein in the urine . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Failure to thrive , seizures , irritability , lack of energy , and difficulty in breathing can be associated with hypertension in neonates and young infants . In older infants and children , hypertension can cause headache , unexplained irritability , fatigue , failure to thrive , blurred vision , nosebleeds , and facial paralysis . 
 = = Causes = = 
 = = = Primary hypertension = = = 
 Hypertension results from a complex interaction of genes and environmental factors . Numerous common genetic variants with small effects on blood pressure have been identified as well as some rare genetic variants with large effects on blood pressure . Also , GWAS have identified 35 genetic loci related to blood pressure ; 12 of these genetic loci influencing blood pressure were newly found . Sentinel SNP for each new genetic loci identified has shown an association with DNA methylation at multiple nearby <unk> sites . These sentinel SNP are located within genes related to vascular smooth muscle and renal function . DNA methylation might affect in some way linking common genetic variation to multiple phenotypes even though mechanisms underlying these associations are not understood . Single variant test performed in this study for the 35 sentinel SNP ( known and new ) showed that genetic variants singly or in aggregate contribute to risk of clinical phenotypes related to high blood pressure . 
 Blood pressure rises with aging and the risk of becoming hypertensive in later life is considerable . Several environmental factors influence blood pressure . High salt intake raises the blood pressure in salt sensitive individuals ; lack of exercise , obesity , stress , and depression can play a role in individual cases . The possible role of other factors such as caffeine consumption , and vitamin D deficiency are less clear . Insulin resistance , which is common in obesity and is a component of syndrome X ( or the metabolic syndrome ) , is also thought to contribute to hypertension . Events in early life , such as low birth weight , maternal smoking , and lack of breast feeding may be risk factors for adult essential hypertension , although the mechanisms linking these exposures to adult hypertension remain unclear . An increased rate of high blood urea has been found in untreated people with hypertensive in comparison with people with normal blood pressure , although it is uncertain whether the former plays a causal role or is subsidiary to poor kidney function . 
 = = = Secondary hypertension = = = 
 Secondary hypertension results from an identifiable cause . Kidney disease is the most common secondary cause of hypertension . Hypertension can also be caused by endocrine conditions , such as Cushing 's syndrome , hyperthyroidism , hypothyroidism , acromegaly , Conn 's syndrome or <unk> , hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma . Other causes of secondary hypertension include obesity , sleep apnea , pregnancy , <unk> of the aorta , excessive liquorice consumption and certain prescription medicines , herbal remedies and illegal drugs . Arsenic exposure through drinking water has been shown to correlate with elevated blood pressure . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 In most people with established essential hypertension , increased resistance to blood flow ( total peripheral resistance ) accounts for the high pressure while cardiac output remains normal . There is evidence that some younger people with <unk> or ' borderline hypertension ' have high cardiac output , an elevated heart rate and normal peripheral resistance , termed hyperkinetic borderline hypertension . These individuals develop the typical features of established essential hypertension in later life as their cardiac output falls and peripheral resistance rises with age . Whether this pattern is typical of all people who ultimately develop hypertension is disputed . The increased peripheral resistance in established hypertension is mainly attributable to structural narrowing of small arteries and arterioles , although a reduction in the number or density of capillaries may also contribute . Whether increased active <unk> vasoconstriction plays a role in established essential hypertension is unclear . Hypertension is also associated with decreased peripheral venous compliance which may increase venous return , increase cardiac <unk> and , ultimately , cause diastolic dysfunction . 
 Pulse pressure ( the difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure ) is frequently increased in older people with hypertension . This can mean that systolic pressure is abnormally high , but diastolic pressure may be normal or low — a condition termed isolated systolic hypertension . The high pulse pressure in elderly people with hypertension or isolated systolic hypertension is explained by increased arterial stiffness , which typically accompanies aging and may be exacerbated by high blood pressure . 
 Many mechanisms have been proposed to account for the rise in peripheral resistance in hypertension . Most evidence implicates either disturbances in the kidneys ' salt and water handling ( particularly abnormalities in the <unk> renin @-@ angiotensin system ) and / or abnormalities of the sympathetic nervous system . These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and it is likely that both contribute to some extent in most cases of essential hypertension . It has also been suggested that endothelial dysfunction and vascular inflammation may also contribute to increased peripheral resistance and vascular damage in hypertension . Interleukin 17 has garnered interest for its role in increasing the production of several other immune system chemical signals thought to be involved in hypertension such as tumor necrosis factor alpha , interleukin 1 , interleukin 6 , and interleukin 8 . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Hypertension is diagnosed on the basis of a persistently high blood pressure . Traditionally , the National Institute of Clinical Excellence recommends three separate sphygmomanometer measurements at monthly intervals . The American Heart Association recommends at least three measurements on at least two separate health care visits . Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring over 12 to 24 hours is the most accurate method to confirm the diagnosis . 
 An exception to this is those with very high blood pressure readings especially when there is poor organ function . Initial assessment of the hypertensive people should include a complete history and physical examination . With the availability of 24 @-@ hour ambulatory blood pressure monitors and home blood pressure machines , the importance of not wrongly diagnosing those who have white coat hypertension has led to a change in protocols . In the United Kingdom , current best practice is to follow up a single raised clinic reading with ambulatory measurement , or less ideally with home blood pressure monitoring over the course of 7 days . The United States Preventative Services Task Force also recommends getting measurements outside of the healthcare environment . <unk> in the elderly or <unk> artery syndrome may also require consideration . This condition is believed to be due to calcification of the arteries resulting in abnormally high blood pressure readings with a blood pressure cuff while intra arterial measurements of blood pressure are normal . Orthostatic hypertension is when blood pressure increases upon standing . 
