 Once the diagnosis of hypertension has been made , healthcare providers should attempt to identify the underlying cause based on risk factors and other symptoms , if present . Secondary hypertension is more common in preadolescent children , with most cases caused by kidney disease . Primary or essential hypertension is more common in adolescents and has multiple risk factors , including obesity and a family history of hypertension . Laboratory tests can also be performed to identify possible causes of secondary hypertension , and to determine whether hypertension has caused damage to the heart , eyes , and kidneys . Additional tests for diabetes and high cholesterol levels are usually performed because these conditions are additional risk factors for the development of heart disease and may require treatment . 
 Serum creatinine is measured to assess for the presence of kidney disease , which can be either the cause or the result of hypertension . Serum creatinine alone may overestimate glomerular filtration rate and recent guidelines advocate the use of predictive equations such as the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease ( <unk> ) formula to estimate glomerular filtration rate ( <unk> ) . <unk> can also provide a baseline measurement of kidney function that can be used to monitor for side effects of certain antihypertensive drugs on kidney function . Additionally , testing of urine samples for protein is used as a secondary indicator of kidney disease . <unk> ( EKG / ECG ) testing is done to check for evidence that the heart is under strain from high blood pressure . It may also show whether there is thickening of the heart muscle ( left ventricular hypertrophy ) or whether the heart has experienced a prior minor disturbance such as a silent heart attack . A chest X @-@ ray or an echocardiogram may also be performed to look for signs of heart enlargement or damage to the heart . 
 = = = Adults = = = 
 In people aged 18 years or older hypertension is defined as a systolic and / or a diastolic blood pressure measurement consistently higher than an accepted normal value ( currently 139 mmHg systolic , 89 mmHg diastolic : see table — Classification ( JNC7 ) ) . Lower thresholds are used ( 135 mmHg systolic or 85 mmHg diastolic ) if measurements are derived from 24 @-@ hour ambulatory or home monitoring . Recent international hypertension guidelines have also created categories below the hypertensive range to indicate a continuum of risk with higher blood pressures in the normal range . JNC7 ( 2003 ) uses the term <unk> for blood pressure in the range 120 – 139 mmHg systolic and / or 80 – 89 mmHg diastolic , while <unk> @-@ ESC Guidelines ( 2007 ) and BHS IV ( 2004 ) use optimal , normal and high normal categories to subdivide pressures below 140 mmHg systolic and 90 mmHg diastolic . Hypertension is also sub @-@ classified : JNC7 distinguishes hypertension stage I , hypertension stage II , and isolated systolic hypertension . Isolated systolic hypertension refers to elevated systolic pressure with normal diastolic pressure and is common in the elderly . The <unk> @-@ ESC Guidelines ( 2007 ) and BHS IV ( 2004 ) additionally define a third stage ( stage III hypertension ) for people with systolic blood pressure exceeding 179 mmHg or a diastolic pressure over 109 mmHg . Hypertension is classified as " resistant " if medications do not reduce blood pressure to normal levels . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Hypertension occurs in around 0 @.@ 2 to 3 % of newborns ; however , blood pressure is not measured routinely in healthy newborns . Hypertension is more common in high risk newborns . A variety of factors , such as gestational age , <unk> age and birth weight needs to be taken into account when deciding if a blood pressure is normal in a newborn . 
 Hypertension defined as elevated blood pressure over several visits affects 1 % to 5 % of children and adolescents and is associated with long term risks of ill @-@ health . Blood pressure rises with age in childhood and , in children , hypertension is defined as an average systolic or diastolic blood pressure on three or more occasions equal or higher than the 95th percentile appropriate for the sex , age and height of the child . High blood pressure must be confirmed on repeated visits however before characterizing a child as having hypertension . <unk> in children has been defined as average systolic or diastolic blood pressure that is greater than or equal to the 90th percentile , but less than the 95th percentile . In adolescents , it has been proposed that hypertension and pre @-@ hypertension are diagnosed and classified using the same criteria as in adults . 
 The value of routine screening for hypertension in children over the age of 3 years is debated . In 2004 the National High Blood Pressure Education Program recommended that children aged 3 years and older have blood pressure measurement at least once at every health care visit and the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute and American Academy of Pediatrics made a similar recommendation . However , the American Academy of Family Physicians support the view of the U.S. preventive Services Task Force that evidence is insufficient to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for hypertension in children and adolescents who do not have symptoms . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Much of the disease burden of high blood pressure is experienced by people who are not labeled as hypertensive . Consequently , population strategies are required to reduce the consequences of high blood pressure and reduce the need for antihypertensive drug therapy . Lifestyle changes are recommended to lower blood pressure , before starting drug therapy . The 2004 British Hypertension Society guidelines proposed the following lifestyle changes consistent with those outlined by the US National High BP Education Program in 2002 for the primary prevention of hypertension : 
 maintain normal body weight for adults ( e.g. body mass index 20 – 25 kg / m2 ) 
 reduce dietary sodium intake to < 100 mmol / day ( < 6 g of sodium chloride or < 2 @.@ 4 g of sodium per day ) 
 engage in regular aerobic physical activity such as brisk walking ( ≥ 30 min per day , most days of the week ) 
 limit alcohol consumption to no more than 3 units / day in men and no more than 2 units / day in women 
 consume a diet rich in fruit and vegetables ( e.g. at least five portions per day ) ; 
 Effective lifestyle modification may lower blood pressure as much as an individual antihypertensive drug . Combinations of two or more lifestyle modifications can achieve even better results . 
 = = Management = = 
 According to one review published in 2003 , reduction of the blood pressure by 5 mmHg can decrease the risk of stroke by 34 % , of <unk> heart disease by 21 % , and reduce the likelihood of dementia , heart failure , and mortality from cardiovascular disease . 
 = = = Target blood pressure = = = 
 Various expert groups have produced guidelines regarding how low the blood pressure target should be when a person is treated for hypertension . These groups recommend a target below the range 140 @-@ 160 / 90 @-@ 100 mmHg for the general population . Controversy exists regarding the appropriate targets for certain subgroups , including the elderly , people with diabetes and people with kidney disease . 
 Many expert groups recommend a slightly higher target of 150 / 90 mmHg for those over 80 years of age . One expert group , the <unk> @-@ 8 , recommends the target of 150 / 90 mmHg for those over 60 years of age , but some experts within this group disagree with this recommendation . Some expert groups have also recommended slightly lower targets in those with diabetes or chronic kidney disease with proteinuria , but others recommend the same target as for the general population . In 2015 a large trial suggests that among people over 50 with increased heart disease risk , aiming to reduce systolic blood pressure to 120 mmHg was associated with lower mortality but increased side effects compared to a target of 140 mmHg . 
 = = = Lifestyle modifications = = = 
 The first line of treatment for hypertension is lifestyle changes , including dietary changes , physical exercise , and weight loss . Though these have all been recommended in scientific advisories , a review by Cochrane found no evidence for effects of weight loss diets on death or long @-@ term complications and adverse events in persons with hypertension . The review did find a decrease in blood pressure . Their potential effectiveness is similar to and at times exceeds a single medication . If hypertension is high enough to justify immediate use of medications , lifestyle changes are still recommended in conjunction with medication . 
 Dietary changes shown to reduce blood pressure include diets with low sodium , the DASH diet , vegetarian diets and high potassium diets . 
 Physical exercise regimens which are shown to reduce blood pressure include isometric resistance exercise , aerobic exercise , resistance exercise , and device @-@ guided breathing . 
 Stress reduction techniques such as biofeedback or transcendental meditation may be considered as an add @-@ on to other treatments to reduce hypertension , but do not have evidence for preventing cardiovascular disease on their own . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 Several classes of medications , collectively referred to as antihypertensive medications , are available for treating hypertension . 
 First line medications for hypertension include thiazide @-@ diuretics , calcium channel blockers , angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers . These medications may be used alone or in combination ; the latter option may serve to minimize counter @-@ regulatory mechanisms that act to revert blood pressure values to pre @-@ treatment levels . The majority of people require more than one medication to control their hypertension . 
 = = = Resistant hypertension = = = 
 Resistant hypertension is defined as hypertension that remains above goal blood pressure in spite of using , at once , three antihypertensive medications belonging to different drug classes . Low adherence to treatment is an important cause of resistant hypertension . Resistant hypertension may also represent the result of chronic high activity of the autonomic nervous system ; this concept is known as " neurogenic hypertension " . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 = = = Adults = = = 
 As of 2000 , nearly one billion people or ~ 26 % of the adult population of the world had hypertension . It was common in both developed ( 333 million ) and undeveloped ( 639 million ) countries . However , rates vary markedly in different regions with rates as low as 3 @.@ 4 % ( men ) and 6 @.@ 8 % ( women ) in rural India and as high as 68 @.@ 9 % ( men ) and 72 @.@ 5 % ( women ) in Poland . In Europe hypertension occurs in about 30 @-@ 45 % of people as of 2013 . 
 In 1995 it was estimated that 43 million people in the United States had hypertension or were taking antihypertensive medication , almost 24 % of the adult United States population . The prevalence of hypertension in the United States is increasing and reached 29 % in 2004 . As of 2006 hypertension affects 76 million US adults ( 34 % of the population ) and African American adults have among the highest rates of hypertension in the world at 44 % . It is more common in blacks and Filipinos and less in whites and Mexican Americans , rates increase with age , and is greater in the southeastern United States . Hypertension is more common in men ( though menopause tends to decrease this difference ) and in those of low socioeconomic status . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Rates of high blood pressure in children and adolescents have increased in the last 20 years in the United States . Childhood hypertension , particularly in <unk> , is more often secondary to an underlying disorder than in adults . Kidney disease is the most common secondary cause of hypertension in children and adolescents . Nevertheless , primary or essential hypertension accounts for most cases . 
 = = Outcomes = = 
 Hypertension is the most important preventable risk factor for premature death worldwide . It increases the risk of ischemic heart disease strokes , peripheral vascular disease , and other cardiovascular diseases , including heart failure , aortic aneurysms , diffuse atherosclerosis , chronic kidney disease , and pulmonary embolism . Hypertension is also a risk factor for cognitive impairment and dementia . Other complications include hypertensive retinopathy and hypertensive nephropathy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Measurement = = = 
 Modern understanding of the cardiovascular system began with the work of physician William Harvey ( 1578 – 1657 ) , who described the circulation of blood in his book " De motu cordis " . The English clergyman Stephen Hales made the first published measurement of blood pressure in 1733 . However hypertension as a clinical entity came into being in 1896 with the invention of the cuff @-@ based sphygmomanometer by Scipione Riva @-@ <unk> in 1896 . This allowed the measurement of blood pressure in the clinic . In 1905 , Nikolai <unk> improved the technique by describing the <unk> sounds that are heard when the artery is <unk> with a stethoscope while the sphygmomanometer cuff is deflated . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 The symptoms similar to symptoms of patients with hypertensive crisis are discussed in medieval Persian medical texts in the chapter of " fullness disease " . The symptoms include headache , heaviness in the head , sluggish movements , general redness and warm to touch feel of the body , prominent , distended and tense vessels , fullness of the pulse , distension of the skin , coloured and dense urine , loss of appetite , weak eyesight , impairment of thinking , yawning , drowsiness , vascular rupture , and hemorrhagic stroke . <unk> disease was presumed to be due to an excessive amount of blood within the blood vessels . 
 Descriptions of hypertension as a disease came among others from Thomas Young in 1808 and especially Richard Bright in 1836 . The first report of elevated blood pressure in a person without evidence of kidney disease was made by Frederick Akbar Mahomed ( 1849 – 1884 ) . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Historically the treatment for what was called the " hard pulse disease " consisted in reducing the quantity of blood by bloodletting or the application of leeches . This was advocated by The Yellow Emperor of China , Cornelius Celsus , Galen , and Hippocrates . The therapeutic approach for the treatment of hard pulse disease included changes in lifestyle ( staying away from anger and sexual intercourse ) and dietary program for patients ( avoiding the consumption of wine , meat , and pastries , reducing the volume of food in a meal , maintaining a low @-@ energy diet and the dietary usage of spinach and vinegar ) . 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , before effective pharmacological treatment for hypertension became possible , three treatment modalities were used , all with numerous side @-@ effects : strict sodium restriction ( for example the rice diet ) , <unk> ( surgical ablation of parts of the sympathetic nervous system ) , and <unk> therapy ( injection of substances that caused a fever , indirectly reducing blood pressure ) . 
 The first chemical for hypertension , sodium thiocyanate , was used in 1900 but had many side effects and was unpopular . Several other agents were developed after the Second World War , the most popular and reasonably effective of which were <unk> chloride , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( derived from the medicinal plant Rauwolfia serpentina ) . None of these were well tolerated . A major breakthrough was achieved with the discovery of the first well @-@ tolerated orally available agents . The first was <unk> , the first thiazide diuretic and developed from the antibiotic <unk> , which became available in 1958 . Subsequently beta blockers , calcium channel blockers , angiotensin converting enzyme ( ACE ) inhibitors , angiotensin receptor blockers and renin inhibitors were developed as antihypertensive agents . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Awareness = = = 
 The World Health Organization has identified hypertension , or high blood pressure , as the leading cause of cardiovascular mortality . The World Hypertension League ( WHL ) , an umbrella organization of 85 national hypertension societies and leagues , recognized that more than 50 % of the hypertensive population worldwide are unaware of their condition . To address this problem , the WHL initiated a global awareness campaign on hypertension in 2005 and dedicated May 17 of each year as World Hypertension Day ( WHD ) . Over the past three years , more national societies have been engaging in WHD and have been innovative in their activities to get the message to the public . In 2007 , there was record participation from 47 member countries of the WHL . During the week of WHD , all these countries – in partnership with their local governments , professional societies , nongovernmental organizations and private industries – promoted hypertension awareness among the public through several media and public rallies . Using mass media such as Internet and television , the message reached more than 250 million people . As the momentum picks up year after year , the WHL is confident that almost all the estimated 1 @.@ 5 billion people affected by elevated blood pressure can be reached . 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 High blood pressure is the most common chronic medical problem prompting visits to primary health care providers in USA . The American Heart Association estimated the direct and indirect costs of high blood pressure in 2010 as $ 76 @.@ 6 billion . In the US 80 % of people with hypertension are aware of their condition , 71 % take some antihypertensive medication , but only 48 % of people aware that they have hypertension adequately control it . Adequate management of hypertension can be hampered by inadequacies in the diagnosis , treatment , and / or control of high blood pressure . Health care providers face many obstacles to achieving blood pressure control , including resistance to taking multiple medications to reach blood pressure goals . People also face the challenges of adhering to medicine schedules and making lifestyle changes . Nonetheless , the achievement of blood pressure goals is possible , and most importantly , lowering blood pressure significantly reduces the risk of death due to heart disease and stroke , the development of other debilitating conditions , and the cost associated with advanced medical care . 
 = Sarah Barnes = 
 Sarah Barnes is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Loui Batley . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 10 October 2005 . Sarah was created by executive producer David Hanson as part of the Barnes family . In 2009 , Batley quit the serial in order to pursue other projects . Although the character is no longer part of current story lines , she has been central to many key story lines , one of the earliest the high profile gay storyline involving supercouple John Paul McQueen and Craig Dean . 
 The theme of sexuality was further explored through Sarah , seeing her have relations with Zoe Carpenter and a serious relationship with Lydia Hart , which Batley initially found strange to portray because of Sarah 's many relationships with male characters . Other story lines include her <unk> on a modelling career , competing in swimming competitions and her many relationships . According to Batley , Sarah relies on people too much for support and was " man @-@ crazy " in her early years . Sarah 's final storyline is her death in a skydiving accident , which was a first for a British soap opera . The storyline aired in the second series of Hollyoaks Later and was devised by producer Bryan Kirkwood . Sarah 's death won " Spectacular Scene Of The Year " at the British Soap Awards in 2010 and the scenes have been praised by certain critics . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Auditions were held for the part of Sarah , the eldest daughter of the Barnes family and actress Loui Batley secured the role . On 1 July 2009 , Digital Spy reported that Loui Batley had quit the soap and would leave towards the end of the year . Loui 's decision matched co @-@ worker Zoë Lister ( Zoë Carpenter ) . The Hollyoaks website officially announced on 23 July 2009 that both Batley and Lister would leave towards the end of that year . Their final storyline was described as a " A tragic curtain call for one of them " , stating that either Sarah or Zoë would die . Batley wanted to quit the serial in December 2008 when her contract ran out . Kirkwood asked her to stay another six months with the promise of a good exit storyline . The plot also involved Zoe and Lydia Hart ( Lydia Kelly ) . She made it clear to Kirkwood and new executive producer Lucy Allan that she would leave afterward . Allan then came up with the idea of writing Batley out of the serial in its sister show Hollyoaks Later . Upon hearing Kirkwood 's ideas for her exit storyline , Batley said : " I 've been there for quite a while and it was a great ending for the character - I couldn 't have asked for a better way to go ... " Hollyoaks Later producer Bryan Kirkwood said : " Loui 's been brilliant in Hollyoaks and she 's massively underrated . She 's been at the centre of some of the biggest storylines on the main show . She never turned in a performance less than top @-@ notch and I wish she had a little more recognition for that . She 's a very strong actress and it 's been fantastic to work with her - and great to be involved in her exit . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Craig 's affair = = = 
 In 2007 , Sarah discovered fiancé Craig Dean 's ( Guy Burnet ) affair with best friend John Paul McQueen ( James Sutton ) , in the storyline dubbed " McDean " . The storyline reached its climax as the truth is revealed " dramatically " at her engagement party . Sarah walked in on the pair kissing , A Hollyoaks spokesperson stated in an interview with Digital Spy , " John Paul 's sick of all the lies and decides enough is enough . He sends a text from Craig 's phone asking Sarah to come upstairs to see him . Safe in the knowledge that Sarah is on her way , JP sets about seducing Craig . When she walks in , she can 't believe what she 's looking at ... " Sarah tried to recover from this and Batley said : " I don 't think she got over Rhys , either . Craig more so , though . He absolutely destroyed her happiness and belief in men . Her relationship with Craig was going to be her life and she put so much effort into it , emotionally and physically , and it completely destroyed her . " Batley said Sarah could not handle the fact he cheated on her with another man . She opined this was the reason her storyline with Zoe and Lydia worked well . However John Paul 's betrayal also had impact on Sarah 's life because he was one of her best friends . Batley said : " John Paul was her confidante and she thought they were best friends - it 's hard to say which part made more of an impact on her . It was all just one horrible experience . It was the betrayal from both of them . " 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 Sexuality continued to be a focal point in Sarah 's storyline . The new plot featured Sarah questioning her sexuality after a one @-@ night stand with Zoë . Speaking to Digital Spy , Batley said Sarah and Zoe always been close . Zoe is the best friend she has ever had because in her life people have always let her down , whereas Zoe has been " her rock " ; despite their fall outs . Batley felt this to be the reason why they share a mutual friendly love for one another . In comparison , Sarah 's feeling intensified and Batley commented : " For Sarah it 's something more - she completely relies on her and that turns into love for her as well . " Whilst filming the raunchy scenes , there was a nervous atmosphere on set . 
 Sarah then embarked on her first full relationship with a woman , with Lydia . The pair have a series of " misunderstandings " until Sarah admits her feelings for Lydia and comes out . Batley spoke of the storyline during an interview with The Sun branding her relationship with Lydia as serious compared to her fling with Zoe . The rocky relationship led to Lydia being jealous of Sarah and Zoë 's friendship , and eventually Sarah 's death within the show . 
 When asked if she thought Sarah had come to terms with the fact she is a lesbian , Batley said : " I don 't know because from the beginning , Sarah was always boy crazy , so for her , I don 't think it 's about being one way or the other — I think she 's just very clingy . Batley also gave her views on how Sarah should have to developed , opining it would have been good for her to spend more time on her own , be herself and learn who she really is . She felt that Sarah had to often clung on to people and believing that ultimately it would make her happy . Sarah tries this notion with Zoe , describing this Batley added : " I think that 's what happened with Zoe as well because they were such good friends . With Lydia , she brought something to her and she got on with her and was sparky , which is something that Sarah liked . I don 't know if she 'd suddenly turned , though . Maybe she was more bisexual than anything . " 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 Alongside Batley 's departure , it was that revealed Lister , who plays Zoe , would also leave the show . The exit storyline was described as a " tragic skydiving death " caused by a jealous Lydia . Prior to transmission of the skydiving , Lister had explained the storyline during an interview with Sky TV . She said Lydia initially severed a parachute to end her own life , later deciding to cut Zoe 's parachute so she could have Sarah to herself . She also explained that viewers were not permitted to know who would have parachute . The parachute mix up was described as the storyline 's " dramatic twist " . Speaking on how Zoe 's friendship with Sarah causes Lydia to commit her actions , Lister stated : 
 It was revealed that cast members filmed on a number of location settings . One of these included an army barracks . They also filmed scenes at Tatenhill Airfield . The airfield 's staff had been asked to remain secretive regarding details of the storyline . Lister explained that the episodes were fun to film and they had to do " funny " stunts . Lister was the only cast member out of her , Batley and Kelly who performed the aired skydiving for real . A Hollyoaks producer released two pictures of funeral wreaths , one reading ' Zoe ' and the other ' Sarah ' , in order to confuse viewers further as to whom the victim would be . When the episode aired it played out with Sarah dying in the jump . When executive producer Bryan Kirkwood described the exit to Batley , she thought it was a " perfect and amazing " end for Sarah . Further adding that " It really draws a line under the four years " of Sarah 's storylines . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 During the character 's original appearance on Hollyoaks , there was no additional information to Sarah 's life beforehand . Mike ( Tony Hirst ) and Kathy Barnes ( Sarah Jane Buckley ) struggled to cope with Kathy 's pregnancy , as the two were still teenagers at the time , and they discussed putting her up for adoption , although Mike then became attached to Sarah after her birth and the couple decided to keep her when Mike realised that he wanted to be a father after all . 
 Sarah befriends Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) and Gilly Roach ( Anthony Quinlan ) , Rhys and Sarah grow closer , but he is put off by her age . Despite her mother 's high hopes for her to become an Olympic swimmer , Sarah begins dating Rhys . Kathy is horrified and vows to stop Rhys seeing Sarah . Kathy then seduces an intoxicated Rhys and she has a one @-@ night stand with him . When Sarah finds out , she dumps him and starts to despise her mother . Few months after , Sarah regrets dumping Rhys and forgives him . However , he takes nude photographs of her and shows them to his friends . Disgusted , she ends her relationship with Rhys . Sarah grows close to Gilly but decides not to begin a relationship . Sarah and Hannah strike friendships with friends Craig and John Paul . She and Craig start to date and set Hannah up with John Paul . Craig is caught kissing John Paul by Hannah , which leads to John Paul 's coming out . Craig convinces Sarah he is heterosexual and John Paul initiated the kiss . Regardless , Sarah sees John Paul as a friend and encourages him in his first relationship with Spike ( Tom Vaughan ) . Craig is angry to learn the pair had sex , he tries to force himself on Sarah and calls her a whore . They later make up . Sarah does a photoshoot for a fictional magazine named Ripple and she delves further into the world of modelling , in spite of Craig 's feelings . Sarah turns to John Paul for advice over her relationship . Unbeknownst to her , John Paul and Craig are having an affair . They go on holiday to repair their problems . Sarah becomes suspicious of Craig , to avoid her finding out the truth Craig proposes marriage to her , which she accepts . They then plan to move to Dublin and Craig 's mother Frankie Osborne ( Helen Pearson ) decides to host an engagement party at The Dog in the Pond . John Paul is heartbroken . John Paul uses Craig 's mobile phone to text Sarah and tell her to come to Craig 's room , where he and Craig are kissing . Sarah walks into the room and is shocked to find Craig cheating . She then tells everyone at the party about Craig and John Paul 's affair . Sarah later asks Craig to take her back , assuming he is just confused . Craig then admits his love for John Paul and he leaves with him for Dublin . 
 Sarah begins to grow close to Rhys again and they reunite . However , Rhys is using her to make Beth Clement ( Sinéad Moynihan ) jealous . Beth and Sarah are friends and she convinces Sarah to split with Rhys . Sarah befriends Zoë and asks her to move in . Kathy accuses Zoë and Mike of having an affair and Mike breaks up with Kathy , who leaves him . Mike confesses his feelings for Zoë and they begin a secret relationship . Sarah discovers the truth and moves in with friend , Nancy Hayton ( Jessica Fox ) . Sarah finds an odd friend in Elliot Bevan ( <unk> Davies ) , who develops feelings for her . Elliot 's physics lecturer Roger <unk> ( Quentin <unk> ) meets Sarah and after embarking on a fling , Elliot uncovers the truth . He becomes angry but eventually forgives Sarah . Sarah splits up with Roger when Sarah finds out he has a wife and made a pass at Zoë . Sarah starts to fall in love with Elliot and confesses to him . Elliot reciprocates and the pair become a couple . Soon after , Elliot decides they are too different and dumps her . Sarah is jealous when best friend Hannah dates him . 
 Sarah makes up with Zoë and moves back into the Barnes home . They , and Nancy , then set off on a holiday to Zoë 's old school so that she could make a speech on careers to current students . While at the school , it becomes apparent that Zoë had been involved in an affair with her teacher while she was fifteen . A drunken Sarah then accuses her of using her dad to fulfil her fantasy of being in a relationship with an older man . The pair end up in a fight . Sarah and Zoë make up as they are left alone in the hotel room . The pair drunkenly share a kiss before sleeping together . After this , Sarah feels more guilty and cannot look at Zoë , who tells her it was a drunken mistake and urges her to put it behind her . Arriving back in Hollyoaks , Sarah makes Zoë leave for a trip to give them space . Zoë returns and Sarah threatens to tell Mike , however Kris Fisher ( Gerard McCarthy ) overhears and tells Nancy and Mike , who throws both Sarah and Zoë out . A guilty Sarah begins to have random sex with teenagers . First Archie Carpenter ( Stephen Beard ) , who turns out to be Zoë 's brother when she catches them in a passionate state . Sarah is then shocked when it turns out Archie is rating her against other girls . She later has sex with Warren Fox ( Jamie Lomas ) . 
 Sarah moves back home when she reconciles with Mike . Whilst working at a dance class Persephone Hart ( Elizabeth Hadley ) claims that Sarah has assaulted her . The girl 's older sister , Lydia manages to get her fired . Sarah and Lydia then become good friends . Lydia later reveals herself to be a lesbian . The pair then share a kiss which leaves Sarah confused . She becomes attracted to Lydia , she thinks is bisexual and that her experience with Zoë had started her sexuality crisis . Sarah eventually admits to having feelings for Lydia , and the pair begin a relationship . Lydia later accuses Sarah of cheating with Zoë . Mike begins to accept Sarah 's sexuality . Sarah discovers she was nearly given up for adoption by Mike and Kathy as a baby , after Zoë steals a script from Mike and uses it in her film for college . Sarah is angry at Zoë for using her but they later make up . Sarah breaks up with Lydia when she catches her kissing ex @-@ girlfriend Charlotte Lau ( Amy Yamazaki ) . Lydia grows increasingly jealous of Sarah and Zoë 's friendship . Lydia trouble between Sarah and Charlotte , so Sarah and Zoe go on an adventure trip . Lydia follows them as they get drunk and Sarah tells Zoe she loves her . Lydia over hears and is further fuels her jealousy . As they prepare for a skydive Lydia cuts Zoe 's parachute , however the become mixed up . Sarah falls to her death with her faulty parachute . Lydia frames Zoe but is eventually convicted . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kris Green of Digital Spy described the skydive as one of the best stunts he had seen in a long time , adding that the reaction to Sarah 's death made him shed a tear and that the episode on a whole was " amazing " . The parachute stunt won ' Spectacular Scene Of The Year ' at the 2010 British Soap Awards . At the 2010 Inside Soap Awards the storyline gained nominations for Batley in the categories of " Best Exit " and " Best Stunt " . 
 Virgin Media profiled some of Hollyoaks ' " hottest females " in their opinion , of Sarah they stated : " Sarah Barnes ' sex appeal stretched so far she even had to experiment with the ladies . Turns out that wasn 't the brightest idea she 'd ever had - her jealous girlfriend Lydia finally polished her off good and proper . " Olly <unk> men 's lifestyle magazine FHM commented on Sarah stating : " the one who fell out of a plane and <unk> all across the ground , leading to a really drawn out and really boring plotline " Holy Soap opined that Batley " livened up screens as lesbian temptress Sarah Barnes . " and that she had many " major storylines " . Digital Spy brand Sarah as , just a " wannabe model " . The Daily Mail have favoured Sarah 's storyline with Zoe . They opined that Sarah has had a " string of bad relationships with men " , that Zoe and Sarah 's kiss was an " interesting turn " and call it a scandal , that " heats and spices up " Hollyoaks . Nadia Sam @-@ <unk> of The Sun disagreed with Batley 's comments on the lesbian scenes being weird and said " They 've been far from weird to watch ... " 
 The Bristol Evening Post branded Sarah 's coming out as an " amazing storyline " , said Sarah is a " leggy brunette " and opined her attraction to Lydia developed into " full @-@ blown obsession " . Asian News International included Sarah and Zoe second on their top ten " girl @-@ on @-@ girl kisses on TV " list . The Liverpool Daily Post ran a quiz focused on style , one of their result trends read " You like to put your own stamp on trends and tend to mix designer and high street clothes to create the look you want . You are an " urban aspirant " like Sarah Barnes , from Hollyoaks . " When Sarah dated males to convince herself she is straight , Lesbian culture website AfterEllen.com stated that " Sarah will surely find out de @-@ gaying is just not possible " . They also branded her storyline " scandalous " and said she " has had her fair share of failed relationships - with men , that is " . 
 = Richard Cantillon = 
 Richard Cantillon ( French : [ kɑ ̃ <unk> ̃ ] ; 1680s – May 1734 ) was an Irish @-@ French economist and author of Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en Général ( Essay on the Nature of Trade in General ) , a book considered by William Stanley Jevons to be the " cradle of political economy " . Although little information exists on Cantillon 's life , it is known that he became a successful banker and merchant at an early age . His success was largely derived from the political and business connections he made through his family and through an early employer , James Brydges . During the late 1710s and early 1720s , Cantillon speculated in , and later helped fund , John Law 's Mississippi Company , from which he acquired great wealth . However , his success came at a cost to his debtors , who pursued him with lawsuits , criminal charges , and even murder plots until his death in 1734 . 
 Essai remains Cantillon 's only surviving contribution to economics . It was written around 1730 and circulated widely in manuscript form , but was not published until 1755 . His work was translated into Spanish by Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos , probably in the late 1770s , and considered essential reading for political economy . Despite having much influence on the early development of the physiocrat and classical schools of thought , Essai was largely forgotten until its rediscovery by Jevons in the late 19th century . Cantillon was influenced by his experiences as a banker , and especially by the speculative bubble of John Law 's Mississippi Company . He was also heavily influenced by prior economists , especially William Petty . 
 Essai is considered the first complete treatise on economics , with numerous contributions to the science . These contributions include : his cause and effect methodology , monetary theories , his conception of the entrepreneur as a risk @-@ bearer , and the development of spatial economics . Cantillon 's Essai had significant influence on the early development of political economy , including the works of Adam Smith , Anne Turgot , Jean @-@ Baptiste Say , Frédéric Bastiat and François Quesnay . 
 = = Biography = = 
 While details regarding Richard Cantillon 's life are scarce , it is thought that he was born sometime during the 1680s in County Kerry , Ireland . He was son to land @-@ owner Richard Cantillon of <unk> . Sometime in the middle of the first decade of the 18th century Cantillon moved to France , where he attained French citizenship . By 1711 , Cantillon found himself in the employment of British Paymaster General James Brydges , in Spain , where he organised payments to British prisoners of war during the War of Spanish Succession . Cantillon remained in Spain until 1714 , cultivating a number of business and political connections , before returning to Paris . Cantillon then became involved in the banking industry working for a cousin , who at that time was lead @-@ correspondent of the Parisian branch of a family bank . Two years later , thanks in large part to financial backing by James Brydges , Cantillon bought his cousin out and attained ownership of the bank . Given the financial and political connections Cantillon was able to attain both through his family and through James Brydges , Cantillon proved a fairly successful banker , specialising in money transfers between Paris and London . 
 At this time , Cantillon became involved with British mercantilist John Law through the Mississippi Company . Based on the monetary theory proposed by William Potter in his 1650 tract The Key of Wealth , John Law posited that increases in the money supply would lead to the employment of unused land and labour , leading to higher productivity . In 1716 , the French government granted him both permission to found the Banque Générale and virtual monopoly over the right to develop French territories in North America , named the Mississippi Company . In return , Law promised the French government to finance their debt at low rates of interest . Law began a financial speculative bubble by selling shares of the Mississippi Company , using the Banque Générale 's virtual monopoly on the issue of bank notes to finance his investors . 
 Richard Cantillon amassed a great fortune from his speculation , buying Mississippi Company shares early and selling them at inflated prices . Cantillon 's financial success and growing influence caused friction in his relationship with John Law , and sometime thereafter Law threatened to imprison Cantillon if the latter did not leave France within twenty @-@ four hours . Cantillon replied : " I shall not go away ; but I will make your system succeed . " To that end , in 1718 Law , Cantillon , and wealthy speculator Joseph Gage formed a private company centred on financing further speculation in North American real estate . 
 In 1719 , Cantillon left Paris for Amsterdam , returning briefly in early 1720 . Lending in Paris , Cantillon had outlying debt repaid to him in London and Amsterdam . With the collapse of the " Mississippi bubble " , Cantillon was able to collect on debt accruing high rates of interest . Most of his debtors had suffered financial damage in the bubble collapse and blamed Cantillon — until his death , Cantillon was involved in countless lawsuits filed by his debtors , leading to a number of murder plots and criminal accusations . 
 On 16 February 1722 , Cantillon married Mary Mahony , daughter of Count Daniel O 'Mahony — a wealthy merchant and former Irish general — spending much of the remainder of the 1720s travelling throughout Europe with his wife . Cantillon and Mary had two children , a son who died at an early age and a daughter , Henrietta , who would go on to marry William Howard Earl of Stafford in 1743 . Although he frequently returned to Paris between 1729 and 1733 , his permanent residence was in London . In May 1734 , his residence in London was burned to the ground , and it is generally assumed that Cantillon died in the fire . While the fire 's causes are unclear , the most widely accepted theory is that Cantillon was murdered . One of Cantillon 's biographers , Antoine Murphy , has advanced the alternative theory that Cantillon staged his own death to escape the harassment of his debtors , appearing in Suriname under the name Chevalier de <unk> . 
 = = Contributions to economics = = 
 Although there is evidence that Richard Cantillon wrote a wide variety of manuscripts , only his Essai Sur La Nature Du Commerce En Général ( abbreviated Essai ) survives . Written in 1730 , it was published in French in 1755 , and was translated into English by Henry Higgs in 1932 . Evidence suggests that Essai had tremendous influence on the early development of economic science , Cantillon 's treatise was largely neglected during the 19th century . In the late 19th century and it was " rediscovered " by William Stanley Jevons , who considered it the " cradle of political economy " . Since then , Cantillon 's Essai has received growing attention . Essai is considered the first complete treatise on economic theory , and Cantillon has been called the " father of enterprise economics " . 
 One of the greatest influences on Cantillon 's writing was English economist William Petty and his 1662 tract Treatise on Taxes . Although Petty provided much of the groundwork for Cantillon 's Essai , Anthony Brewer argues that Petty 's influence has been overstated . Apart from Petty , other possible influences on Cantillon include John Locke , Cicero , Livy , Pliny the Elder , Pliny the Younger , Charles Davenant , Edmond Halley , Isaac Newton , Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban , and Jean <unk> . Cantillon 's involvement in John Law 's speculative bubble proved invaluable and likely heavily influenced his insight on the relationship between increases in the supply of money , price , and production . 
 = = = Methodology = = = 
 Cantillon 's Essai is written using a distinctive causal methodology , separating Cantillon from his mercantilist predecessors . Essai is peppered with the word " natural " , which in the case of Cantillon 's treatise is meant to imply a cause and effect relationship between economic actions and phenomena . Economist Murray Rothbard credits Cantillon with being one of the first theorists to isolate economic phenomena with simple models , where otherwise uncontrollable variables can be fixed . Cantillon made frequent use of the concept of ceteris paribus throughout Essai in an attempt to neutralise independent variables . Furthermore , he is credited with employing a methodology similar to Carl Menger 's methodological individualism , by deducing complex phenomena from simple observations . 
 A cause and effect methodology led to a relatively value @-@ free approach to economic science , in which Cantillon was uninterested in the merit of any particular economic action or phenomenon , focusing rather on the explanation of relationships . This led Cantillon to separate economic science from politics and ethics to a greater degree than previous mercantilist writers . This has led to disputes on whether Cantillon can justly be considered a mercantilist or one of the first anti @-@ <unk> , given that Cantillon often cited government @-@ manipulated trade surpluses and specie accumulation as positive economic stimuli . Others argue that in instances where Cantillon is thought to have supported certain mercantilist policies , he actually provided a more neutral analysis by explicitly stating possible limitations of mercantilist policies . 
 = = = Monetary theory = = = 
 Differences between prior <unk> and Cantillon arise early in Essai , regarding the origins of wealth and price formation on the market . Cantillon distinguishes between wealth and money , considering wealth in itself " nothing but the food , conveniences , and pleasures of life . " While Cantillon advocated an " intrinsic " theory of value , based on the input of land and labour ( cost of production ) , he is considered to have touched upon a subjective theory of value . Cantillon held that market prices are not immediately decided by intrinsic value , but are derived from supply and demand . He considered market prices to be derived by comparing supply , the quantity of a particular good in a particular market , to demand , the quantity of money brought to be exchanged . Believing market prices to tend towards the intrinsic value of a good , Cantillon may have also originated the uniformity @-@ of @-@ profit principle — changes in the market price of a good may lead to changes in supply , reflecting a rise or fall in profit . 
 In Essai , Cantillon provided an advanced version of John Locke 's quantity theory of money , focusing on relative inflation and the velocity of money . Cantillon suggested that inflation occurs gradually and that the new supply of money has a localised effect on inflation , effectively originating the concept of non @-@ neutral money . Furthermore , he posited that the original recipients of new money enjoy higher standards of living at the expense of later recipients . The concept of relative inflation , or a disproportionate rise in prices among different goods in an economy , is now known as the Cantillon effect . Cantillon also considered changes in the velocity of money ( quantity of exchanges made within a specific amount of time ) influential on prices , although not to the same degree as changes in the quantity of money . While he believed that the money supply consisted only of specie , he conceded that increases in money substitutes — or bank notes — could affect prices by effectively increasing the velocity of circulating of deposited specie . Apart from distinguishing money from money substitute , he also distinguished between bank notes offered as receipts for specie deposits and bank notes circulating beyond the quantity of specie — or fiduciary media — suggesting that the volume of fiduciary media is strictly limited by people 's confidence in its <unk> . He considered fiduciary media a useful tool to abate the downward pressure that hoarding of specie has on the velocity of money . 
 Addressing the mercantilist belief that monetary intervention could cause a perpetually favourable balance of trade , Cantillon developed a specie @-@ flow mechanism foreshadowing future international monetary equilibrium theories . He suggested that in countries with a high quantity of money in circulation , prices will increase and therefore become less competitive in relation to countries where there is a relative scarcity of money . Thus , Cantillon also held that increases in the supply of money , regardless of the source , cause increases in the price level and therefore reduce the competitiveness of a particular nation 's industry in relation to a nation with lower prices . However , Cantillon did not believe that international markets tended toward equilibrium , and instead suggested that government hoard specie to avoid rising prices and falling competitiveness . Furthermore , he suggested that a favourable balance of trade can be maintained by offering a better product and retaining qualitative competitiveness . Cantillon 's preference towards a favourable balance of trade possibly stemmed from the mercantilist belief in exchange being a zero @-@ sum game , in which one party gains at the expense of another . 
 A relatively advanced theory of interest is also presented . Cantillon believed that interest originates from the need of borrowers for capital and from the fear of loss of the lenders , meaning that borrowers have to recompense lenders for the risk of the possible insolvency of the debtor . In turn , interest is paid out of earned profits originating from the return on invested capital . While previously it was believed that the rate of interest varied inversely to the quantity of money , Cantillon posited that the rate of interest was determined by the supply and demand on the <unk> funds market — an insight usually attributed to Scottish philosopher David Hume . As such , while saved money impacts the rate of interest , new money that is instead used for consumption does not ; Cantillon 's theory of interest is therefore similar to John Maynard Keynes 's liquidity preference theory . 
 = = = Other contributions = = = 
 Traditionally it is Jean @-@ Baptiste Say who is credited for coining the word and advancing the concept of the entrepreneur , but in fact it was Cantillon who first introduced the term in Essai . Cantillon divided society into two principal classes — fixed income wage @-@ earners and non @-@ fixed income earners . Entrepreneurs , according to Cantillon , are non @-@ fixed income earners who pay known costs of production but earn uncertain incomes , due to the speculative nature of pandering to an unknown demand for their product . Cantillon , while providing the foundations , did not develop a dedicated theory of uncertainty — the topic was not revisited until the 20th century , by Ludwig von Mises , Frank Knight , and John Maynard Keynes , among others . Furthermore , unlike later theories of entrepreneurship which saw the entrepreneur as a disruptive force , Cantillon anticipated the belief that the entrepreneur brought equilibrium to a market by correctly predicting consumer preferences . 
 Spatial economics deal with distance and area , and how these may affect a market through transportation costs and geographical limitations . The development of spatial economics is usually ascribed to German economist Johann Heinrich von Thünen ; however , Cantillon addressed spatial economics nearly a century earlier . Cantillon integrated his advancements in spatial economic theory into his microeconomic analysis of the market , describing how transportation costs influence the location of factories , markets and population centres — that is , individuals strive to lower transportation costs . Conclusions on spatial economics were derived from three premises : cost of raw materials of equal quality will always be higher near the capital , due to transportation costs ; transportation costs vary on transportation type ( for example , water transportation was considered cheaper than land @-@ based transportation ) ; and larger goods that are more difficult to transport will always be cheaper closer to their area of production . For example , Cantillon believed markets were designed as they were to decrease costs to both merchants and villagers in terms of time and transportation . Similarly , Cantillon posited that the locations of cities were the result in large part of the wealth of inhabiting property owners and their ability to afford transportation costs — wealthier property owners tended to live farther from their property , because they could afford the transportation costs . In Essai , spatial economic theory was used to derive why markets occupied the geographical area they did and why costs varied across different markets . 
 Apart from originating theories on the entrepreneur and spatial economics , Cantillon also provided a dedicated theory on population growth . Unlike William Petty , who believed there always existed a considerable amount of unused land and economic opportunity to support economic growth , Cantillon theorised that population grows only as long as there are economic opportunities present . Specifically , Cantillon cited three determining variables for population size : natural resources , technology , and culture . Therefore , populations grow only as far as the three aforementioned variables allowed . Furthermore , Cantillon 's population theory was more modern than that of Malthus in the sense that Cantillon recognised a much broader category of factors which affect population growth , including the tendency for population growth to fall to zero as a society becomes more industrialised . 
 = = Influence = = 
 While Essai was not published until 1755 as a result of heavy censorship in France , it did widely circulate in the form of an unpublished manuscript between its completion and its publication . It notably influenced many direct forerunners of the classical school of thought , including Turgot and other physiocrats . Cantillon was a major influence on physiocrat François Quesnay , who may have learned of Cantillon 's work through Marquis of Mirabeau . While it is evident that Essai influenced Quesnay , to what degree remains controversial . There is evidence that Quesnay did not fully understand , or was not completely aware of , Cantillon 's theories . Many of Quesnay 's economic beliefs were elucidated previously in Essai , but Quesnay did reject a number of Cantillon 's premises , including the scarcity of land and Cantillon 's population theory . Also , Quesnay recognised the scarcity of capital and capital accumulation as a prerequisite for investment . Nevertheless , Cantillon was considered the " father of physiocracy " by Henry Higgs , due to his influence on Quesnay . It is also possible that Cantillon influenced Scottish economist James Steuart , both directly and indirectly . 
 Cantillon is one of the few economists cited by Adam Smith , who directly borrows Cantillon 's sustenance theory of wages . Large sections of Smith 's economic theory were possibly directly influenced by Cantillon , although in many respects Adam Smith advanced well beyond the scope of Cantillon . Some economic historians have stated that Adam Smith provided little of value from his own intellect , notably Schumpeter and Rothbard . In any case , through his influence on Adam Smith and the physiocrats , Cantillon was quite possibly the pre @-@ classical economist who contributed most to the ideas of the classical school . Illustrative of this was Cantillon 's influence on Say , which is noticeable in the methodology employed in the latter 's Treatise on Political Economy . 
 = Hasta Que Te Conocí = 
 " Hasta Que Te Conocí " ( " Until I Met You " ) is a song written , produced , and performed by Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Juan Gabriel . It was released in 1986 as the third single from his studio album Pensamientos . In the song , the protagonist learns the meaning of suffering after meeting a lover who mistreats him . It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot Latin Song chart . A live version of the song was included on his album En el Palacio de Bellas Artes ( 1990 ) which peaked at number ten on the Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 The song has been recorded by several artists including Roberto del Castillo , Ana Gabriel , Marc Anthony , Raúl di Blasio , and Maná . Anthony covered the song on his debut studio album Otra Nota ( 1993 ) after hearing it on the radio during a taxi <unk> di Blasio 's version features Gabriel performing the vocals on the song . Maná 's recording peaked at number one on the Hot Latin Songs and earned a nomination for Record of the Year at the 2012 Latin Grammy Awards . Gabriel received an American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Latin award in 1994 and in 2013 for Anthony 's and Maná 's covers of the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Hasta Que Te Conocí " is a song written , produced , and performed by Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Juan Gabriel as the final track on Juan Gabriel 's studio album Pensamientos ( 1986 ) . It was released as the second single from the album by RCA Latin . The song is in the key of D minor . In the lyrics , the protagonist has not known the feeling of suffering until he meets a lover who mistreats him . The song has been featured in some of Gabriel 's compilation albums including 14 Exitos <unk> : Para Ti ( 1988 ) , La Historia del Divo ( 2006 ) , and Lo <unk> de Juan Gabriel ( 2008 ) . A live version of the song was included on the live album En el Palacio de Bellas Artes ( 1990 ) as a potpourri which features the National Symphony Orchestra . He also performed the song live during the 10th Latin Grammy Awards ceremony where he received the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year award . In 2015 , Gabriel recorded the song as a duet featuring Mexican singer Joy Huerta ( of Jesse & Joy ) for his album Los Dúo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jason Birchmeier of Allmusic called the song a " classic " on the review of La Historia del Divo . On the week of December 26 , 1986 , " Hasta Que Te Conocí " debuted at number thirty @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . The song climbed to the top ten on the week of March 21 , 1987 and peaked at number two six weeks later with the number one position being held off by Braulio 's song " En <unk> " . " Hasta Que Te Conocí " ended 1987 as the fourth best @-@ performing Latin single of the year in the United States . The live version of the song peaked at number ten on the Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Marc Anthony version = = 
 In 1993 , American recording artist Marc Anthony covered " Hasta Que Te Conocí " on his debut studio album Otra Nota . According to Anthony , he originally had no desire to record in Spanish and turned down an offer by RMM manager Ralph Mercado to record an album in salsa . During a taxi ride , Anthony heard Gabriel 's " Hasta Que Te Conocí " on the radio and was compelled to perform the song in salsa . This led to an agreement between Mercado and Anthony to record an album in salsa with a cover of " Hasta Que Te Conocí " included . 
 A curtailed version of the song appears on Anthony 's compilation album Desde un Principio : From the Beginning ( 1999 ) while the full version appears on his 2003 compilation album Éxitos <unk> . Anthony performed a live version of the song at the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards . The song has been included in his tour setlist including his Nada Personal Tour and the Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony en Concierto tour . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 On the review of the album , Evan Gutierrez of Allmusic cited Anthony 's cover as one of the tracks that " showcased well " with his " edgy improvisation and wide vocal range " . Anthony 's cover received a nomination for Tropical Song of the Year at the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards , but lost to " El Baile del <unk> " by <unk> Vargas y su Orquesta . At the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) Latin Awards of 1994 , Juan Gabriel received an award in the Tropical / Salsa Category for " Hasta Que Te Conocí " . " Hasta Que Te Conocí " peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 A music video for the song was produced to promote the single which was filmed in New York City . In the video , Anthony and a woman are shown having a happy relationship until she breaks up with him by leaving a note for him leaving Anthony in bitterness . It was included on the video compilation album <unk> Videos de India y Marc Anthony ( 1996 ) . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Maná version = = 
 In 2012 , Mexican rock band Maná covered the song for their greatest hits album <unk> en la Bahía : Lo Mejor de Maná . The song was released as a single on June 26 , 2012 . It is the second time that the band covered a song by Juan Gabriel after " Se Me <unk> Otra Vez " in 1999 . According to lead vocalist <unk> Olvera , they heard the song while in Venezuela and the band decided to cover the song in ballad with swing music . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 David <unk> of Allmusic called Mana 's cover of the song " an excellent , heartfelt take " . Carlos Quintana of About.com labeled it as " one of the very best songs of this production . " At the 13th Latin Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination for Record of the Year which was awarded to Jesse & Joy for " ¡ Corre ! " . In 2013 , it was nominated Rock / Alternative Song of the Year at the 25th Lo Nuestro Awards , which went to Maná 's other song " El <unk> Amor <unk> " . The success of Maná 's cover led to Gabriel receiving an ASCAP Latin award in the pop category . 
 In the United States , the song reached number @-@ one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs becoming their ninth number @-@ one song on the chart . It also peaked at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In Mexico , the peaked at number three on the Mexican Airplay Chart chart . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 A music video for Maná 's version was released on August 27 , 2012 . It was directed by Pablo Croce and filmed in the Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City , Mexico . In the video , a man recounts his sorrows with depression and alcohol in a bar regretting his love for a woman . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Other cover versions = = 
 In 1987 , Dominican musician Roberto del Castillo covered " Hasta Que Te Conocí " in merengue on his album Justo a Tiempo . His version peaked at number eleven on the Hot Latin Songs chart . Mexican singer Ana Gabriel performed a live cover of the song on her album En Vivo ( 1990 ) . Her version peaked at number twenty @-@ five on the Hot Latin Songs chart . In 1994 , Argentine pianist Raúl di Blasio covered the song on his album Piano de America , Vol . 2 @.@ di Blasio 's cover was released to radio stations on May 10 , 1994 . It features Gabriel performing the vocals which was omitted on the Anglo version of the <unk> di Blasio 's version peaked at number thirty @-@ six on the Hot Latin Songs . It has been featured on his compilation albums Entre Amigos y Exitos ( 2003 ) and La Historia del Piano de América ... Los Éxitos ( 2006 ) and on Gabriel 's album Mis <unk> , Mis Amigos ( 2009 ) . A music video for the Anglo version was released by BMG and was included on the DVD set for La Historia del Piano de América ... Los Éxitos ( 2006 ) . Mexican singer Pilar Montenegro included a version of the track featuring rapper Voltio on her album South Beach in 2005 . In 2009 , Mexican recording artist <unk> sampled the record on her song " Hasta Que Me <unk> " ( " Until You Met Me " ) from her album Mi Delirio , in which the song is written as a " response " to the original composition . 
 = Scattered disc = 
 The scattered disc ( or scattered disk ) is a distant circumstellar disc in the Solar System that is sparsely populated by icy minor planets , a subset of the broader family of trans @-@ Neptunian objects . The scattered @-@ disc objects ( SDOs ) have orbital eccentricities ranging as high as 0 @.@ 8 , inclinations as high as 40 ° , and perihelia greater than 30 astronomical units ( 4 @.@ 5 × 109 km ; 2 @.@ 8 × 109 mi ) . These extreme orbits are thought to be the result of gravitational " scattering " by the gas giants , and the objects continue to be subject to perturbation by the planet Neptune . 
 Although the closest scattered @-@ disc objects approach the Sun at about 30 – 35 AU , their orbits can extend well beyond 100 AU . This makes scattered objects among the most distant and coldest objects in the Solar System . The innermost portion of the scattered disc overlaps with a torus @-@ shaped region of orbiting objects traditionally called the Kuiper belt , but its outer limits reach much further away from the Sun and further above and below the ecliptic than the Kuiper belt proper . 
 Because of its unstable nature , astronomers now consider the scattered disc to be the place of origin for most periodic comets in the Solar System , with the centaurs , a population of icy bodies between Jupiter and Neptune , being the intermediate stage in an object 's migration from the disc to the inner Solar System . Eventually , perturbations from the giant planets send such objects towards the Sun , transforming them into periodic comets . Many Oort cloud objects are also thought to have originated in the scattered disc . Detached objects are not sharply distinct from scattered disc objects , and some such as Sedna have sometimes been considered to be included in this group . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Traditionally , devices like a blink comparator were used in astronomy to detect objects in the Solar System , because these objects would move between two exposures — this involved time @-@ consuming steps like exposing and developing photographic plates or films , and people then using a blink comparator to manually detect prospective objects . During the 1980s , the use of CCD @-@ based cameras in telescopes made it possible to directly produce electronic images that could then be readily digitized and transferred to digital images . Because the CCD captured more light than film ( about 90 % versus 10 % of incoming light ) and the blinking could now be done at an adjustable computer screen , the surveys allowed for higher throughput . A flood of new discoveries was the result : over a thousand trans @-@ Neptunian objects were detected between 1992 and 2006 . 
 The first scattered @-@ disc object ( SDO ) to be recognised as such was 1996 <unk> , originally identified in 1996 by astronomers based at Mauna Kea in Hawaii . Three more were identified by the same survey in 1999 : 1999 <unk> , 1999 <unk> , and 1999 <unk> . The first object presently classified as an SDO to be discovered was 1995 <unk> , found in 1995 by <unk> . 
 As of 2011 , over 200 SDOs have been identified , including 2007 <unk> ( discovered by <unk> , Brown , and Rabinowitz ) , 2002 <unk> ( NEAT ) , Eris ( Brown , Trujillo , and Rabinowitz ) , Sedna ( Brown , Trujillo , and Rabinowitz ) and 2004 <unk> ( Deep Ecliptic Survey ) . Although the numbers of objects in the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc are hypothesized to be roughly equal , observational bias due to their greater distance means that far fewer SDOs have been observed to date . 
 = = Subdivisions of trans @-@ Neptunian space = = 
 Known trans @-@ Neptunian objects are often divided into two subpopulations : the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc . A third reservoir of trans @-@ Neptunian objects , the Oort cloud , has been hypothesized , although no confirmed direct observations of the Oort cloud have been made . Some researchers further suggest a transitional space between the scattered disc and the inner Oort cloud , populated with " detached objects " . 
 = = = Scattered disc versus Kuiper belt = = = 
 The Kuiper belt is a relatively thick torus ( or " doughnut " ) of space , extending from about 30 to 50 AU comprising two main populations of Kuiper belt objects ( KBOs ) : the classical Kuiper @-@ belt objects ( or " cubewanos " ) , which lie in orbits untouched by Neptune , and the resonant Kuiper @-@ belt objects ; those which Neptune has locked into a precise orbital ratio such as 3 : 2 ( the object goes around twice for every three Neptune orbits ) and 2 : 1 ( the object goes around once for every two Neptune orbits ) . These ratios , called orbital resonances , allow KBOs to persist in regions which Neptune 's gravitational influence would otherwise have cleared out over the age of the Solar System , since the objects are never close enough to Neptune to be scattered by its gravity . Those in 3 : 2 resonances are known as " plutinos " , because Pluto is the largest member of their group , whereas those in 2 : 1 resonances are known as " <unk> " . 
 In contrast to the Kuiper belt , the scattered @-@ disc population can be disturbed by Neptune . Scattered @-@ disc objects come within gravitational range of Neptune at their closest approaches ( ~ 30 AU ) but their farthest distances reach many times that . Ongoing research suggests that the centaurs , a class of icy planetoids that orbit between Jupiter and Neptune , may simply be SDOs thrown into the inner reaches of the Solar System by Neptune , making them " cis @-@ Neptunian " rather than trans @-@ Neptunian scattered objects . Some objects , like ( <unk> ) 1999 <unk> , blur the distinction and the Minor Planet Center ( MPC ) , which officially catalogues all trans @-@ Neptunian objects , now lists centaurs and SDOs together . 
 The MPC also makes a clear distinction between the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc ; separating those objects in stable orbits ( the Kuiper belt ) from those in scattered orbits ( the scattered disc and the centaurs ) . However , the difference between the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc is not clearcut , and many astronomy see the scattered disc not as a separate population but as an outward region of the Kuiper belt . Another term used is " scattered Kuiper @-@ belt object " ( or <unk> ) for bodies of the scattered disc . 
 Morbidelli and Brown propose that the difference between objects in the Kuiper @-@ belt and scattered @-@ disc objects is that the latter bodies " are transported in semi @-@ major axis by close and distant encounters with Neptune " , but the former experienced no such close encounters . This delineation is inadequate ( as they note ) over the age of the Solar System , since bodies " trapped in resonances " could " pass from a scattering phase to a non @-@ scattering phase ( and vice versa ) numerous times " . That is , trans @-@ Neptunian objects could travel back and forth between the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc over time . Therefore , they chose instead to define the regions , rather than the objects , defining the scattered disc as " the region of orbital space that can be visited by bodies that have encountered Neptune " within the radius of a Hill sphere , and the Kuiper belt as its " complement ... in the a > 30 AU region " ; the region of the Solar System populated by objects with semi @-@ major axes greater than 30 AU . 
 = = = Detached objects = = = 
 The Minor Planet Center classifies the trans @-@ Neptunian object 90377 Sedna as a scattered @-@ disc object . Its discoverer Michael E. Brown has suggested instead that it should be considered an inner Oort @-@ cloud object rather than a member of the scattered disc , because , with a perihelion distance of 76 AU , it is too remote to be affected by the gravitational attraction of the outer planets . Under this definition , an object with a perihelion greater than 40 AU could be classified as outside the scattered disc . 
 Sedna is not the only such object : 2000 CR105 ( discovered before Sedna ) and 2004 <unk> have a perihelion too far away from Neptune to be influenced by it . This led to a discussion among astronomers about a new minor planet set , called the extended scattered disc ( E @-@ SDO ) . 2000 CR105 may also be an inner Oort @-@ cloud object or ( more likely ) a transitional object between the scattered disc and the inner Oort cloud . More recently , these objects have been referred to as " detached " , or distant detached objects ( DDO ) . 
 There are no clear boundaries between the scattered and detached regions . Gomes et al. define SDOs as having " highly eccentric orbits , perihelia beyond Neptune , and semi @-@ major axes beyond the 1 : 2 resonance . " By this definition , all distant detached objects are SDOs . Since detached objects ' orbits cannot be produced by Neptune scattering , alternative scattering mechanisms have been put forward , including a passing star or a distant , planet @-@ sized object . 
 A scheme introduced by a 2005 report from the Deep Ecliptic Survey by J. L. Elliott et al. distinguishes between two categories : scattered @-@ near ( i.e. typical SDOs ) and scattered @-@ extended ( i.e. detached objects ) . Scattered @-@ near objects are those whose orbits are non @-@ resonant , non @-@ planetary @-@ orbit @-@ crossing and have a Tisserand parameter ( relative to Neptune ) less than 3 . Scattered @-@ extended objects have a Tisserand parameter ( relative to Neptune ) greater than 3 and have a time @-@ averaged eccentricity greater than 0 @.@ 2 . 
 An alternative classification , introduced by B. J. Gladman , B. G. Marsden and C. Van <unk> in 2007 , uses 10 @-@ million @-@ year orbit integration instead of the Tisserand parameter . An object qualifies as an SDO if its orbit is not resonant , has a semi @-@ major axis no greater than 2000 AU , and , during the integration , its semi @-@ major axis shows an excursion of 1 @.@ 5 AU or more . Gladman et al. suggest the term scattering disk object to emphasize this present mobility . If the object is not an SDO as per the above definition , but the eccentricity of its orbit is greater than 0 @.@ 240 , it is classified as a detached TNO . ( Objects with smaller eccentricity are considered classical . ) In this scheme , the disc extends from the orbit of Neptune to 2000 AU , the region referred to as the inner Oort cloud . 
 = = Orbits = = 
 The scattered disc is a very dynamic environment . Because they are still capable of being perturbed by Neptune , SDOs ' orbits are always in danger of disruption ; either of being sent outward to the Oort cloud or inward into the centaur population and ultimately the Jupiter family of comets . For this reason Gladman et al. prefer to refer to the region as the scattering disc , rather than scattered . Unlike Kuiper @-@ belt objects ( KBOs ) , the orbits of scattered @-@ disc objects can be inclined as much as 40 ° from the ecliptic . 
 SDOs are typically characterized by orbits with medium and high eccentricities with a semi @-@ major axis greater than 50 AU , but their perihelia bring them within influence of Neptune . Having a perihelion of roughly 30 AU is one of the defining characteristics of scattered objects , as it allows Neptune to exert its gravitational influence . 
 The classical objects ( cubewanos ) are very different from the scattered objects : more than 30 % of all cubewanos are on low @-@ inclination , near @-@ circular orbits whose eccentricities peak at 0 @.@ 25 . Classical objects possess eccentricities ranging from 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 8 . Though the inclinations of scattered objects are similar to the more extreme KBOs , very few scattered objects have orbits as close to the ecliptic as much of the KBO population . 
 Although motions in the scattered disc are random , they do tend to follow similar directions , which means that SDOs can become trapped in temporary resonances with Neptune . Examples of resonant orbits within the scattered disc include 1 : 3 , 2 : 7 , 3 : 11 , 5 : 22 and 4 : 79 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The scattered disc is still poorly understood : no model of the formation of the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc has yet been proposed that explains all their observed properties . 
 According to contemporary models , the scattered disc formed when Kuiper belt objects ( KBOs ) were " scattered " into eccentric and inclined orbits by gravitational interaction with Neptune and the other outer planets . The amount of time for this process to occur remains uncertain . One hypothesis estimates a period equal to the entire age of the Solar System ; a second posits that the scattering took place relatively quickly , during Neptune 's early migration epoch . 
 Models for a continuous formation throughout the age of the Solar System illustrate that at weak resonances within the Kuiper belt ( such as 5 : 7 or 8 : 1 ) , or at the boundaries of stronger resonances , objects can develop weak orbital instabilities over millions of years . The 4 : 7 resonance in particular has large instability . KBOs can also be shifted into unstable orbits by close passage of massive objects , or through collisions . Over time , the scattered disc would gradually form from these isolated events . 
 Computer simulations have also suggested a more rapid and earlier formation for the scattered disc . Modern theories indicate that neither Uranus nor Neptune could have formed in situ beyond Saturn , as too little primordial matter existed at that range to produce objects of such high mass . Instead , these planets , and Saturn , may have formed closer to Jupiter , but were flung outwards during the early evolution of the Solar System , perhaps through exchanges of angular momentum with scattered objects . Once the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn shifted to a 2 : 1 resonance ( two Jupiter orbits for each orbit of Saturn ) , their combined gravitational pull disrupted the orbits of Uranus and Neptune , sending Neptune into the temporary " chaos " of the proto @-@ Kuiper belt . As Neptune traveled outward , it scattered many trans @-@ Neptunian objects into higher and more eccentric orbits . This model states that 90 % or more of the objects in the scattered disc may have been " promoted into these eccentric orbits by Neptune 's resonances during the migration epoch ... [ therefore ] the scattered disc might not be so scattered . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Scattered objects , like other trans @-@ Neptunian objects , have low densities and are composed largely of frozen volatiles such as water and methane . Spectral analysis of selected Kuiper belt and scattered objects has revealed signatures of similar compounds . Both Pluto and Eris , for instance , show signatures for methane . 
 Astronomers originally supposed that the entire trans @-@ Neptunian population would show a similar red surface colour , as they were thought to have originated in the same region and subjected to the same physical processes . Specifically , SDOs were expected to have large amounts of surface methane , chemically altered into complex organic molecules by energy from the Sun . This would absorb blue light , creating a reddish hue . Most classical objects display this colour , but scattered objects do not ; instead , they present a white or greyish appearance . 
 One explanation is the exposure of whiter subsurface layers by impacts ; another is that the scattered objects ' greater distance from the Sun creates a composition gradient , analogous to the composition gradient of the terrestrial and gas giant planets . Mike Brown , discoverer of the scattered object Eris , suggests that its paler colour could be because , at its current distance from the Sun , its atmosphere of methane is frozen over its entire surface , creating an inches @-@ thick layer of bright white ice . Pluto , conversely , being closer to the Sun , would be warm enough that methane would freeze only onto cooler , high @-@ albedo regions , leaving low @-@ albedo tholin @-@ covered regions bare of ice . 
 = = Comets = = 
 The Kuiper belt was initially thought to be the source of the Solar System 's ecliptic comets . However , studies of the region since 1992 have shown that the orbits within the Kuiper belt are relatively stable , and that these comets originate from the scattered disc , where orbits are generally less stable . 
 Comets can loosely be divided into two categories : short @-@ period and long @-@ period — the latter being thought to originate in the Oort cloud . The two major categories of short @-@ period comets are Jupiter @-@ family comets ( JFCs ) and Halley @-@ type comets . Halley @-@ type comets , which are named after their prototype , Halley 's Comet , are thought to have originated in the Oort cloud but to have been drawn into the inner Solar System by the gravity of the giant planets , whereas the JFCs are thought to have originated in the scattered disc . The centaurs are thought to be a dynamically intermediate stage between the scattered disc and the Jupiter family . 
 There are many differences between SDOs and JFCs , even though many of the Jupiter @-@ family comets may have originated in the scattered disc . Although the centaurs share a reddish or neutral coloration with many SDOs , their nuclei are bluer , indicating a fundamental chemical or physical difference . One hypothesis is that comet nuclei are resurfaced as they approach the Sun by subsurface materials which subsequently bury the older material . 
 = Juan José Castelli = 
 Juan José Castelli ( July 19 , 1764 – October 12 , 1812 ) was an Argentine lawyer . He was one of the leaders of the May Revolution , which started the Argentine War of Independence . He led an ill @-@ fated military campaign in Upper Peru . 
 Juan José Castelli was born in Buenos Aires , and went to school at the Real Colegio de San Carlos in Buenos Aires and Monserrat College in the city of Córdoba , Argentina . He graduated as a lawyer from the University of Charcas , in Upper Peru . His cousin , Manuel Belgrano , introduced him to the public administration of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata . Along with Belgrano , Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , and Hipólito Vieytes , Castelli planned a revolution to replace the absolute monarchy with the new ideas of the Age of Enlightenment . He led the Buenos Aires patriots during the May Revolution , which ended with the removal of viceroy Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros from power . He is known as the " Speaker of the Revolution " for his speech during the open cabildo held in Buenos Aires on May 22 , 1810 . 
 Castelli was appointed a Committee member of the Primera Junta and was sent to Córdoba to end Santiago de Liniers 's counter @-@ revolution . He succeeded , and ordered the execution of Liniers and his supporters . He then commanded the establishment of a revolutionary government in Upper Peru ( today 's Bolivia ) with the aim of freeing the indigenous peoples and African slaves . In 1811 Castelli signed a truce with the Spanish in Upper Peru , but they betrayed him and caught the Northern Army unprepared . As a result , the Argentines suffered a major loss in the Battle of Huaqui on June 20 , 1811 . When Castelli returned to Buenos Aires , the First Triumvirate imprisoned him for losing the battle , and Castelli died shortly afterwards from tongue cancer . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and studies = = = 
 Castelli was born in Buenos Aires in 1764 . He was the first of eight children born to a Venetian doctor , Ángel Castelli Salomón , and Josefa <unk> , who was a relative of Manuel Belgrano . He was trained by the Jesuits shortly before their expulsion , and attended the Real Colegio de San Carlos in Buenos Aires . As was customary , one of the children of the Castelli family was ordained into the priesthood , and Juan José was chosen for this . He was sent to study at the Colegio Monserrat , part of the University of Córdoba . He was influenced by the works of Voltaire and Diderot , and especially by Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract . He was a fellow student of men who would later have influence in the public life of South America , including Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , Juan José Paso , Manuel Alberti , Pedro Medrano , and Juan Martínez de Rozas , among others . He focused on studying philosophy and theology , but when his father died in 1785 , he abandoned his career in the priesthood , for which he felt no strong vocation . 
 Rejecting his mother 's proposal of sending him to study in Spain , he enrolled in jurisprudence studies alongside his cousin , Manuel Belgrano , at the University of Salamanca and Alcalá de Henares . He enrolled in the University of Chuquisaca , in the Upper Peru ( modern Bolivia ) . There , he learned about the ongoing French Revolution , and the new ideas of the Age of Enlightenment . He also learned about the 1782 Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II and the oppression of the indigenous peoples , which influenced his actions in his future Upper Peru campaign . Before returning to Buenos Aires , he visited Potosí and witnessed the use of slave labor in the mines . 
 Castelli returned to Buenos Aires and established a legal firm in his family home . He represented the University of Córdoba in various causes , as well as his uncle , Domingo Belgrano Peri . Through his associations with Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , he also met and befriended his brother , Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , and his associate , Hipólito Vieytes . Castelli married María Rosa Lynch in 1794 , and they had seven children : Angela , Pedro , Luciano , Alejandro , Francisco José , and Juana . 
 = = = First political steps = = = 
 The intellectuals of the viceroyalty received and secretly distributed a copy of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen , promulgated by the French Revolution in 1789 . Meanwhile , Belgrano returned from his studies in Europe , and was appointed as Perpetual Secretary of the new Consulate of Commerce of Buenos Aires . Belgrano and Castelli shared similar ideas about the Spanish trade monopoly and the rights of the natives . Belgrano attempted to appoint Castelli as interim Secretary of the Consulate as his assistant , but faced strong opposition from the peninsular merchants , who delayed the appointment until 1796 . Belgrano became ill during his stay in Europe , which forced him to take extended leaves from work , and wanted Castelli to be his successor if he resigned . 
 There was a similar opposition during the 1799 election of delegates to the Buenos Aires Cabildo : Castelli was elected as third <unk> , but was rejected by merchants associated with the port of Cádiz . The conflict lasted a year , until the prominent local merchant Cornelio Saavedra wrote a memorandum recommending Castelli . Viceroy Avilés finally confirmed him in office by royal decree , in May 1800 . Castelli , however , rejected the post because of his high workload in the Consulate . This was seen as an insult by peninsular merchants such as Martín de Álzaga , who was influential in the Cabildo . 
 Castelli and Belgrano backed a pair of projects from Francisco Cabello y Mesa , who had just arrived from Spain . Cabello proposed the creation of a " Patriotic , Literary and Economic Society " lodge and the publication of a newspaper . This newspaper , the first one published in Buenos Aires , was named Telégrafo Mercantil . However , both projects were short @-@ lived : the lodge was never established and its activities were banned by royal decree , and the Consulate was instructed to withdraw support for the newspaper , which was then closed . Published by Castelli , Cabello , and Belgrano ( secretary of the publication ) , as well as José Manuel Lavardén , Miguel de Azcuénaga and Fray Cayetano Rodríguez , the Telegraph was the first journal to advance the concept of fatherland , and the first to speak of the inhabitants as " Argentines . " 
 Nevertheless , Hipólito Vieytes released a new newspaper shortly afterwards , the Agriculture , Trade and Industry Weekly , with Castelli in the staff . The editorial staff had meetings at the house of Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , discussing ideas for technical improvements in agriculture , removal of trade restrictions , development , manufacturing , and other topics . The newspaper also published the biographies of some Founding Fathers of the United States , such as Benjamin Franklin . 
 = = = The British invasions = = = 
 Rodriguez Peña introduced Castelli to James Florence Burke , who claimed to represent the British Empire in support of proposals published by Francisco de Miranda , which aimed to emancipate the Latin American colonies . Burke was actually a British spy , gathering information about the Spanish colonies . Bearing promises of British support , he created the first native secret society organized for such purposes . It would henceforth be known as " party of independence " , and included Castelli , Burke and major contributors of Vieytes 's newspaper . The spy was eventually discovered by Viceroy Rafael de Sobremonte and expelled from the viceroyalty , but his duplicity was not disclosed to his unaware associates . 
 Castelli moved to a farm in modern the Buenos Aires neighborhood of Núñez . The farm had some agriculture fields and a small brick factory . He lived next to other influential people like Cornelio Saavedra , Juan Larrea , Miguel de Azcuénaga , and attorney José <unk> . The meetings of the secret society continued , unaffected by the departure of Burke . On June 2 , 1806 , Castelli 's mother died , and he was still in mourning when the city learned of a British landing in Quilmes . 
 The " party of independence " was caught by surprise by the invasion , as the British proclaimed respect for religion , ownership , order , freedom , and trade — but made no mention concerning Miranda 's ideals . They arranged an interview with the British Viscount William Carr Beresford , asking for a clarification on whether the promises of Burke were still standing . They also asked if the British government would support an independentist attempt . Beresford gave evasive answers , saying he had no instructions to that effect . He explained that with the recent death of Prime Minister William Pitt and the rise of the Liberals to power , he needed further orders . 
 Castelli understood that the British force only aspired to annex the city to the British Empire , and resigned to avoid swearing allegiance to Britain . Santiago de Liniers liberated Buenos Aires a short time later , but Saturnino Rodríguez Peña helped Beresford escape , hoping to influence an eventual second invasion to implement reforms supported by Burke and Miranda . The second British invasion , however , ended the patriot 's hopes of British support , and they fought against their former allies . 
 After the successful defense of the city in 1807 , the local criollos increased their political power with their higher military role . There was a dispute between the newly appointed Viceroy , Santiago de Liniers , and the Buenos Aires Cabildo , led by Martín de Álzaga . Both attempted to take advantage of the new situation , and influence the criollos to support them . Álzaga refrained from accusing Rodríguez Peña for aiding in Beresford 's escape , and Liniers kept the criollo military bodies armed . 
 = = = Carlotism = = = 
 Napoleon invaded Spain in 1807 , starting the Peninsular War . King Charles IV of Spain abdicated in favor of his son Ferdinand VII , but Napoleon captured him and appointed his own brother , Joseph Bonaparte , as king of Spain instead , in a series of transfers of the Spanish crown known as the abdications of Bayonne . The Spanish people organized Government Juntas to resist against the French occupation , and within months the Junta Central of Seville claimed supreme authority over Spain and the colonies . This situation encouraged the Princess Charlotte of Spain to claim the regency of the Spanish American colonies . 
 In this context , Castelli and Álzaga plotted to oust Liniers and constitute a local government Junta , similar to those of the <unk> . This project was not shared by most of the natives or by the head of the Regiment of Patricians , Cornelio Saavedra . Manuel Belgrano proposed as an alternative to support the plans of Princess Charlotte , which were supported by Castelli and other criollos . Belgrano , who held monarchist ideas , argued that the Carlotist project would be the most practical means of achieving independence from Spain in the circumstances . On September 20 , 1808 , Castelli wrote a letter to Charlotte , with the signatures of Antonio Beruti , Hipólito Vieytes , Belgrano , and Nicolás Rodríguez Peña . 
 Charlotte rejected this support : the party of independence sought to establish a constitutional monarchy headed by Charlotte , but she preferred to retain the power of an absolutist monarchy . Consequently , she denounced the letter and organized the detention of Diego Paroissien . Paroissien , who had several letters to the criollos , was charged with high treason . Castelli was his lawyer . 
 Castelli won Paroissien 's acquittal by invoking the doctrine of the retroversion of the sovereignty of the people , which claimed that the Spanish American lands were a personal possession of the King of Spain but not a Spanish colony . That approach was already old , and it was used to legislate in both districts , but in this context Castelli argued that neither the Council of Regency or any other power of Spain — other than the rightful King — had authority over Spanish America . Castelli said that " the will of the people of Spain is not enough to bring the Indies to obedience " . Under these premises , Castelli argued successfully that the regency offered to the sister of the captive king , while not denying the legitimacy of Ferdinand VII , was not an act of treason , but a legitimate political project that should be resolved by the Spanish American people without the intervention of the peninsular Spanish . 
 On January 1 , 1809 , Martín de Álzaga rallied most peninsular battalions to Plaza de Mayo and attempted a mutiny against Liniers . A few criollos , such as Mariano Moreno , laid their hopes for independence in this attempt , but most did not . The battalions still faithful to Liniers – the Regiment of Patricians , the other criollo battalions , and the remaining peninsular ones – conquered the Plaza and ordered the mutinying forces to withdraw . Castelli supported Liniers , accusing Álzaga of independentism . Though Castelli was himself an independentist , and had also sought to remove Liniers , he opposed Álzaga for other reasons : Álzaga was hoping to maintaining the social dominance of the peninsulares over the criollos once the viceroy , who opposed his interests , was deposed . Álzaga was defeated , and the power of the criollos was increased : <unk> and Álzaga were banished to Carmen de Patagones and the Spanish militias who attempted the coup were disbanded . 
 A new viceroy , Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros , arrived in July to replace Liniers , and the independentist group did not agree on how to react . Castelli proposed a resumption of Álzaga 's idea of creating a governing Junta , but not headed by the Spanish . Belgrano insisted on the plan to appoint Charlotte as regent of a constitutional monarchy , and Rodriguez Peña proposed a military coup , with or without Liniers at the head . They finally accepted the perspective of Cornelio Saavedra , and delayed taking action until a better opportunity . 
 = = = May Revolution = = = 
 When the news of the fall of the Junta of Seville arrived , the group headed by Castelli and Belgrano led the process leading to the May Revolution . Castelli and Saavedra were the most important leaders of the time , and first discarded Martín Rodríguez 's plan to expel Cisneros in a coup d 'état . After several discussions , they decided to request an open cabildo , an emergency popular assembly . Castelli and Belgrano negotiated with the senior alcalde and nobleman , Juan de Lezica , and the procurator , Julián de Leiva . Although they convinced them , they still needed the permission of Cisneros himself , for which Castelli and Rodriguez went to his office at the Fort of Buenos Aires . Previously , Cornelio Saavedra had denied Cisneros the support of the Regiment of Patricians , on the premise that with the disappearance of the Junta of Seville — who had appointed him as viceroy — he no longer had the right to hold that position . 
 Cisneros was outraged by the appearance of Castelli and Rodríguez , who came armed and without an appointment . They reacted harshly and demanded an immediate reply to the request for an open cabildo . After a brief private conversation with the prosecutor , Caspe , Cisneros gave his consent . When they were leaving , Cisneros inquired about his personal safety , to which Castelli said : " Lord , Your Excellency 's person and your family are among Americans , and this should reassure you " . After the interview they returned to the house of Rodríguez Peña , to inform their supporters of the new situation . 
 Besides his oratory , Castelli is known as the " Speaker of the Revolution " because of his great activity during the " May week " . The memoirs of witnesses and participants mention him at many venues , taking part in many activities . He negotiated with the Cabildo and visited the Fort several times until the viceroy gave in to the pressure . At the same time , he held secret meetings with other criollos at the house of Rodríguez Peña , planning their actions , and he harangued the criollo militias at the barracks . Cisneros himself , describing the events the Council of Regency , called Castelli " the most interested one in the novelty " , i.e. , in the revolution . 
 The open cabildo was held on May 22 , 1810 ; it was debated whether the viceroy should continue in office , and if not , who should replace him . The first opinion was from Bishop Benito Lue y Riega , who held that Cisneros should continue and that , if all of Spain was conquered by France , peninsulars were meant to rule in the Americas . Castelli made a counter @-@ argument , based on the doctrine of the retroversion of the sovereignty of the people that he had already employed in the defense of Paroissien . He insisted that in the absence of a legitimate authority , sovereignty should be returned to the people ; they should govern themselves . The idea of dismissing the viceroy ultimately prevailed , but as Buenos Aires had no authority to decide unilaterally the new form of government , they would elect a provisional government . A congress of deputies called from all other cities would take the final decision . However , there were disputes over who should exercise the provisional government : some argued that the Cabildo should do so , and others that it should be a Junta . Castelli bowed to Saavedra 's proposal to form a Junta , but with the proviso that the procurator of the Cabildo , Julián de Leiva , had a decisive vote in the appointment . By adding this proviso , Castelli sought to add the former supporters of Martín de Álzaga , such as Mariano Moreno , Domingo Matheu , and Leiva himself . 
 However , this power allowed Leiva to perform a maneuver that Castelli had not anticipated . Although he approved the end of Cisneros ' rule as viceroy , Leiva formed a Junta with Cisneros as its president ; Cisneros would stay in power . The other members of the Junta would have been two peninsulars , the priest Juan Nepomuceno Solá and the merchant José Santos Inchaurregui , and two criollos , Saavedra and Castelli . The bulk of the natives rejected the proposal : they did not accept that Cisneros should remain in power , even under a different title . They were suspicious of the intentions of Saavedra , and believed that with Castelli alone in the Junta , little or nothing could be achieved . Castelli and Saavedra resigned that same day to put pressure on Cisneros and force him to resign , and the Junta never came into power . 
 That same night , the criollos gathered at the home of Rodriguez Pena and compiled a list of members for a governing Junta that was presented on 25 May . Meanwhile , Domingo French , Antonio Beruti , Aparicio , Donado , and other armed men occupied the Plaza and its access points . The list included a balance of representatives from different extractions of local politics . Lezica finally reported to Cisneros that he was no longer in command , and the Primera Junta assumed power . 
 Castelli and Mariano Moreno led the more radical positions of the Junta . They became close friends , visiting each other daily . Julio César Chávez described them as associates , sharing projects of a deep political , social and economic revolution , based in higher freedom for the Spanish American criollos . He described them as pragmatic men , willing to reward the allies and punish the enemies of the revolution , even if it meant using capital punishments . They were called " Jacobins " , comparing their actions with those of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution , but they were not Francophiles or afrancesados . Besides this , the similarities between the revolutions at France and Buenos Aires were largely superficial . 
 One of the first steps of Castelli and the Junta was the expulsion of Cisneros and the judges of the Royal Audiencia , who were shipped off to Spain under the pretext that their lives were in danger . 
 = = = Execution of Liniers = = = 
 Upon hearing the news of the change of government , former viceroy Santiago de Liniers prepared a counter @-@ revolution from the city of Córdoba , but Francisco Ortiz de Ocampo routed his militia and captured all the leaders in just a couple of skirmishes . The initial orders were to send them to Buenos Aires , but after their capture the Junta decided to execute them . This decision was taken in a resolution signed by all members of the Junta , excepting Manuel Alberti , because as a priest , he could not give consent to the death penalty . The measure found strong popular resistance in Córdoba , as Liniers and the governor Juan Gutierrez de la Concha were popular and the execution of a priest ( Rodrigo de Orellana , another leader of the counter @-@ revolution ) was rejected as heretical . Ocampo and Chiclana decided to carry on with the original orders , and transferred the prisoners to Buenos Aires . 
 The Junta reconfirmed the order , but excluded the bishop of Córdoba , Rodrigo de Orellana , who was banished instead . Castelli was commissioned by the Junta to enforce the execution order . Mariano Moreno said , " Go , Castelli , and I hope you will not incur the same weakness as our general , if not yet fulfilled the determination , Larrea will go , and finally I 'll go myself if necessary " . Ocampo and Chiclana were demoted . Castelli 's assistants were Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , elected as secretary , his former client Diego Paroissien as a campaign doctor , and Domingo French as head of the escort . 
 Right after finding the prisoners , he ordered and presided over their execution : the governor of Córdoba , Juan Gutiérrez de la Concha , the former Viceroy , Santiago de Liniers , former Governor Santiago Alejo de Allende , the adviser Victorino Rodriguez , and the accountant Moreno . The execution took place at Cabeza de Tigre , in the boundary between Santa Fe and Córdoba . The bishop Orellana was not shot , but was compelled to give spiritual assistance to those convicted and to witness the execution . Domingo French was commissioned to execute the verdict . 
 After shooting Liniers , Castelli returned briefly to Buenos Aires and met Moreno . The secretary of war congratulated him for his conduct , and appointed him as a member representing the Junta , with full power to direct the operations to La Paz . He also left a series of instructions : Castelli was to put the government in the hands of patriots , earn the native 's support , and shoot president Nieto , governor Sanz , and the Bishop of La Paz , in the case of their capture . He received similar orders to capture and execute José Manuel de Goyeneche , who had already defeated the rebels of La Paz revolution ( a rebellion similar to the May Revolution , which took place at La Paz , modern Bolivia ) . Castelli was also instructed to rescue and draft to the Auxiliary Army the <unk> and Patricians soldiers that , under the command of Vicente Nieto , had left Buenos Aires in 1809 to suppress revolutions in Chuquisaca and La Paz . Suspicious of those soldiers , Nieto had them disarmed and sent as prisoners to the mines of Potosi , under the supervision of Francisco de Paula Sanz . More than a third of the soldiers died within a month of work in the mines . 
 = = = Campaign in Upper Peru = = = 
 Castelli was not well received in Córdoba , where Liniers was popular , but he was in San Miguel de Tucumán . In Salta , despite a formal good reception , he had difficulty obtaining troops , mules , food , money , or guns . He took political leadership of the expedition to Upper Peru , displacing Hipólito Vieytes , and replaced Ocampo with Colonel Antonio González Balcarce . He was informed that Cochabamba revolted in support of the Junta , but was threatened by royalist forces from La Paz . Castelli intercepted a letter from Nieto to Gutiérrez de la Concha , governor of Córdoba , who was already executed for his support of Liniers . This letter mentioned a royalist army led by Goyeneche marching to Jujuy . Balcarce , who had advanced to Potosi , was defeated by Nieto in the Battle of <unk> , so Castelli sent two hundred men and two cannon to strengthen his forces . With these reinforcements , Balcarce achieved victory at the Battle of Suipacha , which allowed patriots to control all of Upper Peru unopposed . One of the men sent was Martín Miguel de Güemes , who would eventually lead the Guerra Gaucha in Salta years later . 
 At Villa Imperial , one of the richest cities of Upper Peru , an open cabildo called on Goyeneche to withdraw from their territory . He obeyed , as he did not have the military strength to prevail . The Bishop of La Paz , Remigio La Santa y Ortega , fled with him . Castelli was received in Potosí and requesting that the locals swear allegiance to the Junta . He also requested that the royalist generals Francisco de Paula Sanz and José de Córdoba y Rojas submit to him . He made arrangements that the operation to capture Vicente Nieto should be carried out exclusively by the surviving members of the Regiment of Patricians from the mines of Potosi , who had been incorporated with honors into the Army of the North . Sanz , Nieto , and Córdoba were executed at the Plaza of Potosí . Nieto claimed that he died happy , because it was under the Spanish flag . Goyeneche and Ortega , on the other hand , were safe on royalist land . Bernardo Monteagudo , inmate at the Jail of the Court of Chuquisaca for his participation in the revolution of 1809 , escaped to join the ranks of the army . Castelli , who already knew Monteagudo 's background , appointed him his secretary . 
 Castelli set up his government in Chuquisaca , where he presided over the change of regime for the entire region . He planned the reorganization of the Mines of Potosi , and a reform at the University of Charcas . He proclaimed the end of native slavery and servitude in Upper Peru , and the natives were granted political rights equal to those of the criollos . Castelli forbade the establishment of new convents and parishes to avoid the common practice that , under the guise of spreading Christian doctrine , the natives were forced into servitude by religious orders . He authorized free trade and redistributed land expropriated from the former workers of the mills . The decree was published in Spanish , Guarani , Quechua , and Aymara ; he established several bilingual schools as well . Several Indian chiefs participated in the first anniversary of the May Revolution , celebrated in <unk> , where Castelli paid tribute to the ancient Incas and encouraged the people to rise against the Spanish . Despite their welcome , however , Castelli was aware that most of the aristocracy supported the auxiliary army out of fear instead of genuine support . 
 In November 1810 he requested authorization from the Junta for a military operation : to cross the Desaguadero river , the border between the two viceroyalties , and take control of the Peruvian cities of Puno , Cuzco , and Arequipa . Castelli argued that it was urgent to rise against Lima because its economy depended largely on those districts , and if they lost power over that area , the main royalist stronghold would be threatened . The plan was rejected as too risky , and Castelli complied with the original orders . 
 In December , fifty @-@ three peninsulars were banished to Salta , and the decision was sent to the Junta for approval . The vocal Domingo Matheu , who had business associations with Tulla and Pedro Salvador Casas , arranged the annulment of the act , arguing that Castelli had been influenced by slander and unfounded accusations . Support for Castelli began to decline , mainly due to the favourable treatment of natives and the determined opposition of the church , which attacked the public atheism of Bernardo Monteagudo , Castelli 's secretary . Both royalists in Lima and Saavedra in Buenos Aires compared them with Maximilien Robespierre , leader of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution . 
 Castelli also abolished the mita in Upper Peru , a mandatory form of public service that bordered on slavery . Mariano Moreno has also wished to end the mita , but Moreno had resigned from the Junta by this point . Without Castelli being in Buenos Aires to mediate between them , the disputes between Moreno and Saavedra had worsened . The Junta requested that Castelli should moderate his actions , but he went ahead with the positions he shared with Moreno . Several Saavedrist officers , such as José María <unk> , José León Domínguez , Matías Balbastro , chaplain Manuel Antonio <unk> , and sergeant major Toribio de <unk> , planned to kidnap Castelli , deliver him to Buenos Aires for trial , and give command of the Army of the North to Juan Jose Viamonte . However , Viamonte did not accept the plan when he was informed by the conspirators , and did not attempt to carry it out . When Castelli knew about Moreno 's resignation , he wrote a letter to Vieytes , Rodriguez Peña , Larrea , and Azcuénaga , asking them to move to Upper Peru . If they defeated Goyeneche , they planned to march back to Buenos Aires . However , the letter was sent via the common postal service , and the postmaster of Córdoba , Jose de Paz , decided to send it instead to Cornelio Saavedra . The Morenist members of the Junta had already been ousted and exiled by that point . 
 = = = The Battle of Huaqui = = = 
 The order of the Junta not to proceed to the Viceroyalty of Peru was a de facto truce that would last while Castelli did not attack Goyeneche 's army . Castelli tried to turn the situation into a formal agreement , which would imply recognition of the Junta as a legitimate interlocutor . Goyeneche agreed to sign an armistice for 40 days to allow time for Lima to ratify the agreement , but he actually used the time to reinforce his army . On 19 June , with the truce still in effect , an advanced royalist troop attacked positions at <unk> . Castelli declared the truce broken and declared war on Peru . 
 The royalist army crossed the Desaguadero on June 20 , 1811 , starting the Battle of Huaqui . The army waited near Huaqui , between the plains of <unk> and Lake Titicaca . The patriotic left wing , commanded by Diaz Velez , faced the bulk of the royalist forces , while the center was hit by the soldiers of Pio Tristan . Many patriotic soldiers recruited at Upper Peru surrendered or fled , and many of the recruits from La Paz switched sides during the battle . The Saavedrist Juan José Viamonte helped ensure Castelli 's defeat by refusing to join the conflict . 
 Although the casualties of the Army of the North were not substantial , it was left demoralized and disbanded . Goyeneche pursued the fleeing patriots , and captured Huaqui after his victory . The inhabitants of Upper Peru welcomed the royalists back , so the army had to quickly leave those provinces . However , the resistance of Cochabamba prevented the royalists from proceeding to Buenos Aires . Castelli moved to the post of <unk> , and received orders to return to Buenos Aires for trial . However , by the time he was notified , new orders had been issued : Castelli should be confined at Catamarca , while Saavedra himself took charge of the Army of the North . Saavedra was deposed as soon as he left Buenos Aires , and was confined to San Juan . The First Triumvirate , which had commenced governing by then , required Castelli to return . 
 Once in Buenos Aires , Castelli found himself in political isolation . The triumvirate and the newspaper La Gazeta blamed him for the defeat at Huaqui , and sought punishment as a deterrent . His former supporters were divided between those who supported the ideas of the Triumvirate and those no longer able to help . Castelli suffered from tongue cancer during the long trial , which made it progressively more difficult for him to speak . He died on October 12 , 1812 , while the trial was still underway . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Castelli is largely ignored in the historiography of Argentina . Most historians focus instead on the disputes between Mariano Moreno and Cornelio Saavedra in the Junta , with Castelli described in passing as a supporter of Moreno . Despite of his role in the May Revolution , he was not the clear leader of it , as José Gervasio Artigas was for the Cry of Asencio or Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla for the Cry of Dolores . The May Revolution was instead the result of the convergence of diverse factions that shared the desire to remove the viceroy , and different historians highlight different specific factions . Castelli is largely ignored in Bolivia as well . His support of indigenous rights — still an ongoing issue in the country — and his religious ideas strongly affect the way he is perceived there . 
 The most notable biography of Castelli was Castelli , el <unk> de Mayo ( Spanish : Castelli , the champion of May ) , written by the Paraguayan Julio César Chaves . Andrés Rivera increased the public awareness about Castelli with the historical novel La revolución es un sueño <unk> ( Spanish : The revolution is an eternal dream ) . The famous <unk> Felipe Pigna wrote a whole chapter about Castelli at the book Los mitos de la historia argentina , which was then moved to television in the documentary film Algo <unk> hecho por la historia argentina . 
 = Julius Schreck = 
 Julius Schreck ( 13 July 1898 – 16 May 1936 ) was a senior Nazi official and close confidant of Adolf Hitler . 
 Born on 13 July 1898 in Munich , Schreck served in World War I and shortly afterwards joined right @-@ wing paramilitary units . He joined the Nazi Party in 1920 and developed a close friendship with Adolf Hitler . Schreck was a founding member of the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Department " ; SA ) and was active in its development . Later in 1925 , he became the first leader of the Schutzstaffel ( " Protection Squadron " ; SS ) . He then served for a time as a chauffeur for Hitler . Schreck developed meningitis in 1936 and died on 16 May . Hitler gave him a state funeral which was attended by several members of the Nazi elite with Hitler delivering the eulogy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Julius Schreck was born on 13 July 1898 in Munich , a largely Catholic city in Bavaria . He served in the German Army during World War I. After the war ended in November 1918 , he became a member of Freikorps Epp , a right @-@ wing paramilitary unit formed to combat the communistic revolution . Schreck was an early member of the National Socialist German Workers ' Party ( Nazi Party ; NSDAP ) , having joined in 1920 and documented as member # 53 . Schreck developed a friendship with the party 's leader Adolf Hitler during its early years . 
 = = Career in the SA = = 
 Schreck was a founding member of the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Department " ; SA ) , being involved in its growth and development . This was a paramilitary wing of the party designed to disrupt political opponents and provide muscle for security tasks . Hitler , in early 1923 , ordered the formation of a small separate bodyguard dedicated to his service and protection rather than an uncontrolled mass of the party , such as the SA . Originally the unit was composed of only eight men , commanded by Schreck and Joseph Berchtold . It was designated the Stabswache ( " Staff Guard " ) . The Stabswache were issued unique badges , but at this point the Stabswache was still under overall control of the SA , whose membership continued to increase . Schreck resurrected the use of the Totenkopf ( " death 's head " ) as the unit 's insignia , a symbol various elite forces had used in the past , including specialized assault troops of Imperial Germany in World War I who used <unk> infiltration tactics . 
 In May 1923 , the unit was renamed Stoßtrupp @-@ Hitler ( " Shock Troop @-@ Hitler " ) . The unit was solely responsible for Hitler 's protection . On 9 November 1923 the Stoßtrupp , along with the SA and several other paramilitary units , took part in the Beer Hall Putsch in Munich . The plan was to seize control of the city in a coup d 'état and then challenge the government in Berlin . The putsch was quickly crushed by the local police and resulted in the death of 16 Nazi supporters and 4 police officers . In the aftermath of the failed putsch both Hitler , Schreck , and other Nazi leaders were incarcerated at Landsberg Prison . The Nazi Party and all associated formations , including the Stoßtrupp , were officially disbanded . 
 = = Career in the SS = = 
 After Hitler 's release from prison on 20 December 1924 , the Nazi Party was officially refounded . In 1925 , Hitler ordered Schreck to organise the formation of a new bodyguard unit , the Schutzkommando ( " Protection Command " ) . Hitler wanted a small group of tough ex @-@ soldiers like Schreck , who would be loyal to him . The unit included old Stoßtrupp members like Emil Maurice and Erhard Heiden . The unit made its first public appearance in April 1925 . That same year , the Schutzkommando was expanded to a national level . It was also successively renamed the Sturmstaffel ( " Storm Squadron " ) and then finally the Schutzstaffel ( " Protection Squadron " ; SS ) on 9 November 1925 . Schreck became SS member # 5 . He was asked by Hitler to command the bodyguard company and , as such , became the first Reichsführer @-@ SS , although Schreck never referred to himself by this title . 
 In 1926 , Schreck stood down as <unk> @-@ SS and Berchtold took over the leadership . He remained on the SS rolls as an SS @-@ Führer and worked as Hitler 's private chauffeur after Maurice until 1934 . In 1930 , after the SS had begun to expand under Heinrich Himmler , Schreck was appointed an SS @-@ Standartenführer , but had little actual power . He served at Hitler 's side and they were on very good terms . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1936 , Schreck developed meningitis and died on 16 May in Munich . He was a well @-@ liked man and Hitler was distraught when Schreck died . His final rank was SS @-@ Oberführer , a rank between colonel and general . Schreck was accorded a Nazi state funeral with Hitler delivering his eulogy . Schreck 's funeral was attended by many senior Nazi officials , including Hermann Göring , Joseph Goebbels , Rudolf Hess , Joachim von Ribbentrop , Konstantin von Neurath , Emil Maurice , Hans Baur , Heinrich Hoffmann and Baldur von Schirach . As with many other buried Nazi Party members , Schreck 's grave marker was removed after World War II and there is a stone without inscription on the spot where he was buried . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " How Hitler 's Bodyguard Worked " . World Media Rights . Retrieved 23 May 2015 . 
 " Schreck , Julius " . World War II <unk> . Retrieved 23 May 2015 . 
 = Virginia State Route 253 = 
 State Route 253 ( SR 253 ) is a primary state highway in the U.S. state of Virginia . Known as Port Republic Road , the state highway runs 12 @.@ 18 miles ( 19 @.@ 60 km ) from U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) in Harrisonburg east to US 340 near Port Republic . SR 253 is a northwest – southeast highway that connects Harrisonburg with Cross Keys and Port Republic in southeastern Rockingham County . The state highway also provides access to portions of James Madison University on either side of Interstate 81 ( I @-@ 81 ) . SR 253 is maintained by the Virginia Department of Transportation except for the portion in the independent city of Harrisonburg , which is municipally maintained . 
 A small portion of Port Republic Road through Port Republic was included in the state highway system by the late 1920s as part of the highway between Waynesboro and Elkton . This section was paved in the early 1930s and carried three different route numbers until it was transferred to the secondary system in the early 1940s . Port Republic Road was placed on its modern alignment through Port Republic in the mid @-@ 1950s , by which time almost all of the highway was paved . SR 659 , which was assigned to Port Republic Road from Harrisonburg to near Cross Keys , was extended southeast through Port Republic by the mid @-@ 1970s . Port Republic Road was expanded to four lanes within Harrisonburg in the mid @-@ 1990s and mid @-@ 2000s and along a short stretch south from the city limits in the early 2010s . SR 659 was brought into the primary highway system as SR 253 in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 253 begins at an intersection with US 11 ( Main Street ) south of downtown Harrisonburg and southwest of the campus of James Madison University . The highway heads southeast as a four @-@ lane undivided highway that intersects Bluestone Drive , which heads north to the campus and <unk> Stadium and Zane <unk> Field , just before meeting I @-@ 81 at a diamond interchange . SR 253 's next intersection is with Forest Hill Road , which leads to the James Madison University Convocation Center , the Edith J. Carrier Arboretum , and the rest of the portion of James Madison University east of I @-@ 81 . The highway gains a center turn lane at Devon Lane and passes several university athletic fields at Neff Avenue . SR 253 's center turn lane ends and the road expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway at the boundary between the independent city of Harrisonburg and Rockingham County . The highway intersects SR 280 ( Stone Spring Road ) next to Rockingham Memorial Hospital . 
 South of SR 704 ( Boyer Road ) , SR 253 drops to two lanes and the surroundings transition from suburban to rural . The highway intersects SR 276 ( Cross Keys Road ) a short distance northeast of the village of Cross Keys and crosses Mill Creek east of the village . SR 253 curves southwest and crosses the North River into the village of Port Republic , then curves back southeast and exits the village by crossing the South River just west of the confluence of the two rivers to form the South Fork Shenandoah River . SR 253 has an intersection with the northern end of SR 825 ( South River Road ) and a level crossing of Norfolk Southern Railway 's Roanoke District before reaching its eastern terminus at US 340 ( East Side Highway ) ; Port Republic Road continues as SR 659 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first portion of Port Republic Road to become a part of the state highway system was from Main Street ( now SR 605 ) in Port Republic north to Pineville Road ( now SR 672 ) . That highway , SR 809 , ran from Greenville through Waynesboro and Grottoes to SR 17 ( now US 33 ) at Montevideo between Harrisonburg and Elkton by 1928 . In 1930 , the state highway was relocated to the east side of the South River from Grottoes to Port Republic along South River Road ( now SR 825 ) . SR 809 was not paved along Port Republic Road until 1932 . As of 1932 , the remainder of Port Republic Road followed highways maintained by the city of Harrisonburg and Rockingham County . These included county route ( CR ) 31 from Harrisonburg through the junction with CR 12 ( now SR 276 ) near Cross Keys to Goods Mill Road ( now SR 708 ) , on which CR 31 continued . Port Republic Road continued along CR 214 to Battlefield Road ( then CR 7 , now SR 679 ) . The road continued along CR 7 to the junction with SR 809 . CR 31 was paved from Harrisonburg to about the modern city limits of Harrisonburg , and CR 7 was paved from SR 809 to the Battlefield Road split . By July 1933 , after the passage of the Byrd Road Act that established Virginia 's secondary highway system and transferred maintenance responsibility for local highways from the county to the state , all of Port Republic Road 's route numbers changed . SR 807 became part of SR 340 , which became SR 12 in 1936 . After the East Side Highway , the modern route of US 340 , was completed from Grottoes to Elkton in 1941 , SR 12 was moved to the new highway by 1944 ; the old highway became SR 865 . 
 SR 865 's modern bridges across the South River and North River and their approaches were constructed in 1955 and 1956 . These bridges were upstream from the old bridges . SR 865 's bridge across Mill Creek and its approaches were constructed in 1956 and 1957 . By 1958 , Port Republic Road consisted of SR 659 from Harrisonburg to Goods Mill Road , SR 675 south from there to Battlefield Road , SR 679 from there to SR 865 ( Pineville Road ) , SR 865 through Port Republic , and SR 629 from SR 865 just south of the South River to beyond US 340 ( East Side Highway ) . The county highways were all paved except for SR 675 , which was gravel . Port Republic Road 's interchange with I @-@ 81 was completed when the Interstate was completed between interchanges with US 11 on either side of Harrisonburg in 1961 . By 1974 , SR 659 was extended southeast so that all of Port Republic Road was one route number . Port Republic Road was relocated at its intersection with SR 680 ( Oak Ridge Road ) in 1971 . The intersection had formerly been a T intersection that required a turn to remain on Port Republic Road . SR 659 was reconstructed from SR 689 ( <unk> Church Road ) to just south of I @-@ 81 by 1978 . The highway 's intersections with SR 708 and SR 679 were revised and SR 659 was reconstructed between them by 1987 . 
 Port Republic Road was widened by the city of Harrisonburg to four lanes from US 11 to I @-@ 81 in 1994 , from I @-@ 81 to Neff Avenue in 2004 , and from Neff Avenue to the city limit by 2006 . Port Republic Road in the city of Harrisonburg and SR 659 in Rockingham County from the city to US 340 were transferred from the secondary system to the primary highway system as SR 253 by a resolution passed by the Commonwealth Transportation Board on March 17 , 2005 . The transfer was supported in part by the planned relocation of Rockingham Memorial Hospital from north of the James Madison University campus in the city to southeast of the city in Rockingham County , a process that began in 2004 and was completed when the hospital opened in 2010 . SR 253 was expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway from SR 704 ( Boyers Road ) north to the city limit , thus connecting with the four @-@ lane highway built by the city , starting in early 2010 . The expansion project was completed in early 2012 , although the new divided highway opened to traffic in June 2011 . The project included construction of a small piece of SR 280 — a highway planned as the Southeast Connector that is intended to connect SR 42 , US 11 , SR 253 , and US 33 south of Harrisonburg — at its intersection with SR 253 next to Rockingham Memorial Hospital . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass 'n = 
 Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association , 531 U.S. 288 ( 2001 ) , is a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether the actions of an interscholastic sport @-@ association that regulated sports among Tennessee schools could be regarded as a state actor for First Amendment and Due Process purposes . The Court held that the sport @-@ association can be sued as a state actor because its actions and history have been " entangled " with state action . While the Supreme Court would reconsider this same case in the future , this specific decision became important in articulating a new principle of what entities are bound by the First Amendment . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association ( TSSAA ) is a non @-@ profit membership corporation organized to regulate interscholastic sports among its members ( a large portion of the public and private high schools in Tennessee ) . The Association 's role in regulating interscholastic competition in public schools was recognized by the state 's Board of Education in the case . Brentwood Academy is a private high school that fields interscholastic teams as a member of TSSAA . Brentwood was highly successful in sports competition , winning nine state football championships between 1969 , when it was founded , and 1997 . This success fostered resentment among opponent schools , which questioned the Academy 's tactics for recruiting players . 
 In 1997 , TSSAA investigated rumors that Brentwood Academy was engaging in illegal practices to recruit public school athletes to the school . No such practices were identified , but TSSAA discovered that Brentwood Academy 's football coach had invited eighth grade boys who would be enrolling in the school the following school year to attend spring football practice . TSSAA identified this as a violation of its rules and fined the school $ 3 @,@ 000 for contacting student athletes prior to their official enrollment at the school and for violating a TSSAA policy prohibiting " undue influence on a student ( or ) his or her parents ... to secure or to retain a student for athletic purposes . " The Association also placed the school on four years ' probation and banned it from participating in state playoff games for two years . 
 Brentwood Academy sued the Association over this action . Brentwood argued that the enforcement of the rule constituted state action which they claimed violated the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment 's Due Process Clause . The school asserted that their due process rights had been violated because there were no evidentiary hearings to determine the validity of the claim that they inappropriately recruited football players . Further , they argued that the rule violated their freedom of speech because it restricted the ways the Academy could recruit . In July 1998 , the District Court agreed with this argument and granted summary judgement to the Academy , while enjoining the Association from enforcing the rule . A year later , the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court 's decision , finding that the actions of the Association did not constitute ' state action ' . The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari of the case to review this question . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Before any questions of First Amendment law could be decided , the Court had to first determine wither TSSAA was a state entity ( as the First Amendment only applies to the government ) . The Court issued a divided decision , splitting 5 @-@ 4 in favor of reversing the Sixth Circuit and finding the actions of the Association as ' state action ' . 
 Justice Souter wrote for the five @-@ justice majority , holding that " The nominally private character of the Association is overborne by the pervasive entwinement of public institutions and public officials in its composition and workings , and there is no substantial reason to claim unfairness in applying constitutional standards to it . " Part of the basis for this determination were historical statements by the Tennessee Board of Education which had granted regulatory authority to the Association and recognition of its own independent authority . For example , the Board explicitly approved the TSSAA 's rules and reserved the right to continuously review them in the future . Further , employees at the Association were given state pensions . Because the Association could essentially " coerce " the member schools to follow its rules , and that the state would back this up , it was utilizing state police power . Therefore , Souter concluded , the restrictions on denial of due process would apply to the Association , and the lawsuit could proceed in the lower courts . 
 = = = Dissenting opinion = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion , joined by three other Justices . He criticized the usage of a new " entwinement " standard for determining state action , which he said " stretched the doctrine beyond its permissible limits " . He attacked the majority 's decision as breaking a prohibition on extending the Fourteenth Amendment to " merely private conduct " , relying on similar cases which did not extend ' state action ' to collegiate sports associations . Further , he said the meaning of ' entwinement ' is " unclear " because it was left undefined and possibly too expansive . He concluded by stating that the Court should have affirmed the Sixth Circuit 's opinion . 
 = = Subsequent history = = 
 This case created the " entwinement test " , the principle that a private organization could be connected in such a way with state organizations that the private organization itself exercises state power . With this new rule announced , the Court sent the case back to lower courts to reconsider the arguments of Brentwood Academy . 
 The case was sent back to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals who instructed the Association that they could prevail if they showed the enforced rule was narrowly defined to " promote governmental interests " . A second District Court trial on this factor again resulted in a finding in favor of Brentwood Academy . The Sixth Circuit this time affirmed . In 2007 , the Supreme Court again granted review and this time reversed in favor of the Association . In a unanimous decision , Justice John Paul Stevens held that the actual rule did not violate the First Amendment and that the tactics used to recruit football players rose to the level of a governmental interest . On other claims though , the case was sent back again to the Sixth Circuit . The Sixth Circuit rejected the remaining claims and the Supreme Court denied review , ending the case . 
 = Animals ( Pink Floyd album ) = 
 Animals is the tenth studio album by English progressive rock group Pink Floyd , released in January 1977 . A concept album , it provides a scathing critique of the social @-@ political conditions of late 1970s Britain , and presents a marked change in musical style from their earlier work . Animals was recorded at the band 's studio , Britannia Row , in London , but its production was punctuated by the early signs of discord that three years later would culminate in keyboardist Richard Wright leaving the band . The album 's cover image , a pig floating between two chimneys on Battersea Power Station , was conceived by bassist and writer Roger Waters , and photographed by long @-@ time collaborators Hipgnosis . 
 The album was released to generally positive reviews in the United Kingdom , where it reached number 2 . It was also a success in the United States , reaching number 3 on the Billboard 200 , and although it scored on the American charts for only six months , steady sales have resulted in its certification by the RIAA at four times platinum . The size of the venues on the band 's In the Flesh Tour , and an incident in which Waters spat at a fan , prompted him to conceive the band 's subsequent album , The Wall . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1975 Pink Floyd bought a three @-@ story block of church halls at 35 Britannia Row in Islington , north London . Their deal with record company EMI , for unlimited studio time in return for a reduced percentage of sales , had expired , and they converted the building into a recording studio and storage facility . Its construction took up most of 1975 , and in April 1976 the band started work on their tenth studio album , Animals , at the new facility . 
 = = Concept = = 
 Loosely based on George Orwell 's political fable Animal Farm , the album 's lyrics describe various classes in society as different kinds of animals : the combative dogs , despotic ruthless pigs , and the " mindless and unquestioning herd " of sheep . Whereas the novella focuses on Stalinism , the album is a critique of capitalism and differs again in that the sheep eventually rise up to overpower the dogs . The album was developed from a collection of unrelated songs into a concept which , in the words of author Glenn Povey , " described the apparent social and moral decay of society , likening the human condition to that of mere animals " . 
 Apart from its critique of society , the album is also a part @-@ response to the punk rock movement , which grew in popularity as a nihilistic statement against the prevailing social and political conditions , and also a reaction to the general complacency and nostalgia that appeared to surround rock music . Pink Floyd were an obvious target for punk musicians , notably Johnny Rotten of The Sex Pistols , who wore a Pink Floyd T @-@ shirt on which the words " I hate " had been written in ink ; Lydon , however , has constantly said it was done for a laugh ( he was a fan of several progressive rock bands of the era , including Magma and Van Der Graaf Generator ) . Drummer Nick Mason later stated that he welcomed the " Punk Rock insurrection " and viewed it as a welcome return to the underground scene from which Pink Floyd had grown . In 1977 he produced The Damned 's second album , Music for Pleasure , at Britannia Row . 
 In his 2008 book Comfortably Numb , author Mark Blake argues that " Dogs " contains some of David Gilmour 's finest work ; although the guitarist sings only one lead vocal , his performance is " explosive " . The song also contains notable contributions from keyboardist Richard Wright , which echo the funereal synthesizer sounds used on the band 's previous album , Wish You Were Here . " Pigs ( Three Different Ones ) " is audibly similar to " Have a Cigar " , with bluesy guitar fills and elaborate bass lines . Of the song 's three pigs , the only one directly identified is morality campaigner Mary Whitehouse , who amongst other things is described as a " house @-@ proud town mouse " . " Sheep " contains a modified version of Psalm 23 , which continues the traditional " The Lord is my shepherd " with words like " he maketh me to hang on hooks in high places and <unk> me to lamb cutlets " ( referring to the sheep of the title ) . Towards the end of the song , the eponymous sheep rise up and kill the dogs , but later retire back to their homes . The album is book @-@ ended by each half of " Pigs on the Wing " , a simple love song in which a glimmer of hope is offered despite the anger expressed in the album 's three other songs . Described by author Andy Mabbett as " [ sitting ] in stark contrast to the heavyweight material between them " , the two halves of the song were heavily influenced by Waters ' relationship with his then @-@ wife . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Animals was engineered by a previous Floyd collaborator , Brian Humphries , and recording took place at Britannia Row from April to December 1976 , continuing into early 1977 . " Raving and Drooling " and " You 've Got to Be Crazy " , two songs previously performed live and considered for Wish You Were Here , reappeared as " Sheep " and " Dogs " respectively . They were reworked to fit the new concept , and separated by a Waters @-@ penned composition , " Pigs ( Three Different Ones ) " . With the exception of " Dogs " ( co @-@ written by Gilmour ) the album 's five tracks were written by Waters . The song contains references to Waters ' private life ; his new romantic interest was Carolyne Anne Christie ( married to Rock Scully , manager of the Grateful Dead ) . Gilmour was distracted by the birth of his first child , and contributed little else towards the album . Similarly , neither Mason nor Wright contributed as much as they had on previous albums , and Animals was the first Pink Floyd album not to contain a composer 's credit for Wright . 
 The band had discussed employing another guitarist for future tours , and Snowy White was therefore invited into the studio . When Waters and Mason inadvertently erased one of Gilmour 's completed guitar solos , White was asked to record a solo on " Pigs on the Wing " . Although his performance was omitted from the vinyl release , it was included on the eight @-@ track cartridge version . White later performed on the Animals tour . Mason recalled that he enjoyed working on Animals more than he had working on Wish You Were Here . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Once the album was complete , work began on its cover . Hipgnosis , designer of the band 's previous album covers , offered three ideas , one of which was a small child entering his parents ' bedroom to find them having sex : " copulating , like animals ! " The final concept was , unusually , designed by Waters . At the time he lived near Clapham Common , and regularly drove past Battersea Power Station , which was by then approaching the end of its useful life . A view of the building was chosen for the cover image , and the band commissioned German company Ballon Fabrik ( who had previously constructed Zeppelin airships ) and Australian artist Jeffrey Shaw to build a 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) porcine balloon ( known as Algie ) . The balloon was inflated with helium and maneuvered into position on 2 December 1976 , with a marksman ready to fire if it escaped . Unfortunately inclement weather delayed work , and the band 's manager Steve O 'Rourke neglected to book the marksman for a second day ; the balloon broke free of its moorings and disappeared from view . It eventually landed in Kent and was recovered by a local farmer , who was apparently furious that it had " scared his cows " . The balloon was recovered and filming continued for a third day , but as the early photographs of the power station were considered better , the image of the pig was later superimposed onto one of those . 
 During the " Isles of Wonder " short film shot by Danny Boyle and shown as part of the Opening Ceremonies of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , the camera zooms down the length of the River Thames , from a small spring in the countryside all the way to the Olympic venue . During the fly @-@ by , a pig can be seen floating above Battersea Power Station . 
 The album 's theme continues onto the record 's picture labels . Side one 's label shows a fisheye lens view of a dog and the English countryside , and side two features a pig and sheep , in the same setting . Mason 's handwriting is used as a typeface throughout the packaging . The gatefold features monochrome photographs of the dereliction around the power station . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album 's release followed Capital Radio 's broadcast two days earlier of The Pink Floyd Story , and an evening press conference held at the power station two days before that . The broadcast was originally to have been an exclusive for the London @-@ based station , who since mid @-@ December had been broadcasting The Pink Floyd Story , but a copy was given to John Peel , who played side one of the album in its entirety a day earlier . 
 Animals was released in the UK on 23 January 1977 , and in the US on 12 February . It reached number two in the UK , and three in the US . Thanks to the album and the band 's back catalogue , noted The Guinness Book of British Hit Albums , " Pink Floyd bested Abba for most weeks on chart ( in 1977 ) , 108 to 106 . " 
 NME called Animals " one of the most extreme , relentless , harrowing and downright iconoclastic hunks of music to have been made available this side of the sun " , and Melody Maker 's Karl Dallas described it as " [ an ] uncomfortable taste of reality in a medium that has become in recent years , increasingly soporific " . Rolling Stone 's Frank Rose was unimpressed , writing : " The 1977 Floyd has turned bitter and morose . They complain about the duplicity of human behavior ( and then title their songs after animals – get it ? ) . They sound like they 've just discovered this – their message has become pointless and tedious . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice gave the album a " B + " rating and found the negative reaction overly cynical , reasoning that the album functions simply as " a piece of well @-@ constructed political program music ... lyrical , ugly , and rousing , all in the right places " . 
 In his 2004 autobiography Inside Out , Nick Mason suggests that the album 's perceived harshness , when compared to previous Floyd releases , may be a result of a " workman @-@ like mood in the studio " , and an unconscious reaction to the accusations from the aforementioned punk genre that bands like Pink Floyd represented " dinosaur rock " . Animals was certified by the RIAA as 4 × Platinum on 31 January 1995 . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 Originally released on Harvest Records in the UK and Columbia Records in the US , Animals was issued on Compact Disc ( CD ) in 1985 , and in the US in 1987 . It was reissued as a digitally remastered CD with new artwork in 1994 , and as a digitally remastered limited @-@ edition vinyl album in 1997 . An anniversary edition was released in the US in the same year , followed in 2000 by a reissue from Capitol Records . The album was also included in the Shine On box set . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 The album became the subject material for the band 's In the Flesh Tour , which began in Dortmund on the same day the album was released . The tour continued through continental Europe in February , the UK in March , the US for three weeks in April and May , and another three weeks in the US in June and July . Algie became the inspiration for a number of pig themes used throughout . An inflatable pig was floated over the audience , and during each performance was replaced with a cheaper , but explosive version . On one occasion the mild propane gas was replaced with an oxygen @-@ acetylene mixture , producing a massive ( and dangerous ) explosion . German promoter Marcel Avram presented the band with a piglet in Munich , only for it to leave a trail of broken mirrors and excrement across its mirrored hotel room , leaving manager O 'Rourke to deal with the resulting fallout . 
 The band were joined by familiar figures such as Dick Parry and Snowy White , but relations within the band became fraught . Waters took to arriving at the venues alone , departing as soon as each performance was over . On one occasion , Wright flew back to England , threatening to leave the band . The size of the venues was also an issue ; in Chicago , the promoters claimed to have sold out the 67 @,@ 000 person regular capacity of the Soldier Field stadium ( after which ticket sales should have been ended ) , but Waters and O 'Rourke were suspicious . They hired a helicopter , photographer and attorney , and discovered that the actual attendance was 95 @,@ 000 ; a shortfall to the band of $ 640 @,@ 000 . The end of the tour was a low point for Gilmour , who felt that they had by now achieved the success they originally sought , and that there was nothing else they could look forward to . In July 1977 – on the final date at the Montreal Olympic Stadium – a small group of noisy and excited fans in the front row of the audience irritated Waters to such an extent that he spat at one of them . He was not the only person who felt depressed about playing to such large audiences , as Gilmour refused to perform a third encore . Waters later spoke with producer Bob Ezrin and told him of his sense of alienation on the tour , and how he sometimes felt like building a wall to separate himself from the audience . The spitting incident would later form the basis of a new concept , which would eventually become one of the band 's most successful album releases , The Wall . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lead vocals performed by Roger Waters , except where noted 
 All songs written and composed by Roger Waters , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 = 
 Die Elenden sollen essen ( The miserable shall eat ) , BWV 75 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it for the first Sunday after Trinity and first performed it in Leipzig on 30 May 1723 . The complex work in two parts of seven movements each marks the beginning of his first annual cycle of cantatas . 
 Bach composed the cantata at a decisive turning point in his career . After various positions in churches and courts , he assumed his post of Thomaskantor in Leipzig on the first Sunday after Trinity , performing this cantata . He began the ambitious project of composing a new cantata for every occasion of the liturgical year . 
 The work is structured in an unusual layout of 14 movements in two symmetrical parts , to be performed before and after the sermon . The unknown poet begins his text with a quotation from Psalm 22 and departs from its ideas on wealth and poverty , rich and poor , and illustrates the contrasts . The focus of the second part is on being poor or rich in spirit . Both parts are concluded by a stanza of Samuel Rodigast 's hymn " Was Gott tut , das ist wohlgetan " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Johann Sebastian Bach had served in several churches as Kantor and organist , and at the courts of Weimar and Köthen , when he applied for the post of Thomaskantor in Leipzig . He was 38 years old and had a reputation as an organist and organ expert . He had composed church cantatas , notably the funeral cantata Actus tragicus around 1708 . In Weimar , he had begun a project to cover all occasions of the liturgical year by providing one cantata a month for four years , including works such as Weinen , Klagen , Sorgen , Zagen , BWV 12 , and Erschallet , ihr Lieder , BWV 172 . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata for the First Sunday after Trinity and first performed it in the service in the Nikolaikirche on 30 May 1723 , to take up his position as Thomaskantor . From then he was responsible for the education of the Thomanerchor , performances in the regular services in the Thomaskirche , the Nikolaikirche , Neue Kirche and <unk> . He started a project of composing one cantata for each Sunday and holiday of the liturgical year , termed by Christoph Wolff " an artistic undertaking on the largest scale " . 
 The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle of John , " God is Love " ( 1 John 4 : 16 – 21 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus ( Luke 16 : 19 – 31 ) . An unknown poet begins the cantata with a verse from a psalm , Psalms 22 : 26 ( verse 27 in the Luther Bible ) , " The meek shall eat and be satisfied : they shall praise the Lord that seek him : your heart shall live for ever " , connecting the gospel to the Old Testament as a starting point . The later cantata for the same occasion , Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brot , BWV 39 ( Break your bread for the hungry ) , begins similarly with a quotation from the Old Testament . The poet expands on the contrast of " <unk> und <unk> " ( wealth and poverty , rich and poor ) in fourteen elaborate movements , arranged in two parts to be performed before and after the sermon . The poet expands the contrast of " <unk> und <unk> " ( wealth and poverty , rich and poor ) Both parts are concluded by a stanza of Samuel Rodigast 's hymn " Was Gott tut , das ist wohlgetan " , stanza 2 in movement 7 , stanza 6 in movement 14 . 
 The autograph score is written neatly on non @-@ Leipzig paper , probably while Bach still lived in Köthen . A Leipzig chronicle , " Acta <unk> <unk> " , reported the social event : " ... <unk> ... Hr. Joh . Sebastian Bach ... mit <unk> <unk> seine erste Music auf " ( ... performed ... with good applause his first music ) . " Good applause " means " great approval " rather than clapping of hands . A different translation renders the note as " ... the new Cantor and Director of the Collegium Musicum , Herr Johann Sebastian Bach , who has come hither from the Prince 's court of Cöthen , produced his first music here with great success . " 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata is structured in two parts of seven movements each , to be performed before and after the sermon . It is scored for four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir SATB , trumpet ( Tr ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , oboe d 'amore ( Oa ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo ( Bc ) including bassoon . The two parts of seven movements each are composed as the same arrangement of alternating recitatives and arias with a concluding chorale , only Part II is opened by a sinfonia instead of a chorus . The duration is given as 35 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 Bach marked the occasion , creating the opening chorus reminiscent of a French overture , with a slow first section in dotted rhythm and a fast fugue . He chose the same form one year later to begin his second annual cycle of chorale cantatas with O Ewigkeit , du Donnerwort , BWV 20 . The composition can also be seen as a prelude and fugue on a large scale . The prelude is again in two sections separated by a short interlude , in the way of a motet according to the different ideas of the text . In the fugue on the words " <unk> Herz soll <unk> leben " ( your heart shall live for ever ) , the subject is developed three times , again separated by interludes . 
 Four of the recitatives are " secco " , accompanied only by the continuo , but the first one of each part is " accompagnato " , brightened by the strings . In the arias , the voice and the instruments mostly share the themes . The arias can be considered as a suite of French dance movements , the tenor a Polonaise , the soprano aria a Minuet , the alto aria a <unk> and the bass aria a Gigue . In the last aria , the trumpet opens the setting and then accompanies the bass in virtuoso figuration , adding splendour to the words " Mein Herze <unk> und <unk> " ( My heart believes and loves ) . 
 The music of the two stanzas of the chorale is identical . The tune is not a simple four @-@ part setting as in most of Bach 's later cantatas , but the voices are embedded in a concerto of the orchestra , led by violin I and oboe I. The instrumental theme is derived from the first line of the chorale tune . 
 The sinfonia beginning Part II , rare in Bach 's cantatas , is especially remarkable because it is a chorale fantasia on the same chorale melody . The tune is played by the trumpet which was silent throughout Part I , as the cantus firmus against a polyphonic string setting , emphasizing once more " Was Gott tut , das ist wohlgetan " ( What God does is well done ) . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 A list of recordings is provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = Rubidium = 
 Rubidium is a chemical element with symbol Rb and atomic number 37 . Rubidium is a soft , silvery @-@ white metallic element of the alkali metal group , with an atomic mass of 85 @.@ <unk> . Elemental rubidium is highly reactive , with properties similar to those of other alkali metals , including rapid oxidation in air . On Earth , natural rubidium comprises two isotopes : 72 % is the stable isotope , <unk> ; 28 % is the slightly radioactive 87Rb , with a half @-@ life of 49 billion years — more than three times longer than the estimated age of the universe . 
 German chemists Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered rubidium in 1861 by the newly developed technique , flame spectroscopy . 
 Rubidium 's compounds have various chemical and electronic applications . Rubidium metal is easily vaporized and has a convenient spectral absorption range , making it a frequent target for laser manipulation of atoms . 
 Rubidium is not a known nutrient for any living organisms . However , rubidium ions have the same charge as potassium ions , and are actively taken up and treated by animal cells in similar ways . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Rubidium is a very soft , ductile , silvery @-@ white metal . It is the second most electropositive of the non @-@ radioactive alkali metals and melts at a temperature of 39 @.@ 3 ° C ( 102 @.@ 7 ° F ) . Similar to other alkali metals , rubidium metal reacts violently with water . As with potassium ( which is slightly less reactive ) and caesium ( which is slightly more reactive ) , this reaction is usually vigorous enough to ignite the hydrogen gas it produces . Rubidium has also been reported to ignite spontaneously in air . It forms amalgams with mercury and alloys with gold , iron , caesium , sodium , and potassium , but not lithium ( even though rubidium and lithium are in the same group ) . 
 Rubidium has a very low ionization energy of only 406 kJ / mol . Rubidium and potassium show a very similar purple color in the flame test , and distinguishing the two elements requires something more sophisticated , such as spectroscopy . 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 Rubidium chloride ( <unk> ) is probably the most used rubidium compound : among several other chlorides , it is used to induce living cells to take up DNA ; it is also used as a biomarker , because in nature , it is found only in small quantities in living organisms and when present , replaces potassium . Other common rubidium compounds are the corrosive rubidium hydroxide ( <unk> ) , the starting material for most rubidium @-@ based chemical processes ; rubidium carbonate ( <unk> ) , used in some optical glasses , and rubidium copper sulfate , <unk> · <unk> · 6H2O . Rubidium silver iodide ( <unk> ) has the highest room temperature conductivity of any known ionic crystal , a property exploited in thin film batteries and other applications . 
 Rubidium forms a number of oxides when exposed to air , including rubidium monoxide ( <unk> ) , <unk> , and <unk> ; rubidium in excess oxygen gives the superoxide <unk> . Rubidium forms salts with halides , producing rubidium fluoride , rubidium chloride , rubidium bromide , and rubidium iodide . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Although rubidium is monoisotopic , rubidium in the Earth 's crust is composed of two isotopes : the stable <unk> ( 72 @.@ 2 % ) and the radioactive 87Rb ( 27 @.@ 8 % ) . Natural rubidium is radioactive , with specific activity of about 670 Bq / g , enough to significantly expose a photographic film in 110 days . 
 Twenty four additional rubidium isotopes have been synthesized with half @-@ lives of less than 3 months ; most are highly radioactive and have few uses . 
 Rubidium @-@ 87 has a half @-@ life of 48 @.@ 8 × 109 years , which is more than three times the age of the universe of ( 13 @.@ 799 ± 0 @.@ 021 ) × 109 years , making it a primordial nuclide . It readily substitutes for potassium in minerals , and is therefore fairly widespread . Rb has been used extensively in dating rocks ; 87Rb beta decays to stable 87Sr . During fractional crystallization , Sr tends to concentrate in plagioclase , leaving Rb in the liquid phase . Hence , the Rb / Sr ratio in residual magma may increase over time , and the progressing differentiation results in rocks with elevated Rb / Sr ratios . The highest ratios ( 10 or more ) occur in pegmatites . If the initial amount of Sr is known or can be extrapolated , then the age can be determined by measurement of the Rb and Sr concentrations and of the 87Sr / <unk> ratio . The dates indicate the true age of the minerals only if the rocks have not been subsequently altered ( see rubidium @-@ strontium dating ) . 
 Rubidium @-@ 82 , one of the element 's non @-@ natural isotopes , is produced by electron @-@ capture decay of strontium @-@ 82 with a half @-@ life of 25 @.@ 36 days . With a half @-@ life of 76 seconds , rubidium @-@ 82 decays by positron emission to stable krypton @-@ 82 . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Rubidium is the twenty @-@ third most abundant element in the Earth 's crust , roughly as abundant as zinc and rather more common than copper . It occurs naturally in the minerals leucite , pollucite , carnallite , and <unk> , which contain as much as 1 % rubidium oxide . <unk> contains between 0 @.@ 3 % and 3 @.@ 5 % rubidium , and is the commercial source of the element . Some potassium minerals and potassium chlorides also contain the element in commercially significant quantities . 
 Seawater contains an average of 125 µg / L of rubidium compared to the much higher value for potassium of 408 mg / L and the much lower value of 0 @.@ 3 µg / L for caesium . 
 Because of its large ionic radius , rubidium is one of the " incompatible elements . " During magma crystallization , rubidium is concentrated together with its heavier analogue caesium in the liquid phase and crystallizes last . Therefore , the largest deposits of rubidium and caesium are zone pegmatite ore bodies formed by this enrichment process . Because rubidium substitutes for potassium in the crystallization of magma , the enrichment is far less effective than that of caesium . Zone pegmatite ore bodies containing mineable quantities of caesium as pollucite or the lithium minerals lepidolite are also a source for rubidium as a by @-@ product . 
 Two notable sources of rubidium are the rich deposits of pollucite at Bernic Lake , Manitoba , Canada , and the <unk> ( ( Rb , K ) <unk> ) found as impurities in pollucite on the Italian island of Elba , with a rubidium content of 17 @.@ 5 % . Both of those deposits are also sources of caesium . 
 = = Production = = 
 Although rubidium is more abundant in Earth 's crust than caesium , the limited applications and the lack of a mineral rich in rubidium limits the production of rubidium compounds to 2 to 4 tonnes per year . Several methods are available for separating potassium , rubidium , and caesium . The fractional crystallization of a rubidium and caesium alum ( Cs , Rb ) Al ( SO4 ) 2 · 12H2O yields after 30 subsequent steps pure rubidium alum . Two other methods are reported , the <unk> process and the ferrocyanide process . 
 For several years in the 1950s and 1960s , a by @-@ product of potassium production called Alkarb was a main source for rubidium . Alkarb contained 21 % rubidium , with the rest being potassium and a small amount of caesium . Today the largest producers of caesium , such as the Tanco Mine , Manitoba , Canada , produce rubidium as a by @-@ product from pollucite . 
 = = History = = 
 Rubidium was discovered in 1861 by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff , in Heidelberg , Germany , in the mineral lepidolite through spectroscopy . Because of the bright red lines in its emission spectrum , they chose a name derived from the Latin word rubidus , meaning " deep red " . 
 Rubidium is a minor component in lepidolite . Kirchhoff and Bunsen processed 150 kg of a lepidolite containing only 0 @.@ 24 % rubidium oxide ( <unk> ) . Both potassium and rubidium form insoluble salts with chloroplatinic acid , but those salts show a slight difference in solubility in hot water . Therefore , the less @-@ soluble rubidium hexachloroplatinate ( <unk> ) could be obtained by fractional crystallization . After reduction of the hexachloroplatinate with hydrogen , the process yielded 0 @.@ 51 grams of rubidium chloride for further studies . Bunsen and Kirchhoff began their first large @-@ scale isolation of caesium and rubidium compounds with 44 @,@ 000 litres ( 12 @,@ 000 US gal ) of mineral water , which yielded 7 @.@ 3 grams of caesium chloride and 9 @.@ 2 grams of rubidium chloride . Rubidium was the second element , shortly after caesium , to be discovered by spectroscopy , just one year after the invention of the spectroscope by Bunsen and Kirchhoff . 
 The two scientists used the rubidium chloride to estimate that the atomic weight of the new element was 85 @.@ 36 ( the currently accepted value is 85 @.@ 47 ) . They tried to generate elemental rubidium by electrolysis of molten rubidium chloride , but instead of a metal , they obtained a blue homogeneous substance which " neither under the naked eye nor under the microscope showed the slightest trace of metallic substance . " They presumed it was a <unk> ( Rb 
 2Cl ) ; however , the product was probably a colloidal mixture of the metal and rubidium chloride . In a second attempt to produce metallic rubidium , Bunsen was able to reduce rubidium by heating charred rubidium tartrate . Although the distilled rubidium was pyrophoric , they were able to determine the density and the melting point . The quality of this research in the 1860s can be appraised by the fact that their determined density differs less than 0 @.@ 1 g / cm3 and the melting point by less than 1 ° C from the presently accepted values . 
 The slight radioactivity of rubidium was discovered in 1908 , but that was before the theory of isotopes was established in 1910 , and the low level of activity ( half @-@ life greater than 1010 years ) made interpretation complicated . The now proven decay of 87Rb to stable 87Sr through beta decay was still under discussion in the late 1940s . 
 Rubidium had minimal industrial value before the 1920s . Since then , the most important use of rubidium is research and development , primarily in chemical and electronic applications . In 1995 , rubidium @-@ 87 was used to produce a Bose – Einstein condensate , for which the discoverers , Eric Allin Cornell , Carl Edwin Wieman and Wolfgang <unk> , won the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Rubidium compounds are sometimes used in fireworks to give them a purple color . Rubidium has also been considered for use in a thermoelectric generator using the magnetohydrodynamic principle , where rubidium ions are formed by heat at high temperature and passed through a magnetic field . These conduct electricity and act like an armature of a generator thereby generating an electric current . Rubidium , particularly vaporized 87Rb , is one of the most commonly used atomic species employed for laser cooling and Bose – Einstein condensation . Its desirable features for this application include the ready availability of inexpensive diode laser light at the relevant wavelength , and the moderate temperatures required to obtain substantial vapor pressures . 
 Rubidium has been used for polarizing 3He , producing volumes of magnetized 3He gas , with the nuclear spins aligned rather than random . Rubidium vapor is optically pumped by a laser and the polarized Rb polarizes 3He through the hyperfine interaction . Such spin @-@ polarized 3He cells are useful for neutron polarization measurements and for producing polarized neutron beams for other purposes . 
 The resonant element in atomic clocks utilizes the hyperfine structure of rubidium 's energy levels , and rubidium is useful for high @-@ precision timing . It is used as the main component of secondary frequency references ( rubidium oscillators ) in cell site transmitters and other electronic transmitting , networking , and test equipment . These rubidium standards are often used with GPS to produce a " primary frequency standard " that has greater accuracy and is less expensive than caesium standards . Such rubidium standards are often mass @-@ produced for the telecommunication industry . 
 Other potential or current uses of rubidium include a working fluid in vapor turbines , as a getter in vacuum tubes , and as a <unk> component . Rubidium is also used as an ingredient in special types of glass , in the production of superoxide by burning in oxygen , in the study of potassium ion channels in biology , and as the vapor in atomic magnetometers . In particular , 87Rb is used with other alkali metals in the development of spin @-@ exchange relaxation @-@ free ( <unk> ) magnetometers . 
 Rubidium @-@ 82 is used for positron emission tomography . Rubidium is very similar to potassium and tissue with high potassium content will also accumulate the radioactive rubidium . One of the main uses is myocardial perfusion imaging . As a result of changes in the blood brain barrier in brain tumors , rubidium collects more in brain tumors than normal brain tissue , allowing the use of radioisotope rubidium @-@ 82 in nuclear medicine to locate and image brain tumors . Rubidium @-@ 82 has a very short half @-@ life of 76 seconds , and the production from decay of strontium @-@ 82 must be done close to the patient . 
 Rubidium was tested for the influence on manic depression and depression . Dialysis patients suffering from depression show a depletion in rubidium and therefore a supplementation may help during depression . In some tests the rubidium was administered as rubidium chloride with up to 720 mg per day for 60 days . 
 = = Precautions and biological effects = = 
 Rubidium reacts violently with water and can cause fires . To ensure safety and purity , this metal is usually kept under a dry mineral oil or sealed in glass ampoules in an inert atmosphere . Rubidium forms peroxides on exposure even to small amount of air diffused into the oil , and storage is subject to similar precautions as the storage of metallic potassium . 
 Rubidium , like sodium and potassium , almost always has + 1 oxidation state when dissolved in water , even in biological contexts . The human body tends to treat Rb + ions as if they were potassium ions , and therefore concentrates rubidium in the body 's intracellular fluid ( i.e. , inside cells ) . The ions are not particularly toxic ; a 70 kg person contains on average 0 @.@ 36 g of rubidium , and an increase in this value by 50 to 100 times did not show negative effects in test persons . The biological half @-@ life of rubidium in humans measures 31 – 46 days . Although a partial substitution of potassium by rubidium is possible , when more than 50 % of the potassium in the muscle tissue of rats was replaced with rubidium , the rats died . 
 = Gilberto Silva = 
 Gilberto <unk> da Silva ( Brazilian Portuguese : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 7 October 1976 ) is a Brazilian former footballer known for his time with Arsenal where he played as a defensive midfielder or defender . 
 Gilberto was raised in a poor family and as a child he balanced playing football with various labour jobs . He began his football career in 1997 with América Mineiro , where good form earned him a move to Atlético Mineiro in 2000 . He became a star player for Atlético , playing for three years in the Brazilian Campeonato Brasileiro Série A. He came to particular prominence when he helped the Brazilian national team win the 2002 FIFA World Cup , playing in all seven of Brazil 's matches . 
 In August 2002 , for a fee of £ 4 @.@ 5 million , he joined Arsenal , with whom he won the 2003 – 04 Premier League as an ' Invincible ' , and two FA Cup trophies . In his first five seasons with the club , he played 208 games and scored 23 goals . On 19 August 2006 , he scored Arsenal 's first competitive goal at the newly built Emirates Stadium . He was made vice @-@ captain of Arsenal in 2006 . He has also scored Arsenal 's fastest ever goal coming in at just 20 seconds in a game against PSV in the 2002 – 03 UEFA Champions League . During his time with the Gunners , Gilberto developed into one of the best defensive midfielders in Europe . In 2007 , he was selected as Brazil captain for the Copa América tournament , which Brazil went on to win . In 2012 , Gilberto returned to Atlético Mineiro , where he won the Copa Libertadores . 
 = = Early life = = 
 As a child , Gilberto lived in the city of Lagoa da Prata with his father ( a blacksmith ) , his mother ( a housewife ) and three sisters . His family lived in a small house which his father built , in the district of Usina <unk> . Despite financial hardship , causing his sisters and him to share a single room , he had a relatively carefree childhood : he describes it as " [ a time when ] I had no responsibility in my life , I played football on the street with cousins and friends , and we never had any contact with drugs or violence " . In 1988 ( aged 12 ) , he got the chance to break out of poverty by playing football , joining América Mineiro as a youth player . It was during these years at América Mineiro that Gilberto was taught defensive discipline by playing as a central defender . When not playing football , Gilberto was taught furniture @-@ making skills by his father , which he would come to use in the following years . In 1991 , Gilberto 's father retired leaving the 15 @-@ year @-@ old to provide financially for his whole family , a task made more difficult by his mother 's ill @-@ health . 
 Because of the low wage at América Mineiro , he was forced to quit football to take various jobs as a labourer , a carpenter , and a worker in a sweet factory . It looked as if this would be the end of his childhood dream . As a factory @-@ worker Gilberto earned the equivalent of about £ 50 a month by 2002 rates . After three years of working in a factory , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old decided to try his luck at football again by enrolling in the local club 's youth academy . His time in the academy did not last long due to the worsening situation at home as a result of his mother 's ill health ; he returned to work in the sweet factory with little hope of resurrecting his football career . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1997 , Gilberto 's friends convinced him to give football another try , which led to him re @-@ signing for América Mineiro on 1 June 1997 , this time as a full @-@ time professional . Aged 22 , Gilberto played as a central defender for the first team . During his first season for América Mineiro he was regarded as a key player by the club , despite being criticised by some fans for inconsistency . He helped them win the Série B division , and consequently gain promotion to Série A. 
 During Gilberto 's third season at América Mineiro , with the team back to Série B after relegation in Série A in 1999 , he played 20 games and scored one goal , helping the club to finish runners @-@ up in the league . In 2000 , aged 24 , he joined rival club Atlético Mineiro . In his first season for the club , he fractured his right tibia and , as a result , missed a number of games . In his second season , he was moved by the manager Carlos Alberto <unk> from central defence to a defensive midfield role where he flourished . He scored three goals in the 2001 season and became a revelation in Brazilian club football . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Gilberto 's performance in the 2002 FIFA World Cup caught the attention of many coaches . Gilberto expressed a desire to move to England , saying , " It would be fantastic to play against the likes of David Beckham again . " As a result , FA Premier League clubs Aston Villa and Arsenal led the chase to sign him . In August , while still under contract to Atlético Mineiro , Gilberto joined Arsenal on their pre @-@ season tour of Austria ; while he had not yet signed for Arsenal the deal looked set to go ahead . However , complications arose when a transfer embargo was placed on Atlético Mineiro due to unpaid wages to some players at the club , including Gilberto . There was also an issue of obtaining a UK work permit for Gilberto . Despite the complications , Gilberto ended a summer of speculation and joined Arsenal on 7 August 2002 for a fee of £ 4 @.@ 5 million . Upon signing Gilberto , Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger said , " What I like was the fact that he kept things simple . He can play all across the midfield but the holding role just in front of the defence is what he does best . " 
 When Gilberto moved to England and began training with Arsenal , he bought a house in St Albans , South Hertfordshire . Having been used to life in small Brazilian towns , he initially struggled to adapt to the new way of life in London . However , on the pitch , he settled in very quickly . On 11 August 2002 he made his Arsenal debut as a substitute against Liverpool in the second half of the FA Community Shield game in which he scored the winning goal . As the 2002 – 03 FA Premier League season began , Gilberto faced stiff competition for a place in midfield from compatriot Edu . After two substitute appearances , Gilberto finally broke into the starting eleven on 27 August , helping Arsenal to a 5 – 2 win against West Bromwich Albion . Gilberto 's good form continued as he set a new record for the fastest goal scored in the UEFA Champions League , scoring after 20 @.@ 07 seconds against PSV on 25 September 2002 . However , his legal problems continued , since his transfer to England still was not fully resolved . As a result , Gilberto instructed his lawyers to start legal proceedings against Atlético Mineiro for unpaid wages in November 2002 . For the second half of the 2002 – 03 season , he remained a regular starter in the Arsenal side . Even though he suffered a lapse in form towards the end of the season , he won an FA Cup winner 's medal , playing in the final at the Millennium Stadium as Arsenal beat Southampton 1 – 0 . 
 2003 – 04 was an even better season for Gilberto , as he was instrumental in helping Arsenal win the Premier League title whilst going the entire season unbeaten . He played in 32 of Arsenal 's 38 unbeaten Premier League games during the season . His next season started equally impressively , as he scored the first goal in Arsenal 's 3 – 1 Community Shield win over Manchester United at the Millennium Stadium . During the opening games of the season , he started to experience severe pain in his back , and after a match at Bolton Wanderers on 27 September 2004 , a scan revealed he had fractured his back . At first it was reported that he would be out of action for a month . Later reports suggested the injury could be season @-@ threatening . 
 Gilberto 's doctor ordered him to wear a back brace for three months to aid the healing of the fractured bone . Gilberto returned to his native Brazil for the duration of his rehabilitation . During his time there , he doubted whether he would ever be able to play football again , due to speculation that his injury could threaten his career . Despite his concerns , his long rehabilitation time paid off as he made a full recovery . He made his footballing comeback in Arsenal 's 4 – 1 victory over Norwich City on 22 April 2005 . During the whole 2004 – 05 season , Gilberto was injured for 7 months and played only 17 games . His absence , combined with Arsenal 's slump in form at the time , led to much discussion regarding the importance of Gilberto to the Arsenal team ; some suggesting that Arsenal struggled without him . Gilberto 's difficult 2004 – 05 season ended in consolation as Arsenal finished runners @-@ up in the Premier League and won the FA Cup against Manchester United in a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 In June 2005 , football agent Jacques Lichtenstein took Atlético Mineiro to court over Gilberto 's transfer in 2002 . Lichtenstein 's lawyer argued that he and his informal partner , Ronny Rosenthal , never received an allegedly agreed 10 % commission from Gilberto 's £ 4 @.@ 5 million transfer to Arsenal from Atlético Mineiro in July 2002 . Arsène Wenger and Arsenal vice @-@ chairman David Dein both gave evidence in court , saying that Arsenal dealt directly with Atlético Mineiro and that no agent was involved in the deal . The case was conducted before The Hon. Mr Justice Jack , who on 29 June ruled against Lichtenstein , and ordered the claimants pay Atletico <unk> £ 94 @,@ 000 in legal costs . A year later , the case could have caused problems for Arsenal , when former player Ashley Cole criticised the club for " hypocrisy and double standards " in the way they approached Gilberto . 
 With legal matters subsided , the 2005 – 06 season began . Following midfielder and team captain Patrick Vieira 's departure from Arsenal , Gilberto became a senior member of the Arsenal team . Shortly into the season , in September 2005 , his desire to see his career out with the club led to Gilberto extending his Arsenal contract to June 2009 . A month later this loyalty was repaid when , on 18 October 2005 , Gilberto made his first appearance for Arsenal as captain , against Sparta Prague . Although Gilberto had a period of bad form during the winter months of the season , his good defensive performances during the latter stages of the UEFA Champions League ( in particular , games against Real Madrid , Juventus and Villarreal ) gained him praise . On 17 May 2006 Gilberto played for Arsenal in the UEFA Champions League Final against FC Barcelona , which Arsenal lost 2 – 1 . 
 Following the departure of defender Sol Campbell and retirement of striker Dennis Bergkamp in the summer of 2006 , Gilberto was announced as Arsenal 's vice @-@ captain for the 2006 – 07 season . He began the season well , as he scored the first ever goal at the Dutch DSB Stadion in a pre @-@ season friendly match . He then scored Arsenal 's first ever goal in a competitive match at the Emirates Stadium in a 1 – 1 draw with Aston Villa . His good form continued for Arsenal as he scored several league goals , garnering praise for his performances as stand @-@ in captain while Thierry Henry was injured . Gilberto and his agent ( Paulo <unk> ) also reiterated the player 's desire to honour his contract with the Gunners . Meanwhile , Gilberto 's good form carried through to the second half of the season . Even though Arsenal only managed to finish fourth in the league , he ended the season as Arsenal 's second highest scorer with 10 Premier League goals . The explanation for his unusually high tally is the fact that Henry suffered two lengthy injury spells , in which Gilberto stepped up as captain to take penalties . Gilberto 's goal scoring record combined with his own good form in midfield and his leadership of Wenger 's youthful squad led some Arsenal fans and football pundits to label Gilberto as Arsenal 's best player of the season , and one of the best in the Premier League . 
 The buildup of the 2007 – 08 season saw Arsenal captain Thierry Henry leave the club to join Barcelona . This coupled with the fact that Gilberto was Arsenal 's vice @-@ captain during the 2006 – 07 season led many people to assume that Gilberto would take over Henry 's role . However , to the surprise of Gilberto , William Gallas was given the captain 's armband instead . In August , after returning to Arsenal 's pre @-@ season training late due to his involvement in the Copa América tournament ( and thus missing the start of the season ) , Gilberto then lost his place in the first team to young midfielder Mathieu Flamini . This reignited speculation linking Gilberto to Italy due to rumours that he was unhappy being on the bench at Arsenal . However , reports that he was being snubbed at the club were dismissed by Wenger , who insisted that Gilberto would remain at Arsenal to fight for his place . Despite this , in October 2007 , rumours in the press reemerged that Gilberto was angry at Wenger for being asked to play in defence in a League Cup game against Sheffield United , and had resultantly refused to play . Gilberto ended up playing the game in midfield though , with he and Wenger both denying rumours of a rift with each other . Gilberto subsequently commented that while he was not happy being a substitute , he would remain professional and fight for his place at the club . Also in October , Gilberto ceded the Brazilian captaincy to Lúcio upon his compatriot 's return from injury . 
 Through the winter months of the 2007 – 08 season , Gilberto started a limited number of games for the Gunners , though he kept his place in the Brazil team , starting several games for A <unk> . After becoming more and more frustrated with not playing regularly , Gilberto admitted in February 2008 that he had been made to feel " totally useless " by Wenger . Despite this , he declined to make a decision on his future ; something which prompted Wenger to promise talks with Gilberto . Amidst Gilberto 's frustration at Arsenal , he targeted playing in Brazil 's Olympic team in Beijing during August 2008 ; a competition which he had never played in . Off the pitch , Gilberto was reported to have passed his UK Citizenship test , and that he would subsequently apply for a British passport . April saw Gilberto 's season take a turn for the better ; making 5 starts – a substantial portion of his seasonal total of 12 – even managing to score a goal . The goal came against Reading on 19 April , and despite its <unk> nature leading to some classing it as a possible own goal , the Premier League 's Dubious Goals Committee eventually credited the goal to Gilberto . However , Gilberto 's return to favour did not stop Arsenal 's 2007 – 08 season ending trophyless . The club subsequently faced the possibility of several players leaving ; among those rumoured to leave was Flamini , the player who had kept Gilberto out of the first team . The Frenchman ended up moving to A.C. Milan on 6 May , and a subsequent gap was left in the Arsenal midfield . Gilberto became less likely to leave the club during Summer 2008 as a result , and Wenger remarked that he wanted to keep Gilberto ; Gilberto saying he wanted to stay and possibly even renew his contract at Arsenal . Gilberto finished the 2007 – 08 season with 36 appearances for Arsenal , albeit only 12 of these being Premier League starts . 
 = = = Panathinaikos = = = 
 Following Brazil 's summer international games , he was seriously linked with a move to Greek club Panathinaikos . The speculation concluded when Gilberto agreed terms with the Athenian side on 17 July 2008 , for an undisclosed fee . During his first season at the club , Gilberto helped the side reach the UEFA Champions League Round of 16 . He managed to win both the 2009 – 10 Greek Championship and Cup with Panathinaikos , being the starting holding midfielder and producing numerous solid displays . In Gilberto 's final home game for Panathinaikos on 23 May 2011 , he scored the winning goal in a 1 – 0 victory over PAOK , for the Greek UEFA Champions League playoffs . Two days later , he played his final game for the team , winning 2 – 0 against AEK Athens . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 On 23 May 2011 , Gilberto ended his 9 @-@ year career in Europe by signing an 18 @-@ month deal with Grêmio , of Porto Alegre . 
 In the past , Gilberto has hinted that he may one day return to Brazil to play for Atlético Mineiro . After his football career finishes , he has said that he would like to , " Live in a small farm and ride a horse and have all of my family next to me . " On 10 November 2012 , it was confirmed that Gilberto 's wish would be granted , as he signed a pre @-@ contract with Galo . 
 On 9 December 2012 , Silva was welcomed at <unk> dos <unk> by fans of Atlético Mineiro , returning to the Belo Horizonte side after 11 years away . Silva spoke of winning the 2013 Copa Libertadores title upon his return . Silva achieved this wish on 24 July 2013 , with a final victory over Club Olimpia of Paraguay . 
 On 11 December 2015 , after two years without a club , he officially announced his retirement as a footballer , intending to pursue a career as an international consultant for clubs and players . 
 = = International career = = 
 In October 2001 , his good performances from that year earned Gilberto a call @-@ up to the Brazilian national team ( " A <unk> " ) by Luiz Felipe Scolari for the 2002 World Cup qualification games . He made his international debut against Chile on 7 October , coming on as a substitute . On 7 November , he made his debut in the starting line @-@ up of the national team against Bolivia . His international career continued to flourish in early 2002 : he scored twice against Bolivia and once against Iceland . In 2002 , he was a surprise inclusion in the Brazil squad for the 2002 FIFA World Cup in South Korea and Japan . He was expected to play a small part in the tournament . However , defensive midfielder and Brazilian team captain Emerson was injured in training just before the first World Cup game . In light of the setback , coach Scolari called upon Gilberto to fill the gap which Emerson left . Gilberto ended up playing in every minute of every match of the tournament , which Brazil went on to win . In the words of Veja magazine , Gilberto " carried the piano for Ronaldo and Rivaldo to play their tunes on " . He was not without attacking use either , setting up Ronaldo 's semi @-@ final goal to put Brazil through to the final . It was Gilberto 's performance in this tournament which led to him being classed as one of the top defensive midfielders in the world . 
 On 22 June 2005 , Gilberto played in Brazil 's 1 – 1 draw against Japan , in his only game of the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup . His absence as a first team regular could be explained by his lack of games , and thus match fitness , for Arsenal during the season leading up to the tournament . Gilberto 's appearance in the tournament gained him a winners medal , as Brazil went on to win the competition . On the back of his good Champions League form , Gilberto was selected for the Brazil national football team for the 2006 FIFA World Cup . Gilberto was substituted on in two games , and started twice due to another injury to Emerson . Brazil were beaten 1 – 0 by France in the quarter final . Following Brazil 's World Cup disappointment , midfielder Juninho called for the older members of the Brazil squad ( including Gilberto ) to retire from international football . On the back of Gilberto 's childhood idol Dunga being appointed Brazil coach , Gilberto did not take Juninho 's advice , and subsequently continued his international career . 
 On 1 June 2007 , Gilberto captained Brazil against England at the first senior international match at the new Wembley Stadium . Having had a seemingly good headed goal disallowed after 20 minutes , he set up Brazil 's only goal as the game ended 1 – 1 . During the summer of 2007 Gilberto played in the Copa América tournament , in which he was chosen to captain Brazil in the absence of Lúcio . They went on to beat Argentina 3 – 0 in the final , though he missed the final game through suspension . Following the end of the 2007 – 08 Premier League season , Gilberto was called up to the Brazil national team for 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifiers during the summer as well as a tour of the United States . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Gilberto is often called " the invisible wall " in Brazil . His play often goes unnoticed as he positions himself between the two centre backs and the rest of midfield , breaking up opposition attacks before they gather momentum . In this role , he is a part of the defensive unit for both club and country . When playing , he is more passive than most players in defense . Rather than tackle an opponent , he is more likely to shadow him , thus pushing him back . As a result , he has an unusually clean record for a defensive midfielder : he has twice gone 45 games or more without receiving a single booking during his Arsenal career . 
 Gilberto is good at helping to defend against opponents who play a long ball game because he often man marks the opposition 's attacking target @-@ man . This cuts off the opposition 's supply to the strikers , and thus forces the long @-@ ball team to play through the midfield , something to which long @-@ ball teams are not particularly suited . 
 Despite Gilberto 's high pass completion rate , his passing has been described as erratic in the past . 
 According to <unk> ( a data analysis system used by football managers ) figures cited by The Sunday Times in January 2007 , Gilberto was , together with Paul Scholes of Manchester United and Frank Lampard of Chelsea , one of the few midfielders in England to attain " the elite Champions League level " of performance . 
 = = Outside football = = 
 He is a patron of The Street League , a UK based charity which organises football matches for homeless people , refugees and asylum seekers . In June 2003 , Gilberto travelled to Brazil on tour with 17 Street League players . The tour included a visit to his home town Lagoa da Prata and games against local shanty town teams at the Maracanã stadium . 
 Gilberto is a keen musician . In his spare time , he plays the mandolin and the guitar . When he first moved to England he took up mandolin lessons and played publicly at his local pub in St Albans . He later started learning the guitar instead . 
 He has a Giant <unk> named after him at London Zoo . Gilberto is an adoptee of the animal , which he received from a London Zoo competition winner . The footballer described the South American animal as " my slightly more hairy brother ! " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 ( Statistics correct as of 17 October 2011 ) 
 ( Brackets indicate appearances in non @-@ FIFA matches , and do not count towards total ) 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Club 
 América ( MG ) 
 Série B : 1997 
 Copa Sul @-@ Minas : 2000 
 Atlético Mineiro 
 Campeonato Mineiro : 2000 , 2013 
 Copa Libertadores : 2013 
 Arsenal 
 FA Premier League : 2003 – 04 
 FA Cup : 2003 , 2005 
 FA Community Shield : 2002 , 2004 
 UEFA Champions League Runner @-@ up : 2005 – 06 
 Panathinaikos 
 Super League Greece : 2009 – 10 
 Greek Football Cup : 2010 
 International 
 Brazil 
 FIFA World Cup : 2002 
 Copa América : 2007 
 FIFA Confederations Cup : 2005 , 2009 
 = William Tailer = 
 William Tailer ( February 25 , 1675 / 6 – March 1 , 1731 / 2 ) was a military officer and politician in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Born into the wealthy and influential Stoughton family , he twice married into other politically powerful families . He served as lieutenant governor of the province from 1711 until 1716 , and again in the early 1730s . During each of these times he was briefly acting governor . He was a political opponent of Governor Joseph Dudley , and was a supporter of a land bank proposal intended to address the province 's currency problems . During his first tenure as acting governor he authorized the erection of Boston Light , the earliest lighthouse in what is now the United States . 
 He was active in the provincial defense , and commanded a regiment in the 1710 siege of Port Royal , the capital of French Acadia , during Queen Anne 's War . He was responsible for overseeing the defenses of Boston in the 1720s , and was sent to negotiate with the Iroquois and Abenaki during Dummer 's War . Jonathan Belcher , initially a political opponent , later became an ally , and selected him to serve as his lieutenant governor in 1730 . Tailer held the post until is death , and was interred in the tomb of his uncle , William Stoughton . 
 = = Early life and military service = = 
 William Tailer was born in Dorchester , Massachusetts Bay Colony on February 25 , 1675 / 6 to William Tailer and Rebecca Stoughton Tailer . His mother was the daughter of early Massachusetts settler Israel Stoughton and sister to magistrate William Stoughton . His father was a wealthy landowner and merchant . His father owned commercial real estate in Boston and was a member of the Atherton Company , one of New England 's most powerful and well @-@ connected land development partnerships . He was also one of " a selected fraternity " of merchants engaged in the " eastward trade " with neighboring French Acadia , one of whose leading members was Boston merchant John Nelson . Tailer 's father committed suicide in 1682 , apparently suffering from depression which may have been brought on by financial reverses . 
 The younger Tailer inherited a substantial estate ; it was reported that in 1695 his guardians operated five mills on his behalf . He was also a beneficiary of the large estate of his uncle , who died a childless bachelor . By 1702 Tailer had married Sarah Byfield , daughter to Nathaniel Byfield , another leading colonial magistrate . She died childless in about 1708 . Byfield and Tailer 's father had been business partners , a relationship that Tailer continued . 
 He served in the provincial militia during Queen Anne 's War . In 1710 he commanded a militia regiment that saw action at the capture of Port Royal , Acadia . Following the victory he went London with Francis Nicholson , the expedition 's leader , where he was " <unk> with expectation " of advancement . His expectations were rewarded with a commission as lieutenant governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , serving under Governor Joseph Dudley . He then returned to Massachusetts , where he was again active in the defense of the colonies , serving at Fort William and Mary in New Hampshire , and reporting on the frontier defenses in what is now southern Maine ( but was then part of Massachusetts ) . 
 In early 1711 / 2 he married Abigail Gillam Dudley , widow of Joseph Dudley 's grandson Thomas . The couple had six children , who they raised in the old Stoughton homestead in Dorchester . Tailer joined the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company in 1712 and was elected as its captain the same year . 
 = = Acting governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Tailer was elected to the Governor 's Council from 1712 to 1729 , and was on three separate occasions commissioned as lieutenant governor of Massachusetts . Despite his connection by marriage to the Dudleys , he had an awkward political relationship with the governor during the period of his first two commissions . A number of Anglicans in the colony , Tailer among them , were skeptical of Dudley 's faith . ( Dudley had been raised in the Puritan way , and had formally adopted Anglican practices while in England in the 1690s . ) He and Dudley were also on opposite sides of the debate on the province 's currency problems . Dudley favored the issuance of public bills of credit as a means to circumvent the inflationary issuance of paper currency that had become a serious problem by the end of Queen Anne 's War in 1713 , while Tailer , along with his father @-@ in @-@ law Nathaniel Byfield and others , favored the establishment of a private land bank , that would issue bills secured by the lands of its investors . 
 Byfield in 1714 went to London to lobby on behalf of the land bank interests , and to seek for himself the post of governor , which was open for consideration after the accession of King George I to the throne . He was unsuccessful in acquiring the governorship , but was able to convince Colonel Elizeus Burges , who had been chosen to replace Dudley , to keep Tailer on as lieutenant governor . Burges , however , was bribed by land bank opponents to resign his post before leaving England . The commissions of Burges and Tailer had by then been sent to Massachusetts , and Tailer became acting governor in November 1715 after they were formally proclaimed . 
 Immediately after taking office Tailer engaged in political housecleaning , eliminating land bank opponents and Dudley supporters from a number of provincial positions . His efforts , however , backfired : the provincial assembly elected Joseph Dudley 's son Paul as attorney general , and London agents of the anti @-@ bank party worked to ensure Tailer 's replacement . ( One of those agents , Jonathan Belcher , would ironically become a Tailer ally in later years and secure the lieutenant governorship for him the third time . ) Through their efforts the king chose Colonel Samuel Shute , a land bank opponent , to replace Burges , and William Dummer as Shute 's lieutenant governor . Tailer was turned out of office with Shute 's arrival in October 1716 . Shute deliberately snubbed Tailer upon his arrival , choosing to first meet with the Dudleys instead . 
 The only major long @-@ term accomplishment of Tailer 's tenure as acting governor was the establishment of Boston Light , the first lighthouse built in what is now the United States . While a member of the assembly , Tailer had sat on the legislative committee that drafted the enabling and funding bills , and he signed them after he became governor . 
 = = Provincial military service = = 
 He next traveled to England . There he lobbied , on behalf of John Nelson , heir to Sir Thomas Temple 's claims to Nova Scotia . Nelson sought recompense for the loss of the territory in the 1667 Treaty of Breda , but Tailer 's efforts were in vain . He also lobbied on his own behalf for a military pension . He successfully convinced Lord Cobham that he deserved one for his service at Port Royal in 1710 , and was awarded the half pay of a colonel , amounting to £ 400 per year . John Nelson observed that Tailer 's loss of the lieutenant governorship ( worth £ 50 per year ) " has proved much to his advantage " . 
 Tailer eventually returned to Massachusetts . Under Shute 's governorship he was several times involved in negotiations with Indians on the northern frontiers , and continued to be active in the provincial militia . Tailer accompanied Shute on an expedition to Maine to negotiate with the Abenaki of northern New England in 1717 . Shute handled the negotiations poorly , raising tensions between the Abenaki and British settlers . In 1720 Tailer was one of several commissioners sent to mediate between the settlers and Abenaki . Although a potential basis for agreement was identified , continued raiding and disagreement on the details of proposed terms caused the situation to deteriorate further . Shute declared war on the Abenaki in July 1722 following raids against British settlements on the Maine coast . 
 Shute 's ongoing conflicts with the provincial assembly prompted him to leave for England in early 1723 , leaving handling of the war in Lieutenant Governor Dummer 's hands . Tailer was one of the lead members of a party sent in 1723 to Albany , New York in an attempt to convince the Iroquois to join the conflict against the Abenaki . The embassy was unsuccessful : the Iroquois resisted all attempts to bring them into the war against the Abenaki . Tailer continued to be involved in the war , where he was responsible for maintaining Boston 's defenses . 
 = = Reprise as acting governor = = 
 Tailer 's politics shifted during the 1720s , and he and Byfield came to align more closely with the populist faction . As a result he and one @-@ time opponent Jonathan Belcher became allies . When Governor William Burnet died in 1729 , Belcher was in London , acting as agent for Connecticut and assisting in lobbying against Burnet 's unpopular insistence on a permanent salary . Belcher successfully gained for himself the post of governor , and then secured for Tailer another appointment as lieutenant governor . Tailer 's commission was proclaimed before Belcher 's arrival , and he briefly served as acting governor while awaiting his superior 's arrival . The few months were uneventful , as the province was then suffering from an outbreak of smallpox , because of which Tailer prorogued the assembly . 
 Tailer died in Dorchester , while serving as lieutenant governor , in March 1731 / 2 . His pallbearers included Governor Belcher and other leading political figures . He is buried in the tomb of his uncle , Willam Stoughton , in what is now called the Dorchester North Burying Ground . 
 = David Freese = 
 David Richard Freese ( born April 28 , 1983 ) is an American professional baseball third baseman for the Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He began his MLB career with the St. Louis Cardinals , where he was a key player during the 2011 postseason , batting .545 with 12 hits in the 2011 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . He also set an MLB postseason record of 21 runs batted in ( RBI ) , earning the NLCS MVP Award and World Series MVP Award . In addition , Freese won the Babe Ruth Award , naming him the MVP of the 2011 MLB postseason . 
 A star high school player , Freese declined a college baseball scholarship from the University of Missouri . Needing a break from baseball , he sat out his freshman year of college before feeling a renewed urge to play the game . He transferred to St. Louis Community College – Meramec , a junior college , where he played for one season before transferring to the University of South Alabama . The San Diego Padres selected Freese in the ninth round of the 2006 MLB draft . 
 The Cardinals acquired Freese before the 2008 season . He made his MLB debut on Opening Day 2009 due to an injury to starting third baseman Troy <unk> . Despite suffering his own injuries in the minor leagues and in his first two MLB seasons , Freese batted .297 with 10 home runs and 55 RBI during the Cardinals ' 2011 World Series championship season . The next season , he batted .293 with 20 home runs and was selected to his first MLB All @-@ Star Game . Freese authored a 20 @-@ game hitting streak in 2013 , but back injuries limited his effectiveness , and the Cardinals traded him to the Angels following the season . He played for the Angels for two seasons before signing with the Pirates in March 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Corpus Christi , Texas , Freese was raised in the Greater St. Louis area , in Wildwood , Missouri . He grew up a fan of the St. Louis Cardinals . He graduated in 2001 from Lafayette High School in Wildwood . Freese recorded a Lafayette @-@ record .533 batting average and 23 home runs during his senior season . He was considered to be the best shortstop in the state . 
 As a senior in high school , Freese was offered a scholarship to play college baseball for the University of Missouri 's baseball team . Feeling burned out , Freese decided to quit the sport , but he studied computer science at Missouri and was a member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity . 
 During the summer after his freshman year , Freese worked for the Rockwood School District maintenance department . When he visited Lafayette High School towards the end of the summer , he realized how much he missed baseball . Freese asked Tony <unk> , the coach at St. Louis Community College – Meramec , for a roster spot . In one season at St. Louis Community College , Freese hit .396 with 41 runs batted in ( RBI ) and 10 home runs and was named to the National Junior College Athletic Association All @-@ America second team . 
 <unk> recommended Freese to Steve Kittrell , the head coach of the Jaguars baseball team at the University of South Alabama . At South Alabama , opposing teams respected his hitting ability ; scouts told their pitchers : " Don 't let Freese beat us . " As a junior in 2005 , Freese hit .373 , with a .443 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) , .525 slugging percentage ( SLG ) , and 52 runs scored in 56 games . He was seventh in the Sun Belt Conference ( SBC ) in average and led the school one year after Adam Lind had done so . Freese was even better in 2006 , hitting .414 with a <unk> OBP and <unk> SLG with 73 runs and 73 RBI in 60 games . He won the SBC batting title and led the conference in RBI . He tied for ninth in Division I in RBI , was 12th in average and just missed the top 10 in runs scored . He made the All @-@ Conference team at third base and was named SBC Player of the Year . He was named an American Baseball Coaches Association All @-@ American as the top third baseman in NCAA Division I , ahead of Evan Longoria and Pedro Alvarez , among others . Kittrell considers Freese to be the best player he coached at South Alabama , where he also coached Lind , Luis Gonzalez and Juan Pierre . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues : 2006 – 2008 = = = 
 Prior to the 2006 Major League Baseball Draft , the Boston Red Sox attempted to sign Freese for $ 90 @,@ 000 . However , South Alabama made the College World Series regional playoffs , which extended their season past the pre @-@ draft signing deadline . 
 Freese was drafted by the San Diego Padres in the ninth round ( 273rd overall ) of the draft . Freese played for the Eugene Emeralds of the Class @-@ A Short Season Northwest League , Fort Wayne Wizards of the Class @-@ A Midwest League and Lake Elsinore Storm of the Class @-@ A Advanced California League in the San Diego farm system in 2006 and 2007 . He batted .379 with a .465 OBP , <unk> SLG , 19 runs and 26 RBI in 18 games for the Emeralds and .299 with a .374 OBP , <unk> SLG and 44 RBI in 53 games for the Wizards in 2006 . Freese batted .302 with a .400 OBP and .489 SLG for Lake Elsinore in 128 games during the 2007 season . He scored 104 runs and drove in 96 . He ranked seventh in the California League in OBP , seventh in RBI and tied with Tony <unk> for third in runs . He made the California League All @-@ Star team . However , the Padres had third basemen Chase Headley and Kevin <unk> as well , potentially blocking Freese 's path to the majors . As a result , Freese began to practice as a catcher . 
 Before the 2008 season , Freese was traded by the Padres to the Cardinals for Jim Edmonds . He spent the season with the Memphis Redbirds of the Triple @-@ A Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , where he batted .306 with a .361 OBP and .550 SLG , hit 26 home runs and recorded 91 RBI . He led PCL third basemen in fielding percentage ( .967 ) and double plays ( 26 ) . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals = = = 
 = = = = Early MLB career : 2009 – 2010 = = = = 
 Freese emerged as a potential starter when an injury seemed likely to put Cardinals starting third baseman Troy <unk> on the disabled list at the beginning of the 2009 season . Freese made his MLB debut on Opening Day of the 2009 season , coming off the bench and hitting a go @-@ ahead sacrifice fly in the Cardinals ' home opener against the Pittsburgh Pirates . Freese was expected to be the team 's starting third baseman , but was quickly passed over by Brian Barden and Joe Thurston . He was optioned to Triple @-@ A Memphis on April 20 , 2009 to make room for newly acquired reliever Blaine Boyer . He later had surgery to repair a left ankle injury that hampered him during spring training . He missed two months of the season . He was activated and assigned to the Springfield Cardinals of the Double @-@ A Texas League in late July , before he was assigned to Memphis . He led the Memphis Redbirds to a PCL division championship . He was recalled in the September call @-@ up on September 23 , 2009 . Freese played only 17 games for the Cardinals in 2009 , in addition to 56 games for Triple @-@ A Memphis . 
 Freese began the 2010 season as the Cardinals ' starting third baseman . However , he suffered a right ankle injury in June . This injury required him to have two ankle surgeries and ended his season after 70 games . 
 = = = = Breakout season : 2011 = = = = 
 Freese was projected to start the 2011 season , and he was named the starter on Opening Day , despite suffering minor ailments during spring training . He started off the year batting over .320 , but he missed 51 games after being hit by a pitch that fractured his left hand . After returning to the starting lineup , he finished the season with a .297 batting average , 10 home runs , and 55 RBI . He recorded hits in eight of the final nine regular @-@ season games . Freese credited his improvement in power hitting to hitting coach Mark McGwire , who helped him refine his stroke . 
 = = = = = 2011 postseason = = = = = 
 In his first playoff series , he drove in 4 runs against Philadelphia in Game 4 to force a fifth game . In the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) against Milwaukee , Freese had a .545 batting average , hit 3 home runs , drove in 9 runs , and scored 7 runs . He was named the NLCS Most Valuable Player . Through Game 3 of the World Series against Texas , Freese had a 13 @-@ game postseason hitting streak , a Cardinals record and just two short of matching the all @-@ time National League record . The hitting streak was snapped in Game 4 . 
 In Game 6 of the 2011 World Series , with the Texas Rangers leading the game 7 – 5 , and leading the series by 3 games to 2 , Freese came to bat in the bottom of the ninth with two out and two men on base . With a count of one ball and two strikes , Freese hit a two @-@ run triple off <unk> Feliz just out of the reach of Nelson Cruz to tie the game and send it to extra innings . In the 11th inning , again with two strikes , Freese hit a game @-@ winning lead @-@ off , walk @-@ off , solo home @-@ run to deep center field ( 420 feet ) , to send the World Series to its first Game 7 since 2002 . Freese joined Jim Edmonds , the man he was traded for , as the only players in Cardinals history to hit an extra @-@ inning walk @-@ off home run in the postseason . He joined Aaron Boone ( 2003 ) , David Ortiz ( 2004 ) and Hall of Famers Carlton Fisk ( 1975 ) and Kirby Puckett ( 1991 ) as the only players to hit an extra @-@ inning walk @-@ off home run when their team was facing postseason elimination . 
 In Game 7 of the World Series , Freese hit a two @-@ run double in the bottom of the first inning , bringing his 2011 postseason RBI total to 21 , an MLB record . The Cardinals went on to win the game and the series , making Freese a World Series champion for the first time . For his efforts , Freese was named the World Series MVP . He became the sixth player to win the LCS and World Series MVP awards in the same year . Freese also won the Babe Ruth Award as the postseason MVP . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 Freese won the All @-@ Star Final Vote in 2012 , joining the All @-@ Star roster with teammates Lance Lynn , Carlos Beltrán , Rafael Furcal , and Yadier Molina for the National League in the 2012 MLB All @-@ Star Game . Freese had a .294 batting average , along with 13 home runs and 50 RBI in the first half of the season . After being injury @-@ plagued in previous years , Freese played in a career @-@ high 144 games in 2012 , finishing the season with 79 RBIs , 20 home runs and a .293 batting average . In the 2012 NLCS against the San Francisco Giants , Freese hit a two @-@ run home run off Madison Bumgarner in Game 1 . Through this point in his postseason career , Freese had played 25 games , batting .386 with 11 doubles , six home runs , 25 RBIs and a <unk> slugging percentage in 100 plate appearances . Only Carlos Beltrán ( <unk> ) and Babe Ruth ( <unk> ) had higher slugging percentages among players with 100 or more plate appearances in the postseason . However , he slumped after that game , batting just .192 for the series as the Giants won in seven games and advanced to the 2012 World Series . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 On February 8 2013 , Freese and the Cardinals reached agreement on a one @-@ year contract , avoiding arbitration . This was the first season he was arbitration @-@ eligible and when filing he had requested a 2013 salary of $ 3 @.@ 75 million . The Cardinals counter @-@ offered $ 2 @.@ 4 million . After suffering a back injury in spring training and starting the 2013 season on the disabled list , Freese struggled at the plate for much of the first six weeks of the season , having only four RBIs by mid @-@ May . However , on 17 May , Freese began a twenty @-@ game hitting streak , the longest of any MLB player to that point in the 2013 season . The streak ended on June 12 . 
 On August 16 , the Cardinals promoted <unk> Wong to play second base , intending for Matt Carpenter to play third base , reducing Freese 's playing time . In the postseason , he collected just 10 hits in 56 at @-@ bats as the Cardinals fell to the Boston Red Sox in the 2013 World Series . 
 = = = Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim = = = 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 After the 2013 season , the Cardinals traded Freese and Fernando Salas to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim for Peter <unk> and Randal <unk> . Again eligible for salary arbitration for the 2014 season , Freese filed for a $ 6 million salary while the Angels countered with $ 4 @.@ 1 million ; they settled on a $ 5 @.@ 05 million salary . Freese had a slow start , ending May with a .203 batting average , and improved from June through August , batting .292 in those months . He hit a home run against the Kansas City Royals in the first game of the 2014 American League Division Series for his 24th postseason extra @-@ base hit and 30th RBI . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 In his last year of arbitration before becoming eligible for free agency , Freese requested a $ 7 @.@ 6 million salary for the 2015 season , while the Angels filed for $ 5 @.@ 25 million . The two sides avoided arbitration by agreeing on a $ 6 @.@ 425 million salary . Freese entered the 2015 season as the Angels everyday third baseman , and hit .240 with 11 homers and 43 RBI in 90 games . He broke his right index finger when it was hit by a pitch on July 22 , and went on the disabled list . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = 
 Freese entered free agency after the 2015 season . Rather than re @-@ sign Freese , the Angels chose to trade for Yunel Escobar . Unsigned at the beginning of spring training in 2016 , Freese signed a one @-@ year contract with the Pittsburgh Pirates worth $ 3 million on March 11 . Neal Huntington , the Pirates ' general manager , indicated that Freese would play third base while Jung @-@ ho Kang rehabilitated from an injury , and would join John <unk> in a platoon at first base after Kang 's return . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Freese 's father , Guy , is a civil engineer . His mother , Lynn , is a retired teacher . Freese also has a sister , Pam . According to his mother , Freese — a professed lifelong Cardinals fan — had an original Ozzie Smith glove , and while pitching in his younger years always used number 45 in honor of another Cardinals legend , pitcher Bob Gibson . Freese is a Christian . He is of German descent , the Freese family originally hailing from <unk> , Westphalia . 
 In December 2009 , Freese was arrested for driving under the influence in Maryland Heights , Missouri , a suburb of St. Louis . Breath tests indicated a .232 blood alcohol content ; the state 's legal limit is .08 . Freese had also been arrested in November 2002 in Maryland Heights for driving while intoxicated . The 2009 arrest was a violation of Freese 's probation , due to a September 2007 arrest for resisting arrest ( amongst other charges ) in Lake Elsinore , California . 
 Freese crashed his Range Rover SUV into a tree in Wildwood , Missouri , a suburb of St. Louis , on November 22 , 2012 . Local investigators stated that the crash was a result of Freese 's swerving to avoid hitting a wild deer . Alcohol was not a factor in the crash . 
 In June 2013 , Freese signed a three @-@ year deal to endorse and serve as spokesman for Imo 's Pizza , a Midwestern pizza chain headquartered in the St. Louis area . No financial terms of the deal were announced other than as part of the contract Imo 's would also donate $ 10 @,@ 000 to a St. Louis area charity in Freese 's name . 
 During the offseason , he lives in St. Louis . 
 = Richard Mentor Johnson = 
 Richard Mentor Johnson ( October 17 , 1780 [ a ] – November 19 , 1850 ) was the ninth Vice President of the United States , serving in the administration of Martin Van Buren ( 1837 – 41 ) . He is the only vice president ever elected by the United States Senate under the provisions of the Twelfth Amendment . Johnson also represented Kentucky in the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate ; he began and ended his political career in the Kentucky House of Representatives . 
 Johnson was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1806 . He became allied with fellow Kentuckian Henry Clay as a member of the War Hawks faction that favored war with Britain in 1812 . At the outset of the War of 1812 , Johnson was commissioned a colonel in the Kentucky Militia and commanded a regiment of mounted volunteers from 1812 to 1813 . He and his brother James served under William Henry Harrison in Upper Canada . Johnson participated in the Battle of the Thames . Some reported that he personally killed the Shawnee chief Tecumseh , which he later used to his political advantage . 
 After the war , Johnson returned to the House of Representatives . The legislature appointed him to the Senate in 1819 to fill the seat vacated by John J. Crittenden . As his prominence grew , his interracial relationship with Julia Chinn , an <unk> slave , was more widely criticized . It worked against his political ambitions . Unlike other upper class leaders who had African American mistresses but never mentioned them , Johnson openly treated Chinn as his common law wife . He acknowledged their two daughters as his children , giving them his surname , much to the consternation of some of his constituents . The relationship is believed to have led to the loss of his Senate seat in 1829 , but his Congressional district returned him to the House the next year . 
 In 1836 , Johnson was the Democratic nominee for vice @-@ president on a ticket with Martin Van Buren . Campaigning with the slogan " Rumpsey Dumpsey , Rumpsey Dumpsey , Colonel Johnson killed Tecumseh " , Johnson fell just short of the electoral votes needed to secure his election . Virginia 's delegation to the Electoral College went against the state 's popular vote and refused to endorse Johnson . However , he was elected to the office by the Senate , which was dominated by Democrats . 
 Johnson proved such a liability for the Democrats in the 1836 election that they refused to renominate him for vice @-@ president in 1840 . Van Buren campaigned without a running mate . He lost to William Henry Harrison , a Whig . Johnson tried to return to public office but was defeated . He finally was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1850 , but he died on November 19 , 1850 , just two weeks into his term . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Richard Mentor Johnson was born on October 17 , 1780 , the fifth of Robert and Jemima ( <unk> ) Johnson 's eleven children . At the time , the family was living in the newly founded settlement of " <unk> " , near present @-@ day Louisville , Kentucky ; Kentucky was part of Virginia until organized and admitted as a state in 1792 . 
 By 1782 , the Johnsons had moved to Bryan 's Station ( future Lexington ) in Fayette County . Johnson 's mother was considered among the heroic women of the community because of her actions during Simon Girty 's raid on Bryan 's Station in August 1782 . According to tradition , as Girty 's forces surrounded the fort , the occupants discovered that they had almost no water inside to withstand a siege . Several Indians had concealed themselves near the spring outside the fort . The Kentuckians reasoned that the Indians would stay hidden until they attacked . Jemima Johnson approved a plan for the women to go alone and collect water from the spring as usual . Many men disapproved of the plan , fearing the women would be attacked and killed . However , faced with no other option they finally agreed . Shortly after sunrise , the women went to the spring and returned without incident . 
 Not long after they had returned , the attack began . Indian warriors set fire to several houses and stables , but a favorable wind kept the fires from spreading . Children used the water drawn by the women to put out the fires . A flaming arrow landed in baby Richard Johnson 's crib , but it was doused by his sister Betsy . Help arrived from Lexington and Boone Station , and the Indians retreated . 
 By 1784 , the Johnson family was at Great Crossing in Scott County . In 1779 , Johnson purchased 2000 acres from Patrick Henry and a large portion of James Madison 's 3000 @-@ acre land grant in the area . As a surveyor , Robert Johnson became successful through well @-@ chosen land purchases and being early in the region when huge land grants were made . 
 The son Richard Johnson did not begin his formal education until age fifteen , since there were no schools on the frontier . He entered Transylvania University in Lexington , Kentucky . By 1799 , he was studying law ( reading the law ) as a legal apprentice with George Nicholas and James Brown . They were professors of law at the University in addition to being in private practice . This was the customary way for many young men to enter the law . 
 At least two of Johnson 's brothers had notable careers as well : the eldest , James Johnson , went into shipping and stagecoach lines . A younger brother , John T. Johnson , became a minister and prominent in the Christian Churches , a 19th @-@ century movement in the Protestant congregations . 
 = = Career = = 
 Johnson was admitted to the Kentucky bar in 1802 , and opened his office at Great Crossing . Later , he owned a retail store and pursued a number of business ventures with his brothers . Johnson often worked pro bono for poor people , prosecuting their cases when they had merit . He also opened his home to disabled veterans , widows , and orphans . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Family tradition holds that Johnson broke off an early marital engagement when he was about sixteen years old because of his mother 's disapproval . Purportedly Johnson vowed revenge for his mother 's interference . Despite the fact that the engagement was broken off , a daughter named Celia was born . She was raised by the Johnson family and later married to Wesley Fancher , one of the men who served in Johnson 's regiment at the Battle of the Thames . 
 After his father died , Richard Johnson inherited Julia Chinn , an <unk> slave ( one @-@ eighth African , seven @-@ eighths European in ancestry ) . Johnson began a long @-@ term relationship with her and treated her as his common @-@ law wife . They were prohibited from marrying because she was a slave . When Johnson was away from his Kentucky plantation , he authorized Chinn to manage his business affairs . She died in an epidemic of cholera in the summer of 1833 , to Johnson 's great grief . 
 Johnson and Chinn had two daughters , <unk> ( or Adeline ) Chinn Johnson and Imogene Chinn Johnson , whom he acknowledged and gave his surname . He provided for their education . Both daughters married white men . Johnson gave them large farms as dowries from his own holdings . There is confusion about whether Adeline Chinn Scott had children ; a 2007 account by the Scott County History Museum said she had at least one son , Robert Johnson Scott . Meyers said that she was childless . There is also disagreement about the year of her death . Bevins writes that Adeline died in the 1833 cholera epidemic . Meyers wrote she died in 1836 . The Library of Congress notes that she died in February 1836 . 
 Although Johnson treated these two daughters as his own , according to Meyers , the surviving Imogene was prevented from inheriting his estate at the time of his death . The court noted she was illegitimate , and so without rights in the case . Upon Johnson 's death , the Fayette County Court found that " he left no widow , children , father , or mother living . " It divided his estate between his living brothers , John and Henry . 
 Bevins ' account , written for the Georgetown & Scott County Museum , says that Adeline 's son Robert Johnson Scott ; a nephew , Richard M. Johnson , Jr . ; and Imogene 's family " acquired " Johnson 's remaining land after his death . This could mean that his brothers settled some property on Adeline 's son and Imogene and her husband Daniel , as well as Johnson 's nephew , but such generosity would have been unusual for white families to extend to an interracial branch of the family at the time . 
 After his wife 's death , Johnson began an intimate relationship with another family slave . When she left him for another man , Johnson had her picked up and sold at auction . Afterward he began a similar relationship with her sister , also a slave . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Johnson entered politics in 1804 , when he was elected to represent Scott County in the Kentucky House of Representatives . He was twenty @-@ three years old . Although the Kentucky Constitution imposed an age requirement of twenty @-@ four for members of the House of Representatives , Johnson was so popular that no one raised questions about his age , and he was allowed to take his seat . He was placed on the Committee on Courts of Justice . During his tenure , he supported legislation to protect settlers from land speculators . On January 26 , 1807 , he delivered an address condemning the Burr conspiracy . 
 In 1806 , Johnson was elected as a Democratic @-@ Republican to the United States House of Representatives . At the time of his election in August 1806 , he did not meet the U.S. Constitution 's age requirement for service in the House ( 25 ) , but by the time the congressional session began the following March , he met the required age . He was re @-@ elected and served six consecutive terms . From 1807 to 1813 , he represented Kentucky 's Fourth District . 
 He secured one of Kentucky 's at @-@ large seats in the House from 1813 to 1815 , and represented Kentucky 's Third District from 1815 to 1819 . He continued to represent the interests of the poor as a member of the House . He first came to national attention with his opposition to rechartering the First Bank of the United States . 
 Johnson served as chairman of the Committee on Claims during the Eleventh Congress ( 1809 – 1811 ) . The committee was charged with adjudicating financial claims made by veterans of the Revolutionary War . He sought to influence the committee to grant the claim of Alexander Hamilton 's widow to wages which Hamilton had declined when serving under George Washington . Although Hamilton was a champion of the rival Federalist Party , Johnson had compassion for Hamilton 's widow ; before the end of his term , he secured payment of the wages . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 The War of 1812 was extraordinarily popular in Kentucky ; Kentuckians depended on sea trade through the port of New Orleans and feared that the British would stir up another Indian war . [ b ] After the election of 1808 , Johnson was one of the War Hawks , a group of legislators who clamored for war with the British . 
 Congress declared war in June 1812 , and after its adjournment , Johnson returned to Kentucky to recruit volunteers . So many men responded that he chose only those with horses , and raised a body of mounted rifles . Johnson recruited 300 men , divided into three companies , who elected him major . They merged with another battalion , forming a regiment of 500 men , with Johnson as colonel . [ c ] 
 Johnson 's force was originally intended to join General William Hull at Detroit , but Hull surrendered Detroit on August 16 and his army was captured . Johnson reported to William Henry Harrison , Territorial Governor of Indiana , then in command of the entire Northwest frontier . He was ordered to relieve Fort Wayne in the northeast of the Territory , which was already being attacked by the Indians . On September 18 , 1812 , Johnson 's men reached Fort Wayne in time to save it , and turned back an Indian ambush . They returned to Kentucky and disbanded , going out of their way to burn Potawatomi villages along the Elkhart River . 
 Johnson returned to his seat in Congress in the late fall of 1812 . Based on his experience , he proposed a plan to defeat the mobile , guerrilla warfare of the Indians . American troops moved slowly , dependent on a supply line . Indians would evade battle and raid supplies until the American forces withdrew or were overrun . Mounted riflemen could move quickly , carry their own supplies , and live off the woods . If they attacked Indian villages in winter , the Indians would be compelled to stand and fight for the supplies they used to wage war , and could be decisively defeated . Johnson submitted this plan to President James Madison and Secretary of War John Armstrong , who approved it in principle . They referred the plan to Harrison , who found winter operations impracticable . Johnson was permitted to try the tactics in the summer of 1813 ; later the US conducted Indian wars in winter with his strategy . 
 Johnson left Washington , D.C. just before Congress adjourned . He raised one thousand men , nominally part of the militia brigade under Kentucky Governor Isaac Shelby , but largely operating independently . He disciplined his men , required that every man have arms in prime condition and ready to hand , and hired gunsmiths , blacksmiths , and doctors at his own expense . He devised a new tactical system : when any group of men encountered the enemy , they were to dismount , take cover , and hold the enemy in place . All groups not in contact were to ride to the sound of firing , and dismount , surrounding the enemy when they got there . Between May and September , Johnson raided throughout the Northwest , burning the war supply centers of Indian villages , surrounding Indian fighting units and scattering them , killing some Indian warriors each time . 
 In September , Oliver Hazard Perry destroyed most of the British fleet at the Battle of Lake Erie , taking control of the lake . This put the British army , then at Fort Malden ( now Amherstburg , Ontario ) out of supply , and threatened to cut it off from the rest of Canada by a landing to the east . The British , under General Henry Procter , withdrew to the northeast , followed by Harrison , who had advanced through Michigan while Johnson kept the Indians engaged . The Indian <unk> and his tribe , hired as mercenaries , covered the British retreat , but were countered by Johnson , who had been called back from a raid on Kaskaskia that had taken the post where the British had distributed arms and money to their hired Indians .. Johnson 's cavalry defeated Tecumseh 's main force on September 29 , took British supply trains on October 3 , and was one of the factors inducing Procter to stand and fight at the Battle of the Thames on October 5 , as Tecumseh had been demanding he do . 
 At the battle itself , Johnson 's forces were the first to attack . One battalion of five hundred men , under Johnson 's elder brother , James Johnson , engaged the British force of eight hundred regulars ; simultaneously , Richard Johnson , with the other , now somewhat smaller battalion , attacked the fifteen hundred Indians led by Tecumseh . There was too much tree cover for the British volleys to be effective against James Johnson ; three quarters of the regulars were killed or captured . 
 The Indians were a harder fight ; they were out of the main field of battle , skirmishing on the edge of an adjacent swamp . Richard Johnson eventually ordered a suicide squad of twenty men to ride forward and draw the Indians ' fire , planning to charge with the rest as they reloaded . But the ground before the Indian position was too swampy to support many cavalry . Johnson had to order his men to dismount and hold until Shelby 's infantry came up . But eventually they broke , and fled into the swamp . At some point in that fight , Tecumseh was slain . 
 Richard Johnson was credited later with killing Tecumseh personally . Indian reports were that Tecumseh was killed by a man on horseback , and Johnson was one of the few mounted men at that side of the battle . ( His own men had dismounted , and Shelby 's were infantry . ) Furthermore , Johnson , who had been wounded four times already , had been shot in the shoulder by an Indian chief who was advancing to tomahawk Johnson , when he shot back and killed the Indian instantly with a single pistol shot . A nineteenth @-@ century source asserts that Tecumseh 's body was found , near Johnson 's hat and scabbard , shot from above ( as from horseback ) , and wounded with Johnson 's usual load of two buckshot and a pistol ball . [ d ] 
 Johnson fell unconscious after this duel and was dragged from the battlefield ; in addition to his five wounds , twenty other bullets had hit his horse and gear . But the war in the Northwest was over . Although there was no organized resistance to his presence in Canada , Harrison withdrew to Detroit because of supply problems . ( The Canadians would not feed his men . ) Johnson eventually recovered , except for a crippled hand , but he was still suffering from his wounds when he returned to the House in February 1814 . 
 On April 4 , 1818 an act of Congress requested that the President of the United States present to Johnson a sword in honor of his " daring and distinguished valor " at the Battle of the Thames . Johnson was only one of 14 military officers to be presented a sword by an act of Congress prior to the American Civil War . 
 In August 1814 , British forces attacked Washington , D.C. and burned the White House . Congress formed a committee to investigate the circumstances that allowed Washington to be captured . Johnson chaired this committee , and delivered its final report . After the sacking of Washington , the tide of battle turned against the British , and the Treaty of Ghent ended the war even as Johnson prepared to return to Kentucky to raise another military unit . With the end of the war , he turned his legislative attention to issues such as securing pensions for widows and orphans and funding internal improvements in the West . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career in the House = = = 
 Johnson believed that Congressional business was too slow and tedious , and that the per diem system of compensation encouraged delays on the part of members . To remedy this , he sponsored the Compensation Act of 1816 . The measure proposed paying annual salaries of $ 1 @,@ 500 to congressmen rather than a $ 6 per diem for the days the body was in session . ( At the time , this had the effect of increasing the total compensation from about $ 900 to $ 1500 . Johnson noted that congressmen had not had a pay increase in 27 years , and that $ 1500 was less than the salaries of the 28 clerks employed by the government . ) Johnson 's bill provided that if a congressman was absent , his salary would be reduced proportionally . 
 The bill passed the House and Senate quickly and was made law on March 19 , 1816 . But , the measure proved extremely unpopular with voters , in part because it applied to the current Congress . [ e ] Many legislators who supported the bill lost their congressional seats as a result , including Johnson 's colleague Solomon P. Sharp from Kentucky . Johnson 's popularity in other matters helped him retain his seat . Two days into the next session , he recanted his support for the law . It was repealed in that session , and in its place , legislators passed an increase in the per diem salary . 
 President James Monroe 's first choice for Secretary of War was Henry Clay , who declined the office . When Johnson also declined to serve , the post ultimately went to John C. Calhoun . The result was that Johnson became chair of the Committee on Expenditures where he wielded considerable influence over defense policy in the Department of War during the Fifteenth Congress . In 1817 , Congress investigated General Andrew Jackson 's execution of two British subjects during the First Seminole War . Johnson chaired the inquiry committee . The majority of the committee favored a negative report and a censure for Jackson . Johnson , a Jackson supporter , drafted a counter report that was more favorable to Jackson and opposed the censure . The ensuing debate pitted Johnson against fellow Kentuckian Henry Clay . Johnson 's report prevailed , and Jackson was spared censure . This disagreement between Johnson and Clay , however , marked the beginning of a political separation between the two that lasted for the duration of their careers . 
 In 1818 , Calhoun approved an expedition to build a military outpost near the present site of Bismarck , North Dakota on the Yellowstone River ; Johnson awarded the contract to his brother James . Although the Yellowstone Expedition was an ultimate failure and expensive to the U.S. Treasury , the Johnsons escaped political ill will in their home district because the venture was seen as a peacekeeping endeavor on the frontier . 
 = = = Senator = = = 
 Johnson announced his intent to retire from the House in early 1818 . In December 1818 , the state legislature was to elect a replacement for outgoing senator Isham Talbot . Johnson lost the election by twelve votes to William Logan despite the fact that he never officially declared his candidacy . It was reported in the local newspapers that Johnson 's friends intended to nominate him for governor in the 1820 election . 
 Johnson 's term in the House expired March 3 , 1819 , but by August , he had returned to the state legislature where he helped secure passage of a law that abolished imprisonment for debtors in Kentucky . In December 1819 , he resigned his post in the state legislature to fill the Senate seat vacated by the resignation of John J. Crittenden . He was re @-@ elected to a full term in 1822 , so that in total , his Senate tenure ran from December 10 , 1819 to March 4 , 1829 . In 1821 , he introduced legislation chartering Columbian College ( later The George Washington University ) in Washington , D.C. 
 There had been inflation after the War of 1812 , and the establishment of the Second Bank of the United States . In these times , when paper currency was privatized , this took the form of wildcat banks . Johnson , like many other Kentuckians , was caught in the ensuing financial collapse , the Panic of 1819 . He took a strong part in the politically popular struggle for debt relief , and some form of bankruptcy legislation , called the Relief War , which would help his own problems and those of his neighbors . 
 Part of Johnson 's campaign for relief was the abolition of the practice of debt imprisonment nationwide . It would take him nearly ten years to see this goal accomplished . He first spoke to the issue in the Senate on December 14 , 1822 , introducing a bill to end the practice , and pointing to the positive effects its cessation had effected in his home state . The bill failed , but Johnson persisted in re @-@ introducing it every year . In 1824 , it passed the Senate , but was too late to be acted upon by the House . It passed the Senate a second time in 1828 , but again , the House failed to act on it , and the measure died for some years , owing to Johnson 's exit from the Senate the next year . 
 Already known for securing government contracts for himself , as well as his brothers and friends , he offered land to establish the Choctaw Academy , a school devoted to the European @-@ American education of Indians from the Southeast tribes . It was built on his farm in Scott County in 1825 . Although he never ran afoul of the conflict of interest standards of his day , some of his colleagues considered his actions ethically questionable . Johnson was paid well for the school by the federal government , which gave him a portion of the annuities for the Choctaw . It was promoted by the Baptist Missionary Society as well . Some European @-@ American students also attended the Academy , including his nephew Robert Ward Johnson from Arkansas . 
 Another pet project Johnson supported was prompted by his friendship with John Cleves Symmes , Jr . , who proposed that the Earth was hollow . In 1823 , Johnson proposed in the Senate that the government fund an expedition to the center of the Earth . The proposal was soundly defeated , receiving only twenty @-@ five votes in the House and Senate combined . 
 Johnson served as chairman of the Committee on Post Office and Post Roads during the Nineteenth and Twentieth Congresses . Near the end of his term in the Senate , petitioners asked Congress to prevent the handling and delivery of mail on Sunday because it violated biblical principles about not working on the Sabbath . These petitions were referred to Johnson 's committee . In response , Johnson , a practicing Baptist , drafted a report now commonly referred to as The Sunday Mail Report In the report , presented to Congress on January 19 , 1829 , Johnson argued that government was " a civil , and not a religious institution " , and as such could not legislate the tenets of any particular denomination . The report was applauded as an elegant defense of the doctrine of separation of church and state . But , Johnson was criticized for conflict of interest in his defense , as he had friends who were contracted to haul mail , and who would have suffered financially from banning of Sunday deliveries . 
 In 1828 , Johnson was an unsuccessful candidate for re @-@ election , owing in part to his relationship with the <unk> slave Julia Chinn , with whom he lived in a common @-@ law marriage . Although members of his own district seemed little bothered by the arrangement , slaveholders elsewhere in the state were not so forgiving . In his own defense , Johnson said , " Unlike Jefferson , Clay , Poindexter and others I married my wife under the eyes of God , and apparently He has found no objections . " ( Note : The named men were suspected or known to have similar relationships with slave women . ) According to Henry Robert Burke , what people objected to was Johnson trying to introduce his daughters to " polite society " . People were used to planters and overseers having relationships with slave women , but they were expected to deny them . 
 = = = Return to the House = = = 
 After his failed Senatorial re @-@ election bid , Johnson returned to the House , representing Kentucky 's Fifth District from 1829 to 1833 , and Thirteenth District from 1833 to 1837 . During the Twenty @-@ first and Twenty @-@ second Congresses , he again served as chairman of the Committee on Post Office and Post Roads . In this capacity , he was again asked to address the question of Sunday mail delivery . He drew up a second report , largely similar in content to the first , arguing against legislation preventing mail delivery on Sunday . The report , commonly called " Col. Johnson 's second Sunday mail report " , was delivered to Congress in March 1830 . 
 Some contemporaries doubted Johnson 's authorship of this second report . Many claimed it was instead written by Amos Kendall . Kendall claimed he had seen the report only after it had been drafted and said he had only altered " one or two words . " Kendall speculated that the author could be Reverend <unk> Brown , but historian Leland Meyer concludes that there is no reason to doubt that Johnson authored the report himself . 
 Johnson chaired the Committee on Military Affairs during the Twenty @-@ second , Twenty @-@ third , and Twenty @-@ fourth Congresses . Beginning in 1830 , there arose a groundswell of public support for Johnson 's " pet project " of ending debt imprisonment . The subject began to appear more frequently in President Jackson 's addresses to the legislature . Johnson chaired a House committee to report on the subject , and delivered the committee 's report on January 17 , 1832 . Later that year , a bill abolishing the practice of debt imprisonment passed both houses of Congress , and was signed into law on July 14 . 
 Johnson 's stands won him widespread popularity and endorsement by George H. Evans , Robert Dale Owen , and Theophilus Fisk for the presidency in 1832 , but Johnson abandoned his campaign when Andrew Jackson announced he would seek a second term . He then began campaigning to become Jackson 's running mate , but Jackson favored Martin Van Buren instead . At the Democratic National Convention , Johnson finished a distant third in the vice @-@ presidential balloting , receiving only the votes of the Kentucky , Indiana , and Illinois delegations ; William B. Lewis had to persuade him to withdraw 
 = = = Election of 1836 = = = 
 After the election of 1832 , Johnson continued to campaign for the Vice Presidency which would be available in 1836 ; he was endorsed by the New York labor leader Ely Moore on March 13 , 1833 , nine days after Jackson and Van Buren were inaugurated . Moore praised his devotion to freedom of religion and his opposition to imprisonment for debt . [ f ] 
 William Emmons , the Boston printer , published a biography of Johnson in New York dated July 1833 . Richard Emmons , from Great Crossing , Kentucky , followed this up with a play entitled Tecumseh , of the Battle of the Thames and a poem in honor of Johnson . Many of Johnson 's friends and supporters – Davy Crockett and John Bell among them – encouraged him to run for president . Jackson , however , supported Vice @-@ President Van Buren for the office . Johnson accepted this choice , and worked to gain the nomination for vice @-@ president . 
 Emmons ' poem provided the line that became Johnson 's campaign slogan : " Rumpsey Dumpsey , Rumpsey Dumpsey , Colonel Johnson killed Tecumseh . " Jackson supported Johnson for vice @-@ president , thinking that the war hero would balance the ticket with Van Buren , who had not served in the War of 1812 . Jackson made his decision based on Johnson 's loyalty but also the president 's anger at the primary rival , William Cabell Rives . 
 Despite Jackson 's support , the party was far from united behind Johnson . Van Buren preferred Rives as a running mate . In a letter to Jackson , Tennessee Supreme Court justice John Catron doubted that " a lucky random shot , even if it did hit Tecumseh , qualifies a man for the vice presidency " . Although Johnson was a " widower " , after Chinn 's death in 1833 , there was still dissension related to Johnson 's open relationship with a slave . The 1835 Democratic National Convention , in Baltimore , in May 1835 , was held under the two @-@ thirds rule , largely to demonstrate Van Buren 's wide popularity . Although Van Buren was nominated unanimously , Johnson barely obtained the necessary two thirds of the vote . ( A motion was made to change the rule , but it obtained only a bare majority , not two thirds . ) 
 Tennessee 's delegation did not attend the convention . Edward Rucker , a Tennessean who happened to be in Baltimore , was picked to cast its 15 votes , so that all the states would endorse Van Buren . Senator Silas Wright , of New York , prevailed upon Rucker to vote for Johnson , giving him just more than twice the votes cast for Rives , and the nomination . 
 Jackson 's faith in Johnson to balance the ticket proved misplaced . In the general election , Johnson cost the Democrats votes in the South , where his relationship with Chinn was particularly unpopular . He also failed to garner much support from the West , where he was supposed to be strong due to his reputation as an Indian fighter and war hero . He even failed to deliver his home state of Kentucky for the Democrats . Regardless , the Democrats still won the popular vote . 
 When the electoral vote was counted in Congress on February 8 , 1837 , Van Buren was found to have received 170 votes for president , but Johnson had received only 147 for vice @-@ president . Although Virginia had elected electors pledged to both Van Buren and Johnson , the state 's 23 " faithless electors " refused to vote for Johnson , leaving him one electoral vote short of a majority . For the only time , the Senate was charged with electing the Vice President under the provisions of the Twelfth Amendment . The vote divided strictly along party lines , with Johnson becoming vice @-@ president by a vote of 36 , as opposed to 16 for Whig Francis Granger , with three senators absent . 
 = = = Vice Presidency = = = 
 Johnson served as Vice President from March 4 , 1837 , to March 4 , 1841 . His term was largely unremarkable , and he enjoyed little influence with President Van Buren . His penchant for wielding his power for his own interests did not abate . He lobbied the Senate to promote Samuel <unk> , whom he owed a favor , to the position of Indian agent . When Lewis Tappan requested presentation of an abolitionist petition to the Senate , Johnson , who was still a slaveholder , declined the request . 
 As presiding officer of the Senate , Johnson was called on to cast a tie @-@ breaking vote fourteen times , more than all of his predecessors save John Adams and John Calhoun . Despite the precedent set by some of his predecessors , Johnson never addressed the Senate on the occasion of a tie @-@ breaking vote ; he did once explain his vote via an article in the Kentucky Gazette . 
 After the financial Panic of 1837 , Johnson took a nine @-@ month leave of absence , during which he returned home to Kentucky and opened a tavern and spa on his farm to offset his continued financial problems . Upon visiting the establishment , Amos Kendall wrote to President Van Buren that he found Johnson " happy in the inglorious pursuit of tavern keeping – even giving his personal superintendence to the chicken and egg purchasing and water @-@ melon selling department " . 
 In his later political career , he became known for wearing a bright red vest and tie . He adopted this dress during his term as vice @-@ president when he and James Reeside , a mail contractor known for his drab dress , passed a tailor 's shop that displayed a bright red cloth in the window . Johnson suggested that Reeside should wear a red vest because the mail coaches he owned and operated were red . Reeside agreed to do so if Johnson would also . Both men ordered red vests and neckties , and were known for donning this attire for the rest of their lives . 
 = = = Election of 1840 = = = 
 By 1840 , it had become clear that Johnson was a liability to the Democratic ticket . Even former president Jackson conceded that Johnson was " dead weight " , and threw his support to James K. Polk . President Van Buren stood for re @-@ election , and the Whigs once again countered with William Henry Harrison . Van Buren was reluctant to drop Johnson from the ticket , fearing that dropping the Democrats ' own war hero would split the party and cost him votes to Harrison . A unique compromise ensued , with the Democratic National Convention refusing to nominate Johnson , or any other candidate , for vice @-@ president . The idea was to allow the states to choose their own candidates , or perhaps return the question to the Senate should Van Buren be elected with no clear winner in the vice @-@ presidential race . 
 Undaunted by this lack of confidence from his peers , Johnson continued to campaign to retain his office . Although his campaign was more vigorous than that of Van Buren , his behavior on the campaign trail raised concern among voters . He made rambling , incoherent speeches . During one speech in Ohio , he raised his shirt in order to display to the crowd the wounds he received during the Battle of the Thames . Charges he leveled against Harrison in Cleveland were so poorly received that they touched off a riot in the city . 
 In the end , Johnson received only forty @-@ eight electoral votes . One elector from Virginia and all eleven from South Carolina voted for Van Buren for president but selected someone other than Johnson for vice @-@ president . Johnson lost his home state of Kentucky again and added to the embarrassment by losing his home district as well . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his term as vice @-@ president , Johnson returned to Kentucky to tend to his farm and oversee his tavern . He again represented Scott County in the Kentucky House from 1841 to 1843 . In 1845 , he served as a pallbearer when Daniel Boone was re @-@ interred in Frankfort Cemetery . 
 Johnson never gave up on a return to public service . He ran an unsuccessful campaign for the U.S. Senate against John J. Crittenden in 1842 . He briefly and futilely sought his party 's nomination for president in 1844 . He also ran as an independent candidate for Governor of Kentucky in 1848 , but after talking with the Democratic candidate , Lazarus W. Powell , who had replaced Linn Boyd on the ticket , Johnson decided to drop out and back Powell . Some speculated that the real object of this campaign was to secure another nomination to the vice @-@ presidency , but this hope was denied . 
 Johnson finally returned to elected office in 1850 , when he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives . By this time , however , his physical and mental health was already failing . On November 9 , the Louisville Daily Journal reported that " Col. R. M. Johnson is laboring under an attack of dementia , which renders him totally unfit for business . It is painful to see him on the floor attempting to discharge the duties of a member . He is incapable of properly exercising his physical or mental powers . " 
 He died of a stroke on November 19 , just two weeks into his term . He was interred in the Frankfort Cemetery , in Frankfort , Kentucky . Ruling that his surviving daughter Imogene was illegitimate , the Frankfort County Court split his estate between his brothers John and Henry . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The counties of five U.S. states bear Johnson 's name , namely in Illinois , Iowa , Kentucky , Missouri , and Nebraska . Richard Mentor Johnson is also the namesake of Dick Johnson Township , Indiana . 
 His political prominence led to a family dynasty : his brothers James and John Telemachus Johnson , and his nephew Robert Ward Johnson were all elected to the House of Representatives , the first two from Kentucky , and Robert from Arkansas . Robert was later elected as a Senator before the Civil War . 
 = = Representation in other media = = 
 Johnson , Julia Chinn , and their daughters are featured as characters in Eric Flint 's alternate history novels , 1812 : The Rivers of War and 1824 : The Arkansas War . 
 = Camak House = 
 Camak House , at 279 Meigs Street , Athens , Georgia , was built in about 1834 by James Camak and featured in Georgia 's early railroad history . An example of Federal architecture , it has a number of features unusual for its period , including a kitchen within the raised basement and closets . Both main floors have four rooms ; the stairwell has a mahogany railing , and moldings and trim were made using a Greek key pattern . After long service as a family home , it was used as a Masonic Lodge before being bought by Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises . In 1975 Camak House was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , but the building had by then fallen into disrepair . It was restored and used as the offices of a law firm . As of December 2011 , it is for sale . 
 = = Architecture and early history = = 
 Built atop a hill , Camak House was the first dwelling constructed on Prince Avenue ; Meigs Street was added later , cutting off a portion of the original property . The architecture is Federal style , " relatively unusual in Athens " , with locally produced ironwork in the front . The fanlight of the central doorway and the white @-@ washed brick construction are typical elements of the style . The house has two stories , with a " four @-@ over @-@ four room , central hall plan " – a style " based on the standard Greek Revival floor plan " with a " raised basement , a low @-@ hipped roof , and two @-@ story pilasters " . The basement originally housed slave quarters and the kitchen ; the hazard of fire made it unusual for houses of the period to include a kitchen , but because of Camak House 's brick construction the risk was thought to be low . 
 The floors were constructed using " knot @-@ free heart @-@ pine " , and solid mahogany was used for the railing of the stairwell . Details include silver @-@ plated doorknobs , " hand @-@ forged locks and latches " , and " a simple but visually striking Greek key pattern " for moldings and trim . Camak House was built with closets – a very unusual feature for the time . 
 Camak House was the location for a meeting to organize what became " the first successful railroad company in Georgia and only the third such company in the United States " . James Camak was named president of the company , and later served as the first president of Georgia Railroad Bank . 
 Five generations of <unk> lived in the house until 1947 . In her book Historic Houses of Athens , Charlotte Thomas Marshall notes that " It was not until 1904 , eleven years after Dr. Camak 's [ son of the James Camak who built the house ] death , that the first deed relating to the Camak house lot was recorded . At that time his sons , Louis and James Wellborn Camak , executed a quitclaim deed to their mother , Mary Wellborn Camak , acknowledging that the lot has been given to her by their father without a deed being made . " In 1949 , the house was purchased to serve as the Mount Vernon Lodge No. 22 , F. & A. M ( Masonic lodge ) ; then in 1979 by the Athens Coca @-@ Cola Bottling Company . 
 = = Restoration and current use = = 
 Albert Sams was president of the Athens Coca @-@ Cola Bottling Company when it acquired Camak House . He " was an active member of the Athens @-@ Clarke Heritage Foundation and a generous philanthropist , particularly with regard to historic houses " , and he planned to renovate Camak House for administrative offices ; corporate mergers ( ultimately with Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises ) in the 1980s ended those plans . However , it was the Sams family that sought Camak House 's listing on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The house and grounds had fallen into decay by 1993 , when the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation and the law firm of Winburn , Lewis and Barrow formed a partnership to purchase Camak House from Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises . The trust added protective covenants before selling the property on to the law firm , one of whose partners was John Barrow , who served as the " prime mover in these negotiations " . A local company , S & W Development Corp , whose owner , Smith Wilson had been working in historic preservation for 18 years , was contracted to carry out the restoration work . The original floor plans , which had been altered during the Masons ' tenure , were reinstated ; Wilson was able to use drawings made of Camak House during the 1930s as part of the Works Progress Administration 's documentation of historic buildings . 
 The house 's restoration for use as law offices has been described by Elizabeth Dalton of the Athens @-@ Clarke Heritage Foundation as " an excellent example of adaptive use " . As of 2011 , Camak House is owned by the law firm of Lewis , Frierson and Grayson , LLP . 
 = = Historic status = = 
 Camak House was listed as a " point of interest " in the WPA Guide to Georgia ( which characterized the architecture as Georgian Colonial ) . The Athens Historical Society dedicated a historical marker on the grounds in 1963 . The Historic American Buildings Survey documented Camak House ( GA @-@ 14 @-@ 67 ) ; on July 7 , 1975 , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places ; on March 6 , 1990 , it was locally designated a Historic Landmark ; and recognized by the Georgia Historical Marker Program ( 029 – 10 ) . 
 = The Jakarta Post = 
 The Jakarta Post is a daily English language newspaper in Indonesia . The paper is owned by PT Bina Media Tenggara , and the head office is in the nation 's capital , Jakarta . 
 The Jakarta Post was started as a collaboration between four Indonesian media under the urging of Information Minister Ali Murtopo and politician Jusuf Wanandi . After the first issue was printed on 25 April 1983 , it spent several years with minimal advertisements and increasing circulation . After a change in chief editors in 1991 , it began to take a more vocal pro @-@ democracy point of view . The paper was one of the few Indonesian English @-@ language dailies to survive the 1997 Asian financial crisis and currently has a circulation of about 40 @,@ 000 . 
 The Jakarta Post also features both a Sunday and Online edition , which go into detail not possible in the daily print edition . It is targeted at foreigners and educated Indonesians , although the middle @-@ class Indonesian readership has increased . Noted for being a training ground for local and international reporters , The Jakarta Post has won several awards and been described as being " Indonesia 's leading English @-@ language daily " . The Jakarta Post is a member of Asia News Network . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and development = = = 
 The Jakarta Post was the brainchild of Information Minister Ali Murtopo and politician Jusuf Wanandi . Murtopo and Wanandi were disappointed at the perceived bias against Indonesia in foreign news sources . At the time , there were two English @-@ language dailies , the Indonesia Times and Indonesian Observer . However , due to negative public perception regarding the existing papers they decided to create a new one . In order to ensure credibility , the two agreed to convince a group of competing newspapers ( the Golkar @-@ backed Suara Karya , the Catholic @-@ owned Kompas , the Protestant @-@ owned Sinar Harapan , and the weekly Tempo ) to back the nascent paper . It was hoped to become a quality English @-@ language paper , similar to The Straits Times in Singapore , the Bangkok Post in Thailand , and the New Straits Times in Malaysia . 
 After founding PT Bina Media Tenggara to back the paper , Wanandi spent several months contacting influential figures at the targeted newspapers . To receive their cooperation , Kompas requested a 25 percent share in the new newspaper , for which it would handle the daily business operations , such as printing , circulation , and advertising . Tempo offered to assist with management in return for a 15 percent share , while <unk> <unk> of Sinar Harapan was hired as the first chief editor , for which Sinar Harapan received stock . The establishment of the paper was further aided by incoming Information Minister Harmoko , who received 5 percent interest for his role in acquiring a license . In total , the start @-@ up cost Rp . 500 million ( US $ 700 @,@ 000 at the time ) . Muhammad <unk> , a co @-@ founder of The Jakarta Post who formerly reported for Antara , became the newspaper 's first general manager . 
 Further details , including the matter of Sinar Harapan 's share of stock and the publisher , were decided at a meeting at Wanandi 's office in March 1983 . The next month , on 25 April , the first edition — totalling eight pages — was published . The first newsroom of the new paper were located in Kompas 's former laundry room , a one story warehouse ; the first employees had to do the layout by hand , using pica poles as straight edges . During the first few months , the writers translated and recycled previously published stories from Indonesian media , which were later picked up by foreign wire services . Original reporting was rare as the editors at first did not want to deal with the censorship of Suharto 's New Order government . 
 During the early years of publication , The Jakarta Post had difficulty attracting advertisers , to the point that some editions ran without ads . However , circulation increased dramatically , from 8 @,@ 657 in 1983 to 17 @,@ 480 in 1988 . Although it was originally hoped that the paper would begin to turn a profit within the first three years , the recession in the early 1980s led to the start @-@ up funds being depleted . Eventually , in 1985 the paper took out an interest @-@ free loan and received Rp . 700 million from its owners . After advertising increased , The Jakarta Post was able to turn a profit by 1988 , and was considered " one of the most credible newspapers " in Indonesia . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Susanto Pudjomartono , former chief editor of Tempo , became The Jakarta Post 's second chief editor on 1 August 1991 , after <unk> was chosen to be Indonesia 's ambassador to Australia . Under Pudjomartono 's leadership , the paper began publishing more original work and doing less translation ; reporters were also asked to take a more active role in the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the paper . The paper also became more vocal regarding politics , taking a pro @-@ democracy stance like Tempo . It soon converted its offices into a new , two @-@ story building built using the Kompas pension fund and expanded to 12 pages . 
 In 1994 , The Jakarta Post signed a distribution agreement with the British news service Reuters and the American Dialog Information Services , allowing its stories to be more easily promoted overseas . By the mid @-@ 1990s , it had established a workshop to assist its new , foreign @-@ born staff in learning the local culture . By December 1998 , The Jakarta Post had a circulation of 41 @,@ 049 , and was one of the few English @-@ language dailies in Indonesia after the 1997 Asian financial crisis ; six other English @-@ language dailies had failed . That year it also became a founding member of the Asia News Network . 
 In November 2008 , The Jakarta Post began to feel competition , dubbed " a wake up call " , from the Jakarta Globe , which is backed by billionaire James Riady . Several reporters from The Jakarta Post left the paper to join the Jakarta Globe , and the initial print run of the latter was 40 @,@ 000 . As of 2011 , the chief editor is <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Editions and other publications = = 
 = = = Sunday edition = = = 
 The Jakarta Post 's Sunday edition was launched on 18 September 1994 . The Sunday edition includes more in @-@ depth stories , as well as entertainment and fiction that would not be published in the weekday editions . 
 = = = Online edition = = = 
 The Jakarta Post features an online edition , which includes both print and internet exclusive stories that are free to access . There are also news flashes that are developed as they happen . The paper hopes to digitise the entirety of its printed stories , with at least 50 @,@ 000 articles dating to June 1994 already digitised . 
 = = = Bali Daily = = = 
 On 9 April 2012 the Jakarta Post launched Bali Daily , a four pages daily newspaper produced in Bali , after noting that 4 @,@ 900 of their subscribers lived on the island . 
 = = Market = = 
 The Jakarta Post is targeted at Indonesian businesspeople , well @-@ educated Indonesians , and foreigners . In 1991 , 62 percent of the paper 's readers were expatriates . Under Pudjomartono 's leadership , it began targeting more Indonesian readers . As of 2009 , approximately half of its 40 @,@ 000 readers are middle class Indonesians . 
 = = Layout and style = = 
 The Jakarta Post follows a broadsheet format . In the beginning , it featured an index on the front page , as well as short offbeat stories under the title " This Odd World " . The lifestyle section had eight comic strips , and it used more photographs and graphics than was normal for Indonesian publications at that time . The editorials tended to be shorter than their Indonesian counterparts . 
 The Jakarta Post uses the inverted pyramid style of reporting , with the most important information at the beginning of the article ; during the 1980s , many Indonesian papers put the lede further down . Bill Tarrant attributes this to the different writing styles in English and Indonesian , with English favouring the active voice and direct statements , while respectful Indonesian favours the passive voice and a circuitous approach . Regarding this topic , Wanandi has said that " You cannot bullshit in English , like the Javanese way . " 
 = = Public opinion = = 
 Peter <unk> , of The New York Times , notes that The Jakarta Post has been considered a " training ground " for local reporters , and offers apprenticeship programs . In 2009 , six former The Jakarta Post reporters worked for Bloomberg . In 2014 the Jakarta Post was behind Kompas in terms of online visits . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 In 2006 , the Reporters Union of Indonesia recognised The Jakarta Post as being one of the Indonesian newspapers that best followed the journalism ethics and standards ; other papers so recognised were Kompas and Indo Pos . The paper received the Adam Malik Award in January 2009 for their reporting on foreign politics ; the coverage was considered accurate and educated , with good analysis . The following year three reporters received the <unk> Award from Sampoerna for excellent photography in the fields of culture , law , and politics . Another journalist received the Adam Malik Award in 2014 for his writings which assisted the ministry to distribute information regarding foreign policy implementation . 
 = Aberdeen F.C. = 
 Aberdeen Football Club ( also known as The Dons or The Reds ) are a Scottish professional football club based in Aberdeen , Scotland . They compete in the Scottish Premiership and have never been relegated from the top division of the Scottish football league system since they were promoted in 1905 . Aberdeen have won four Scottish league titles , seven Scottish Cups and six Scottish League Cups . They are also the only Scottish team to have won two European trophies , having won the European Cup Winners ' Cup and the European Super Cup in 1983 . 
 Formed in 1903 as a result of the amalgamation of three clubs from Aberdeen , they rarely challenged for honours until the post war decade , when they won each of the major Scottish trophies under manager Dave Halliday . This level of success was surpassed in the 1980s , when , under the management of Alex Ferguson , they won three league titles , four Scottish Cups and a Scottish League Cup , alongside the two European trophies . Aberdeen were the last club outside of the Old Firm to win a league title , in 1984 – 85 , and also the last Scottish team to win a European trophy . The team has enjoyed less success since this golden era , but a 19 @-@ year wait for a major trophy was ended by winning the 2013 – 14 Scottish League Cup . 
 Aberdeen have played at Pittodrie Stadium since their inception . The ground currently has a capacity of 20 @,@ 961 and was the first all @-@ seated and all @-@ covered stadium in the United Kingdom . Pittodrie was also the first football stadium to feature a dugout , an invention of player and coach Donald Colman . The club 's colours have been primarily red and white since 1939 ; before this , they played in black and gold vertical stripes . Aberdeen attract support from the city and surrounding areas , as they are the only senior team within a wide area . Aberdeen have no geographically close rivals ; their nearest neighbours at the same level are in the city of Dundee . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years ( 1903 – 1939 ) = = = 
 The current Aberdeen F.C. was formed following the merger of three clubs based in the city — Aberdeen , Victoria United and Orion — in 1903 . The new club played its first match on 15 August 1903 , a 1 – 1 draw with Stenhousemuir . That first season produced a win in the Aberdeenshire Cup , but only a third @-@ place finish in the Northern League . The club applied for membership of the Scottish League for the following season , and were elected to the Second Division , rather than the First . 
 In 1904 , the club were managed by Jimmy Philip . At the end of its first season , despite having finished seventh out of twelve teams , Aberdeen were elected to the new , expanded First Division . They have remained in the top tier of Scottish football ever since , a record shared only with Celtic . From 1906 , the club made steady progress , with a Scottish Cup semi @-@ final appearance in 1908 and another in 1911 . In that season of 1910 – 11 , Aberdeen recorded their first victories over the Old Firm , and led the league for a time , but finished the season in second place . 
 Wartime affected the club as much as any other ; despite spending cuts and other economies , by 1917 the situation became untenable . Aberdeen dropped out of competitive football , along with Dundee and Raith Rovers . Senior football returned on 16 August 1919 , and Aberdeen resumed with a fixture against Albion Rovers . Philip was still in charge , and continued to oversee a team capable of isolated good results , but never quite able to sustain a challenge long enough to win a trophy . In 1923 , Aberdeen were drawn against Peterhead in the Scottish Cup , and posted their record score — a 13 – 0 victory . Philip retired a year later , and was replaced as manager by Paddy Travers . He presided over the team 's first Scottish Cup final in 1937 . 
 Travers ' " trainer " — first team coach in modern parlance — was former player Donald Colman . Colman was regarded as a brilliant and innovative thinker about football , and conceived the dug @-@ out , a covered area set slightly below the level of the playing surface to better aid his observations . Everton visited Pittodrie soon after its introduction , and exported the idea to the English leagues , from where it spread throughout the football @-@ playing world . Travers left to become manager of Clyde in 1939 . 
 = = = Halliday to McNeill ( 1939 – 1978 ) = = = 
 Travers was replaced by Dave Halliday . Halliday went to his ex club Queen of the South to sign inside forward George Hamilton . This would be as shrewd a signing as Halliday would ever make . However Halliday had barely begun his work when the Second World War halted competitive football in the United Kingdom . 
