 Halliday 's place in the Aberdeen Hall of Fame was secured after the war when he became the first manager to bring national trophies to Pittodrie . Aberdeen , now playing in red , won the Southern League Cup in the 1945 – 46 season , defeating Rangers 3 – 2 at Hampden . They then reached the 1947 Scottish Cup final , defeating Hibernian 2 – 1 with the inspirational Hamilton scoring to gain the club 's first major trophy . From this early success , Halliday 's side reached two more Scottish Cup finals , in 1953 and 1954 , although both were lost . Halliday 's team were not to be denied , however , and the following season , 1954 – 55 , Aberdeen won their first Scottish League title . Though league winners , the club did not participate in the first European Cup competition — Scotland 's place was awarded to Hibernian , who took part by special invitation . 
 Halliday and Hamilton left at the end of that championship @-@ winning season , Halliday replaced by Davie Shaw . Aberdeen won the League Cup under his guidance , beating St Mirren in 1955 – 56 , and reached another Scottish Cup final in 1959 . However , Shaw stepped aside for another former favourite player , Tommy Pearson , in 1959 . Pearson 's time in charge coincided with a high turnover of players , and yielded no trophies . He retired in 1965 , making way for Eddie Turnbull . Turnbull led Aberdeen to two Scottish Cup finals against Celtic , the first a loss in 1967 . 
 Aberdeen first played in Europe in the 1967 – 68 Cup Winner 's Cup , qualifying as runners @-@ up to Celtic in the Scottish Cup final . Their first tie was a 14 – 1 aggregate victory over KR Reykjavik , although they lost the second round tie with Standard Liège 3 – 2 on aggregate . Two years later , Derek " Cup @-@ tie " McKay recorded the only four goals of his Aberdeen career to help his team to the 1969 – 70 Scottish Cup , scoring the winning goals in the quarter- and semi final , and two in the final itself . As Scottish Cup holders , Aberdeen once again qualified for the same competition , but were eliminated in the first round following a 4 – 4 aggregate tie with Honvéd . This tie , level after extra time and also level on away goals , was decided by the first penalty shoot @-@ out in UEFA competition history , Honvéd winning the shootout 5 – 4 in Budapest . 
 The Aberdeen side of the 1970s regularly challenged for domestic honours . However , they rarely won trophies , with the exception of the Drybrough Cup in 1971 under Jimmy <unk> and the League Cup in 1976 , under Ally MacLeod . During this decade , Aberdeen had five managers : Eddie Turnbull , Jimmy <unk> , Ally MacLeod , Billy McNeill and Alex Ferguson . They reached two more national cup finals — the Scottish Cup in 1978 under Billy McNeill and the League Cup in the following season under the new manager Alex Ferguson . 
 = = = Alex Ferguson era ( 1978 – 1986 ) = = = 
 Under Ferguson 's guidance , the club won three league championships , four Scottish Cups , the European Cup Winner 's Cup , the European Super Cup , a League Cup , and a Drybrough Cup — all in the space of seven years . Players such as Jim Leighton , Willie Miller , Alex McLeish and Gordon Strachan became the backbone of the team . Aberdeen 's second League title was won in 1979 – 80 , and this initial success was built on , with Scottish Cup wins in three successive seasons from 1982 to 1984 , and two more league titles in 1983 – 84 and 1984 – 85 . 
 In the European Cup Winners ' Cup in 1983 Aberdeen beat FC Sion , Dinamo Tirana and Lech Poznań to face the German Cup winners Bayern Munich . This game was won 3 – 2 at Pittodrie after a goalless draw in Germany , John Hewitt with the winning goal . They then faced now defunct Belgian club <unk> in the semi @-@ final . Aberdeen beat them 5 – 1 at home , and lost for the first time in the tournament , 1 – 0 away , resulting in an aggregate victory which sent Aberdeen to the final . On 11 May 1983 , Aberdeen beat Real Madrid 2 – 1 after extra time to win the cup and become only the third Scottish side to win a European trophy . The club released a song , " European Song " , to coincide with the appearance in the final . This was followed up with the capture of the European Super Cup in December , when Hamburger SV were beaten over two legs . 
 Aberdeen reached the semi @-@ finals of the 1983 – 84 European Cup Winners ' Cup , before losing to Porto 2 – 0 on aggregate . In the first round of the 1984 – 85 European Champion Club 's Cup Aberdeen lost to East Berlin side BFC Dynamo in a penalty shoot @-@ out 4 – 5 , following a 3 – 3 on aggregate in regular times . Today , both clubs enjoy friendly relations . 
 = = = Post @-@ Ferguson ( 1987 – 1999 ) = = = 
 After Ferguson moved south of the border to manage Manchester United in November 1986 , Aberdeen struggled to compete with Celtic and a resurgent Rangers . 
 Aberdeen signed new co @-@ managers in 1989 , pairing Alex Smith and <unk> Scott . A number of foreign players were signed , including Dutch internationals Theo <unk> and Hans <unk> . In the 1989 – 90 the club won both the Scottish Cup and the Scottish League Cup . In the 1990 – 91 they lost the last game of the season , and the league title , to Rangers . Former player Willie Miller took over in 1992 and presided over two seasons where Aberdeen came close to winning the title . However , he was sacked in 1995 after a bad season , and the club had to rely on a play @-@ off victory over Dunfermline Athletic to retain their Premier League status . Aberdeen replaced him with Roy Aitken . Despite a Scottish League Cup success beating Dundee in 1995 , the club continued to struggle . Alex Miller and Paul Hegarty had spells in charge in the late 1990s , but with the financial burden of a new stand putting the club into debt for the first time in its history , the directors turned to Stewart Milne , a local businessman whose firm had built the stand , to bring business acumen to the running of the club . 
 = = = Skovdahl to Brown ( 1999 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Aberdeen 's first ( and only to date ) non @-@ Scottish manager , Ebbe Skovdahl , was appointed in 1999 and his time in charge coincided with some of the heaviest defeats in the club 's history . The low point of the club 's history came in the 1999 – 2000 season , when they finished last in the Premier division . As the SPL was being expanded to 12 teams , there was then a three team play @-@ off . However , as Falkirk 's stadium did not meet SPL requirements , Aberdeen retained their status in the top flight . Subsequent to this , and with the club in debt for the first time following the construction of a new stand at one end of the ground , a policy of trying to live within their means has meant that the club has not approached the heights of the 1980s . 
 Steve Paterson was appointed to replace Skovdahl but lasted only two seasons . Paterson 's tenure with Aberdeen was marred by his abuse of alcohol . In March 2003 he failed to attend a home game against Dundee due to being too hungover after a night of binge drinking prior to the match . 
 Jimmy Calderwood took over in 2004 and Aberdeen posted more consistent results than in previous seasons . In the 2006 – 07 season , the club finished in third place in the league and entered the final qualifying round for the 2007 – 08 UEFA Cup . Aberdeen defeated Dnipro on the away goals rule to progress ( the first time Aberdeen had won on away goals in European football for 40 years ) . They went on to beat F.C. Copenhagen 4 – 0 , which was the biggest margin of victory and one of Pittodrie 's biggest crowds since the 1980s . This set up a meeting with German giants Bayern Munich , which they lost 7 – 3 on aggregate after a 2 – 2 draw which saw Aberdeen lead twice in the first leg . Calderwood was sacked by Aberdeen on 24 May 2009 , hours after he took the club to a fourth @-@ place finish and back into Europe . Poor domestic cup performances were thought to be the reason for Calderwood 's dismissal . 
 Mark McGhee of Motherwell was appointed as Calderwood 's replacement on 12 June 2009 . McGhee controversially dismissed Aberdeen legend and goalkeeping coach Jim Leighton in August 2009 and replaced him with Colin Meldrum . Aberdeen suffered a 9 – 0 defeat to Celtic on 6 November 2010 , their heaviest ever defeat . McGhee and his assistants were eventually sacked on 1 December 2010 . 
 Aberdeen approached Craig Brown , who was working without a contract at Motherwell , to replace McGhee . Brown initially rebuffed an offer made on 8 December 2010 ; but after further discussions with the club Brown resigned as manager at Motherwell to be announced as the next manager at Aberdeen on 10 December 2010 . The first act of the new management team of Brown and Archie Knox was to re @-@ instate Jim Leighton . Aberdeen failed to produce better results under Craig Brown 's tenure , and in March 2013 announced his retirement to take up a non @-@ executive director role on the club 's board . 
 = = = Recent years ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 Derek McInnes was announced as the successor to Craig Brown in March 2013 . In McInnes ' first season as manager , Aberdeen won the 2013 – 14 Scottish League Cup after defeating Inverness 4 – 2 on penalties , their first trophy in 19 years . Aberdeen finished third in the Scottish Premiership , and began the next season by coming through the early rounds of the Europa League , beating Dutch club FC Groningen before eventually being eliminated by Spanish side Real Sociedad . The club ended the season in second place , their best league position since 1993 – 94 . In the following season 's Europa League , they were again defeated in the third round , this time by FC <unk> . Following a title challenge against Celtic , the team finished the league as runners @-@ up for the second year running . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 For the first season of the club 's existence , the team played in a predominantly white strip . This is variously reported as all @-@ white , or as white shirts with blue shorts and socks . This colour scheme was the direct descendant of the colours worn by the precursor Aberdeen club , but lasted only one season before being replaced . 
 For the 1904 – 05 season , Aberdeen adopted a black and gold striped shirt , which led to the team being nicknamed " Wasps " . This strip , with only minor variations , was worn until just before the start of the Second World War . The blue shorts lasted until 1911 , and then were replaced with white ones . Socks were black with gold trim , either as stripes or as a solid bar at the <unk> . 
 In March 1939 , Aberdeen changed the black and gold colours to red and white , reflecting the silver and red colours of the official City of Aberdeen arms . The first red strips were worn with white shorts , with either red or white socks from 1939 until the 1965 – 66 season . In 1966 , Aberdeen adopted red shorts , making the official kit all @-@ red , similar to that of Liverpool , who made a similar change at around the same time . This arrangement has continued to the present day , with several variations in design , in common with most senior clubs as the replica shirt market has expanded . In the late 1970s an Admiral strip featured five vertical white stripes on the left side of the shirt and shorts , and the early 1980s shirts — as worn at the 1983 European Cup Winners Cup final — featured white vertical pinstripes . Later design changes included significant amounts of blue , and a one season reversion to white shorts , although the all @-@ red scheme returned in 1997 . For the 2012 – 13 season , Aberdeen once again reverted to wearing white shorts . In 2013 – 14 , the all @-@ red kit was reintroduced . 
 Shirt sponsorship began in 1987 , and the initial shirt sponsor was JVC . Since then , with the club making fewer appearances on the international stage , shirt sponsors have tended to be local to Aberdeen — they have included one of the local commercial radio stations , <unk> , as well as several Aberdeen @-@ based oil service companies . The current shirt sponsor is Saltire Energy . 
 Away colours have tended to be either white — often with black shorts — or a combination of yellow and black , referring back to the black and gold strips of the pre @-@ war era , although for a time in the 1970s , Aberdeen sported an all @-@ blue change strip with white socks . For the 2007 – 08 season , the change strip was all @-@ white , with a third kit of yellow and black halves available if needed for European games , or in the event of a clash involving both red and white . 
 The club did not have an official crest before 1972 , but several variations on the letters AFC had from time to time featured on the shirt , usually in some kind of cursive font . In November 1972 , the club unveiled an official crest or logo , designed by <unk> graphic designer Donald Addison . The design represented a capital letter A as the side view of a football goal , with a ball forming the crossbar of the letter . This ball was crosshatched in such a way as to depict it as being inside the net , signifying the scoring of a goal . The logo was completed by the letters FC in smaller type at a level with the ball element . This badge was used on the shirts from around 1978 , with no significant alterations until the mid @-@ 1980s when the words " Aberdeen Football Club " were added in a circular border , and the date of the club 's founding , 1903 , was added under the goal element . The current version of the crest , which retains these elements in a unified design , was introduced at the start of the 1997 – 98 season . Two stars signifying the winning of the two European trophies in 1983 were introduced over the badge in the 2005 – 06 season . 
 = = = Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors = = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Aberdeen have played throughout their existence at Pittodrie Stadium , the name of which comes from the Pictish for " place of manure " . The ground was first used by the original Aberdeen F.C. in 1899 , in a 7 – 1 win over Dumbarton ; when they merged with two other teams in 1903 , the new club took over the old Aberdeen ground . On 15 August 1903 , 8 @,@ 000 spectators turned up to watch the new Aberdeen draw 1 – 1 against Stenhousemuir , the first game played at Pittodrie by its amalgamated tenants . The club initially rented the ground , but subsequently bought it in 1920 . The stadium currently seats 20 @,@ 961 . The record attendance is 45 @,@ 061 , during a Scottish Cup match between Aberdeen and Hearts on 13 March 1954 . 
 The stadium consists of four stands : the Main Stand , which also houses the club offices and players facilities ; the <unk> Road Family Stand ; the South Stand , which is opposite the main stand and holds the largest amount of spectators ; and the Richard Donald stand to the east , which was completed in 1993 , contains hospitality suites , and is named after former chairman Dick Donald . A quarter of the South Stand is used to accommodate travelling supporters . In 1978 , Pittodrie became the first all covered , all @-@ seater stadium in Britain . 
 = = = New Aberdeen Stadium = = = 
 Since 2009 , Aberdeen has been examining a move to a new stadium . Plans for a new stadium began when the club indicated that further development of Pittodrie Stadium was not possible due to the age of the ground and the restrictions from surrounding land . Aberdeen City Council approved an initial project in May 2009 , to be situated near <unk> Loch in the south of the city , subject to planning permission . In August 2010 , a planning application for the new stadium was submitted to the council , which was approved the following February . 
 The move was delayed by a year in May 2012 due to problems with land ownership , and suffered a serious setback the following August , when the council rejected a joint application by Aberdeen F.C. and Cove Rangers to build a community sports centre at nearby Calder Park . Aberdeen announced in November 2014 new plans to instead build training facilities at <unk> , on land owned by the University of Aberdeen , but the project was ultimately scrapped in the following July . 
 Plans to develop a new stadium and training facilities near Westhill , close to the newly developed Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route , were announced in May 2016 . The site 's training facilities are scheduled to be operational by 2018 , while the stadium could be ready ahead of the 2019 – 20 season . The new stadium is expected to have a similar capacity to Pittodrie Stadium . 
 = = Supporters and nicknames = = 
 = = = Supporters = = = 
 Aberdeen 's supporters , known as the Red Army , are listed in the team squad list as wearing the number 12 shirt . In 1999 , a group of supporters founded the Red Ultras group with the express aim of improving the atmosphere at Pittodrie . However , it was decided that this particular group was to disband at the beginning of 2010 . Organised chants and choreography still take place in ' centre block ' of the top tier of the Richard Donald Stand and Aberdeen fans still do choreographies at home and away games . 
 Aberdeen are the only senior team in the third largest city in Scotland , a city which is relatively remote , geographically , from other large population centres , and as a result have a large catchment area of potential supporters . The average attendance in the 2015 – 16 Scottish Premiership is currently 13 @,@ 530 . 
 In the 1980s , a minority of the club 's supporters had a reputation as one of Britain 's most prominent casuals groups , the Aberdeen Soccer Casuals . The rise of the Aberdeen Casuals coincided with the most successful period in the club 's history , and has been chronicled in more than one published account . Whilst numbers have steadily declined with the introduction of Football Banning Orders preventing hooligans from travelling to games , the Aberdeen Casuals still appear at big fixtures often away from home and in the UEFA Europa League . There were clashes at both fixtures against FC Groningen in 2014 , as well as 13 arrests after violent clashes with Dundee United fans at a game in December 2015 . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 Aberdeen have rarely played in the same division as their geographically closest rivals : Peterhead , Brechin City , Montrose , Arbroath , Elgin City , and Forfar Athletic , so rivalries have tended to come from further afield . Currently , Aberdeen have a minor rivalry with Inverness Caley Thistle , due to the fact both Aberdeen and Inverness are the two largest settlements in the north of Scotland . This is known as the North derby and has arisen since Inverness were first promoted to the SPL in 2004 . 
 In the early 1980s , owing to the success both domestically and in Europe of Aberdeen and Dundee United , the pair were known as the New Firm . However , Dundee United have their city neighbours Dundee as close rivals , and the antagonism was not always reciprocated to the same degree . The same situation applies to Aberdeen 's rivalry with Rangers , in that Rangers have their own much older and well @-@ known Old Firm rivalry with Celtic . Aberdeen 's rivalry with Rangers arose after a number of incidents in matches between the two clubs in the 1980s , namely Willie Johnston 's stamp on John McMaster 's neck in the Scottish League Cup and Neil Simpson 's tackle on Ian Durrant in 1988 , as well as Aberdeen 's dominance in Scottish football throughout the decade . There are still often violent clashes between both sets of supporters within and outwith the stadium to this day . 
 Since Aberdeen 's re @-@ emergence as one of the top teams in Scotland , Aberdeen 's rivalry with Celtic has increased both competitively and between supporters . There have been minor incidents at games , mainly relating to political disturbances by Celtic supporters at games between the clubs , including the disruption of minute 's silences and the display of banners showing support for the 1981 Irish hunger strike . 
 = = = Nicknames = = = 
 Aberdeen are known as " The Dons " , a name that has been in use since at least 1913 . The origin of this nickname is unclear . One theory is that it derives from the word " don " meaning " teacher " , given Aberdeen 's history as a university town . It may also be a reference to the nearby River Don , or a contraction of " <unk> " . Before the popular adoption of " The Dons " , the team were variously known as " The Wasps " or " The Black and Golds " , both names a reference to the yellow and black striped shirts of the time . As with many teams that play in red , Aberdeen may also be called " The Reds " , and are referred to by some supporters as " The Dandy Dons " or " The Dandies " . 
 Rival clubs occasionally refer to Aberdeen " The Sheep " and their supporters " The Sheep <unk> " . The term was eventually accepted by the club after Aberdeen fans started singing " the sheep are on fire " at games . The song was originally sung by away fans poking fun at an Aberdeen fan set on fire by on a train in a homemade sheep costume . This in turn led to specialised merchandise being sold by the club and local businesses . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Scottish League 
 Champions ( 4 ) : 1954 – 55 , 1979 – 80 , 1983 – 84 , 1984 – 85 
 Runners @-@ up ( 15 ) : 1910 – 11 , 1936 – 37 , 1955 – 56 , 1970 – 71 , 1971 – 72 , 1977 – 78 , 1980 – 81 , 1981 – 82 , 1988 – 89 , 1989 – 90 , 1990 – 91 , 1992 – 93 , 1993 – 94 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 @-@ 16 
 Scottish Cup 
 Winners ( 7 ) : 1946 – 47 , 1969 – 70 , 1981 – 82 , 1982 – 83 , 1983 – 84 , 1985 – 86 , 1989 – 90 
 Runners @-@ up ( 8 ) : 1936 – 37 , 1952 – 53 , 1953 – 54 , 1958 – 59 , 1966 – 67 , 1977 – 78 , 1992 – 93 , 1999 – 00 
 Scottish League Cup 
 Winners ( 6 ) : 1955 – 56 , 1976 – 77 , 1985 – 86 , 1989 – 90 , 1995 – 96 , 2013 – 14 
 Runners @-@ up ( 7 ) : 1946 – 47 , 1978 – 79 , 1979 – 80 , 1987 – 88 , 1988 – 89 , 1992 – 93 , 1999 – 00 
 = = = European = = = 
 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1982 – 83 
 UEFA Super Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1983 
 = = = UEFA Ranking = = = 
 As of 28 June 2016 
 = = Club officials = = 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 19 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Out on loan = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Notable players = = = 
 Hall of Fame 
 Aberdeen inaugurated a Hall of Fame as part of the club 's centenary celebrations in 2003 . Six players were inducted following the initial dinner in March 2004 , and a further six were included in November 2004 . Ex @-@ manager Alex Ferguson was inducted at a re @-@ launch event in November 2015 . 
 Greatest ever team 
 In November 2015 , supporters cast votes to determine the greatest ever Aberdeen team . 
 Jim Leighton ( 1977 – 88 , 1997 – 2000 ) 
 Stuart Kennedy ( 1976 – 83 ) 
 Willie Miller ( 1972 – 90 ) 
 Alex McLeish ( 1978 – 94 ) 
 Russell Anderson ( 1996 – 2007 , 2012 – 15 ) 
 Gordon Strachan ( 1977 – 84 ) 
 Eoin Jess ( 1987 – 96 , 1997 – 2001 ) 
 Jim Bett ( 1985 – 94 ) 
 Neil Simpson ( 1980 – 90 ) 
 Joe Harper ( 1969 – 72 ) 
 Duncan Shearer ( 1992 – 97 ) 
 = = Records = = 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 All players are from Scotland unless otherwise stated . 
 = = Managers = = 
 List of full @-@ time managers , as of 16 December 2015 . Only competitive matches are counted . Caretaker managers are not listed . 
 = Adam Miller ( footballer ) = 
 Adam Edward Miller ( born 19 February 1982 ) is a retired footballer . He began his career with Ipswich Town but failed to make the first team and played for several non @-@ league teams before joining Queens Park Rangers , where he made his Football League debut in December 2004 . He later joined Stevenage Borough , but followed manager Mark Stimson to Gillingham in late 2007 . He has represented the England National Game XI and played at Wembley Stadium in the final of the FA Trophy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Miller was born in Hemel Hempstead , but grew up in the <unk> district of Colchester , where his family still lived as of 2004 . He attended The Stanway School in the town . At the age of 17 he joined Ipswich Town as a trainee . At around the same time he was called up to represent Northern Ireland at under @-@ 18 level , qualifying by virtue of the fact that his maternal grandfather was born in the country . 
 = = Career = = 
 Miller proved unable to break into Ipswich 's first team and was permitted to undertake a trial with Southend United in August 2000 . He played for the Essex club 's reserve team , which led to him being offered a professional contract , but Alan Little was dismissed as the club 's manager shortly afterwards , and the offer of a contract was withdrawn . In October 2000 , Miller was released from his contract at Ipswich and dropped into non @-@ league football , joining Canvey Island of the Isthmian League . In the 2000 – 01 season he made 36 appearances for the " Gulls " and helped the team reach the final of the FA Trophy , although he was an unused substitute for Canvey 's victory over Forest Green Rovers in the final . The following season he was a key member of the team that finished second in the Isthmian League Premier Division , playing 48 times in total . 
 In August 2002 , after two final games for Canvey , he moved to Grays Athletic in a swap deal which saw Jeff Minton go in the opposite direction . Although he played 26 times for Grays in the 2002 – 03 season , scoring six goals , he was made available for transfer at the end of the season . He joined Gravesend & Northfleet in September 2003 , but played just four games for the club before moving on to Aldershot Town a month later . His form at Aldershot won him The Non @-@ League Paper 's Young Player of the Year award for the 2003 – 04 season , and also led to a call @-@ up to the England National Game XI in February 2004 , although it was to be his only cap for the semi @-@ professional national team . 
 In November 2004 , Miller played for Aldershot against the reserve team of Queens Park Rangers , the team he had supported since childhood . Rangers manager Ian Holloway , who had received promising reports about Miller from scouts , was sufficiently impressed to sign the player after watching him in person . Although the exact amount was undisclosed , the transfer fee was the highest ever received by Aldershot Town . Miller made his Football League debut on 4 December 2004 in a 2 – 1 defeat to Nottingham Forest , and played in more than half of the team 's remaining league matches that season . By late September 2005 , he had made just one league appearances since the start of the season , and was sent to Peterborough United on what was originally intended to be a three @-@ month loan . A month later he was recalled to Loftus Road , but he was not to feature again in the Rangers team . In January 2006 , he had a brief trial with Oxford United but the following week he joined Stevenage Borough of the Conference National , initially on an 18 @-@ month contract . 
 Miller featured regularly for Stevenage , and was in the starting line @-@ up for the 2007 FA Trophy final , the first competitive match at the new Wembley Stadium , in which Borough came back from two goals down to beat Kidderminster Harriers and win the Trophy . 
 Stevenage manager , Mark Stimson , was appointed as the new manager of Gillingham in November 2007 , and quickly moved to sign Miller and his team @-@ mate John Nutter on loan . Miller made his debut for the Kent club in the 2 – 1 home win over Hartlepool United on 24 November 2007 , and signed a permanent contract in January 2008 , set to keep him at the club until 2010 . During the team 's ultimately unsuccessful struggle to avoid relegation from League One in the 2007 – 08 season , Miller was identified as a key player and singled out for praise by Stimson , who said " If eight players play like Adam Miller we won 't be in this position but if we 've only got one or two we will be " . The following season he remained a regular selection in Stimson 's team , acting as captain in Barry Fuller 's absence , but injury kept him out of the team at the end of the season as Gillingham clinched a place in , and ultimately promotion through , the play @-@ offs . In the 2009 – 10 season , however , he failed to hold down a regular place in the team , and in November 2009 went to Dagenham & Redbridge on a one @-@ month loan . Miller 's debut for Dagenham came on 14 November in a 1 – 0 away win against Accrington Stanley . He returned to Gillingham at the end of his loan spell , but Stimson announced that the club was considering paying off the remainder of the player 's contract . Despite this , Miller played regularly during the remainder of the 2009 – 10 season . At the end of the season he left Gillingham and joined Cambridge United . Miller played several times at the start of the 2010 – 11 campaign , but was seriously injured in early September against Eastbourne Borough . Two years later , he announced his retirement from football as a result of the injury . He subsequently set up a company leasing luxury cars to other footballers . 
 = = Honours = = 
 FA Trophy : 2001 , 2007 
 = Changi Murals = 
 The Changi Murals are a set of five paintings of biblical theme painted by Stanley Warren , a British bombardier and prisoner @-@ of @-@ war ( POW ) interned at the Changi Prison , during the Japanese occupation of Singapore in World War II ( WWII ) . His murals were completed under difficult conditions of sickness , limited materials and hardships . With a message of universal love and forgiveness , they helped to uplift the spirits of the POWs and sick when they sought refuge in the prison chapel . 
 After the war , the walls of the chapel were distempered over , hiding the murals from view . They were forgotten until its rediscovery in 1958 . Due to their historical significance , an international search was conducted to locate the original painter in helping to restore the damaged and faded murals . Stanley was eventually found in 1959 and , after much persuasion , agreed to assist in the restoration project . He made three trips to Singapore between 1963 and 1988 to restore his former paintings . Due to Stanley 's advanced age , only four of the original murals were fully restored . In the 1990s , the former site of the murals was gazetted as a Heritage Site by the National Heritage Board of Singapore . 
 = = History = = 
 Stanley Warren was born in England in 1917 . He was talented in art from young and was a religious man . Stanley was employed as a commercial designer producing poster ads with the Grenada organisation before the war . In January 1940 , he enlisted in the army to join the fight against Nazi Germany and was posted to the Royal Regiment of Artillery as an Observation Post Assistant . His responsibilities included having to make quick drawings of panoramas used to plot targets for the guns . 
 = = = Changi = = = 
 In early 1942 , he was posted overseas to Malaya ( former name for Malaysia ) with the 15th Field Regiment Royal Artillery after the Japanese had invaded Malaya and Thailand , and Pearl Harbor had been bombed . Upon their arrival , their fight against the Japanese was brutal and short @-@ lived , and soon his battalion began retreating to Singapore . The Changi Garrison , a heavily fortified coastal defence where most of the British forces were based , consisted of three army barracks ; the 2nd Battalion Gordon Highlanders in the Selarang Barracks , the Royal Engineers in Kitchener Barracks , and the 9th Coastal Artillery Regiment of the Royal Artillery in Roberts Barracks . By 12 February , the situation in Singapore was desperate and Lieutenant @-@ General Arthur Ernest Percival , General Officer Commanding of HQ Malaya Command , ordered the Changi Garrison to withdraw to Singapore Town . After the British surrender of Singapore on 15 February 1942 , Stanley and Allied POWs were ordered to march to Changi for internment ; the 15 @,@ 000 Australians went into Selarang Barracks and the British to Roberts and Kitchener Barracks . Stanley was interned at Roberts Barracks and later joined other POWs to work around Singapore , repairing damage inflicted by the Japanese attacks and getting essential services back to working order . Percival was held in Roberts Barracks until , with all senior officers above the rank of Lieutenant Colonel , he was sent to Formosa ( now Taiwan ) by the Japanese . The food given to the prisoners was of poor quality and inadequate for men working as slave labour . As a result of this and the harsh treatment meted out by the Japanese guards such as the beatings and executions of escaped prisoners , the men 's health and morale began to suffer in the long run . 
 = = = St Luke 's Chapel = = = 
 During one of the work parties , Stanley was sent to build a road and stairs leading to a memorial to the Japanese dead on Bukit Batok Hill ( Marked with a Bukit Batok Memorial plaque today , only the stairs and road called Lorong <unk> are still there to be seen ) . The chaplain of the regiment , well aware of Stanley 's religious conviction and artistic background , requested him to decorate the asbestos walls at the altar area of a small open <unk> @-@ roofed chapel at Bukit Batok . With charcoal salvaged from around the camp , he drew two murals : Nativity , which featured a Malay Madonna and Descent from the Cross in which he included soldiers in uniforms , using his comrades as models . By then , he was becoming ill and was suffering from a severe renal disorder complicated by amoebic dysentery . On 23 May 1942 , Stanley was lying comatose and was sent to Roberts Barracks in Changi which was converted for use as a hospital for POWs to recuperate . 
 By mid @-@ August 1942 , Stanley had recovered enough to be moved to the dysentery wing at Block 151 of Roberts Barracks . Padres Chambers and Payne had heard that Stanley had decorated the prisoners ' chapel at Bukit Batok . So they asked him if he would do some paintings for St Luke 's Chapel , which was recently converted from the ground floor of Block 151 , near the area where Stanley was recuperating . The Chapel was dedicated to St Luke the Physician . Stanley agreed , and sought inspiration for the proposed paintings in the Gospels . 
 = = = The five murals = = = 
 On 30 August 1942 , at the time when Stanley was preparing the draft drawings of the murals , the Japanese began an action which would become known as the Selarang Barracks Incident . It was an incident concerning seventeen thousand Anglo @-@ Australian POWs , who were forced to vacate their buildings and be exposed for nearly five days in the open without water or sanitation for refusing to sign a " No Escape Pledge " . Against this backdrop , Stanley began to paint the murals . No one had asked the Japanese for permission to draw and at no stage did they interfere with his work . Considering the purpose of the murals , Stanley felt that the Chapel was basically dedicated to peace and reconciliation , and so he choose universal themes for the murals which would embrace all mankind . Paint was not readily available in the camp , but with the aid of the other prisoners , who unquestionably put themselves at great risk , materials to make the paint were gradually acquired — brown camouflage paint , a small amount of crimson paint , white oil paint and billiard chalk were found and brought for Stanley use . Despite still being very ill , Stanley set to work on the murals in early September 1942 . His illness meant that he could only paint for a limited period each day , for perhaps 15 minutes at a time followed by a rest . To compensate as much as he could for the lack of coloured paint , Stanley resorted to using large brush strokes and big areas of solid colour when painting . In September 1942 , a few weeks after Stanley began painting the murals , he was informed that his work party was to be sent north to Thailand to work on the Thai @-@ Burma Railway . A colonel in charge of the hospital , who knew of his work @-@ in @-@ progress murals , intervened to have Stanley transferred back to the hospital so that he could continue on his work in the Chapel . Most of Stanley 's unit who went to the Thai @-@ Burma Railway never returned . Stanley recounted : " Had I gone with them , most certainly , I would have died . So the murals very directly saved my life in the way I could never have foreseen ... It 's a terrible sense of debt ... that one feels to the chapel . " 
 By Christmas 1942 , he completed his first mural , the Nativity . Altogether , Stanley managed to produce five large murals on the walls of the Chapel , each mural being about three metres long , in the following order : 
 Nativity 
 Ascension 
 Crucifixion 
 Last Supper 
 St Luke in Prison 
 All of them were subjects which are at the very heart of Christian belief . The completed murals uplifted the spirits of the POWs and sick when they seek refuge in the Chapel . Stanley never put his name on any of his paintings as he considered them " a gift to God " . In May 1944 , Block 151 with the St Luke Chapel 's inspiring murals was designated to become a store for an airfield nearby . The lower portion of St Luke in Prison mural was almost completely destroyed when it was demolished to make a link to an adjoining room . The walls of the Chapel was distempered over , hiding the murals from view . Stanley was later sent to Kranji in the north of Singapore , not far from the Causeway to Malaya , and remained there till the Japanese surrender on 15 August 1945 . After the war , Stanley returned to England believing that his murals had been destroyed by Allied bombing towards the end of the war . He married and became an art teacher at the Sir William Collins School , later South Camden Community School and currently Regent High School in Somers Town , London . 
 = = = Rediscovery = = = 
 Forgotten for nearly 13 years , the Changi Murals were accidentally rediscovered in 1958 by servicemen of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) occupying the Roberts Barracks . The Chapel was again used as a store , and later as accommodation by the RAF . Once rediscovered , the distemper coating covering the murals was carefully removed – four complete murals and the top @-@ quarter of a fifth were revealed . As there was no signature on any of the murals , a search for the artist was undertaken but failed after initial investigations . By a stroke of luck , the artist 's name came to light in the RAF Changi Education Library of all places . A reader came across a book titled The Churches of the Captivity in Malaya , mentioning about the Chapel of St Luke in Roberts Barracks and the artist 's name – Bombardier Stanley Warren . The Daily Mirror was notified and again went to work looking for the known artist . In February 1959 , he was found living in London with his wife and son . He was shocked when he saw the photo of his mural of the Crucifixion , when a keen @-@ eyed colleague of his showed him the papers . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 In 1960 , the RAF contacted Stanley and the idea of restoring the murals was brought up . He was initially reluctant to return to restore his works due to the painful memories of war and captivity the murals would bring back to him : " I didn 't immediately want to come . I felt that there would be some sort of ... trauma . I 'm trying to forget this , you know , I tried so hard ... It took years really to eliminate the memories and fears ... the long drawn out experience and really waiting for death over three and a half years , it 's long time to expect death . And I really tried to forget ... But of course I was never able to do that . " 
 After much persuasion , he overcame his fear and eventually made three trips to Singapore to restore his murals in December 1963 , July 1982 and May 1988 . The 1982 restoration was more intensive and the invaluable assistance given to Warren by the officers and boys of the SAF Boys ' School enabled the bulk of the work to be completed . Of the original five murals , only one was not fully restored ; the mural of St Luke in Prison . Stanley 's original tracing of the drawing was missing , and he could not remember the details of the missing portion . In 1985 , Stanley 's original drawing was discovered in the memorabilia of Wally Hammond who had been a fellow prisoner with Stanley . These original sketches were subsequently donated to the National Archives of Singapore . From the original , Stanley painted a small picture , which was placed below the remaining piece of the mural in 1988 . He was , by then , not fit enough to restore the actual mural . 
 On 20 February 1992 , Stanley died in his home in Bridport , England at the age of 75 . 
 = = = Parliamentary discussions = = = 
 Stanley 's murals were discussed in the British Parliament in October 1968 . Charles Morris , minister of parliament for Openshaw , asked the Defence Ministry , Denis Healy , to consider moving the murals to England . His proposal was unsuccessful when the Singapore Ministry of Defence decided to take responsibility of the murals and to keep them in good condition for display in 1969 . ( Singapore gained independence from Britain in August 1965 ) . In addition , a copy of one of the murals painted by Stanley had been brought to England and installed in the Garrison Church at Larkhill in Wiltshire . 
 = = The murals today = = 
 The three @-@ storey Block 151 of Roberts Barracks ( off Martlesham Road ) still stands today , but is now part of the Ministry of Defence 's Changi Airbase Camp . Most of the buildings surrounding Block 151 were demolished in July 2003 . Inside the Chapel , there is a photo of Stanley and some narrative about him and the murals but access to the Chapel is restricted . However , for public interest , a replica of Stanley Warren 's murals is also on display at the Changi Chapel and Museum , along with an audio @-@ visual theatre that screens videos about POW life , display of POW belongings and collection of books about Singapore during WWII . 
 Since 1993 , the Changi Murals , Changi Prison and other WWII sites in Singapore , is part of a Battlefield Tour organised by the National Institute of Education and the Ministry of Defence , a bi @-@ annual five @-@ day residential National Awareness programme to create greater awareness of national and security issues among trainee teachers . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 In November 1994 , a two @-@ man British team was in Singapore to film the Changi Murals and Kranji War Memorial for a BBC documentary , for the Commonwealth War Graves Commission which marked the 50th Anniversary of the end of World War II . 
 On 15 February 2002 , more than 250 former POWs and their families from Australia , New Zealand and the United Kingdom came over to Singapore for a reunion @-@ cum @-@ memorial service that was held at the Changi Chapel and Museum , and a tour of the Changi Murals and the Selarang Camp . The event was organised by the Singapore Tourism Board to mark the 60th anniversary of the fall of Singapore . 
 = Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) = 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " is a song by the rock band U2 . It is the fifth track on their 1993 album , Zooropa , and was released as the album 's third single on 22 November 1993 . The song was a top ten hit in Ireland , Australia , the United Kingdom , and several other countries . The music video was shot in Berlin , Germany . The earliest incarnation of the song developed during sessions for the group 's 1991 album Achtung Baby . It was written for and inspired by Frank Sinatra and bore his surname as the original working title . An alternate recording was used in the Wim Wenders film Faraway , So Close ! . 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was well received by critics and nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Original Song . The song made its live debut on the Zoo TV Tour but has only been performed intermittently in an acoustic version over subsequent tours . Members of U2 consider it to be one of their favourite songs ; guitarist The Edge named it the best track on the album , while lead singer Bono stated that it was one of their best creations . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 The earliest incarnation of " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was developed during the recording sessions for Achtung Baby . While working in Hansa Ton Studios in Berlin , guitarist The Edge and lead singer Bono created the verse . The track was given the working title " Sinatra " in reference to the artist whose music inspired it . The group reworked it in preparation of Zooropa . The Edge noted " it came to us in installments " . Bassist Adam Clayton said " it was hard to figure out how we would do it . I mean , no one is going to mistake us for Frank Sinatra 's backing band . A very humble little combo sound is what we ended up with and that really worked . " The Edge added " I was playing around on piano with some old @-@ school chord progressions trying to summon up the spirit of Frank Sinatra . It 's definitely not from a rock and roll tradition . " He worked out a chord progression based on old Tin Pan Alley songs . 
 As the recording sessions progressed , Wim Wenders approached the band and asked them for a song for his next film , Faraway , So Close ! . The Edge said " we heard Wim Wenders was looking for a song ... so I had a go at finishing it . " U2 watched the film , Faraway , So Close ! , for inspiration on how to craft the song . Bono said " the film was about angels who want to be human and who want to be on Earth . But to do so they have to become mortal . That was a great image to play with - the impossibility of wanting something like this , and then the cost of having it . " Two versions of the song were crafted ; the first was released on Zooropa , and the second , almost two minutes longer and featuring " an edgier guitar and drum performance , " was included on the Faraway , So Close ! soundtrack . Close to the completion of the recording Bono renamed the song " Stay . " Wanting to further reference the Wenders film he then changed it once more , to " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " . 
 = = Composition and theme = = 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " runs for 4 : 58 ( 4 minutes , 58 seconds ) . According to Universal Music Publishing Group 's sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , it is played in common time at a tempo of 86 beats per minute in the key of E ♭ major . The vocals extend from a low note of B3 to a high of D ♯ 7 . 
 Third Way contributor Graham Cray wrote that the song " [ describes ] more directly a culture which consists of a cacophony of voices and images but which has neither soul nor direction . " Hot Press editor Niall Stokes noted that the lyrics were ambiguous in whether they took place in reality or fantasy , which he likened to the overarching theme of the album . Author David <unk> believed that " the pop melody conceals the lyric 's dark theme about a victim of physical abuse who reasons her pain away with the line ' When he hurts you , you feel alive . ' " Mark Brown of The Orange County Register described it as " the desperate tale of an abused woman with nowhere to go but back to her home . " He compared it to U2 's 1987 song " Running to Stand Still " , saying " That same sort of descriptive but distanced narrative is what made [ it ] so powerful . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Promotional singles were released in the fall of 1993 . The 12 @-@ inch vinyl and CD versions contained the album version of the song . The 7 @-@ inch vinyl promo also included a cover of " I 've Got You Under My Skin " . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was released internationally as the third single from Zooropa on 22 November 1993 , following the releases of " Numb " and " Lemon " earlier in the year . It was available in 7 @-@ inch vinyl , cassette , and CD formats in four versions . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was included on U2 's 2002 compilation album The Best of 1990 – 2000 , and its accompanying video release . The alternate recording of the song was released on the soundtrack to Faraway , So Close ! . Craig Armstrong covered it on his 2002 album As If to Nothing ; Bono recorded a new vocal take for the track . The song also features in the 1993 Only Fools and Horses episode " Fatal Extraction . " 
 = = = B @-@ sides = = = 
 Six B @-@ sides were included across the four versions . " I 've Got You Under My Skin " was the sole B @-@ side on the 7 " and cassette formats . It was also available on the version dubbed " The Swing Format , " which contained two remixes of " Lemon . " " I 've Got You Under My Skin " is a cover of the 1936 Cole Porter song , recorded as a duet by Bono and Frank Sinatra . It was also released on Sinatra 's 1993 album Duets . " Lemon ( Perfecto Mix ) " was remixed by Paul Oakenfold and Steve Osborne . " Lemon ( Bad Yard Club Edit ) " was mixed by David Morales , who added his own percussion to the track . 
 " The Live Format " included the first studio release of " Slow Dancing " and live versions of " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Love Is Blindness " from the Zoo TV Tour . " Slow Dancing " is an acoustic song by Bono and was written for Willie Nelson . It debuted in concert on 1 December 1989 in Osaka , Japan , on the Lovetown Tour , almost four years before it was released , and has been performed infrequently since then . While recording elements of " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " , Bono picked up a guitar and began to play the song . When finished he asked Flood if he wanted to record it ; unbeknownst to him , the microphone was on and the take had been recorded . A second take was then done . It was considered for inclusion on Zooropa ; although producer Brian Eno liked it , the song was not selected for the album . A second version , recorded with Nelson , was later released as a B @-@ side on U2 's 1997 single " If God Will Send His Angels . " " Bullet the Blue Sky " was recorded on 28 August 1993 in Dublin . " Love Is Blindness " was taken from U2 's concert on 30 August 1992 in New York City . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was directed by Wim Wenders , produced by Debbie Mason , and edited by Jerry Chater . The video was filmed in Berlin over the course of three days , primarily in black @-@ and @-@ white but with some sequences in colour . It contains cameos of some of the actors who appeared in Faraway , So Close ! , including Otto Sander , as well as Wenders ' nephew . Several scenes are taken directly from Faraway , So Close ! and Wenders ' 1987 film Wings of Desire , which also served as the principal inspiration for the video 's premise . Wenders noted that " making a video is really a very different ballgame . You have the script , so to speak , because you have the song , and everything you do is in order to help the song shine ... You want to make that song look as good as possible and sound as good as possible and as interesting as possible . " Several shots depict the band members standing on the statue of Victoria , a monument at the top of the Berlin Victory Column ; a model of the angel was created for those scenes . Leftover military equipment from the Cold War , including the Soviet MiG , were included in the background . 
 The video depicts a band playing " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " . U2 were cast in the role of the band 's guardian angels , watching over the position that corresponds to their instrument in U2 . <unk> Becker is the lead actress of the video , cast as the band 's lead singer . Wenders stated that they " liked the idea that Bono 's voice would be sung by a girl in this video . " Throughout the video U2 help the musicians play the track ; drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. is shown assisting in the beat , while The Edge tunes the guitar , which Wenders noted is " what you 'd do if you were guardian angel to a lead guitarist . " The video alternates between the band playing , the members of U2 standing on Victoria , and scenes from both Wenders films . At the conclusion of the video , Bono leaves the band on their own . The final shot shows him falling to earth , personifying the final lyric " Just the bang and the clatter as an angel hits the ground . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " debuted on 31 July 1993 in Stockholm , Sweden , on the fourth leg of the Zoo TV Tour . It was performed at all remaining concerts on the tour . It was not played on the PopMart Tour . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " returned to the live setting on 20 April 2001 in San Jose , California , on the first leg of the Elevation Tour , making it the first song from Zooropa to be played in North America . It was performed as an acoustic duet by Bono and The Edge . The rendition was impromptu and not on the setlist , with Bono reading the lyrics from a sheet . The song continued to be performed sporadically through the rest of the tour , appearing at 48 of 113 concerts . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was not played during the Vertigo Tour , but U2 revived it on the U2 360 ° Tour . It was played sporadically on the first and second leg of the tour , and was a mainstay feature of the fifth leg . It was the only song from Zooropa performed by U2 at the Glastonbury Festival in 2011 . 
 Live performances of the song appear on Zoo TV : Live from Sydney ( 1994 ) , Elevation 2001 : Live from Boston ( 2001 ) , the " Walk On " and " Stuck in a Moment You Can 't Get Out Of " singles ( 2001 ) , Zoo TV Live ( 2006 ) , and the live album U22 ( 2012 ) . The Zoo TV Live performance is an audio rip of the performance from Zoo TV : Live from Sydney . The version on the " Walk On " and " Stuck in a Moment You Can 't Get Out Of " singles was recorded in Toronto , Ontario , on 25 May 2001 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was critically acclaimed . Music journalist Sam Richards rated the song four stars out of five , calling it " a twinkling ' 90s alt. rock ballad - a cousin of Radiohead 's " High and Dry " and Smashing Pumpkins ' " 1979 " - that just about manages to keep a lid on its impulse to seek out the nearest clifftop . " Hot Press editor Niall Stokes said " the performance is full of languorous beauty , a gentle understated kind of emotion that seems at odds with the disorientation in the lyrics . " Billboard contributor Fred Bronson joked that it was an example of how songs named " Stay " reach the Hot 100 , following similarly named hits by Big Mountain , The Four Seasons , Shakespears Sister , and Jodeci . Robert Levine of Spin called it one of their best songs , saying " They 're still obsessed with transcendence , whether it 's the kind you find on a Joshua Tree bluff or a " Miami " dance floor . And [ " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " ] framed that search in the most intimate of terms , even when they were too jaded to crawl out from under their lemon and look us in the eye . " 
 Writing for Time , Josh Tyrangiel compared it to U2 's earlier hits " Where the Streets Have No Name " and " One " , saying " ' Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) ' ... [ achieves ] the impossible — becoming meaningful to millions of people — precisely because [ it is ] beautifully vague . " David Bauder of the Associated Press called it " the album 's most beautiful song . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star said that it was " the most conventional U2 song on the album . " The Orange County Register 's Mark Brown noted " The casual guitar lines on ' Stay ' infuse the song with a tension that perfectly suits the subject " . The Bergen Record reviewer Barbara Jaeger called it an " achingly beautiful ballad . " Writing for The Dallas Morning News , Manuel Mendoza said it was " absolutely gorgeous , with Bono 's husky moaning evoking a warm yearning . " 
 " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was nominated in the category Best Original Song at the 51st Golden Globe Awards . In 2005 , Bono said " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was " perhaps the greatest U2 song , " saying it has the " most extraordinary contour of a melody . It 's really quite sophisticated . The lyric never misses , " and noting that they had " never turned ' Stay ' into the single it deserved to be . " He named it as one of his two favourite U2 songs , along with " Please . " The Edge called it " the stand @-@ out track on the record . " Wenders described it as one of his favourite U2 songs . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 All tracks written by U2 and performed by U2 except " I 've Got You Under My Skin , " written by Cole Porter and performed by Frank Sinatra with Bono . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Sales and Certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy = 
 My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy is an autobiography written by Nancy Cartwright . First published in September 2000 by Hyperion , it details Cartwright 's career , particularly her experiences as the voice of Bart Simpson on The Simpsons and contains insights on the show , diary entries and anecdotes about her encounters with various guest stars . 
 Critics commented that the book seemed to be aimed at fans of The Simpsons rather than a more general audience . Other criticisms included the simplicity of the writing and a lack of interesting stories . In 2004 , Cartwright adapted the book into a one @-@ woman show , which she has performed all over the world , including at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the opening chapter , Cartwright writes " About five years ago I decided I wanted to write this book . I knew that The Simpsons would end some day . [ ... ] I decided that I wanted to write it while the show was still on the air . " In an interview with Scotland on Sunday , she added " I wanted to tell my story and I needed to because I get so much fan mail . People are so interested in the whole process , how it all comes together . This book does that . " In a 1995 interview , five years before writing the book , Cartwright remarked that she wanted to write a book and that if she did , it would be titled " My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy . " 
 The book contains excerpts from date books and journals that Cartwright had kept over the years . The book was officially announced in January 2000 and Cartwright had originally intended that it be released on October 31 . 
 = = Content = = 
 My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy opens with a dedication to Daws Butler , a list of acknowledgements and a foreword from Cartwright 's The Simpsons co @-@ star Dan Castellaneta . The first chapter of the book details Cartwright 's life and career prior to 1987 . In the second chapter , Cartwright recalls the day she went to audition for a role in a series of animated shorts on The Tracey Ullman Show . The shorts were about a dysfunctional family and Cartwright intended to audition for the role of Lisa Simpson , the eldest daughter . Upon arriving at the audition , she found the role of her brother Bart to be much more interesting . Matt Groening , creator of the shorts , allowed her to audition for Bart , and gave her the job on the spot after hearing her reading . From there , the book contains her experiences as the voice of Bart. After three seasons of shorts , a half @-@ hour spinoff called The Simpsons debuted in 1989 . In the following chapters , she recalls the early days of The Simpsons , commenting on the recording process and her co @-@ stars and revealing how she got the roles of some of the other characters she voices , including Nelson Muntz and Ralph Wiggum . In the 15th chapter , she discusses her experiences of voicing a famous character , but rarely being recognized . 
 Several chapters are devoted to a detailed " behind the scenes " look at how an episode of The Simpsons is made , including the writing , recording and animation . My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy contains multiple excerpts from Cartwright 's diary detailing various events , mostly encounters with The Simpsons guest stars . Guest stars she talks about include Ernest Borgnine , Danny DeVito , Kirk Douglas , Mel Gibson , Kelsey Grammer , Tom Jones , Michael Jackson , Mickey Rooney , Meryl Streep and Elizabeth Taylor . One chapter describes the day she found out that Phil Hartman , a frequent guest star on The Simpsons , was murdered . The final chapter is a retrospective in which she answers the question " what is it like to be the voice behind the star ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy 's original print of 25 @,@ 000 copies were sold on pre @-@ order in the United Kingdom , with 38 @,@ 000 copies being sold . Cartwright began a publicity tour in late October 2000 , starting in her hometown of Dayton , Ohio , where the book became the top selling non @-@ fiction in the town in the first week of November 2000 . 
 Laura A. Bischoff of the Dayton Daily News commented that the book was the " ultimate insider 's guide to The Simpsons . " However , several critics commented that the book was straightforward and presented few interesting stories . Susan Shapiro of The New York Times wrote that " Although the paradoxes of being ' a celebrity nobody knows ' are interesting , the photographs , diary entries and overly cute commentaries make this book feel like a personal scrapbook . " <unk> Brewer of the Library Journal commented that " Cartwright 's own life notwithstanding , there is nothing really new or exciting here . She knew what she wanted to do and was able to do it ; end of story . " Lee Bacchus of The Province wrote that " This little book by the voice of Bart Simpson reads as if it were written by a 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy . Not that that 's all bad . Cartwright , who voices Bart along with Ralph Wiggum and a few others on The Simpsons , gives a very unchallenging tour behind the scenes of the phenomenally successful series . It 's kind of fun to discover how the show is put together and how an adult woman snagged one of the coolest jobs in the world [ ... ] If only it wasn 't all so relentlessly perky . " 
 Another common criticism was that the book was aimed at fans of The Simpsons and not a general audience . A preview in People said the bottom line was that the book is " for die @-@ hard fans only . " Bacchus concurred , saying " Cartwright writes as if she were speaking to devotees of The Simpsons Fan Club , too often providing bland tidbits of background that only obsessives would ever really care about . " Rob Sheridan of the National Post also believes that the book is " aimed squarely at rabid Simpsons fans " , and criticized the writing , commenting that " the chronology of her story is sometimes muddled , and a lot of sentences have that first @-@ draft feeling [ ... ] But none of this is anything to have a cow about . " 
 = = Stage adaptation = = 
 In 2004 , My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy was adapted into a one @-@ woman play . Described as " a romp through Springfield through [ Cartwright 's ] eyes " , the first portion of the play is scripted and includes anecdotes from Cartwright , dialogue performed in her characters ' voices and video clips from The Simpsons . At the end , she does a question and answer session and occasionally plays a game to allow for audience participation . Cartwright 's friend Rose Goss co @-@ wrote the play , and serves as director . Cartwright has performed the show at various locations , including the Big Laugh Comedy Festival in Parramatta , Australia , in March 2004 , a three @-@ week run at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe in Edinburgh , Scotland in August 2004 , at the " Simpsons Mania " convention in Toronto , Canada , ( the North American debut of the play ) in October 2004 and at Riverside Studios in London , England , in May 2005 . 
 The play has received modest reviews . Julian Hall of The Independent criticized it for a lack of inside stories about The Simpsons , writing that " Cartwright never allows you to become bored but that means some issues are skirted over faster than American closing credits on television . You never really get a feel what it is like recording the show . " Brian Logan of The Guardian described Cartwright as " a lively host [ ... ] eager to please " , but found the play to be " an <unk> upbeat collection of Simpsons chitchat . " David Chatterton of British Theatre Guide described it as " interesting and entertaining , but not really a ' must see ' even for Simpsons fans . " Clive Davis of The Times wrote that " In contrast to The Simpsons itself , where not a line , not a syllable , goes to waste , Cartwright has a habit of losing herself in anecdotes that stumble into dead @-@ ends . [ ... ] The half @-@ hearted trivia quiz involving volunteers from the audience soon dies a death too . The performance really cries out for a hard @-@ headed director . The video clips of Cartwright at large are fun , however . " 
 = Beholder ( horse ) = 
 Beholder ( foaled May 9 , 2010 ) is an American Thoroughbred racehorse . She was purchased as a yearling by B. Wayne Hughes of Spendthrift Farm . With an early reputation for being difficult to handle , trainer Richard Mandella worked extensively with the fractious young horse , gradually developing her from a temperamental front @-@ runner into a seasoned veteran who could be placed in a strategic position to best beat her competition . 
 As a two @-@ year @-@ old in 2012 , she won three of her five races including the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile Fillies and was voted American Champion Two @-@ Year @-@ Old Filly . In the following season she won five of her seven races , including the Breeders ' Cup Distaff . With the Breeders ' Cup win , she became the first horse to win both the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile Fillies and the Distaff in consecutive years , and concluded her three @-@ year old season by being named American Champion Three @-@ Year @-@ Old Filly . After a four @-@ year @-@ old season plagued by injuries and illness , with a single graded stakes win in three attempts , she returned to form as a five @-@ year @-@ old , with multiple stakes wins and becoming the first filly or mare to win the Pacific Classic and was voted American Champion Older Dirt Female Horse . In doing so , she became the first horse since 1976 , male or female , to win Grade 1 stakes races at age 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 . In 2016 , she extended this achievement by winning the Grade 1 Vanity Stakes . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beholder is a bay mare with no white markings , bred by the <unk> Farm in Lexington , Kentucky . She was sired by Henny Hughes , a sprinter whose biggest wins came in the King 's Bishop Stakes and Vosburgh Stakes in 2006 . Beholder 's dam , Leslie 's Lady , was a descendant of the broodmare Last Bird , making her a distant relative of the Kentucky Derby winner I 'll Have Another . Leslie 's Lady won five races out of 28 starts , including the listed Hoosier Debutante Stakes in 1998 . Beholder 's older half @-@ brother , Into Mischief ( sired by Harlan 's Holiday ) , won the 2007 CashCall Futurity and the 2008 Damascus Stakes . 
 As a yearling , Beholder was consigned by the <unk> Farm to the sale at Keeneland in September 2011 , where she was bought for $ 180 @,@ 000 by B. Wayne Hughes ' Spendthrift Farm . At age two , the filly was sent into training with the California @-@ based trainer Richard Mandella . 
 Beholder initially developed a reputation as a " temperamental diva . " As a young filly , she was prone to rearing when she got upset , but later turned to bucking . But the people who worked with her every day viewed her differently ; her exercise rider in 2013 , David <unk> , described her as " straightforward " , explaining , " she kind of likes it to be her idea and doesn 't want to be told too much what to do . " Her groom , Ruben Mercado , said she was a " little angel " in the stables , but " all business " on the track . Mandella used earplugs and a hood with ear coverings ( colloquially called " earmuffs " ) to help keep her focused . At one point , he even tried giving her ear buds , but the sound upset her even more . Mandella was described as the " perfect " trainer for her , as he was willing to try different training techniques to keep her from getting in her own way , took the time to figure out her quirks , and learned to anticipate her behavior . The bond and depth of communication between trainer and horse was noted in the press . Mandella 's son Gary described Beholder as having an " Alpha Male perspective , " explaining " She ’ s actually dominant , <unk> and head strong . She ’ s not quirky because she ’ s worried that something is lurking around the corner . The things that she does that are hard to manage are because she ’ s tougher than you . ” 
 As she aged , her behavior improved and she began to behave like a seasoned veteran . Mandella himself gave credit to the horse : " I ’ d say she brought me along . I haven ‘ t brought her along . I ’ ve just been along for the ride . " By her six @-@ year @-@ old season , following her 17th career win , which was also her sixth consecutive victory , Mandella said of Beholder , " “ Good horses come along , and there are a few great ones , but to be great and stay great , it really is special . ” 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 2012 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Beholder was ridden in all her two @-@ year @-@ old races by Garrett Gomez . She began her racing career by finishing fourth behind Executiveprivilege in a maiden race on the Cushion Track at Hollywood Park Racetrack on June 28 . A month later she recorded her first win in a maiden race at Del Mar racetrack , beating <unk> by 3 1 ⁄ 4 lengths . On September 2 she was moved up to Grade I class for the Del Mar Debutante Stakes over seven furlongs . Starting at odds of 8 @.@ 1 – 1 she hit the starting gate but took an early lead , leading by 2 1 ⁄ 2 lengths in homestretch but was caught by Executiveprivilege at the finish line and was beaten a nose . Beholder moved to Santa Anita Park in October . Because she remained keyed up after the previous race and upset by the stress from shipping , Mandella chose to put her in an easier race than a Grade I to see if she would settle down enough to contest the Breeders ' Cup later in the year . She was entered into a six furlong allowance race and won by eleven lengths despite being eased in the closing stages . On November 2 at Santa Anita , Beholder was one of eight fillies to contest the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile Fillies over one mile . She was the 9 – 2 joint second choice in the betting behind Executiveprivilege , who was made the 13 – 8 favourite . Beholder took the lead from the start and broke clear of the field to open up a three length advantage on the final turn . She held off the late challenge of Executiveprivilege to win by a length . 
 = = = 2013 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Beholder began her three @-@ year @-@ old season in the Grade II Santa Ynez Stakes over seven furlongs at Santa Anita on January 21 . She started the 1 – 5 favorite but was beaten three @-@ quarters of a length by Renee 's Titan . An explanation for her poor performance emerged a week later when an examination revealed an ulcer in the filly 's throat . At the same course on March 2 , Beholder started 4 – 5 favorite for the Grade I Las <unk> Stakes over one mile . She led from the start and was never seriously challenged , winning by 3 3 ⁄ 4 lengths from <unk> . Beholder 's next race was the Grade I Santa Anita Oaks on April 6 , for which she started the 3 – 10 favorite . Despite an unfavorable draw , she quickly went into the lead and went clear of the field in the straight to win by 2 3 ⁄ 4 lengths from Iotapa . Mandella described the winner as having " the heart of a warrior " . Throughout her spring campaign , she continued to be ridden by Gomez . 
 In the Kentucky Oaks on May 3 at Churchill Downs , Beholder started at odds of 9 – 1 in a field of ten fillies , with the Gulfstream Oaks winner Dreaming of Julia being made the 6 – 4 favorite . It was the first time she had been shipped outside of California . Beholder tracked the leader Midnight Lucky before moving into the lead in the homestretch but was overtaken in the closing stages by the 39 – 1 outsider Princess of Sylmar and finished second , beaten by half a length . Her loss was attributed in part to her behavior in the post parade . Without her training earmuffs , she was anxious and upset by the crowd noise , fought to get away from the track pony that was leading her to the gate , and partially fell down , forcing Gomez to jump off . Sportswriters described her as " angry " and adrenaline @-@ filled , while Mandella described her as " rattled . " After the race , Gomez speculated that if Princess of Sylmar had been closer as she passed , instead of well to the outside , Beholder 's fighting instincts still might have been enough to have held out for the victory . However , he also commented at the time that she relied on speed to win , and if she was slowed down , she had difficulty regaining momentum . 
 After a break of almost four months , Beholder returned in the Torrey Pines Stakes over one mile at Del Mar on September 1 , where she was ridden for the first time by Gary Stevens . She started the 1 – 10 favorite and led all the way , winning easily from second @-@ place finisher Wittgenstein . Four weeks later , Beholder was matched against older fillies and mares in the Grade I Zenyatta Stakes over eight and a half furlongs at Santa Anita . She led from the start and won easily , with the six @-@ year @-@ old veteran Authenticity in second . Mandella called the winner " a filly that really likes the fight " while Stevens said that " I haven 't gotten close to the bottom of her yet " . On November 1 , Beholder contested the Breeders ' Cup Distaff over nine furlongs at Santa Anita . The field was a very strong one , including Royal Delta who had won the race for the last two years , Princess of Sylmar , Authenticity and Close Hatches . Although Beholder showed some anxiety in the starting gate , she had a clean start . Mandella had been training Beholder so that instead of always being a front @-@ runner , she could be rated behind other horses and conserve energy . His strategy was a success as Beholder tracked the leaders before moving up into second place half a mile from the finish . She took the lead two furlongs out and went clear of the field to win easily by 4 1 ⁄ 4 lengths over Close Hatches , with Royal Delta fourth and Princess of Sylmar last of the six runners . After the race Mandella said " I ’ ve been lucky enough to have many good mares in my years of training , but this mare might have to be the best of all " . With her Distaff win , she became the first horse to win both the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile Fillies and the Distaff in consecutive years . 
 = = = 2014 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Beholder ran only three races in 2014 . She began her third season in the Santa Lucia Stakes at Santa Anita on April 21 . Conceding six pounds to her opponents , she started at odds of 1 – 10 and won by more than five lengths over Legacy . The filly returned to Grade I competition at the Ogden Phipps Stakes at Belmont on June 7 . It was only the second time she had been shipped to race outside California , the only prior trip having been the Kentucky Oaks . Beholder went off as the favorite ahead of Princess of Sylmar and Close Hatches . She raced on the outside and moved up to third on the final turn but could make no further progress and finished fourth behind winner , Close Hatches . | She had sustained an injury during that race , and after returning to training , split the wound site open again during a workout , requiring stitches and missing additional training time . Nonetheless , on September 27 , with Mike Smith riding her for the first time , she won the Zenyatta Stakes for a second time , winning by 3 ⁄ 4 of a length over Tiz Midnight and Iotapa . She was viewed as not at her peak fitness , but progressing well in spite of the delays in training linked to her injury . 
 Beholder was prepared to defend her Breeders ' Cup Distaff title , and was also consigned to be sold at the 2014 Fasig @-@ Tipton fall sale immediately after . Plans changed when she was found to be running a 104 ° F fever after exercising on October 19 . She was scratched from both the race and the sale , and owner Hughes decided that after she recovered from her illness , she would not be sold , but instead would stay in training and return to racing in 2015 . 
 = = = 2015 : five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 For the second year in a row , Beholder took the Santa Lucia Stakes , run at a distance of 1 1 ⁄ 16 miles ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) on April 10 , 2015 . With Stevens returning as her rider , she tracked <unk> until pulling easily away for a 3 3 ⁄ 4 length win . " The game was pretty much over going into the first turn and it was sort of a glorified workout , which is something you hope for in a race like this , " Stevens said . " She 's the best filly I 've ever sat on and I 'm not sure she 's not the best horse I 've ever ridden . " 
 After missing the Grade 1 Vanity Stakes and an anticipated match @-@ up with improving Warren 's <unk> in May due to a fever similar to that which prevented her from competing in the 2014 Breeders ' Cup Distaff , Beholder was given time off . She returned in the Grade III Adoration Stakes on June 13 , where she defeated Warren 's <unk> by a comfortable 1 1 ⁄ 4 lengths in 1 : 41 @.@ 67 . Beholder followed up with an easy win in the Grade I Clement L. Hirsch Stakes , winning by 7 lengths , without being touched with the whip . Her behavior had markedly improved as she matured , with Stevens commenting , " she went from being a cantankerous kid to a laid @-@ back grandma . " With that victory , she became the first horse since 1976 , male or female , to win Grade I stakes races at ages 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 . While other horses had won Grade I stakes four years in a row , she was notable for being the only horse to have done so beginning at age two . 
 On August 22 , 2015 , Beholder became the first filly or mare to win the Grade I Pacific Classic against males . She won by 8 1 ⁄ 4 lengths with a final time of 1 : 59 @.@ 77 , against an otherwise all @-@ male field of nine other horses , including 2014 Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Bayern . She won in the third @-@ fastest winning time in the history of the race , and with the second @-@ largest margin of victory , behind the 2013 win of Game On Dude . Hughes said : “ She ’ s the first horse who has made me feel lucky to be her owner . ” Mandella quipped , " We didn ’ t think she would do it quite like that . We thought it was the girls she was picking on . ” and added later , " I think the boys pissed her off . I think they were telling sexist jokes on the backside . " After the race , her connections announced that she would train with the goal of running in the Breeders ' Cup Classic . They also suggested that she might race again in 2016 and that upon retirement , Hughes would be likely to keep her at his Spendthrift Farm and not offer her for sale . 
 In her last race of 2015 , she won the Zenyatta Stakes for the third time , stalking the pace until taking the lead in the homestretch , easily winning in a field of eight by 3 1 ⁄ 2 lengths . As she prepared for her next race , the 2015 Breeders ' Cup Classic , the biggest challenge was anticipated to be her reaction to travel ; she had only raced twice outside of California , losing both times , and was known to be a poor shipper . With the 2015 Breeders ' Cup races held at Keeneland , and weather causing difficulties for shipping horses by air , Mandella nonetheless declared , " We plan to run in the big one . ” She shipped to Keeneland on October 19 and developed a slight fever shortly after arrival , thought due to shipping stress , but the fever dropped following treatment and she continued to prep for the race . But on the morning of 29 October , Beholder was sent out for a gallop at the Keeneland training track , and examination after the race revealed that she had bled . She was scratched from the Classic . Mandella explained , " there 's obviously some irritated lung tissue there . She will be fine , but if I put her under the pressure of a race situation , it could cause some real damage . This was obviously due to the fever she had when she arrived " . 
 = = = 2016 : six @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 In her 2016 debut , Stevens was once again in the saddle , and Beholder won the Adoration Stakes for the second time in succession at Santa Anita Park on May 8th , the day after the 2016 Kentucky Derby . This was her seventh straight victory in 16 wins overall ; 14 of her wins have been stakes wins . On 4 June Beholder appeared to be facing a much sterner task when she took on the 2015 American Champion three @-@ year @-@ old filly Stellar Wind in the Grade I Vanity Mile at Santa Anita . In a slowly @-@ run race Stevens tracked the early leader Lost Bus before taking the lead on the turn and winning " effortlessly " by one and a half lengths from Stellar Wind . 
 = = Assessment and honors = = 
 Beholder was named American Champion Two @-@ Year @-@ Old Filly at the Eclipse awards for 2012 , gaining 225 of the available 254 votes . She repeated the following year , winning American Champion Three @-@ Year @-@ Old Filly with 207 votes against 42 for runner @-@ up Princess of Sylmar . In the awards for 2014 , in spite of her abbreviated season , she still received five votes for American Champion Older Female , though the award that year went to Close Hatches by a wide margin . Beholder won her third Eclipse Award in January 2016 when she was named American Champion Older Dirt Female Horse , taking 256 of the 261 votes . 
 In the 2013 World 's Best Racehorse Rankings , Beholder was rated the second @-@ best three @-@ year @-@ old filly in the world behind the French @-@ trained Treve , and the thirty @-@ eighth best horse in the world of any age or either sex . In September 2015 , following her Pacific Classic win , she was ranked eighteenth , the sixth @-@ highest rated American horse and again second only to Treve as the highest @-@ rated filly or mare . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo ( 2011 film ) = 
 The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo is a 2011 Swedish @-@ American psychological thriller film based on the novel of the same name by Stieg Larsson . This film adaptation was directed by David Fincher and written by Steven Zaillian . Starring Daniel Craig and Rooney Mara , it tells the story of journalist Mikael Blomkvist ( Daniel Craig ) ' s investigation to find out what happened to a woman from a wealthy family who disappeared 40 years prior . He recruits the help of computer hacker Lisbeth Salander ( Rooney Mara ) . 
 Sony Pictures Entertainment began development on the film in 2009 , the year the first , highly acclaimed adaptation of the novel entered cinemas . It took the company a few months to obtain the rights to the novel , while recruiting Zaillian and David Fincher . The casting process for the lead roles was exhaustive and intense ; Craig faced scheduling conflicts , and a number of actresses were sought for the role of Lisbeth Salander . The script took over six months to write , which included three months of analyzing the novel . 
 Pre @-@ release screenings occurred in London , New York City , and Stockholm . Critics gave the film favorable reviews , praising its bleak tone and lauding Mara and Craig 's performances . With a production budget of $ 90 million , the film grossed $ 232 @.@ 6 million over its theatrical run . In addition to being included in several publications ' best @-@ of lists , the film was a candidate for numerous awards , and ultimately won nine accolades , including an Academy Award for Best Film Editing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Stockholm , Sweden , journalist Mikael Blomkvist ( Daniel Craig ) , co @-@ owner of Millennium magazine , has lost a libel case brought against him by businessman Hans @-@ Erik Wennerström ( Ulf Friberg ) . Lisbeth Salander ( Rooney Mara ) , a brilliant but troubled investigator and hacker , compiles an extensive background check on Blomkvist for business magnate Henrik Vanger ( Christopher Plummer ) , who has a special task for him . In exchange for the promise of damning information about Wennerström , Blomkvist agrees to investigate the disappearance and assumed murder of Henrik 's grandniece , Harriet , 40 years ago . After moving to the Vanger family 's compound , Blomkvist uncovers a notebook containing a list of names and numbers that no one has been able to decipher . 
 Salander , who is under state legal guardianship due to diagnosed mental incompetency , is appointed a new guardian , lawyer Nils Bjurman ( Yorick van Wageningen ) , after her previous guardian Holger Palmgren suffers a stroke . Bjurman abuses his authority to extort sexual favors from Salander and violently rapes her , not realizing she has a hidden video camera on her bag . At their next meeting she stuns him with a stun gun , rapes him with a dildo , and marks him as a rapist with a tattoo on his chest and stomach . Threatening to disclose the video recording , she blackmails him into writing a glowing progress report and granting her full control of her money . 
 Blomkvist 's daughter Pernilla ( <unk> Asplund ) visits him and notes that the numbers from the notebook are Bible references . Blomkvist tells Vanger 's lawyer , <unk> Frode ( Steven Berkoff ) , that he needs help with his research , and Frode recommends Salander based on the work she did researching Blomkvist himself . Blomkvist hires Salander to investigate the notebook 's content . She uncovers a connection to a series of murders of young women from 1947 through 1967 , with the women either being Jewish or having Biblical names ; many of the <unk> are known antisemites . During the investigation , Salander and Blomkvist become lovers . Henrik 's openly national socialist brother Harald identifies Martin ( Stellan Skarsgård ) , Harriet 's brother and operational head of the Vanger empire , and Blomkvist marks Martin as a possible suspect . Salander 's research uncovers evidence that Martin and his deceased father , Gottfried , committed the murders . 
 Blomkvist breaks into Martin 's house to look for more clues , but Martin catches him and prepares to kill him . While torturing Blomkvist , Martin brags of having killed women for decades but denies killing Harriet . Salander arrives , subdues Martin and saves Blomkvist . While Salander tends to Blomkvist , Martin flees . Salander , on her motorcycle , pursues Martin in his SUV . He loses control of his vehicle on an icy road and dies when it catches fire . Salander nurses Blomkvist back to health and tells him that she tried to kill her father when she was 12 . Blomkvist deduces that Harriet is still alive and her cousin Anita ( Joely Richardson ) likely knows where she is . He and Salander monitor Anita , waiting for her to contact Harriet . When nothing happens , Blomkvist confronts her , deducing that the woman posing as Anita is Harriet herself . She explains that her father and brother had sexually abused her for years , and that Martin saw her kill their father in self @-@ defense . Her cousin Anita smuggled her out of the island and let her live under her identity . Finally free of her brother , she returns to Sweden and tearfully reunites with Henrik . 
 As promised , Henrik gives Blomkvist the information on Wennerström , but it proves worthless . Salander hacks into Wennerström 's computer and presents Blomkvist with evidence of Wennerström 's crimes . Blomkvist publishes an article that ruins Wennerström , who flees the country . Salander hacks into Wennerström 's bank accounts and , travelling to Switzerland in disguise , transfers two billion euros to various accounts . Wennerström is found murdered . Salander reveals to her former guardian Holger Palmgren that she is in love with Blomkvist . On her way to give Blomkvist a Christmas present , Salander sees him with his longtime lover and business partner Erika Berger ( Robin Wright ) . Heartbroken , she discards the gift and rides away . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniel Craig as Mikael Blomkvist : 
 A co @-@ owner for Swedish lifestyle magazine Millennium , Blomkvist is devoted to exposing the corruptions and malfeasance of government , attracting infamy for his tendency to " go too far " . Craig competed with Brad Pitt , George Clooney , Viggo Mortensen , and Johnny Depp as candidates for the role . Initial concerns over schedule conflicts with the production of Cowboys & Aliens ( 2011 ) and Skyfall ( 2012 ) prompted Craig to postpone the casting process . Given the uncertainty surrounding Skyfall following Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's bankruptcy , Sony Pictures Entertainment and DreamWorks worked out a schedule and Craig agreed to take the part . The British actor was required to gain weight and adopted a neutral accent to befit Stockholm 's worldly cultural fabric . Having read the book amid its " initial craze " , Craig commented , " It 's one of those books you just don 't put down " [ ... ] There 's just this immediate feeling that bad things are going to happen and I think that 's part of why they 've been so readable for people . " 
 Rooney Mara as Lisbeth Salander : 
 Salander is a computer hacker who has survived severe emotional and sexual abuse . The character was a " vulnerable victim @-@ turned @-@ vigilante " who possessed the " take @-@ no @-@ prisoners " attitude of Lara Croft and the " cool , unsentimental intellect " of Spock . Fincher felt that Salander 's eccentric persona was enthralling , and stated , " there 's a kind of wish fulfillment to her in the way that she takes care of things , the way she will only put up with so much , but there are other sides to her as well . " Casting was complicated by the raft of prominent candidates such as Natalie Portman , Ellen Page , Kristen Stewart , Jennifer Lawrence , Keira Knightley , Anne Hathaway , Olivia Thirlby , Scarlett Johansson , and Emma Watson . Despite the hype , some eventually withdrew from consideration due to the time commitment and low pay . Mara had worked with Fincher in his 2010 film The Social Network . Fincher , while fond of the actress ' youthful appearance , found it difficult at first to mold her to match Salander 's antisocial demeanor , which was a vast contrast from her earlier role as the submissive Erica . Mara went through multiple changes in her appearance to become Salander . Her hair was dyed black and cut into various jagged points , giving the appearance that she cut it herself . In addition to her transgressive appearance , which was described as a " mash @-@ up of brazen Seventies punk and spooky Eighties goth with a dash of S & M temptress " by Lynn Hirschberg of W , Mara participated in a formal screening and was filmed by Fincher on a subway in Los Angeles in an effort to persuade the executives of Sony Pictures that she was a credible choice . 
 Christopher Plummer as Henrik Vanger : 
 Vanger is a wealthy businessman who launches an extensive investigation into his family 's affairs . Despite calling the Vanger family " dysfunctional " , Plummer said of the character : " I love the character of the old man , and I sympathize with him . He 's really the nicest old guy in the whole book . Everybody is a bit suspect , and still are at the end . Old Vanger has a nice straight line , and he gets his wish . " Plummer wanted to imbue the character with irony , an element he found to be absent from the novel 's Henrik . " I think that the old man would have it , " he opined , " because he 's a very sophisticated old guy [ ... ] used to a great deal of power . So in dealing with people , he would be very good [ ... ] he would be quite jokey , and know how to seduce them . " 
 Stellan Skarsgård as Martin Vanger : 
 Martin is the current CEO of the Vanger Corporation . Skarsgård was <unk> by the character 's dual nature , and was fascinated that he got to portray him in " two totally different ways " . In regards to Martin 's " very complex " and " complicated " personality , the Swedish actor said , " He can be extremely charming , but he also can seem to be a completely different person at different points in the film . " While consulting with Fincher , the director wanted Skarsgård to play Martin without reference to the book . 
 Steven Berkoff as <unk> Frode 
 Robin Wright as Erika Berger : Blomkvist 's business partner and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Millennium magazine . She 's also Blomkvist 's occasional lover . 
 Yorick van Wageningen as Nils Bjurman : 
 As Salander 's legal guardian , he uses his position to sexually abuse and eventually rape her . Salander turns the tables on him , torturing him and branding him as a rapist . Fincher wanted the character to be worse than a typical antagonist , although he did not want to emulate the stereotypical " mustache @-@ twirling pervert " . The director considered Van Wageningen to be the embodiment of a versatile actor — one who was a " full @-@ fledged human being " and a " brilliant " actor . " He was able to bring his performance from a logical place in Bjurman 's mind and find the seething morass of darkness inside , " Fincher stated . Bjurman 's multifaceted psyche was the main reason Van Wageningen wanted to play the role . The Dutch actor said , " This character goes through a lot and I wasn 't quite sure I wanted to go through all that . I started out half way between the elation of getting to work with David Fincher and the dread of this character , but I was able to use both of those things . We both thought the most interesting route would be for Bjurman to seem half affable . The challenge was not in finding the freak violence in the guy but finding the humanity of him . " 
 Joely Richardson as Harriet Vanger : 
 Henrik 's long @-@ lost grandniece who went into hiding posing as her cousin Anita . In performing her " tricky " character , Richardson recalled that Fincher wanted her to embrace a " darker , edgier " persona , without <unk> , and not " resolved or healed " . " Even if you were starting to move towards the direction of resolved or healed , he still wanted it edgy and dark . There are no straightforward emotions in the world of this film . " 
 Goran Višnjić as Dragan <unk> , head of Milton Security , Salander 's employer 
 Donald Sumpter as Detective Morell 
 Ulf Friberg as Wennerström 
 Geraldine James as Cecilia Vanger 
 Embeth Davidtz as Annika Giannini , Mikeal 's sister and a lawyer 
 <unk> Asplund as Pernilla Blomkvist , Mikeal 's daughter 
 Per <unk> as Harald Vanger 
 Tony Way as Plague , Salander 's hacker friend 
 Fredrik <unk> as Wennerström 's Lawyer 
 Alan Dale as Detective <unk> 
 Julian Sands as Young Henrik Vanger 
 David <unk> as Young Morell 
 Gustaf <unk> as Young Harald 
 Leo Bill as Trinity , another of Salander 's hacker friends 
 Élodie Yung as Miriam Wu , Salander 's occasional lover 
 Joel Kinnaman as Christer Malm 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 The success of Stieg Larsson 's novel created Hollywood interest in adapting the book , as became apparent in 2009 , when Lynton and Pascal pursued the idea of developing an " American " version unrelated to the Swedish film adaptation released that year . By December , two major developments occurred for the project : Steven Zaillian , who had recently completed the script for Moneyball ( 2011 ) , became the screenwriter , while producer Scott Rudin finalized a partnership allocating full copyrights to Sony . Zaillian , who was unfamiliar with the novel , got a copy from Rudin . The screenwriter recalled , " They sent it to me and said , ' We want to do this . We will think of it as one thing for now . It 's possible that it can be two and three , but let 's concentrate on this one . ' " After reading the book , the screenwriter did no research on the subject . Fincher , who was requested with partner <unk> Chaffin by Sony executives to read the novel , was astounded by the series ' size and success . As they began to read , the duo noticed that it had a tendency to take " readers on a lot of side trips " — " from detailed explanations of surveillance techniques to angry attacks on corrupt Swedish industrialists , " professed The Hollywood Reporter 's Gregg <unk> . Fincher recalled of the encounter : " The ballistic , ripping @-@ yarn thriller aspect of it is kind of a red herring in a weird way . It is the thing that throws Salander and Blomkvist together , but it is their relationship you keep coming back to . I was just wondering what 350 pages Zaillian would get rid of . " Because Zaillian was already cultivating the screenplay , the director avoided interfering . After a conversation , Fincher was comfortable " they were headed in the same direction " . 
 The writing process consumed approximately six months , including three months creating notes and analyzing the novel . Zaillian noted that as time progressed , the writing accelerated . " As soon as you start making decisions , " he explained , " you start cutting off all of the other possibilities of things that could happen . So with every decision that you make you are removing a whole bunch of other possibilities of where that story can go or what that character can do . " Given the book 's sizable length , Zaillian deleted elements to match Fincher 's desired running time . Even so , <unk> took significant departures from the book . To Zaillian , there was always a " low @-@ grade " anxiety , " but I was never doing anything specifically to please or displease , " he continued . " I was simply trying to tell the story the best way I could , and push that out of my mind . I didn 't change anything just for the sake of changing it . There 's a lot right about the book , but that part , I thought we could do it a different way , and it could be a nice surprise for the people that have read it . " 
 Zaillian discussed many of the themes in Larsson 's Millennium series with Fincher , taking the pair deeper into the novel 's darker subjects , such as the psychological dissimilarities between rapists and murderers . Fincher was familiar with the concept , from projects such as Seven ( 1995 ) and Zodiac ( 2007 ) . Zaillian commented , " A rapist , or at least our rapist , is about exercising his power over somebody . A serial killer is about destruction ; they get off on destroying something . It 's not about having power over something , it 's about eliminating it . What thrills them is slightly different . " The duo wanted to expose the novels ' pivotal themes , particularly misogyny . " We were committed to the tack that this is a movie about violence against women about specific kinds of degradation , and you can 't shy away from that . But at the same time you have to walk a razor thin line so that the audience can viscerally feel the need for revenge but also see the power of the ideas being expressed . " Instead of the typical three @-@ act structure , they reluctantly chose a five @-@ act structure , which Fincher pointed out is " very similar to a lot of TV cop dramas . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Fincher and Zaillian 's central objective was to maintain the novel 's setting . To portray Larsson 's vision of Sweden , and the interaction of light on its landscape , Fincher cooperated with an artistic team that included cinematographer Jeff Cronenweth and production designer Donald Graham Burt . The film was wholly shot using Red Digital Cinema Camera Company 's RED MX digital camera , chosen to help evoke Larsson 's tone . The idea , according to Cronenweth , was to employ unorthodox light sources and maintain a realistic perspective . " So there may be shadows , there may be flaws , but it 's reality . You allow silhouettes and darkness , but at the same time we also wanted shots to counter that , so it would not all be one continuous dramatic image . " Sweden 's climate was a crucial element in enhancing the mood . Cronenweth commented , " It 's always an element in the background and it was very important that you feel it as an audience member . The winter becomes like a silent character in the film giving everything a low , cool @-@ colored light that is super soft and non @-@ direct . " To get acquainted with Swedish culture , Burt set out on a month @-@ long expedition across the country . He said of the process , " It takes time to start really taking in the nuances of a culture , to start seeing the themes that recur in the architecture , the landscape , the layouts of the cities and the habits of the people . I felt I had to really integrate myself into this world to develop a true sense of place for the film . It was not just about understanding the physicality of the locations , but the metaphysics of them , and how the way people live comes out through design . " 
 Principal photography began in Stockholm , Sweden in September 2010 . Production mostly took place at multiple locations in the city 's central business district , including at the Stockholm Court House . One challenge was realizing the Vanger estate . They picked an eighteenth @-@ century French architecture mansion <unk> located approximately 15 miles ( 24 km ) southwest of Stockholm . Filmmakers wanted to use a typical " manor from Småland " that was solemn , formal , and " very Old Money " . " The Swedish are very good at the modern and the minimal but they also have these wonderful country homes that can be juxtaposed against the modern city — yet both speak to money . " Principal photography relocated in October to Uppsala . On Queen Street , the facade of the area was renovated to mimic the Hotel Alder , after an old photograph of a building obtained by Fincher . From December onward , production moved to Zurich , Switzerland , where locations were established at <unk> Grand Hotel and the Zurich Airport . Because of the " beautiful " environment of the city , Fincher found it difficult to film in the area . Principal photography concluded in Oslo , Norway , where production took place at Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . Recorded for over fifteen hours , twelve extras were sought for background roles . Filming also took place in the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 In one sequence the character Martin Vanger plays the song " Orinoco Flow " by Enya before beginning his torture of Mikael Blomkvist . David Fincher , the director , said that he believed that Martin " doesn ’ t like to kill , he doesn ’ t like to hear the screams , without hearing his favorite music " so therefore the character should play a song during the scene . Daniel Craig , the actor who played Blomkvist , selected " Orinoco Flow " on his iPod as a candidate song . Fincher said " And we all almost pissed ourselves , we were laughing so hard . No , actually , it ’ s worse than that . He said , ‘ Orinoco Flow ! ’ Everybody looked at each other , like , what is he talking about ? And he said , ‘ You know , “ Sail away , sail away ... ” ’ And I thought , this guy is going to make Blomkvist as metro as we need . " 
 = = = = Title sequence = = = = 
 Tim Miller , creative director for the title sequence , wanted to develop an abstract narrative that reflected the pivotal moments in the novel , as well as the character development of Lisbeth Salander . It was arduous for Miller to conceptualize the sequence abstractly , given that Salander 's occupation was a distinctive part of her personality . His initial ideas were modeled after a keyboard . " We were going to treat the keyboard like this giant city with massive fingers pressing down on the keys , " Miller explained , " Then we transitioned to the liquid going through the giant obelisks of the keys . " Among Miller 's many vignettes was " The Hacker Inside " , which revealed the character 's inner disposition and melted them away . The futuristic qualities in the original designs provided for a much more cyberpunk appearance than the final product . In creating the " cyber " look for Salander , Miller said , " Every time I would show David a design he would say , ' More Tandy ! ' It 's the shitty little computers from Radio Shack , the Tandy computers . They probably had vacuum tubes in them , really old technology . And David would go ' More Tandy ' , until we ended up with something that looked like we glued a bunch of computer parts found at a junkyard together . " 
 Fincher wanted the vignette to be a " personal nightmare " for Salander , replaying her darkest moments . " Early on , we knew it was supposed to feel like a nightmare , " Miller professed , who commented that early on in the process , Fincher wanted to use an artwork as a template for the sequence . After browsing through various paintings to no avail , Fincher chose a painting that depicted the artist , covered in black paint , standing in the middle of a gallery . Many of Miller 's sketches contained a liquid @-@ like component , and were rewritten to produce the " gooey " element that was so desired . " David said let 's just put liquid in all of them and it will be this primordial dream ooze that 's a part of every vignette , " Miller recalled . " It ties everything together other than the black on black . " 
 The title sequence includes abundant references to the novel , and exposes several political themes . Salander 's tattoos , such as her phoenix and dragon tattoos , were incorporated . The multiple flower representations signified the biological life cycle , as well as Henrik , who received a pressed flower each year on his birthday . " One had flowers coming out of this black ooze , " said Fincher , " it blossoms , and then it dies . And then a different flower , as that one is dying is rising from the middle of it . It was supposed to represent this cycle of the killer sending flowers . " Ultimately , the vignette becomes very conceptual because Miller and his team took " a whole thought , and cut it up into multiple different shots that are mixed in with other shots " . In one instance , Blomkvist is strangled by strips of newspaper , a metaphor for the establishment squelching his exposes . 
 In the " Hot Hands " vignette , a pair of rough , distorted hands that embrace Salander 's face and melt it represent all that 's bad in men . The hands that embrace Blomkvist 's face and shatter it , represent wealth and power . Themes of domestic violence become apparent as a woman 's face shatters after a merciless beating ; this also ties in the brutal beating of Salander 's mother by her father , an event revealed in the sequel , The Girl Who Played with Fire ( 2006 ) . 
 A cover of Led Zeppelin 's " Immigrant Song " ( 1970 ) plays throughout the title sequence . The rendition was produced by soundtrack composers Atticus Ross and Nine Inch Nails member Trent Reznor , and features vocals from Yeah Yeah Yeahs lead singer Karen O. Fincher suggested the song , but Reznor agreed only at his request . Led Zeppelin licensed the song only for use in the film 's trailer and title sequence . Fincher stated that he sees title sequences as an opportunity to set the stage for the film , or to get an audience to let go of its preconceptions . 
 Software packages that were primarily used are 3ds Max ( for modeling , lighting , rendering ) , Softimage ( for rigging and animation ) , Digital Fusion ( for compositing ) , Real Flow ( for fluid dynamics ) , Sony Vegas ( for editorial ) , <unk> and <unk> ( for organic modeling ) , and <unk> ( for rendering ) . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Fincher recruited Reznor and Ross to produce the score ; aside from their successful collaboration on The Social Network , the duo had worked together on albums from Nine Inch Nails ' later discography . They dedicated much of the year to work on the film , as they felt it would appeal to a broad audience . Akin to his efforts in The Social Network , Reznor experiments with acoustics and blends them with elements of electronic music , resulting in a forbidding atmosphere . " We wanted to create the sound of coldness — emotionally and also physically , " he asserted , " We wanted to take lots of acoustic instruments [ ... ] and transplant them into a very inorganic setting , and dress the set around them with electronics . " 
 Even before viewing the script , Reznor and Ross opted to use a redolent approach to creating the film 's score . After discussing with Fincher the varying soundscapes and emotions , the duo spent six weeks composing . " We composed music we felt might belong , " stated the Nine Inch Nails lead vocalist , " and then we 'd run it by Fincher , to see where his head ’ s at and he responded positively . He was filming at this time last year and assembling rough edits of scenes to see what it feels like , and he was inserting our music at that point , rather than using temp music , which is how it usually takes place , apparently . " Finding a structure for the soundtrack was arguably the most strenuous task . " We weren ’ t working on a finished thing , so everything keeps moving around , scenes are changing in length , and even the order of things are shuffled around , and that can get pretty frustrating when you get precious about your work . It was a lesson we learned pretty quickly of , ' Everything is in flux , and approach it as such . Hopefully it ’ ll work out in the end . ' " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 A screening for The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo took place on November 28 , 2011 , as part of a critics @-@ only event hosted by the New York Film Critics Circle . Commentators at the event predicted that while the film would become a contender for several accolades , it would likely not become a forerunner in the pursuit for Academy Award nominations . A promotional campaign commenced thereafter , including a Lisbeth Salander @-@ inspired collection , designed by Trish Summerville for H & M. The worldwide premiere was at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on December 12 , 2011 , followed by the American opening at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City on December 14 and Stockholm the next day . Sony 's target demographics were men and women over the age of 25 and 17 – 34 . The film went into general release in North America on December 21 , at 2 @,@ 700 theaters , expanding to 2 @,@ 974 theaters on its second day . The United Kingdom release was on December 26 , Russia on January 1 , 2012 , and Japan on February 13 . India and Vietnam releases were abandoned due to censorship concerns . A press statement from the Central Board of Film Certification stated : " Sony Pictures will not be releasing The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo in India . The censor board has judged the film unsuitable for public viewing in its unaltered form and , while we are committed to maintaining and protecting the vision of the director , we will , as always , respect the guidelines set by the board . " In contrast , the National Film Board of Vietnam insisted that the film 's withdrawal had no relation to rigid censorship guidelines , as it had not been reviewed by the committee . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released the film in a DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc combo pack in the United States on March 20 , 2012 . Bonus features include a commentary from Fincher , featurettes on Blomkvist , Salander , the sets and locations , etc . The disc artwork for the DVD version of the film resembles a Sony brand DVD @-@ R , a reference to the hacker Lisbeth Salander . This caused a bit of confusion in the marketplace with consumers thinking they had obtained a bootleg copy . The release sold 644 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , in third place behind The Muppets and Hop . The following week , the film sold an additional 144 @,@ 000 copies generating $ 2 @.@ 59 million in gross revenue . As of January 2014 , 1 @,@ 478 @,@ 230 units had been sold , grossing $ 22 @,@ 195 @,@ 069 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Fincher 's film grossed $ 232 @.@ 6 million during its theatrical run . The film 's American release grossed $ 1 @.@ 6 million from its Tuesday night screenings , a figure that increased to $ 3 @.@ 5 million by the end of its first day of general release . It maintained momentum into its opening weekend , accumulating $ 13 million for a total of $ 21 million in domestic revenue . The film 's debut figures fell below media expectations . Aided by positive word of mouth , its commercial performance remained steady into the second week , posting $ 19 million from 2 @,@ 914 theaters . The third week saw box office drop 24 % to $ 11 @.@ 3 million , totaling $ 76 @.@ 8 million . The number of theaters slightly increased to 2 @,@ 950 . By the fifth week , the number of theaters shrank to 1 @,@ 907 , and grosses to $ 3 @.@ 7 million , though it remained within the national top ten . The film completed its North American theatrical run on March 22 , 2012 , earning over $ 102 @.@ 5 million . 
 The international debut was in six Scandinavian markets on December 19 – 25 , 2011 , securing $ 1 @.@ 6 million from 480 venues . In Sweden the film opened in 194 theaters to strong results , accounting for more than half of international revenue at the time ( $ 950 @,@ 000 ) . The first full week in the United Kingdom collected $ 6 @.@ 7 million from 920 theaters . By the weekend of January 6 – 8 , 2012 , the film grossed $ 12 @.@ 2 million for a total of $ 29 million ; this included its expansion into Hong Kong , where it topped the box office , earning $ 470 @,@ 000 from thirty @-@ six establishments . The film similarly led the field in South Africa . It accumulated $ 6 @.@ 6 million from an estimated 600 theaters over a seven @-@ day period in Russia , placing fifth . The expansion continued into the following week , opening in nine markets . The week of January 13 – 15 saw the film yield $ 16 @.@ 1 million from 3 @,@ 910 locations in over forty @-@ three territories , thus propelling the international gross to $ 49 @.@ 3 million . It debuted at second place in Austria and Germany , where in the latter , it pulled $ 2 @.@ 9 million from 525 locations . Similar results were achieved in Australia , where it reached 252 theaters . The film 's momentum continued throughout the month , and by January 22 , it had hit ten additional markets , including France and Mexico , from which it drew $ 3 @.@ 25 million from 540 venues and $ 1 @.@ 25 million from 540 theaters , respectively . In its second week in France it descended to number three , with a total gross of $ 5 @.@ 8 million . 
 The next major international release came in Japan on February 13 , where it opened in first place with $ 3 @.@ 68 million ( ¥ 288 million ) in 431 theaters . By the weekend of February 17 – 19 , the film had scooped up $ 119 @.@ 5 million from international markets . The total international gross for The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo was $ 130 @.@ 1 million . MGM , one of the studios involved in the production , posted a " modest loss " and declared that they had expected the film to gross at least 10 % more . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo received very positive reviews from critics , with particular note to the cast , tone , score and cinematography . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 86 % , based on 224 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 6 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " Brutal yet captivating , The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo is the result of David Fincher working at his lurid best with total role commitment from star Rooney Mara . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized score , the film received an average score of 71 out of 100 , based on 41 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 David Denby of The New Yorker asserted that the austere , but captivating installment presented a " glancing , chilled view " of a world where succinct moments of loyalty coexisted with constant trials of betrayal . To USA Today columnist Claudia Puig , Fincher captures the " menace and grim despair in the frosty Scandinavian landscape " by carefully approaching its most gruesome features . Puig noted a surfeit of " stylistic flourishes " and " intriguing " changes in the narrative , compared to the original film . In his three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star review , Chris Knight of the National Post argued that it epitomized a so @-@ called " paradoxical position " that was both " immensely enjoyable and completely unnecessary " . Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald said that the " fabulously sinister entertainment " surpassed the original film " in every way " . The film took two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars from Rolling Stone commentator Peter Travers , who concluded : " Fincher 's Girl is gloriously rendered but too impersonal to leave a mark . " A. O. Scott , writing for The New York Times , admired the moments of " brilliantly orchestrated " anxiety and confusion , but felt that The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo was vulnerable to the " lumbering <unk> " that he saw in its literary counterpart , as evident with the " long stretches of drab , hackneyed exposition that flatten the atmosphere " . The Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern praised Cronenweth 's cinematography , which he thought provided for glossy alterations in the film 's darkness ; " Stockholm <unk> in nighttime exteriors , and its subway shines in a spectacular spasm of action involving a backpack . " Rex Reed of The New York Observer professed that despite its occasional <unk> , the movie was " technically superb " and " superbly acted " . In contrast , Kyle Smith of New York Post censured the film , calling it " rubbish " and further commenting that it " demonstrates merely that masses will thrill to an <unk> , badly written , psychologically shallow and deeply unlikely pulp story so long as you allow them to feel sanctified by the occasional meaningless reference to feminism or Nazis . " 
 The performances were a frequent topic in the critiques . Mara 's performance , in particular , was admired by commentators . In comparing the performances between Mara and Noomi Rapace , who played Salander in the 2009 film , Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said that Rapace felt more self @-@ conscious in the role . A revelation in the eyes of Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman , he proclaimed that her character was more important than " her ability to solve a crime " . Her " hypnotic " portrayal was noted by Justin Chang of Variety , as well as Salon critic Andrew O 'Hehir , who wrote , " Rooney Mara is a revelation as Lisbeth Salander , the damaged , aggressive computer geek and feminist revenge angel , playing the character as far more feral and vulnerable than Noomi Rapace ’ s borderline @-@ stereotype sexpot Goth girl . " Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club enjoyed the chemistry between Mara and Craig , as did David Germain of the Associated Press ; " Mara and Craig make an indomitable screen pair , he nominally leading their intense search into decades @-@ old serial killings , she surging ahead , plowing through obstacles with flashes of phenomenal intellect and eruptions of physical fury . " Although Puig found Mara inferior to Rapace in playing Salander , with regard to Craig 's performance , he said that the actor shone . This was supported by Morgenstern who avouched that Craig " nonetheless finds welcome humor in Mikael 's impassive affect " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In addition to numerous awards , The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo was included on several year @-@ end lists by film commentators and publications . It was named the best film of 2011 by MTV and James Berardinelli of ReelViews . The former wrote , " The director follows up the excellent Social Network with another tour de force , injecting the murder mystery that introduces us to outcast hacker Lisbeth Salander [ ... ] and embattled journalist [ ... ] with style , intensity and relentless suspense . Mara is a revelation , and the film 's daunting 160 @-@ minute runtime breezes by thanks to one heart @-@ racing scene after the next . Dark and tough to watch at times , but a triumph all around . " The film came second in indieWire 's list of " Drew Taylor 's Favorite Films Of 2011 " , while reaching the top ten of seven other publications , including the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch , San Francisco Chronicle , and the New Orleans Times @-@ Picayune . The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo was declared one of the best films of the year by the American Film Institute , as well as the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures . 
 = = Possible sequels = = 
 In December 2011 , Fincher stated that he wanted to film the sequels , The Girl Who Played with Fire and The Girl Who Kicked the Hornets ' Nest , " back to back . " There was an announced release date of 2013 for a film version of The Girl Who Played with Fire , although by August 2012 it was delayed due to difficulties with the script , being written by Zaillian . In July 2013 , Andrew Kevin Walker was hired to re @-@ write the script . 
 In September 2014 , Fincher stated that a script for Played with Fire had been written that was " extremely different from the book , " and that , despite the long delay , he was confident that the film would be made because Sony " already has spent millions of dollars on the rights and the script " . Mara , however , has been less optimistic about the project , saying in interviews in both May 2014 and February 2015 that sequels looked unlikely , despite her desire to appear in them . 
 In November 2015 , TheWrap reported that Sony was rebooting the franchise with an adaptation of The Girl in the Spider 's Web , a 2015 novel by David <unk> that was a continuation of the original Millennium trilogy . According to the report , neither Mara , Craig nor Fincher were likely to return for the film ; Alicia Vikander was discussed as possibly taking over the role of Salander . However , while promoting Carol , Mara stated that she is still signed for the sequel : " As far as I know I 'm doing it until someone tells me otherwise [ ... ] I 'm doing it unless someone tells me that I 'm not — and then I still might do it , " she joked . Steven Knight will serve as screenwriter . 
 = 2005 UEFA Super Cup = 
 The 2005 UEFA Super Cup was an association football match between Liverpool of England and CSKA Moscow of Russia on 26 August 2005 at Stade Louis II , Monaco , the annual UEFA Super Cup contested between the winners of the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup . Liverpool were appearing in the Super Cup for the fifth time , having won the competition in 1977 and 2001 . CSKA Moscow were appearing in the Super Cup for the first time , the first Russian team to appear in the competition . 
 The teams had qualified for the competition by winning the two seasonal European competitions . Liverpool won the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League , defeating Italian team A.C. Milan 3 – 2 in a penalty shootout after the match had finished 3 – 3 . CSKA Moscow won the 2004 – 05 UEFA Cup , beating Portuguese team Sporting CP 3 – 1 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 17 @,@ 042 , CSKA took the lead in the first half when Daniel Carvalho scored . Liverpool did not respond until the 82nd minute when substitute Djibril Cissé scored . The score remained 1 – 1 until the end of the 90 minutes to send the match into extra @-@ time . Cissé scored again in the 103rd minute to give Liverpool the lead , which was later extended by Luis García . Liverpool held out until the end of extra @-@ time to win the match 3 – 1 , their third Super Cup win . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Liverpool qualified for the UEFA Super Cup as the reigning UEFA Champions League winners . They had won the Champions League beating Milan 3 – 2 in a penalty shootout after the match had finished 3 – 3 . It would be Liverpool 's fifth appearance in the Super Cup . They had previously won the competition in 1977 and 2001 , beating Hamburger SV and Bayern Munich respectively . The two other appearances in 1978 and 1984 had resulted in losses to Anderlecht and Juventus respectively . 
 CSKA Moscow had qualified for the Super Cup as a result of winning the 2004 – 05 UEFA Cup . They had beaten Sporting CP 3 – 1 to become the first Russian team to win a European trophy . Therefore , they were making their first appearance in the competition and were the first Russian team to compete in the Super Cup . 
 Both sides had played several matches already , which was unusual as the Super Cup would normally have been the first significant match the two teams had played . Liverpool had been forced to enter the first qualifying round of the 2005 – 06 UEFA Champions League , despite being champions . They had failed to finish in the top four during the 2004 – 05 FA Premier League , which would ensure Champions League qualification . UEFA granted them special dispensation to enter the competition as holders . Meanwhile , CSKA Moscow were in the middle of their domestic season . At the time of this match they were second in the 2005 Russian Premier League , seven points behind leaders Lokomotiv Moscow . 
 Both teams valued the competition , despite some commentators being dismissive of the match 's importance . CSKA captain Sergei Ignashevich underlined his team 's determined mood : " We know their players are very strong because they won the Champions League . But we are not thinking about individuals . We will only worry about ourselves and not them . " Likewise Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard was equally determined to be successful : " This is the opportunity to win another trophy . When you play against good teams you have to do your best . I am not thinking about the past and that we won the Champions League . " 
 CSKA and Liverpool had injury concerns ahead of the match . CSKA striker Ivica Olić , the top scorer in Russia at the time , was sidelined with a serious knee injury . However , fellow CSKA striker Vágner Love was said by manager Valery Gazzaev to have " no problems " over his leg injury . Liverpool were without injured duo Djimi Traoré and Peter Crouch . There was also doubt over whether their captain Steven Gerrard would play . The decision over whether his calf injury had healed sufficiently for the match was left to the last moment . However , Gerrard was not deemed fit enough to play and was left out of the squad . The lead up to the match had been changed from the previous year . The UEFA Club Football Awards were incorporated into the draw for the group stage of the 2005 – 06 UEFA Champions League on the day before the match . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 CSKA kicked @-@ off , but Liverpool had the first chance of the match . Dietmar Hamann shot from 20 yards ( 18 m ) but his shot was saved by CSKA goalkeeper Igor Akinfeev . 11 minutes after the start of the match Luis García was put through on goal from a pass by Hamann , but before he could shoot , Akinfeev had smothered the ball . García was put through on goal again moments later from a Boudewijn Zenden pass but his shot went over the crossbar . Midway through the first @-@ half , García found Fernando Morientes 25 yards ( 23 m ) from goal with a pass , but Morientes ' subsequent shot was saved by Akinfeev . At this point in the match , Liverpool were dominating possession but were unable to convert this into goals . With Liverpool dominate for the majority of the half , CSKA scored against the run of play . Midfielder Daniel Carvalho took the ball past Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina and put the ball into an open goal to give CSKA a 1 – 0 lead . It was not until the 36th minute that Liverpool created another goalscoring opportunity , however García and Steve Finnan both failed to score . Towards the end of the half , Zenden was shown a yellow card for a late tackle on <unk> <unk> . 
 Liverpool kicked @-@ off the second half and five minutes into the half Liverpool defender Josemi was shown a yellow card for fouling Miloš <unk> . Liverpool 's poor play in front of goal continued after the restart ; Josemi had a chance to score , but his shot from the edge of the penalty area went over the crossbar . After the attack , Liverpool made the first substitution of the match ; Florent Sinama Pongolle replaced Finnan . After just over an hour 's play , a mix @-@ up between Reina and Sami Hyypiä nearly contrived to present a goal to CSKA , before Hyypiä intervened to clear the ball . CSKA made their first substitution in the 66th minute with <unk> <unk> replacing Yuri <unk> . Liverpool followed this by replacing Xabi Alonso with Mohamed Sissoko . Vágner Love had a chance to extend CSKA 's lead in the 77th minute , but he was unable to control the ball after a high pass and lost possession . Despite their lead CSKA were negative in their play ; they were punished when Liverpool replaced John Arne Riise with striker Djibril Cissé . Cissé made an immediate impact ; he ran onto to a pass from García . The pass was cleared by CSKA defender Sergei Ignashevich but it ricocheted off Cissé and left him with an open goal after Akinfeev had come off his line in an attempt to clear the ball . Cissé 's goal meant the match was now drawn at 1 – 1 and with no further goals the match went into extra @-@ time . 
 CSKA kicked @-@ off the first half of extra @-@ time . Five minutes into the half , Liverpool substitute Sinama Pongolle was booked . With two minutes of the half remaining , the ball was played into the centre of the CSKA half ; Ignashevich misjudged the flight of the ball , which went over his head and fell to Cissé . His subsequent shot was saved by Akinfeev , but the ball rebounded to Cissé who scored to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 lead . The half was brought to an end with Liverpool leading for the first time in the match . Liverpool kicked @-@ off the second half of extra @-@ time . CSKA had the first chance of the half , but Vágner Love 's effort was easily saved by Reina . Liverpool responded midway through the half ; Cissé 's cross from the right side of the pitch was met by García , who scored . No further goals were scored and the referee blew for full @-@ time with the final score 3 – 1 to Liverpool . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez was happy with his players after they had come from behind to win the match : " It was a difficult game . We were controlling the game , passing the ball around and then we made a mistake and had to work really hard to get back . They played well , but I think we controlled the game . To score three goals is not easy . I can say that we are very happy now with this trophy . Now is the time to enjoy our victory . " With five days of the transfer window left , Benítez refused to speculate on whether Liverpool would sign Michael Owen , stating , " I like good players , we have a lot of them here . " 
 CSKA manager Valery Gazzaev praised his players despite their loss and hinted that injuries may have been a factor in the loss : " The game was satisfactory – we had followed the plan we set out , but still we made two mistakes . On the whole I think our team played very well but of course it is a shame we didn 't win . We had a lot of good opportunities but we couldn 't do it . Liverpool played as we expected – they played quite aggressively . We didn 't feel uncomfortable but we made a couple of mistakes . " Gazzaev rued the injuries his team suffered indicating there might have been a different outcome had certain players been fit . 
 Despite Cissé 's two goals , there had been speculation linking Liverpool with re @-@ signing Michael Owen , who had left the club for Real Madrid a year earlier . Liverpool fans had even chanted Owen 's name during the match , singing , " There 's only one Michael Owen . " Cissé underlined the importance of scoring twice with speculation rife : " It is clear scoring two goals in the Super Cup is important for me , because there has been a lot of speculation about me of late and about my position within the club . " Liverpool defender Jamie Carragher stated the importance of the two goals for Cissé : " Cissé wanted to prove a point – he wanted to show everyone what he can do and great credit to him . We 're the players – it 's up to us to play and the management decides which players we have . " Carragher confirmed that Liverpool missed their captain Gerrard , but was delighted to win the match despite this . 
 = Cars ( film ) = 
 Cars is a 2006 American computer @-@ animated comedy @-@ adventure produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . Directed and co @-@ written by John Lasseter , it is Pixar 's final independently @-@ produced motion picture before its purchase by Disney . Set in a world populated entirely by anthropomorphic cars and other vehicles , it features the voices of Owen Wilson , Paul Newman ( in his final non @-@ documentary feature ) , Larry the Cable Guy , Bonnie Hunt , Tony Shalhoub , Cheech Marin , Michael Wallis , George Carlin , Paul Dooley , Jenifer Lewis , Guido <unk> , Michael Keaton , Katherine Helmond , and John Ratzenberger . Real life race car drivers Dale Earnhardt , Jr . , Mario Andretti and Michael Schumacher , and car enthusiast Jay Leno ( as " Jay Limo " ) voice themselves . It is also the second Pixar film — after A Bug 's Life — to have an entirely non @-@ human cast . The film was accompanied by the short One Man Band for its theatrical and home media releases . 
 Cars premiered on May 26 , 2006 at Lowe 's Motor Speedway in Concord , North Carolina and was theatrically released on June 9 , 2006 , to positive reviews . It was nominated for two Academy Awards , including Best Animated Feature , and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film . The film was released on DVD on November 7 , 2006 and to Blu @-@ ray in late 2007 . Related merchandise , including scale models of several of the cars , broke records for retail sales of merchandise based on a Disney · Pixar film , bringing an estimated $ 10 billion in 5 years since the film 's release . The film was dedicated to Joe Ranft , who was killed in a car accident during the film 's production . 
 A sequel , Cars 2 , was released on June 24 , 2011 , and a spin @-@ off , Planes , produced by DisneyToon Studios , was released on August 9 , 2013 . A series of short animated films entitled Cars Toons has been airing since 2008 . Cars 3 is scheduled for release on June 16 , 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a world populated by anthropomorphic vehicles , the last race of the Piston Cup championship ends in a three @-@ way tie between retiring veteran Strip " The King " Weathers , infamous runner @-@ up Chick Hicks , and rookie Lightning McQueen . The tiebreaker race is scheduled for one week later at the ( fictional ) Los Angeles International Speedway in California . Lightning is desperate to win the race , since it would not only make him the first rookie to win a championship , but also allow him to leave the unglamorous sponsorship of Rust @-@ Eze and allow him to take The King 's place as the sponsored car of the lucrative <unk> team . Eager to start practice in California as soon as possible , he pushes his big rig , Mack , to travel all night long . While McQueen is sleeping , the exhausted Mack drifts off and is startled by a gang of four reckless street racers , causing McQueen to fall out the back of the trailer and onto the road . McQueen wakes in the middle of traffic and speeds off the highway to find Mack , only to end up in the run @-@ down desert town of Radiator Springs , while inadvertently ruining the pavement of its main road . 
 After being arrested and impounded overnight ( while guarded by a rusty , but friendly , tow truck named Mater ) , McQueen is ordered by the town judge , Doc Hudson , to leave town immediately . The local lawyer Sally Carrera requests that McQueen should instead be given community service to repave the road , to which Doc reluctantly agrees . McQueen tries to repave it in a single day , but it turns out to be shoddy and he is ordered to repave the road again , which takes several days to complete . During this time , he becomes friends with several of the cars , and learns that Radiator Springs used to be a popular stopover along the old U.S. Route 66 , but with the construction of Interstate 40 bypassing it , the town literally vanished from the map . McQueen also discovers that Doc is really the " Fabulous Hudson Hornet " , a three @-@ time Piston Cup winner who was forced out of racing after an accident in 1954 and quickly forgotten by the sport . McQueen finishes the road , which has invigorated the cars to improve their town , and spends an extra day in town with his new friends , before Mack and the media descend on the town , led by a tip to McQueen 's location . McQueen reluctantly leaves with the media to get to California in time for the race , while Sally chastises Doc after discovering that he had tipped off the media to McQueen 's whereabouts , not wanting to be discovered by them instead . 
 At the speedway , McQueen 's mind is not fully set on the race , and he soon falls into last place . He is surprised to discover that Doc Hudson , who is decked out in his old racing colors , has taken over as his crew chief , along with several other friends from Radiator Springs to help in the pit . Inspired and recalling tricks he learned from Doc and his friends , McQueen quickly emerges to lead the race into the final laps . Refusing to lose , Hicks <unk> Weathers and sends him into a dangerous spin , causing him to have an accident . Seeing this and recalling Doc 's fate , McQueen stops just short of the finish line , allowing Hicks to win , and drives back to push Weathers over the finish line . The crowd and media condemn Hicks ' victory and give praise to McQueen 's sportsmanship . Though offered the <unk> sponsorship deal , McQueen declines , insisting on staying with his current sponsors as an appreciation of their past support . Later , back at Radiator Springs , McQueen returns and announces that he will be setting up his headquarters there , helping to put Radiator Springs back on the map . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Owen Wilson as Lightning McQueen , described by John Lasseter in the LA Times as " A hybrid between a stock car and a more curvaceous Le Mans endurance racer . " 
 Paul Newman as Doc Hudson , a 1951 Hudson Hornet who is later revealed to be the Fabulous Hudson Hornet . 
 Bonnie Hunt as Sally Carrera , a 2002 996 @-@ series Porsche 911 Carrera . 
 Larry the Cable Guy as Mater , a 1951 International Harvester L @-@ 170 " boom " truck with elements of a mid @-@ 1950s Chevrolet . One @-@ Ton Wrecker Tow Truck . 
 Tony Shalhoub as Luigi , a 1959 Fiat 500 . 
 Cheech Marin as Ramone , a 1959 Chevrolet Impala Lowrider . 
 Michael Wallis as Sheriff , a 1949 Mercury Club Coupe ( police package ) . 
 George Carlin as Fillmore , a 1960 VW Bus . 
 Paul Dooley as Sarge , a 1941 Willys model jeep , in the style used by the US Military . 
 Jenifer Lewis as Flo , a 1957 Motorama show car . 
 Guido <unk> as Guido , a custom forklift , resembling an <unk> at the front . 
 Richard Petty as Strip " The King " Weathers . The car 's design was based on Richard Petty 's 1970 Plymouth Superbird 
 Michael Keaton as Chick Hicks , described by Pixar as a generic 1980s stock car . Strongly resembles a 1978 – 88 General Motors G @-@ Body such as a Buick Regal or Chevrolet Monte Carlo . 
 Katherine Helmond as Lizzie , a 1923 Ford Model T. 
 John Ratzenberger as Mack , a 1985 Mack Super @-@ Liner . 
 Joe Ranft as Red , a 1960s style fire truck ( most closely resembles a mid @-@ 1960s ) and Peterbilt , this was Ranft 's last voice role before his death in August 2005 . 
 Tom Hanks , Tim Allen , Billy Crystal , John Goodman , and Dave Foley reprise their vocal roles from previous Pixar films during an end @-@ credits sequence featuring automobile spoofs of Toy Story , Monsters , Inc . , and A Bug 's Life . 
 = = Production = = 
 Cars is the last film worked on by Joe Ranft , who died in a car accident in August 2005 . The film was the second to be dedicated to his memory , after Corpse Bride ( that showed the roles he 'd done in the other films directed by John Lasseter during the credits ) . This is also the last ( non @-@ documentary ) movie for Paul Newman before his retirement in 2007 and his death in 2008 . It turned out to be the highest @-@ grossing film of his career . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The genesis of the project came in 1998 as Pixar was finishing work on A Bug 's Life . At that time Jorgen Klubien began writing a new script . . called ( called The Yellow Car , about an electric car living in a gas @-@ guzzling world ) , some of the original drawings and characters were produced in 1998 and the producers agreed that Cars could be the next movie after A Bug 's Life and would be released in early 1999 , particularly around June 4 . However , the movie was eventually scrapped in favor of Toy Story 2 . Later , production resumed with major script changes , like giving Mater , Doc , and a few other characters a bigger part . 
 Meanwhile , John Lasseter has said that the idea for Cars was born after he took a cross @-@ country road trip with his wife and five sons in 2000 . When he returned to the studio after vacation , he contacted Michael Wallis , a Route 66 historian . Wallis then led eleven Pixar animators in rented white Cadillacs on two different road trips across the route to research the film . In 2001 , the movie 's working title was Route 66 ( after U.S. Route 66 ) , but in 2002 , the title was changed to prevent people from thinking it was related to the 1960 television show with the same name . In addition , Lightning McQueen 's number was originally going to be 57 ( Lasseter 's birth year ) , but was changed to 95 ( the year Toy Story was released ) . 
 In 2006 , John Lasseter spoke about the inspiration for the film , saying : " I have always loved cars . In one vein , I have Disney blood , and in the other , there 's motor oil . The notion of combining these two great passions in my life — cars and animation — was irresistible . When Joe ( Ranft ) and I first started talking about this film in 1998 , we knew we wanted to do something with cars as characters . Around that same time , we watched a documentary called ' Divided Highways , ' which dealt with the interstate highway and how it affected the small towns along the way . We were so moved by it and began thinking about what it must have been like in these small towns that got bypassed . That 's when we started really researching Route 66 , but we still hadn 't quite figured out what the story for the film was going to be . I used to travel that highway with my family as a child when we visited our family in St. Louis . " 
 Jorgen Klubien said the movie was both his best and most bitter experience because he was fired before the movie premiered and because he feels John Lasseter wrote him out of the story of how the film got made . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 For the cars themselves , Lasseter also visited the design studios of the Big Three Detroit automakers , particularly J Mays of Ford Motor Company . Lasseter learned how real cars were designed . 
 In 2006 , John Lasseter spoke about how they worked hard to make the animation believable , saying : " It took many months of trial and error , and practicing test animation , to figure out how each car moves and how their world works . Our supervising animators , Doug Sweetland and Scott Clark , and the directing animators , Bobby Podesta and James Ford Murphy , did an amazing job working with the animation team to determine the unique movements for each character based on its age and the type of car it was . Some cars are like sports cars and they 're much tighter in their suspension . Others are older ' 50s cars that are a lot looser and have more bounce to them . We wanted to get that authenticity in there but also to make sure each car had a unique personality . We also wanted each animator to be able to put some of themself in the character and give it their own spin . Every day in dailies , it was so much fun because we would see things that we had never seen in our lives . The world of cars came alive in a believable and unexpected way . " 
 Unlike most anthropomorphic cars , the eyes of the cars in this film were placed on the windshield ( which resembles the Tonka Talking Trucks , and the characters from Tex Avery 's One Cab 's Family short and Disney 's own Susie the Little Blue Coupe ) , rather than within the headlights . According to production designer Bob Pauley , " From the very beginning of this project , John Lasseter had it in his mind to have the eyes be in the windshield . For one thing , it separates our characters from the more common approach where you have little cartoon eyes in the headlights . For another , he thought that having the eyes down near the mouth at the front end of the car feels more like a snake . With the eyes set in the windshield , the point of view is more human @-@ like , and made it feel like the whole car could be involved in the animation of the character . This decision was heavily criticized by automotive blog Jalopnik . 
 In 2006 , supervising animator on the film Scott Clark , spoke about the challenges of animating car characters , saying : " Getting a full range of performance and emotion from these characters and making them still seem like cars was a tough assignment , but that 's what animation does best . You use your imagination , and you make the movements and gestures fit with the design . Our car characters may not have arms and legs , but we can lean the tires in or out to suggest hands opening up or closing in . We can use steering to point a certain direction . We also designed a special eyelid and an eyebrow for the windshield that lets us communicate an expressiveness that cars don 't have . " Doug Sweetland , who also served as supervising animator , also spoke about the challenges , saying : " It took a different kind of animator to really be able to interpret the Cars models , than it did to interpret something like The Incredibles models . With The Incredibles , the animator could get reference for the characters by shooting himself and watching the footage . But with Cars , it departs completely from any reference . Yes they 're cars , but no car can do what our characters do . It 's pure fantasy . It took a lot of trial and error to get them to look right . " 
 Lasseter also explained that the film started with pencil and paper designs , saying : " Truth to materials . Starting with pencil @-@ and @-@ paper designs from production designer Bob Pauley , and continuing through the modeling , articulation , and shading of the characters , and finally into animation , the production team worked hard to have the car characters remain true to their origins . " Character department manager Jay Ward also explained how they wanted the cars to look as realistic as possible , saying : " John didn 't want the cars to seem clay @-@ like or mushy . He insisted on truth to materials . This was a huge thing for him . He told us that steel needs to feel like steel . Glass should feel like glass . These cars need to feel heavy . They weigh three or four thousand pounds . When they move around , they need to have that feel . They shouldn 't appear light or overly bouncy to the point where the audience might see them as rubber toys . " According to directing animator James Ford Murphy , " Originally , the car models were built so they could basically do anything . John kept reminding us that these characters are made of metal and they weigh several thousand pounds . They can 't stretch . He showed us examples of very loose animation to illustrate what not to do . " 
 Character shading supervisor on the film Thomas Jordan explained that chrome and car paint were the main challenges on the film , saying : " Chrome and car paint were our two main challenges on this film . We started out by learning as much as we could . At the local body shop , we watched them paint a car , and we saw the way they mixed the paint and applied the various coats . We tried to dissect what goes into the real paint and recreated it in the computer . We figured out that we needed a base paint , which is where the color comes from , and the <unk> , which provides the reflection . We were then able to add in things like metallic flake to give it a glittery sparkle , a pearlescent quality the might change color depending on the angle , and even a layer of pin @-@ striping for characters like Ramone . " Supervising technical director on the film Eben Ostby explained that the biggest challenge for the technical team was creating the metallic and painted surfaces of the car characters , and the reflections that those surfaces generate , saying : " Given that the stars of our film are made of metal , John had a real desire to see realistic reflections , and more beautiful lighting than we ’ ve seen in any of our previous films . In the past , we ’ ve mostly used environment maps and other matte @-@ based technology to cheat reflections , but for Cars we added a ray @-@ tracing capability to our existing <unk> program to raise the bar for Pixar . " 
 Rendering lead Jessica <unk> spoke about the use of ray tracing on the film , saying : " In addition to creating accurate reflections , we used ray tracing to achieve other effects . We were able to use this approach to create accurate shadows , like when there are multiple light sources and you want to get a feathering of shadows at the edges . Or occlusion , which is the absence of ambient light between two surfaces , like a crease in a shirt . A fourth use is irradiance . An example of this would be if you had a piece of red paper and held it up to a white wall , the light would be colored by the paper and cast a red glow on the wall . " Character supervisor Tim <unk> explained that the film uses a ground – locking system that kept the cars firmly planted on the road , saying : " The ground @-@ locking system is one of the things I ’ m most proud of on this film . In the past , characters have never known about their environment in any way . A simulation pass was required if you wanted to make something like that happen . On Cars , this system is built into the models themselves , and as you move the car around , the vehicle sticks to the ground . It was one of those things that we do at Pixar where we knew going in that it had to be done , but we had no idea how to do it . " 
 Technical director Lisa Forsell explained that to enhance the richness and beauty of the desert landscapes surrounding Radiator Springs , the filmmakers created a department responsible for matte paintings and sky flats , saying : " Digital matte paintings are a way to get a lot of visual complexity without necessarily having to build complex geometry , and write complex shaders . We spent a lot time working on the clouds and their different formations . They tend to be on several layers and they move relative to each other . The clouds do in fact have some character and personality . The notion was that just as people see themselves in the clouds , cars see various car @-@ shaped clouds . It ’ s subtle , but there are definitely some that are shaped like a sedan . And if you look closely , you ’ ll see some that look like tire treads . The fact that so much attention is put on the skies speaks to the visual level of the film . Is there a story point ? Not really . There is no pixel on the screen that does not have an extraordinary level of scrutiny and care applied to it . There is nothing that is just throw @-@ away . " 
 Computers used in the development of the film were four times faster than those used in The Incredibles and 1 @,@ 000 times faster than those used in Toy Story . To build the cars , the animators used computer platforms similar to those used in the design of real @-@ world automobiles . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Cars soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on June 6 , 2006 . Nine tracks on the soundtrack are by popular artists , while the remaining eleven are score cues by Randy Newman . It has two versions of the classic Bobby Troup jazz standard " Route 66 " ( popularized by Nat King Cole ) , one by Chuck Berry and a new version recorded specifically for the film 's credits performed by John Mayer . Brad Paisley contributed two of the nine tracks to the album , one being " Find Yourself " used for the end credits . 
 = = Release = = 
 Cars was originally going to be released on November 4 , 2005 , but on December 7 , 2004 , the movie 's release date was changed to June 9 , 2006 . Analysts looked at the release date change as a sign from Pixar that they were preparing for the pending end of the Disney distribution contract by either preparing non @-@ Disney materials to present to other studios , or they were buying time to see what happened with Michael Eisner 's situation at Disney . When Pixar 's chief executive Steve Jobs made the release date announcement , he stated that the reasoning was due to wanting to put all Pixar films on a Summer release schedule , with DVD sales occurring during the holiday shopping season . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Cars was released on DVD , in <unk> and full @-@ screen editions , on November 7 , 2006 in the United States and Canada . This DVD was also released on October 25 in Australia and New Zealand and on November 27 in the United Kingdom . The release includes the DVD @-@ exclusive short film Mater and the Ghostlight and the film 's theatrical short One Man Band as well as a 16 @-@ minute @-@ long documentary about the film entitled Inspiration for Cars , which features director John Lasseter . It also featured the Pixar short Boundin ' . 
 According to the Walt Disney Company , five million copies of the DVD were sold the first two days it was available . The first week , it sold 6 @,@ 250 @,@ 856 units and 15 @,@ 370 @,@ 791 in total ( $ 246 @,@ 198 @,@ 859 ) . Unlike previous Pixar DVD releases , there is no two @-@ disc special edition , and no plans to release one in the future . According to Sara Maher , DVD Production Manager at Pixar , John Lasseter and Pixar were preoccupied with productions like Ratatouille . 
 In the US and Canada , there were bonus discs available with the purchase of the film at Wal @-@ Mart and at Target . The former featured a Geared @-@ Up Bonus DVD Disc that focused on the music of the film , including the music video to " Life Is A Highway " , The Making of " Life Is A Highway " , Cars : The Making of the Music , and Under The Hood , a special that originally aired on the ABC Family cable channel . The latter 's bonus was a Rev 'd Up DVD Disc that featured material mostly already released as part of the official Cars podcast and focused on the inspiration and production of the movie . 
 Cars was also released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on November 6 , 2007 , one year after the DVD release . It was the first Pixar film to be released on Blu @-@ ray ( alongside Ratatouille and Pixar Short Films Collection , Volume 1 ) , and was re @-@ released as a Blu @-@ Ray Disc and DVD combo pack and DVD only edition in April 2011 . The film was released for the first time in 3D on October 29 , 2013 , as part of Cars : Ultimate Collector 's Edition , which included the releases on Blu @-@ ray , Blu @-@ ray 3D , and DVD . 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 A video game of the same name was released on June 6 , 2006 , for Game Boy Advance , Microsoft Windows , Nintendo DS , Nintendo GameCube , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable and Xbox . It was also released on October 23 , 2006 , for Xbox 360 and November 16 , 2006 , for Wii . The video game got mainly positive reviews . GameSpot gave 7 @.@ 0 out of 10 for Xbox 360 and Wii versions , for PlayStation 2 , 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 for the GameCube and Xbox versions , and 7 @.@ 4 out of 10 for the PSP version . Metacritic gave 65 out of 100 for the Wii version , 54 out of 100 for the DS version , 73 out of 100 for the PC version , 71 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version , and 70 out of 100 for the PSP version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Cars was met with positive reviews . Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 74 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 9 / 10 based on 196 reviews . The site 's consensus reads " Cars offers visual treats that more than compensate for its somewhat thinly written story , adding up to a satisfying diversion for younger viewers . " Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 73 out of 100 based on 39 reviews . 
 William Arnold of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer praised it as " one of Pixar 's most imaginative and thoroughly appealing movies ever " and Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly called it " a work of American art as classic as it is modern . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three out of four stars , saying that the movie " is great to look at and a lot of fun , but somehow lacks the extra push of the other Pixar films . Maybe that 's because there 's less at stake here , and no child @-@ surrogate to identify with . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Fueled with plenty of humor , action , heartfelt drama , and amazing new technical feats , Cars is a high octane delight for moviegoers of all ages . " Richard Corliss of Time gave the film a positive review , saying " Existing both in turbo @-@ charged today and the gentler ' 50s , straddling the realms of Pixar styling and old Disney heart , this new @-@ model Cars is an instant classic . " Brian Lowry of Variety gave the film a negative review , saying " Despite representing another impressive technical achievement , it 's the least visually interesting of the computer @-@ animation boutique 's movies , and -- in an ironic twist for a story about auto racing -- drifts slowly through its semi @-@ arid midsection . " Robert Wilonsky of The Village Voice gave the film a positive review , saying " What ultimately redeems Cars from turning out a total lemon is its soul . Lasseter loves these animated inanimate objects as though they were kin , and it shows in every beautifully rendered frame . " Ella Taylor of L.A. Weekly gave the film a positive review , saying " Cars cheerfully hitches cutting @-@ edge animation to a folksy narrative plugging friendship , community and a Luddite mistrust of high tech . " 
 Gene Seymour of Newsday gave the film three out of four stars , saying " And as pop flies go , Cars is pretty to watch , even as it loops , drifts and , at times , looks as if it 's just hanging in midair . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film a positive review , saying " It takes everything that 's made Pixar shorthand for animation excellence -- strong characters , tight pacing , spot @-@ on voice casting , a warm sense of humor and visuals that are pure , pixilated bliss -- and carries them to the next stage . " Bill Muller of The Arizona Republic gave the film four out of five stars , saying " The truest measure of the movie is that eventually we forget we 're watching a bunch of vehicles with faces and start to think of them as individual characters . It 's quite an accomplishment , and perhaps one only possible by Pixar . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film four out of five stars , saying " What 's surprising about this supremely engaging film is the source of its curb appeal : It has heart . " Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post gave the film a positive review , saying " It 's the latest concoction from the geniuses at Pixar , probably the most inventive of the Computer Generated Imagery shop -- and the film 's great fun , if well under the level of the first Toy Story . " Jessica Reaves of the Chicago Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four , saying " While it 's a technically perfect movie , its tone is too manic , its characters too jaded and , in the end , its story too empty to stand up to expectations . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three out of four stars , saying " While Cars may cross the finish line ahead of any of 2006 's other animated films , it 's several laps behind its Pixar siblings . " 
 Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch gave the film an A- , saying " It 's powered by a human heart through a roadway of natural wonders and cultural signposts en route to the checkered flag . " Lisa Kennedy of The Denver Post gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Cars idles at times . And it 's not until its final laps that the movie gains the emotional traction we 've come to expect from the Toy Story and Nemo crews . " Tom Long of The Detroit News gave the film a B + , saying " It 's touching , it 's funny , it offers cautions about the modern pace of life , and it depends on a sense of rural Americana for its soul . " Rick Groen of The Globe and Mail gave the film two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , saying " For parents out there whose future holds the certain prospect of the DVD version blaring repeatedly from family @-@ room screens , let this be your advisory . Warning : Cars comes unequipped with two essential options -- charm and a good muffler . " Amy Biancolli of the Houston Chronicle gave the film three out of four stars , saying " It thunders ahead with breezy abandon , scoring big grins on its way . " Elizabeth Weitzman of the New York Daily News gave the film four out of four stars , saying " It achieves the near impossible , turning cars , trucks , tractors , and farm harvesters into cute Disney characters whose fates you 'll care about . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Cars somewhat self @-@ indulgently runs nearly two hours -- but overall , it 's well worth the trip . " Lisa Rose of the Newark Star @-@ Ledger gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " It 's another innovative piece of entertainment from the animation studio , taking the audience on a kinetic trip into a world populated only by automobiles . " 
 Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film a positive review , saying " The animation is stunningly rendered . But the story is always the critical element in Pixar movies , and Cars ' story is heartfelt with a clear and unabashed moral . " David Edelstein of New York Magazine gave the film a positive review , saying " Like the Toy Story films , Cars is a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ computer @-@ art plea on behalf of outmoded , wholesome fifties technology , with a dash of Zen by way of George Lucas . " Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel gave the film three out of five stars , saying " It 's beautiful to look at . The talking cars feel more alive than talking cars should . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Cars made me want to hop in my <unk> and to head out to Route 66 , bypassing the boring interstate highways that made the Mother Road redundant . " Moira MacDonald of The Seattle Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Though the central idea of nostalgia for a quieter , small @-@ town life may well be lost on this movie 's young audience -- Cars finds a pleasant and often sparkling groove . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film two out of five stars , saying " Cars might get us into car world as a gimmick , but it doesn 't get us into car world as a state of mind . Thus , the animation , rather than seeming like an expression of the movie 's deeper truth , becomes an impediment to it . " Derek Adams of Time Out gave the film a positive review , saying " There are many other brilliant scenes , some just as funny but there are just as many occasions where you feel the film 's struggling to fire on all cylinders . Still , it 's a Pixar film , right ? And they 're always worth a gander no matter what anyone says . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In its opening weekend , Cars earned $ 60 @,@ 119 @,@ 509 in 3 @,@ 985 theaters in the United States , ranking number one at the box office . In the United States , the film held onto the number one spot for two weeks before being surpassed by Click and then by Superman Returns the following weekend . It went on to gross $ 461 @,@ 983 @,@ 149 worldwide ( ranking number six in 2006 films ) and $ 244 @,@ 082 @,@ 982 in the United States ( the third highest @-@ grossing film of 2006 in the country , behind Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Man 's Chest and Night at the Museum ) . It was the second highest grossing film released by Walt Disney Pictures , behind Dead Man 's Chest and was the highest @-@ grossing animated film of 2006 in the United States , but lost to Ice Age : The Meltdown with $ 655 @,@ 388 @,@ 158 in worldwide totals . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Cars had a highly successful run during the 2006 awards season . Many film critic associations such as the Broadcast Film Critics Association and the National Board of Review named it the best Animated Feature Film of 2006 . Cars also received the title of Best Reviewed Animated Feature of 2006 from Rotten Tomatoes . Randy Newman and James Taylor received a Grammy Award for the song " Our Town , " which later went on to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song ( an award it lost to " I Need to Wake Up " from An Inconvenient Truth ) . The film also earned an Oscar nomination for Best Animated Feature , but it lost to Happy Feet . Cars was also selected as the Favorite Family Movie at the 33rd People 's Choice Awards . The most prestigious award that Cars received was the inaugural Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film . Cars also won the highest award for animation in 2006 , the Best Animated Feature Annie Award . The film was also nominated for AFI 's 10 Top 10 in the " Animation " genre . 
 = = Similar films = = 
 Marcus Aurelius Canônico of Folha de S.Paulo described The Little Cars series ( Os <unk> in Portuguese ) , a Brazilian computer graphics film series , as a derivative of Cars . Canônico discussed whether lawsuits from Pixar would appear . The Brazilian Ministry of Culture posted Marcus Aurelius Canônico 's article on its website . 
 It has also been noted that the plot of Cars bears a striking resemblance to that of Doc Hollywood , the 1991 romantic comedy which stars Michael J. Fox as a hotshot young doctor , who , after causing a traffic accident in a small town , is sentenced to work at the town hospital , falls in love with a local law student and eventually acquires an appreciation for small town values . Some have gone so far as to say that the makers of Cars plagiarized the script of Doc Hollywood . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 A sequel to the film , titled Cars 2 , was released on June 24 , 2011 . It was directed again by John Lasseter , who was inspired for the film while traveling around the world promoting the first film . In the sequel , Lightning McQueen and Mater head to Japan and Europe to compete in the World Grand Prix , but Mater becomes sidetracked with international espionage . The film failed to meet or exceed the critical success of its predecessor . 
 Michael Wallis , the voice of Sheriff and a Route 66 consultant for the first two films , said in August 2013 in an interview with <unk> radio that Pixar will make a third film in the series , which will go back to Route 66 and will also include Route 99 . 
 = Gamal Abdel Nasser = 
 Gamal Abdel Nasser Hussein ( Arabic : <unk> عبد <unk> حسين , IPA : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 15 January 1918 – 28 September 1970 ) was the second President of Egypt , serving from 1956 until his death . Nasser led the 1952 overthrow of the monarchy and introduced far @-@ reaching land reforms the following year . Following a 1954 attempt on his life by a Muslim Brotherhood member acting on his own , he cracked down on the organization , put President Muhammad Naguib under house arrest , and assumed executive office , officially becoming president in June 1956 . 
 Nasser 's popularity in Egypt and the Arab world skyrocketed after his nationalization of the Suez Canal and his political victory in the subsequent Suez Crisis . Calls for pan @-@ Arab unity under his leadership increased , culminating with the formation of the United Arab Republic with Syria ( 1958 – 1961 ) . In 1962 , Nasser began a series of major socialist measures and modernization reforms in Egypt . Despite setbacks to his pan @-@ Arabist cause , by 1963 Nasser 's supporters gained power in several Arab countries , but he became embroiled in the North Yemen Civil War . He began his second presidential term in March 1965 after his political opponents were banned from running . Following Egypt 's defeat by Israel in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War , Nasser resigned , but he returned to office after popular demonstrations called for his reinstatement . By 1968 , Nasser had appointed himself prime minister , launched the War of Attrition to regain lost territory , began a process of depoliticizing the military , and issued a set of political liberalization reforms . After the conclusion of the 1970 Arab League summit , Nasser suffered a heart attack and died . His funeral in Cairo drew five million mourners and an outpouring of grief across the Arab world . 
 Nasser remains an iconic figure in the Arab world , particularly for his strides towards social justice and Arab unity , modernization policies , and anti @-@ imperialist efforts . His presidency also encouraged and coincided with an Egyptian cultural boom , and launched large industrial projects , including the Aswan Dam and Helwan City . Nasser 's detractors criticize his authoritarianism , his government 's human rights violations , his populist relationship with the citizenry , and his failure to establish civil institutions , blaming his legacy for future dictatorial governance in Egypt . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gamal Abdel Nasser was born on 15 January 1918 in <unk> , Alexandria , the first son of <unk> and Abdel Nasser Hussein . Nasser 's father was a postal worker born in Beni Mur in Upper Egypt and raised in Alexandria , and his mother 's family came from <unk> , el @-@ Minya . His parents married in 1917 , and later had two more boys , Izz al @-@ Arab and al @-@ <unk> . Nasser 's biographers Robert Stephens and Said Aburish wrote that Nasser 's family believed strongly in the " Arab notion of glory " , since the name of Nasser 's brother , Izz al @-@ Arab , translates to " Glory of the Arabs " — a rare name in Egypt . 
 Nasser 's family traveled frequently due to his father 's work . In 1921 , they moved to Asyut and , in 1923 , to <unk> , where Nasser 's father ran a post office . Nasser attended a primary school for the children of railway employees until 1924 , when he was sent to live with his paternal uncle in Cairo , and to attend the <unk> elementary school . 
 Nasser exchanged letters with his mother and visited her on holidays . He stopped receiving messages at the end of April 1926 . Upon returning to <unk> , he learned that his mother had died after giving birth to his third brother , <unk> , and that his family had kept the news from him . Nasser later stated that " losing her this way was a shock so deep that time failed to remedy " . He adored his mother and the injury of her death deepened when his father remarried before the year 's end . 
 In 1928 , Nasser went to Alexandria to live with his maternal grandfather and attend the city 's <unk> elementary school . He left in 1929 for a private boarding school in Helwan , and later returned to Alexandria to enter the Ras el @-@ Tin secondary school and to join his father , who was working for the city 's postal service . It was in Alexandria that Nasser became involved in political activism . After witnessing clashes between protesters and police in <unk> Square , he joined the demonstration without being aware of its purpose . The protest , organized by the ultranationalist Young Egypt Society , called for the end of colonialism in Egypt in the wake of the 1923 Egyptian constitution 's annulment by Prime Minister Isma 'il Sidqi . Nasser was arrested and detained for a night before his father bailed him out . 
 When his father was transferred to Cairo in 1933 , Nasser joined him and attended al @-@ Nahda al @-@ <unk> school . He took up acting in school plays for a brief period and wrote articles for the school 's paper , including a piece on French philosopher Voltaire titled " Voltaire , the Man of Freedom " . On 13 November 1935 , Nasser led a student demonstration against British rule , protesting against a statement made four days prior by UK foreign minister Samuel Hoare that rejected prospects for the 1923 Constitution 's restoration . Two protesters were killed and Nasser received a graze to the head from a policeman 's bullet . The incident garnered his first mention in the press : the nationalist newspaper Al <unk> reported that Nasser led the protest and was among the wounded . On 12 December , the new king , Farouk , issued a decree restoring the constitution . 
 Nasser 's involvement in political activity increased throughout his school years , such that he only attended 45 days of classes during his last year of secondary school . Despite it having the almost unanimous backing of Egypt 's political forces , Nasser strongly objected to the 1936 Anglo @-@ Egyptian Treaty because it stipulated the continued presence of British military bases in the country . Nonetheless , political unrest in Egypt declined significantly and Nasser resumed his studies at al @-@ Nahda , where he received his leaving certificate later that year . 
 = = = Early influences = = = 
 Aburish asserts that Nasser was not distressed by his frequent relocations , which broadened his horizons and showed him Egyptian society 's class divisions . His own social status was well below the wealthy Egyptian elite , and his discontent with those born into wealth and power grew throughout his lifetime . Nasser spent most of his spare time reading , particularly in 1933 when he lived near the National Library of Egypt . He read the Qur 'an , the sayings of Muhammad , the lives of the Sahaba ( Muhammad 's companions ) , and the biographies of nationalist leaders Napoleon , Ataturk , Otto von Bismarck , and Garibaldi and the autobiography of Winston Churchill . 
 Nasser was greatly influenced by Egyptian nationalism , as espoused by politician Mustafa Kamel , poet Ahmed <unk> , and his anti @-@ colonialist instructor at the Royal Military Academy , Aziz al @-@ Masri , to whom Nasser expressed his gratitude in a 1961 newspaper interview . He was especially influenced by Egyptian writer Tawfiq al @-@ Hakim 's novel Return of the Spirit , in which al @-@ Hakim wrote that the Egyptian people were only in need of a " man in whom all their feelings and desires will be represented , and who will be for them a symbol of their objective " . Nasser later credited the novel as his inspiration to launch the 1952 revolution . 
 = = Military career = = 
 In 1937 , Nasser applied to the Royal Military Academy for army officer training , but his police record of anti @-@ government protest initially blocked his entry . Disappointed , he enrolled in the law school at King Fuad University , but quit after one semester to reapply to the Military Academy . From his readings , Nasser , who frequently spoke of " dignity , glory , and freedom " in his youth , became enchanted with the stories of national liberators and heroic conquerors ; a military career became his chief priority . 
 Convinced that he needed a <unk> , or an influential intermediary to promote his application above the others , Nasser managed to secure a meeting with Under @-@ Secretary of War Ibrahim Khairy Pasha , the person responsible for the academy 's selection board , and requested his help . Khairy Pasha agreed and sponsored Nasser 's second application , which was accepted in late 1937 . Nasser focused on his military career from then on , and had little contact with his family . At the academy , he met Abdel Hakim Amer and Anwar Sadat , both of whom became important aides during his presidency . After graduating from the academy in July 1938 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry , and posted to <unk> . It was here that Nasser and his closest comrades , including Sadat and Amer , first discussed their dissatisfaction at widespread corruption in the country and their desire to topple the monarchy . Sadat would later write that because of his " energy , clear @-@ thinking , and balanced judgement " , Nasser emerged as the group 's natural leader . 
 In 1941 , Nasser was posted to Khartoum , Sudan , which was part of Egypt at the time . Nasser returned to Sudan in September 1942 after a brief stay in Egypt , then secured a position as an instructor in the Cairo Royal Military Academy in May 1943 . In 1942 , the British Ambassador Miles Lampson marched into King Farouk 's palace and ordered him to dismiss Prime Minister Hussein Sirri Pasha for having pro @-@ Axis sympathies . Nasser saw the incident as a blatant violation of Egyptian sovereignty and wrote , " I am ashamed that our army has not reacted against this attack " , and wished for " calamity " to overtake the British . Nasser was accepted into the General Staff College later that year . He began to form a group of young military officers with strong nationalist sentiments who supported some form of revolution . Nasser stayed in touch with the group 's members primarily through Amer , who continued to seek out interested officers within the Egyptian Armed Force 's various branches and presented Nasser with a complete file on each of them . 
 = = = 1948 Arab – Israeli War = = = 
 Nasser 's first battlefield experience was in Palestine during the 1948 Arab – Israeli War . He initially volunteered to serve with the Arab Higher Committee ( AHC ) led by Mohammad Amin al @-@ Husayni . Nasser met with and impressed al @-@ Husayni , but was ultimately refused entry to the AHC 's forces by the Egyptian government for reasons that were unclear . 
 In May 1948 , following the British withdrawal , King Farouk sent the Egyptian army into Palestine , with Nasser serving in the 6th Infantry Battalion . During the war , he wrote of the Egyptian army 's unpreparedness , saying " our soldiers were dashed against fortifications " . Nasser was deputy commander of the Egyptian forces that secured the Faluja pocket . On 12 July , he was lightly wounded in the fighting . By August , his brigade was surrounded by the Israeli Army . Appeals for help from Jordan 's Arab Legion went unheeded , but the brigade refused to surrender . Negotiations between Israel and Egypt finally resulted in the ceding of Faluja to Israel . According to veteran journalist Eric Margolis , the defenders of Faluja , " including young army officer Gamal Abdel Nasser , became national heroes " for enduring Israeli bombardment while isolated from their command . 
 The Egyptian singer Umm Kulthum hosted a public celebration for the officers ' return despite reservations from the royal government , which had been pressured by the British to prevent the reception . The apparent difference in attitude between the government and the general public increased Nasser 's determination to topple the monarchy . Nasser had also felt bitter that his brigade had not been relieved despite the resilience it displayed . He started writing his book Philosophy of the Revolution during the siege . 
 After the war , Nasser returned to his role as an instructor at the Royal Military Academy . He sent emissaries to forge an alliance with the Muslim Brotherhood in October 1948 , but soon concluded that the religious agenda of the Brotherhood was not compatible with his nationalism . From then on , Nasser prevented the Brotherhood 's influence over his cadres ' activities without severing ties with the organization . Nasser was sent as a member of the Egyptian delegation to Rhodes in February 1949 to negotiate a formal armistice with Israel , and reportedly considered the terms to be humiliating , particularly because the Israelis were able to easily occupy the Eilat region while negotiating with the Arabs in March . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 = = = Free Officers = = = 
 Nasser 's return to Egypt coincided with Husni al @-@ Za 'im 's Syrian coup d 'état . Its success and evident popular support among the Syrian people encouraged Nasser 's revolutionary pursuits . Soon after his return , he was summoned and interrogated by Prime Minister Ibrahim Abdel Hadi regarding suspicions that he was forming a secret group of dissenting officers . According to secondhand reports , Nasser convincingly denied the allegations . Abdel Hadi was also hesitant to take drastic measures against the army , especially in front of its chief of staff , who was present during the interrogation , and subsequently released Nasser . The interrogation pushed Nasser to speed up his group 's activities . 
 After 1949 , the group adopted the name " Association of Free Officers " and advocated " little else but freedom and the restoration of their country ’ s dignity " . Nasser organized the Free Officers ' founding committee , which eventually comprised fourteen men from different social and political backgrounds , including representation from Young Egypt , the Muslim Brotherhood , the Egyptian Communist Party , and the aristocracy . Nasser was unanimously elected chairman of the organization . 
 In the 1950 parliamentary elections , the Wafd Party of el @-@ <unk> gained a victory — mostly due to the absence of the Muslim Brotherhood , which boycotted the elections — and was perceived as a threat by the Free Officers as the Wafd had campaigned on demands similar to their own . Accusations of corruption against Wafd politicians began to surface , however , breeding an atmosphere of rumor and suspicion that consequently brought the Free Officers to the forefront of Egyptian politics . By then , the organization had expanded to around ninety members ; according to Khaled Mohieddin , " nobody knew all of them and where they belonged in the hierarchy except Nasser " . Nasser felt that the Free Officers were not ready to move against the government and , for nearly two years , he did little beyond officer recruitment and underground news bulletins . 
 On 11 October 1951 , the Wafd government abrogated the 1936 Anglo @-@ Egyptian Treaty , which had given the British control over the Suez Canal until 1956 . The popularity of this move , as well as that of government @-@ sponsored guerrilla attacks against the British , put pressure on Nasser to act . According to Sadat , Nasser decided to wage " a large scale assassination campaign " . In January 1952 , he and Hassan Ibrahim attempted to kill the royalist general Hussein Sirri Amer by firing their submachine guns at his car as he drove through the streets of Cairo . Instead of killing the general , the attackers wounded an innocent female passerby . Nasser recalled that her wails " haunted " him and firmly dissuaded him from undertaking similar actions in the future . 
 Sirri Amer was close to King Farouk , and was nominated for the presidency of the Officer 's Club — normally a ceremonial office — with the king 's backing . Nasser was determined to establish the independence of the army from the monarchy , and with Amer as the intercessor , resolved to field a nominee for the Free Officers . They selected Muhammad Naguib , a popular general who had offered his resignation to Farouk in 1942 over British high @-@ handedness and was wounded three times in the Palestine War . Naguib won overwhelmingly and the Free Officers , through their connection with a leading Egyptian daily , al @-@ Misri , publicized his victory while praising the nationalistic spirit of the army . 
 = = = Revolution of 1952 = = = 
 On 25 January 1952 , a confrontation between British forces and police at Ismailia resulted in the deaths of 40 Egyptian policemen , provoking riots in Cairo the next day which left 76 people dead . Afterwards , Nasser published a simple six @-@ point program in Rose al @-@ Yūsuf to dismantle feudalism and British influence in Egypt . In May , Nasser received word that Farouk knew the names of the Free Officers and intended to arrest them ; he immediately entrusted Free Officer Zakaria Mohieddin with the task of planning the government takeover by army units loyal to the association . 
 The Free Officers ' intention was not to install themselves in government , but to re @-@ establish a parliamentary democracy . Nasser did not believe that a low @-@ ranking officer like himself ( a lieutenant colonel ) would be accepted by the Egyptian people , and so selected General Naguib to be his " boss " and lead the coup in name . The revolution they had long sought was launched on 22 July and was declared a success the next day . The Free Officers seized control of all government buildings , radio stations , and police stations , as well as army headquarters in Cairo . While many of the rebel officers were leading their units , Nasser donned civilian clothing to avoid detection by royalists and moved around Cairo monitoring the situation . In a move to stave off foreign intervention two days before the revolution , Nasser had notified the American and British governments of his intentions , and both had agreed not to aid Farouk . Under pressure from the Americans , Nasser had agreed to exile the deposed king with an honorary ceremony . 
 On 18 June 1953 , the monarchy was abolished and the Republic of Egypt declared , with Naguib as its first president . According to Aburish , after assuming power , Nasser and the Free Officers expected to become the " guardians of the people 's interests " against the monarchy and the pasha class while leaving the day @-@ to @-@ day tasks of government to civilians . They asked former prime minister Ali Maher to accept reappointment to his previous position , and to form an all @-@ civilian cabinet . The Free Officers then governed as the Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) with Naguib as chairman and Nasser as vice @-@ chairman . Relations between the RCC and Maher grew tense , however , as the latter viewed many of Nasser 's schemes — agrarian reform , abolition of the monarchy , reorganization of political parties — as too radical , culminating in Maher 's resignation on 7 September . Naguib assumed the additional role of prime minister , and Nasser that of deputy prime minister . In September , the Agrarian Reform Law was put into effect . In Nasser 's eyes , this law gave the RCC its own identity and transformed the coup into a revolution . 
 Preceding the reform law , in August 1952 , communist @-@ led riots broke out at textile factories in Kafr el @-@ <unk> , leading to a clash with the army that left nine people dead . While most of the RCC insisted on executing the riot 's two ringleaders , Nasser opposed this . Nonetheless , the sentences were carried out . The Muslim Brotherhood supported the RCC , and after Naguib 's assumption of power , demanded four ministerial portfolios in the new cabinet . Nasser turned down their demands and instead hoped to co @-@ opt the Brotherhood by giving two of its members , who were willing to serve officially as independents , minor ministerial posts . 
 = = Road to presidency = = 
 = = = Disputes with Naguib = = = 
 In January 1953 , Nasser overcame opposition from Naguib and banned all political parties , creating a one @-@ party system under the Liberation Rally , a loosely structured movement whose chief task was to organize pro @-@ RCC rallies and lectures , with Nasser its secretary @-@ general . Despite the dissolution order , Nasser was the only RCC member who still favored holding parliamentary elections , according to his fellow officer Abdel Latif Boghdadi . Although outvoted , he still advocated holding elections by 1956 . In March 1953 , Nasser led the Egyptian delegation negotiating a British withdrawal from the Suez Canal . 
 When Naguib began showing signs of independence from Nasser by distancing himself from the RCC 's land reform decrees and drawing closer to Egypt 's established political forces , namely the Wafd and the Brotherhood , Nasser resolved to depose him . In June , Nasser took control of the interior ministry post from Naguib loyalist Sulayman Hafez , and pressured Naguib to conclude the abolition of the monarchy . 
 On 25 February 1954 , Naguib announced his resignation after the RCC held an official meeting without his presence two days prior . On 26 February , Nasser accepted the resignation , put Naguib under house arrest , and the RCC proclaimed Nasser as both RCC chairman and prime minister . As Naguib intended , a mutiny immediately followed , demanding Naguib 's reinstatement and the RCC 's dissolution . While visiting the striking officers at Military Headquarters ( GHQ ) to call for the mutiny 's end , Nasser was initially intimidated into accepting their demands . However , on 27 February , Nasser 's supporters in the army launched a raid on the GHQ , ending the mutiny . Later that day , hundreds of thousands of protesters , mainly belonging to the Brotherhood , called for Naguib 's return and Nasser 's imprisonment . In response , a sizable group within the RCC , led by Khaled Mohieddin , demanded Naguib 's release and return to the presidency . Nasser acquiesced , but delayed Naguib 's reinstatement until 4 March , allowing him to promote Amer to Commander of the Armed Forces — a position formerly occupied by Naguib . 
 On 5 March , Nasser 's security coterie arrested thousands of participants in the uprising . As a ruse to rally opposition against a return to the pre @-@ 1952 order , the RCC decreed an end to restrictions on monarchy @-@ era parties and the Free Officers ' withdrawal from politics . The RCC succeeded in provoking the beneficiaries of the revolution , namely the workers , peasants , and petty bourgeois , to oppose the decrees , with one million transport workers launching a strike and thousands of peasants entering Cairo in protest in late March . Naguib sought to crack down on the protesters , but his requests were rebuffed by the heads of the security forces . On 29 March , Nasser announced the decrees ' revocation in response to the " impulse of the street " . Between April and June , hundreds of Naguib 's supporters in the military were either arrested or dismissed , and Mohieddin was informally exiled to Switzerland to represent the RCC abroad . King Saud of Saudi Arabia attempted to mend relations between Nasser and Naguib , but to no avail . 
 = = = Assuming chairmanship of RCC = = = 
 On 26 October 1954 , Muslim Brotherhood member Mohammed Abdel Latif attempted to assassinate Nasser while he was delivering a speech in Alexandria to celebrate the British military withdrawal . The speech was broadcast to the Arab world via radio . The gunman was 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) away from him and fired eight shots , but all missed Nasser . Panic broke out in the mass audience , but Nasser maintained his posture and raised his voice to appeal for calm . With great emotion he exclaimed the following : 
 My countrymen , my blood spills for you and for Egypt . I will live for your sake and die for the sake of your freedom and honor . Let them kill me ; it does not concern me so long as I have instilled pride , honor , and freedom in you . If Gamal Abdel Nasser should die , each of you shall be Gamal Abdel Nasser ... Gamal Abdel Nasser is of you and from you and he is willing to sacrifice his life for the nation . 
 The crowd roared in approval and Arab audiences were electrified . The assassination attempt backfired , quickly playing into Nasser 's hands . Upon returning to Cairo , he ordered one of the largest political crackdowns in the modern history of Egypt , with the arrests of thousands of dissenters , mostly members of the Brotherhood , but also communists , and the dismissal of 140 officers loyal to Naguib . Eight Brotherhood leaders were sentenced to death , although the sentence of its chief ideologue , Sayyid Qutb , was commuted to a 15 @-@ year imprisonment . Naguib was removed from the presidency and put under house arrest , but was never tried or sentenced , and no one in the army rose to defend him . With his rivals neutralized , Nasser became the undisputed leader of Egypt . 
 Nasser 's street following was still too small to sustain his plans for reform and to secure him in office . To promote himself and the Liberation Rally , he gave speeches in a cross @-@ country tour , and imposed controls over the country 's press by decreeing that all publications had to be approved by the party to prevent " sedition " . Both Umm Kulthum and Abdel Halim Hafez , the leading Arab singers of the era , performed songs praising Nasser 's nationalism . Others produced plays denigrating his political opponents . According to his associates , Nasser orchestrated the campaign himself . Arab nationalist terms such " Arab homeland " and " Arab nation " frequently began appearing in his speeches in 1954 – 55 , whereas prior he would refer to the Arab " peoples " or the " Arab region " . In January 1955 , the RCC appointed him as their president , pending national elections . 
 Nasser made secret contacts with Israel in 1954 – 55 , but determined that peace with Israel would be impossible , considering it an " expansionist state that viewed the Arabs with disdain " . On 28 February 1955 , Israeli troops attacked the Egyptian @-@ held Gaza Strip with the stated aim of suppressing Palestinian fedayeen raids . Nasser did not feel that the Egyptian Army was ready for a confrontation and did not retaliate militarily . His failure to respond to Israeli military action demonstrated the ineffectiveness of his armed forces and constituted a blow to his growing popularity . Nasser subsequently ordered the tightening of the blockade on Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran and restricted the use of airspace over the Gulf of Aqaba by Israeli aircraft in early September . The Israelis re @-@ militarized the al @-@ Auja Demilitarized Zone on the Egyptian border on 21 September . 
 Simultaneous with Israel 's February raid , the Baghdad Pact was formed between some regional allies of the UK . Nasser considered the Baghdad Pact a threat to his efforts to eliminate British military influence in the Middle East , and a mechanism to undermine the Arab League and " perpetuate [ Arab ] subservience to Zionism and [ Western ] imperialism " . Nasser felt that if he was to maintain Egypt 's regional leadership position he needed to acquire modern weaponry to arm his military . When it became apparent to him that Western countries would not supply Egypt under acceptable financial and military terms , Nasser turned to the Eastern Bloc and concluded a US $ 320 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 armaments agreement with Czechoslovakia on 27 September . Through the Czechoslovakian arms deal , the balance of power between Egypt and Israel was more or less equalized and Nasser 's role as the Arab leader defying the West was enhanced . 
 = = = Adoption of neutralism = = = 
 At the Bandung Conference in Indonesia in late April 1955 , Nasser was treated as the leading representative of the Arab countries and was one of the most popular figures at the summit . He had paid earlier visits to Pakistan ( April 9 ) , India ( April 14 ) , Burma , and Afghanistan on the way to Bandung , and previously cemented a treaty of friendship with India in Cairo on 6 April , strengthening Egyptian – Indian relations on the international policy and economic development fronts . 
 Nasser mediated discussions between the pro @-@ Western , pro @-@ Soviet , and neutralist conference factions over the composition of the " Final Communique " addressing colonialism in Africa and Asia and the fostering of global peace amid the Cold War between the West and the Soviet Union . At Bandung Nasser sought a proclamation for the avoidance of international defense alliances , support for the independence of Tunisia , Algeria , and Morocco from French rule , support for the Palestinian right of return , and the implementation of UN resolutions regarding the Arab – Israeli conflict . He succeeded in lobbying the attendees to pass resolutions on each of these issues , notably securing the strong support of China and India . 
 Following Bandung , Nasser officially adopted the " positive neutralism " of Yugoslavian president Josip Broz Tito and Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru as a principal theme of Egyptian foreign policy regarding the Cold War . Nasser was welcomed by large crowds of people lining the streets of Cairo on his return to Egypt on 2 May and was widely heralded in the press for his achievements and leadership in the conference . Consequently , Nasser 's prestige was greatly boosted as was his self @-@ confidence and image . 
 = = = 1956 constitution and presidency = = = 
 With his domestic position considerably strengthened , Nasser was able to secure primacy over his RCC colleagues and gained relatively unchallenged decision @-@ making authority , particularly over foreign policy . 
 In January 1956 , the new Constitution of Egypt was drafted , entailing the establishment of a single @-@ party system under the National Union ( NU ) , a movement Nasser described as the " cadre through which we will realize our revolution " . The NU was a reconfiguration of the Liberation Rally , which Nasser determined had failed in generating mass public participation . In the new movement , Nasser attempted to incorporate more citizens , approved by local @-@ level party committees , in order to solidify popular backing for his government . The NU would select a nominee for the presidential election whose name would be provided for public approval . 
 Nasser 's nomination for the post and the new constitution were put to public referendum on 23 June and each was approved by an overwhelming majority . A 350 @-@ member National Assembly was established , elections for which were held in July 1957 . Nasser had ultimate approval over all the candidates . The constitution granted women 's suffrage , prohibited gender @-@ based discrimination , and entailed special protection for women in the workplace . Coinciding with the new constitution and Nasser 's presidency , the RCC dissolved itself and its members resigned their military commissions as part of the transition to civilian rule . During the deliberations surrounding the establishment of a new government , Nasser began a process of sidelining his rivals among the original Free Officers , while elevating his closest allies to high @-@ ranking positions in the cabinet . 
 = = Nationalization of the Suez Canal = = 
 After the three @-@ year transition period ended with Nasser 's official assumption of power , his domestic and independent foreign policies increasingly collided with the regional interests of the UK and France . The latter condemned his strong support for Algerian independence , and the UK 's Eden government was agitated by Nasser 's campaign against the Baghdad Pact . In addition , Nasser 's adherence to neutralism regarding the Cold War , recognition of communist China , and arms deal with the Eastern bloc alienated the United States . On 19 July 1956 , the US and UK abruptly withdrew their offer to finance construction of the Aswan Dam , citing concerns that Egypt 's economy would be overwhelmed by the project . 
 Nasser was informed of the British – American withdrawal via a news statement while aboard a plane returning to Cairo from Belgrade , and took great offense . Although ideas for nationalizing the Suez Canal were in the offing after the UK agreed to withdraw its military from Egypt in 1954 ( the last British troops left on 13 June 1956 ) , journalist Mohamed Hassanein Heikal asserts that Nasser made the final decision to nationalize the waterway between 19 and 20 July . Nasser himself would later state that he decided on 23 July , after studying the issue and deliberating with some of his advisers from the dissolved RCC , namely Boghdadi and technical specialist Mahmoud Younis , beginning on 21 July . The rest of the RCC 's former members were informed of the decision on 24 July , while the bulk of the cabinet was unaware of the nationalization scheme until hours before Nasser publicly announced it . According to Ramadan , Nasser 's decision to nationalize the canal was a solitary decision , taken without consultation . 
 On 26 July 1956 , Nasser gave a speech in Alexandria announcing the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company as a means to fund the Aswan Dam project in light of the British – American withdrawal . In the speech , he denounced British imperialism in Egypt and British control over the canal company 's profits , and upheld that the Egyptian people had a right to sovereignty over the waterway , especially since " 120 @,@ 000 Egyptians had died ( sic ) " building it . The motion was technically in breach of the international agreement he had signed with the UK on 19 October 1954 , although he ensured that all existing stockholders would be paid off . 
 The nationalization announcement was greeted very emotionally by the audience and , throughout the Arab world , thousands entered the streets shouting slogans of support . US ambassador Henry A. <unk> stated , " I cannot <unk> [ the ] popularity of the Canal Company nationalization within Egypt , even among Nasser 's enemies . " Egyptian political scientist Mahmoud Hamad wrote that , prior to 1956 , Nasser had consolidated control over Egypt 's military and civilian bureaucracies , but it was only after the canal 's nationalization that he gained near @-@ total popular legitimacy and firmly established himself as the " charismatic leader " and " spokesman for the masses not only in Egypt , but all over the Third World " . According to Aburish , this was Nasser 's largest pan @-@ Arab triumph at the time and " soon his pictures were to be found in the tents of Yemen , the souks of Marrakesh , and the posh villas of Syria " . The official reason given for the nationalization was that funds from the canal would be used for the construction of the dam in Aswan . That same day , Egypt closed the canal to Israeli shipping . 
 = = = Suez Crisis = = = 
 France and the UK , the largest shareholders in the Suez Canal Company , saw its nationalization as yet another hostile measure aimed at them by the Egyptian government . Nasser was aware that the canal 's nationalization would instigate an international crisis and believed the prospect of military intervention by the two countries was 80 per cent likely . He believed , however , that the UK would not be able to intervene militarily for at least two months after the announcement , and dismissed Israeli action as " impossible " . In early October , the UN Security Council met on the matter of the canal 's nationalization and adopted a resolution recognizing Egypt 's right to control the canal as long as it continued to allow passage through it for foreign ships . According to Heikal , after this agreement , " Nasser estimated that the danger of invasion had dropped to 10 per cent " . Shortly thereafter , however , the UK , France , and Israel made a secret agreement to take over the Suez Canal , occupy the Suez Canal zone , and topple Nasser . 
 On 29 October 1956 , Israeli forces crossed the Sinai Peninsula , overwhelmed Egyptian army posts , and quickly advanced to their objectives . Two days later , British and French planes bombarded Egyptian airfields in the canal zone . Nasser ordered the military 's high command to withdraw the Egyptian Army from Sinai to bolster the canal 's defenses . Moreover , he feared that if the armored corps was dispatched to confront the Israeli invading force and the British and French subsequently landed in the canal city of Port Said , Egyptian armor in the Sinai would be cut off from the canal and destroyed by the combined tripartite forces . Amer strongly disagreed , insisting that Egyptian tanks meet the Israelis in battle . The two had a heated exchange on 3 November , and Amer conceded . Nasser also ordered blockage of the canal by sinking or otherwise disabling forty @-@ nine ships at its entrance . 
 Despite the commanded withdrawal of Egyptian troops , about 2 @,@ 000 Egyptian soldiers were killed during engagement with Israeli forces , and some 5 @,@ 000 Egyptian soldiers were captured by the Israeli Army . Amer and Salah Salem proposed requesting a ceasefire , with Salem further recommending that Nasser surrender himself to British forces . Nasser berated Amer and Salem , and vowed , " Nobody is going to surrender . " Nasser assumed military command . Despite the relative ease in which Sinai was occupied , Nasser 's prestige at home and among Arabs was undamaged . To counterbalance the Egyptian Army 's dismal performance , Nasser authorized the distribution of about 400 @,@ 000 rifles to civilian volunteers and hundreds of militias were formed throughout Egypt , many led by Nasser 's political opponents . 
 It was at Port Said that Nasser saw a confrontation with the invading forces as being the strategic and psychological focal point of Egypt 's defense . A third infantry battalion and hundreds of national guardsmen were sent to the city as reinforcements , while two regular companies were dispatched to organize popular resistance . Nasser and Boghdadi traveled to the canal zone to boost the morale of the armed volunteers . According to Boghdadi 's memoirs , Nasser described the Egyptian Army as " shattered " as he saw the wreckage of Egyptian military equipment en route . When British and French forces landed in Port Said on 5 – 6 November , its local militia put up a stiff resistance , resulting in street @-@ to @-@ street fighting . The Egyptian Army commander in the city was preparing to request terms for a ceasefire , but Nasser ordered him to desist . The British @-@ French forces managed to largely secure the city by 7 November . Between 750 and 1 @,@ 000 Egyptians were killed in the battle for Port Said . 
 The US Eisenhower administration condemned the tripartite invasion , and supported UN resolutions demanding withdrawal and a United Nations Emergency Force ( <unk> ) to be stationed in Sinai . Nasser commended Eisenhower , stating he played the " greatest and most decisive role " in stopping the " tripartite conspiracy " . By the end of December , British and French forces had totally withdrawn from Egyptian territory , while Israel completed its withdrawal in March 1957 and released all Egyptian prisoners of war . As a result of the Suez Crisis , Nasser brought in a set of regulations imposing rigorous requirements for residency and citizenship as well as forced expulsions , mostly affecting British and French nationals and Jews with foreign nationality , as well as some Egyptian Jews . 
 After the fighting ended , Amer accused Nasser of provoking an unnecessary war and then blaming the military for the result . On 8 April , the canal was reopened , and Nasser 's political position was enormously enhanced by the widely perceived failure of the invasion and attempt to topple him . British diplomat Anthony Nutting claimed the crisis " established Nasser finally and completely " as the <unk> ( president ) of Egypt . 
 = = Pan @-@ Arabism and socialism = = 
 By 1957 , pan @-@ Arabism had become the dominant ideology in the Arab world , and the average Arab citizen considered Nasser his undisputed leader . Historian <unk> Dawisha credited Nasser 's status to his " charisma , bolstered by his perceived victory in the Suez Crisis " . The Cairo @-@ based Voice of the Arabs radio station spread Nasser 's ideas of united Arab action throughout the Arabic @-@ speaking world , so much so that historian Eugene Rogan wrote , " Nasser conquered the Arab world by radio . " Lebanese sympathizers of Nasser and the Egyptian embassy in Beirut — the press center of the Arab world — bought out Lebanese media outlets to further disseminate Nasser 's ideals . Nasser also enjoyed the support of Arab nationalist civilian and paramilitary organizations throughout the region . His followers were numerous and well @-@ funded , but lacked any permanent structure and organization . They called themselves " Nasserites " , despite Nasser 's objection to the label ( he preferred the term " Arab nationalists " ) . 
 In January 1957 , the US adopted the Eisenhower Doctrine and pledged to prevent the spread of communism and its perceived agents in the Middle East . Although Nasser was an opponent of communism in the region , his promotion of pan @-@ Arabism was viewed as a threat by pro @-@ Western states in the region . Eisenhower tried to isolate Nasser and reduce his regional influence by attempting to transform King Saud into a counterweight . Also in January , the elected Jordanian prime minister and Nasser supporter Sulayman al @-@ Nabulsi brought Jordan into a military pact with Egypt , Syria , and Saudi Arabia . 
 Relations between Nasser and King Hussein deteriorated in April when Hussein implicated Nasser in two coup attempts against him — although Nasser 's involvement was never established — and dissolved al @-@ Nabulsi 's cabinet . Nasser subsequently slammed Hussein on Cairo radio as being " a tool of the imperialists " . Relations with King Saud also became antagonistic as the latter began to fear that Nasser 's increasing popularity in Saudi Arabia was a genuine threat to the royal family 's survival . Despite opposition from the governments of Jordan , Saudi Arabia , Iraq , and Lebanon , Nasser maintained his prestige among their citizens and those of other Arab countries . 
 By the end of 1957 , Nasser nationalized all remaining British and French assets in Egypt , including the tobacco , cement , pharmaceutical , and phosphate industries . When efforts to offer tax incentives and attract outside investments yielded no tangible results , he nationalized more companies and made them a part of his economic development organization . He stopped short of total government control : two @-@ thirds of the economy was still in private hands . This effort achieved a measure of success , with increased agricultural production and investment in industrialization . Nasser initiated the Helwan steelworks , which subsequently became Egypt 's largest enterprise , providing the country with product and tens of thousands of jobs . Nasser also decided to cooperate with the Soviet Union in the construction of the Aswan Dam to replace the withdrawal of US funds . 
 = = = United Arab Republic = = = 
 Despite his popularity with the people of the Arab world , by mid @-@ 1957 his only regional ally was Syria . In September , Turkish troops massed along the Syrian border , giving credence to rumors that the Baghdad Pact countries were attempting to topple Syria 's leftist government . Nasser sent a contingent force to Syria as a symbolic display of solidarity , further elevating his prestige in the Arab world , and particularly among Syrians . 
 As political instability grew in Syria , delegations from the country were sent to Nasser demanding immediate unification with Egypt . Nasser initially turned down the request , citing the two countries ' incompatible political and economic systems , lack of contiguity , the Syrian military 's record of intervention in politics , and the deep factionalism among Syria 's political forces . However , in January 1958 , a second Syrian delegation managed to convince Nasser of an impending communist takeover and a consequent slide to civil strife . Nasser subsequently opted for union , albeit on the condition that it would be a total political merger with him as its president , to which the delegates and Syrian president Shukri al @-@ Quwatli agreed . On 1 February , the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) was proclaimed and , according to Dawisha , the Arab world reacted in " stunned amazement , which quickly turned into uncontrolled euphoria . " Nasser ordered a crackdown against Syrian communists , dismissing many of them from their governmental posts . 
 On a surprise visit to Damascus to celebrate the union on 24 February , Nasser was welcomed by crowds in the hundreds of thousands . Crown Prince Imam Badr of North Yemen was dispatched to Damascus with proposals to include his country in the new republic . Nasser agreed to establish a loose federal union with Yemen — the United Arab States — in place of total integration . While Nasser was in Syria , King Saud planned to have him assassinated on his return flight to Cairo . On 4 March , Nasser addressed the masses in Damascus and waved before them the Saudi check given to Syrian security chief and , unbeknownst to the Saudis , ardent Nasser supporter Abdel Hamid Sarraj to shoot down Nasser 's plane . As a consequence of Saud 's plot , he was forced by senior members of the Saudi royal family to informally cede most of his powers to his brother , King Faisal , a major Nasser opponent who advocated pan @-@ Islamic unity over pan @-@ Arabism . 
 A day after announcing the attempt on his life , Nasser established a new provisional constitution proclaiming a 600 @-@ member National Assembly ( 400 from Egypt and 200 from Syria ) and the dissolution of all political parties . Nasser gave each of the provinces two vice @-@ presidents : Boghdadi and Amer in Egypt , and Sabri al @-@ Asali and Akram al @-@ Hawrani in Syria . Nasser then left for Moscow to meet with Nikita Khrushchev . At the meeting , Khrushchev pressed Nasser to lift the ban on the Communist Party , but Nasser refused , stating it was an internal matter which was not a subject of discussion with outside powers . Khrushchev was reportedly taken aback and denied he had meant to interfere in the UAR 's affairs . The matter was settled as both leaders sought to prevent a rift between their two countries . 
 = = = Influence on the Arab world = = = 
 In Lebanon , clashes between pro @-@ Nasser factions and supporters of staunch Nasser opponent , then @-@ President Camille Chamoun , culminated in civil strife by May . The former sought to unite with the UAR , while the latter sought Lebanon 's continued independence . Nasser delegated oversight of the issue to Sarraj , who provided limited aid to Nasser 's Lebanese supporters through money , light arms , and officer training — short of the large @-@ scale support that Chamoun alleged . Nasser did not covet Lebanon , seeing it as a " special case " , but sought to prevent Chamoun from a second presidential term . 
 On 14 July , Iraqi army officers Abdel Karim Qasim and Abdel Salam Aref overthrew the Iraqi monarchy and , the next day , Iraqi prime minister and Nasser 's chief Arab antagonist , Nuri al @-@ Said , was killed . Nasser recognized the new government and stated that " any attack on Iraq was tantamount to an attack on the UAR " . On 15 July , US marines landed in Lebanon , and British special forces in Jordan , upon the request of those countries ' governments to prevent them from falling to pro @-@ Nasser forces . Nasser felt that the revolution in Iraq left the road for pan @-@ Arab unity unblocked . On 19 July , for the first time , he declared that he was opting for full Arab union , although he had no plan to merge Iraq with the UAR . While most members of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council ( RCC ) favored Iraqi @-@ UAR unity , Qasim sought to keep Iraq independent and resented Nasser 's large popular base in the country . 
 In the fall of 1958 , Nasser formed a tripartite committee consisting of Zakaria Mohieddin , al @-@ Hawrani , and Salah Bitar to oversee developments in Syria . By moving the latter two , who were Ba 'athists , to Cairo , he neutralized important political figures who had their own ideas about how Syria should be run . He put Syria under Sarraj , who effectively reduced the province to a police state by imprisoning and exiling landholders who objected to the introduction of Egyptian agricultural reform in Syria , as well as communists . Following the Lebanese election of Fuad Chehab in September 1958 , relations between Lebanon and the UAR improved considerably . On 25 March 1959 , Chehab and Nasser met at the Lebanese – Syrian border and compromised on an end to the Lebanese crisis . 
 Relations between Nasser and Qasim grew increasingly bitter on 9 March , after Qasim 's forces suppressed a rebellion in Mosul , launched a day earlier by a pro @-@ Nasser Iraqi RCC officer backed by UAR authorities . Nasser had considered dispatching troops to aid his Iraqi sympathizers , but decided against it . He clamped down on Egyptian communist activity due to the key backing Iraqi communists provided Qasim . Several influential communists were arrested , including Nasser 's old comrade Khaled Mohieddin , who had been allowed to re @-@ enter Egypt in 1956 . 
 By December , the political situation in Syria was faltering and Nasser responded by appointing Amer as governor @-@ general alongside Sarraj . Syria 's leaders opposed the appointment and many resigned from their government posts . Nasser later met with the opposition leaders and in a heated moment , exclaimed that he was the " elected " president of the UAR and those who did not accept his authority could " walk away " . 
 = = = Collapse of the union and aftermath = = = 
 Opposition to the union mounted among some of Syria 's key elements , namely the socioeconomic , political , and military elites . In response to Syria 's worsening economy , which Nasser attributed to its control by the bourgeoisie , in July 1961 , Nasser decreed socialist measures that nationalized wide @-@ ranging sectors of the Syrian economy . He also dismissed Sarraj in September to curb the growing political crisis . Aburish states that Nasser was not fully capable of addressing Syrian problems because they were " foreign to him " . In Egypt , the economic situation was more positive , with a GNP growth of 4 @.@ 5 percent and a rapid growth of industry . In 1960 , Nasser nationalized the Egyptian press , which had already been cooperating with his government , in order to steer coverage towards the country 's socioeconomic issues and galvanize public support for his socialist measures . 
 On 28 September 1961 , secessionist army units launched a coup in Damascus , declaring Syria 's secession from the UAR . In response , pro @-@ union army units in northern Syria revolted and pro @-@ Nasser protests occurred in major Syrian cities . Nasser sent Egyptian special forces to Latakia to bolster his allies , but withdrew them two days later , citing a refusal to allow inter @-@ Arab fighting . Addressing the UAR 's breakup on 5 October , Nasser accepted personal responsibility and declared that Egypt would recognize an elected Syrian government . He privately blamed interference by hostile Arab governments . According to Heikal , Nasser suffered something resembling a nervous breakdown after the dissolution of the union ; he began to smoke more heavily and his health began to deteriorate . 
 = = = Revival on regional stage = = = 
 Nasser 's regional position changed unexpectedly when Yemeni officers led by Nasser supporter Abdullah al @-@ Sallal overthrew Imam Badr of North Yemen on 27 September 1962 . Al @-@ Badr and his tribal partisans began receiving increasing support from Saudi Arabia to help reinstate the kingdom , while Nasser subsequently accepted a request by Sallal to militarily aid the new government on 30 September . Consequently , Egypt became increasingly embroiled in the drawn @-@ out civil war until it withdrew its forces in 1967 . Most of Nasser 's old colleagues had questioned the wisdom of continuing the war , but Amer reassured Nasser of their coming victory . Nasser later remarked in 1968 that intervention in Yemen was a " miscalculation " . 
 In July 1962 , Algeria became independent of France . As a staunch political and financial supporter of the Algerian independence movement , Nasser considered the country 's independence to be a personal victory . Amid these developments , a pro @-@ Nasser clique in the Saudi royal family led by Prince Talal defected to Egypt , along with the Jordanian chief of staff , in early 1963 . 
 On 8 February 1963 , a military coup in Iraq led by a Ba 'athist – Nasserist alliance toppled Qasim , who was subsequently shot dead . Abdel Salam Aref , a Nasserist , was chosen to be the new president . A similar alliance toppled the Syrian government on 8 March . On 14 March , the new Iraqi and Syrian governments sent Nasser delegations to push for a new Arab union . At the meeting , Nasser lambasted the Ba 'athists for " facilitating " Syria 's split from the UAR , and asserted that he was the " leader of the Arabs " . A transitional unity agreement stipulating a federal system was signed by the parties on 17 April and the new union was set to be established in May 1965 . However , the agreement fell apart weeks later when Syria 's Ba 'athists purged Nasser 's supporters from the officers corps . A failed counter @-@ coup by a Nasserist colonel followed , after which Nasser condemned the Ba 'athists as " fascists " . 
 In January 1964 , Nasser called for an Arab League summit in Cairo to establish a unified Arab response against Israel 's plans to divert the Jordan River 's waters for economic purposes , which Syria and Jordan deemed an act of war . Nasser blamed Arab divisions for what he deemed " the disastrous situation " . He discouraged Syria and Palestinian guerrillas from provoking the Israelis , conceding that he had no plans for war with Israel . During the summit , Nasser developed cordial relations with King Hussein , and ties were mended with the rulers of Saudi Arabia , Syria , and Morocco . In May , Nasser moved to formally share his leadership position over the Palestine issue by initiating the creation of the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) . In practice , Nasser used the PLO to wield control over the Palestinian fedayeen . Its head was to be Ahmad Shukeiri , Nasser 's personal nominee . 
 After years of foreign policy coordination and developing ties , Nasser , President Sukarno of Indonesia , President Tito of Yugoslavia , and Prime Minister Nehru of India founded the Non @-@ Aligned Movement ( NAM ) in 1961 . Its declared purpose was to solidify international non @-@ alignment and promote world peace amid the Cold War , end colonization , and increase economic cooperation among developing countries . In 1964 , Nasser was made president of the NAM and held the second conference of the organization in Cairo . 
 Nasser played a significant part in the strengthening of African solidarity in the late 1950s and early 1960s , although his continental leadership role had increasingly passed to Algeria since 1962 . During this period , Nasser made Egypt a refuge for anti @-@ colonial leaders from several African countries and allowed the broadcast of anti @-@ colonial propaganda from Cairo . Beginning in 1958 , Nasser had a key role in the discussions among African leaders that led to the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) in 1963 . 
 = = Modernization efforts and internal dissent = = 
 = = = Al @-@ Azhar = = = 
 In 1961 , Nasser sought to firmly establish Egypt as the leader of the Arab world and to promote a second revolution in Egypt with the purpose of merging Islamic and socialist thinking . To achieve this , he initiated several reforms to modernize al @-@ Azhar , which serves as the de facto leading authority in Sunni Islam , and to ensure its prominence over the Muslim Brotherhood and the more conservative Wahhabism promoted by Saudi Arabia . Nasser had used al @-@ Azhar 's most willing ulema ( scholars ) as a counterweight to the Brotherhood 's Islamic influence , starting in 1953 . 
 Nasser instructed al @-@ Azhar to create changes in its syllabus that trickled to the lower levels of Egyptian education , consequently allowing the establishment of coeducational schools and the introduction of evolution into school curriculum . The reforms also included the merger of religious and civil courts . Moreover , Nasser forced al @-@ Azhar to issue a fatwā admitting Shia Muslims , Alawites , and Druze into mainstream Islam ; for centuries prior , al @-@ Azhar deemed them to be " heretics " . 
 = = = Rivalry with Amer = = = 
 Following Syria 's secession , Nasser grew concerned with Amer 's inability to train and modernize the army , and with the state within a state Amer had created in the military command and intelligence apparatus . In late 1961 , Nasser established the Presidential Council and decreed it the authority to approve all senior military appointments , instead of leaving this responsibility solely to Amer . Moreover , he instructed that the primary criterion for promotion should be merit and not personal loyalties . Nasser retracted the initiative after Amer 's allies in the officers corps threatened to mobilize against him . 
 In early 1962 Nasser again attempted to wrest control of the military command from Amer . Amer responded by directly confronting Nasser for the first time and secretly rallying his loyalist officers . Nasser ultimately backed down , wary of a possible violent confrontation between the military and his civilian government . According to Boghdadi , the stress caused by the UAR 's collapse and Amer 's increasing autonomy forced Nasser , who already had diabetes , to practically live on painkillers from then on . 
 = = = National Charter and second term = = = 
 In October 1961 , Nasser embarked on a major nationalization program for Egypt , believing the total adoption of socialism was the answer to his country 's problems and would have prevented Syria 's secession . In order to organize and solidify his popular base with Egypt 's citizens and counter the army 's influence , Nasser introduced the National Charter in 1962 and a new constitution . The charter called for universal health care , affordable housing , vocational schools , greater women 's rights and a family planning program , as well as widening the Suez Canal . 
 Nasser also attempted to maintain oversight of the country 's civil service to prevent it from inflating and consequently becoming a burden to the state . New laws provided workers with a minimum wage , profit shares , free education , free health care , reduced working hours , and encouragement to participate in management . Land reforms guaranteed the security of tenant farmers , promoted agricultural growth , and reduced rural poverty . As a result of the 1962 measures , government ownership of Egyptian business reached 51 percent , and the National Union was renamed the Arab Socialist Union ( ASU ) . With these measures came more domestic repression , as thousands of Islamists were imprisoned , including dozens of military officers . Nasser 's tilt toward a Soviet @-@ style system led his aides Boghdadi and Hussein el @-@ <unk> to submit their resignations in protest . 
 During the presidential referendum in Egypt , Nasser was re @-@ elected to a second term as UAR president and took his oath on 25 March 1965 . He was the only candidate for the position , with virtually all of his political opponents forbidden by law from running for office , and his fellow party members reduced to mere followers . That same year , Nasser had the Muslim Brotherhood chief ideologue Sayyed Qutb imprisoned . Qutb was charged and found guilty by the court of plotting to assassinate Nasser , and was executed in 1966 . Beginning in 1966 , as Egypt 's economy slowed and government debt became increasingly burdensome , Nasser began to ease state control over the private sector , encouraging state @-@ owned bank loans to private business and introducing incentives to increase exports . During the 60 's , the Egyptian economy went from sluggishness to the verge of collapse , the society became less free , and Nasser 's appeal waned considerably . 
 = = Six @-@ Day War = = 
 In mid May 1967 , the Soviet Union issued warnings to Nasser of an impending Israeli attack on Syria , although Chief of Staff Mohamed Fawzi considered the warnings to be " baseless " . According to Kandil , without Nasser 's authorization , Amer used the Soviet warnings as a pretext to dispatch troops to Sinai on 14 May , and Nasser subsequently demanded <unk> 's withdrawal . Earlier that day , Nasser received a warning from King Hussein of Israeli @-@ American collusion to drag Egypt into war . The message had been originally received by Amer on 2 May , but was withheld from Nasser until the Sinai deployment on 14 May . Although in the preceding months , Hussein and Nasser had been accusing each other of avoiding a fight with Israel , Hussein was nonetheless wary that an Egyptian @-@ Israeli war would risk the West Bank 's occupation by Israel . Nasser still felt that the US would restrain Israel from attacking due to assurances that he received from the US and Soviet Union . In turn , he also reassured both powers that Egypt would only act defensively . 
 On 21 May , Amer asked Nasser to order the Straits of Tiran blockaded , a move Nasser believed Israel would use as a casus belli . Amer reassured him that the army was prepared for confrontation , but Nasser doubted Amer 's assessment of the military 's readiness . According to Nasser 's vice president Zakaria Mohieddin , although " Amer had absolute authority over the armed forces , Nasser had his ways of knowing what was really going on " . Moreover , Amer anticipated an impending Israeli attack and advocated a preemptive strike . Nasser refused the call upon determination that the air force lacked pilots and Amer 's handpicked officers were incompetent . Still , Nasser concluded that if Israel attacked , Egypt 's quantitative advantage in manpower and arms could stave off Israeli forces for at least two weeks , allowing for diplomacy towards a ceasefire . Towards the end of May , Nasser increasingly exchanged his positions of deterrence for deference to the inevitability of war , under increased pressure to act by both the general Arab populace and various Arab governments . On 26 May Nasser declared , " our basic objective will be to destroy Israel " . On 30 May , King Hussein committed Jordan in an alliance with Egypt and Syria . 
 On the morning of 5 June , the Israeli Air Force struck Egyptian air fields , destroying much of the Egyptian Air Force . Before the day ended , Israeli armored units had cut through Egyptian defense lines and captured the town of el @-@ Arish . The next day , Amer ordered the immediate withdrawal of Egyptian troops from Sinai — causing the majority of Egyptian casualties during the war . Israel quickly captured Sinai and the Gaza Strip from Egypt , the West Bank from Jordan , and the Golan Heights from Syria . 
 According to Sadat , it was only when the Israelis cut off the Egyptian garrison at Sharm el @-@ Sheikh that Nasser became aware of the situation 's gravity . After hearing of the attack , he rushed to army headquarters to inquire about the military situation . The simmering conflict between Nasser and Amer subsequently came to the fore , and officers present reported the pair burst into " a nonstop shouting match " . The Supreme Executive Committee , set up by Nasser to oversee the conduct of the war , attributed the repeated Egyptian defeats to the Nasser – Amer rivalry and Amer 's overall incompetence . According to Egyptian diplomat Ismail <unk> , who became foreign minister during Sadat 's presidency , the Israeli invasion and Egypt 's consequent defeat was a result of Nasser 's dismissal of all rational analysis of the situation and his undertaking of a series of irrational decisions . 
 = = = Resignation and aftermath = = = 
 During the first four days of the war , the general population of the Arab world believed Arab radio station fabrications of imminent Arab victory . On 9 June , Nasser appeared on television to inform Egypt 's citizens of their country 's defeat . He announced his resignation on television later that day , and ceded all presidential powers to his then @-@ Vice President Zakaria Mohieddin , who had no prior information of this decision and refused to accept the post . Hundreds of thousands of sympathizers poured into the streets in mass demonstrations throughout Egypt and across the Arab world rejecting his resignation , chanting , " We are your soldiers , Gamal ! " Nasser retracted his decision the next day . 
 On 11 July , Nasser replaced Amer with Mohamed Fawzi as general commander , over the protestations of Amer 's loyalists in the military , 600 of whom marched on army headquarters and demanded Amer 's reinstatement . After Nasser sacked thirty of the loyalists in response , Amer and his allies devised a plan to topple him on 27 August . Nasser was tipped off about their activities and , after several invitations , he convinced Amer to meet him at his home on 24 August . Nasser confronted Amer about the coup plot , which he denied before being arrested by Mohieddin . Amer committed suicide on 14 September . Despite his souring relationship with Amer , Nasser spoke of losing " the person closest to [ him ] " . Thereafter , Nasser began a process of depoliticizing the armed forces , arresting dozens of leading military and intelligence figures loyal to Amer . 
 At the 29 August Arab League summit in Khartoum , Nasser 's usual commanding position had receded as the attending heads of state expected Saudi King Faisal to lead . A ceasefire in the Yemen War was declared and the summit concluded with the Khartoum Resolution . The Soviet Union soon resupplied the Egyptian military with about half of its former arsenals and broke diplomatic relations with Israel . Nasser cut relations with the US following the war , and , according to Aburish , his policy of " playing the superpowers against each other " ended . In November , Nasser accepted UN Resolution 242 , which called for Israel 's withdrawal from territories acquired in the war . His supporters claimed Nasser 's move was meant to buy time to prepare for another confrontation with Israel , while his detractors believed his acceptance of the resolution signaled a waning interest in Palestinian independence . 
 = = Final years of presidency = = 
 = = = Domestic reforms and governmental changes = = = 
 Nasser appointed himself the additional roles of prime minister and supreme commander of the armed forces on 19 June 1967 . Angry at the military court 's perceived leniency with air force officers charged with negligence during the 1967 war , workers and students launched protests calling for major political reforms in late February 1968 . Nasser responded to the demonstrations , the most significant public challenge to his rule since workers ' protests in March 1954 , by removing most military figures from his cabinet and appointing eight civilians in place of several high @-@ ranking members of the Arab Socialist Union ( ASU ) . By 3 March , Nasser directed Egypt 's intelligence apparatus to focus on external rather than domestic espionage , and declared the " fall of the <unk> state " . 
 On 30 March , Nasser proclaimed a manifesto stipulating the restoration of civil liberties , greater parliamentary independence from the executive , major structural changes to the ASU , and a campaign to rid the government of corrupt elements . A public referendum approved the proposed measures in May , and held subsequent elections for the Supreme Executive Committee , the ASU 's highest decision @-@ making body . Observers noted that the declaration signaled an important shift from political repression to liberalization , although its promises would largely go unfulfilled . 
 Nasser appointed Sadat and Hussein el @-@ <unk> as his vice presidents in December 1969 . By then , relations with his other original military comrades , namely Khaled and Zakaria Mohieddin and former vice president Sabri , had become strained . By mid @-@ 1970 , Nasser pondered replacing Sadat with Boghdadi after reconciling with the latter . 
 = = = War of Attrition and regional diplomatic initiatives = = = 
 Meanwhile , in January 1968 , Nasser commenced the War of Attrition to reclaim territory captured by Israel , ordering attacks against Israeli positions east of the then @-@ blockaded Suez Canal . In March , Nasser offered Yasser Arafat 's Fatah movement arms and funds after their performance against Israeli forces in the Battle of Karameh that month . He also advised Arafat to think of peace with Israel and the establishment of a Palestinian state comprising the West Bank and the Gaza Strip . Nasser effectively ceded his leadership of the " Palestine issue " to Arafat . 
 Israel retaliated against Egyptian shelling with commando raids , artillery shelling and air strikes . This resulted in an exodus of civilians from Egyptian cities along the Suez Canal 's western bank . Nasser ceased all military activities and began a program to build a network of internal defenses , while receiving the financial backing of various Arab states . The war resumed in March 1969 . In November , Nasser brokered an agreement between the PLO and the Lebanese military that granted Palestinian guerrillas the right to use Lebanese territory to attack Israel . 
 In June 1970 , Nasser accepted the US @-@ sponsored Rogers Plan , which called for an end to hostilities and an Israeli withdrawal from Egyptian territory , but it was rejected by Israel , the PLO , and most Arab states except Jordan . Nasser had initially rejected the plan , but conceded under pressure from the Soviet Union , which feared that escalating regional conflict could drag it into a war with the US . He also determined that a ceasefire could serve as a tactical step toward the strategic goal of recapturing the Suez Canal . Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel . In dozens of speeches and statements , Nasser posited the equation that any direct peace talks with Israel were tantamount to surrender . Following Nasser 's acceptance , Israel agreed to a ceasefire and Nasser used the lull in fighting to move SAM missiles towards the canal zone . 
 Meanwhile , tensions in Jordan between an increasingly autonomous PLO and King Hussein 's government had been simmering ; following the Dawson 's Field hijackings , a military campaign was launched to rout out PLO forces . The offensive elevated risks of a regional war and prompted Nasser to hold an emergency Arab League summit on 27 September in Cairo , where he forged a ceasefire . 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 As the summit closed on 28 September 1970 , hours after escorting the last Arab leader to leave , Nasser suffered a heart attack . He was immediately transported to his house , where his physicians tended to him . Nasser died several hours later , around 6 : 00 p.m. Heikal , Sadat , and Nasser 's wife Tahia were at his deathbed . According to his doctor , al @-@ <unk> Habibi , Nasser 's likely cause of death was arteriosclerosis , varicose veins , and complications from long @-@ standing diabetes . Nasser was a heavy smoker with a family history of heart disease — two of his brothers died in their fifties from the same condition . The state of Nasser 's health was not known to the public prior to his death . He had previously suffered heart attacks in 1966 and September 1969 . 
 Following the announcement of Nasser 's death , Egypt and the Arab world were in a state of shock . Nasser 's funeral procession through Cairo on 1 October was attended by at least five million mourners . The 10 @-@ kilometer ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) procession to his burial site began at the old RCC headquarters with a flyover by MiG @-@ 21 jets . His flag @-@ draped coffin was attached to a gun carriage pulled by six horses and led by a column of cavalrymen . All Arab heads of state attended , with the exception of Saudi King Faisal . King Hussein and Arafat cried openly , and Muammar Gaddafi of Libya fainted from emotional distress twice . A few major non @-@ Arab dignitaries were present , including Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin and French Prime Minister Jacques Chaban @-@ Delmas . 
 Almost immediately after the procession began , mourners engulfed Nasser 's coffin chanting , " There is no God but Allah , and Nasser is God 's beloved … Each of us is Nasser . " Police unsuccessfully attempted to quell the crowds and , as a result , most of the foreign dignitaries were evacuated . The final destination was the Nasr Mosque , which was afterwards renamed Abdel Nasser Mosque , where Nasser was buried . 
 Because of his ability to motivate nationalistic passions , " men , women , and children wept and wailed in the streets " after hearing of his death , according to Nutting . The general Arab reaction was one of mourning , with thousands of people pouring onto the streets of major cities throughout the Arab world . Over a dozen people were killed in Beirut as a result of the chaos , and in Jerusalem , roughly 75 @,@ 000 Arabs marched through the Old City chanting , " Nasser will never die . " As a testament to his unchallenged leadership of the Arab people , following his death , the headline of the Lebanese Le Jour read , " One hundred million human beings — the Arabs — are orphans . " Sherif <unk> , a former political prisoner and later member Nasser 's ASU , said that " Nasser 's greatest achievement was his funeral . The world will never again see five million people crying together . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nasser made Egypt fully independent of British influence , and the country became a major power in the developing world under his leadership . One of Nasser 's main domestic efforts was to establish social justice , which he deemed a prerequisite to liberal democracy . During his presidency , ordinary citizens enjoyed unprecedented access to housing , education , jobs , health services and nourishment , as well as other forms of social welfare , while feudalistic influence waned . By the end of his presidency , employment and working conditions improved considerably , although poverty was still high in the country and substantial resources allocated for social welfare had been diverted to the war effort . 
 The national economy grew significantly through agrarian reform , major modernization projects such as the Helwan steel works and the Aswan Dam , and nationalization schemes such as that of the Suez Canal . However , the marked economic growth of the early 1960s took a downturn for the remainder of the decade , only recovering in 1970 . Egypt experienced a " golden age " of culture during Nasser 's presidency , according to historian Joel Gordon , particularly in film , television , theater , radio , literature , fine arts , comedy , poetry , and music . Egypt under Nasser dominated the Arab world in these fields , producing cultural icons . 
 During Mubarak 's presidency , Nasserist political parties began to emerge in Egypt , the first being the Arab Democratic Nasserist Party ( <unk> ) . The party carried minor political influence , and splits between its members beginning in 1995 resulted in the gradual establishment of splinter parties , including <unk> Sabahi 's 1997 founding of Al @-@ Karama . Sabahi came in third place during the 2012 presidential election . Nasserist activists were among the founders of <unk> , a major opposition force during Mubarak 's rule . On 19 September 2012 , four Nasserist parties ( the <unk> , Karama , the National Conciliation Party , and the Popular Nasserist Congress Party ) merged to form the United Nasserist Party . 
 = = = Image = = = 
 Nasser was known for his intimate relationship with ordinary Egyptians . His availability to the public , despite assassination attempts against him , was unparalleled among his successors . A skilled orator , Nasser gave 1 @,@ 359 speeches between 1953 and 1970 , a record for any Egyptian head of state . Historian Elie <unk> wrote that a constant theme of Nasser 's image was " his ability to represent Egyptian authenticity , in triumph or defeat " . The national press also helped to foster his popularity and profile — more so after the nationalization of state media . Historian Tarek Osman wrote : 
 The interplay in the Nasser ' phenomenon ' between genuine expression of popular feeling and state @-@ sponsored propaganda may sometimes be hard to disentangle . But behind it lies a vital historical fact : that Gamal Abdel Nasser signifies the only truly Egyptian developmental project in the country 's history since the fall of the <unk> [ sic ] state . There had been other projects ... But this was different — in origin , meaning and impact . For Nasser was a man of the Egyptian soil who had overthrown the Middle East 's most established and sophisticated monarchy in a swift and bloodless move — to the acclaim of millions of poor , oppressed Egyptians — and ushered in a programme of ' social justice ' , ' progress and development ' , and ' dignity ' . 
 While Nasser was increasingly criticized by Egyptian intellectuals following the Six @-@ Day War and his death in 1970 , the general public was persistently sympathetic both during and after Nasser 's life . According to political scientist Mahmoud Hamad , writing in 2008 , " nostalgia for Nasser is easily sensed in Egypt and all Arab countries today " . General malaise in Egyptian society , particularly during the Mubarak era , augmented nostalgia for Nasser 's presidency , which increasingly became associated with the ideals of national purpose , hope , social cohesion , and vibrant culture . 
 Until the present day , Nasser serves as an iconic figure throughout the Arab world , a symbol of Arab unity and dignity , and a towering figure in modern Middle Eastern history . He is also considered a champion of social justice in Egypt . Time writes that despite his mistakes and shortcomings , Nasser " imparted a sense of personal worth and national pride that [ Egypt and the Arabs ] had not known for 400 years . This alone may have been enough to balance his flaws and failures . " 
 Historian Steven A. Cook wrote in July 2013 , " Nasser 's heyday still represents , for many , the last time that Egypt felt united under leaders whose espoused principles met the needs of ordinary Egyptians . " During the Arab Spring , which resulted in a revolution in Egypt , photographs of Nasser were raised in Cairo and Arab capitals during anti @-@ government demonstrations . According to journalist <unk> Andoni , Nasser had become a " symbol of Arab dignity " during the mass demonstrations . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Sadat declared his intention to " continue the path of Nasser " in his 7 October 1970 presidential inauguration speech , but began to depart from Nasserist policies as his domestic position improved following the 1973 October War . President Sadat 's <unk> policy sought to open Egypt 's economy for private investment . According to Heikal , ensuing anti @-@ Nasser developments until the present day led to an Egypt " [ half ] at war with Abdel @-@ Nasser , half [ at war ] with Anwar El @-@ Sadat " . 
 Nasser 's Egyptian detractors considered him a dictator who thwarted democratic progress , imprisoned thousands of dissidents , and led a repressive administration responsible for numerous human rights violations . Islamists in Egypt , particularly members of the politically persecuted Brotherhood , viewed Nasser as oppressive , tyrannical , and demonic . Liberal writer Tawfiq al @-@ Hakim described Nasser as a " confused Sultan " who employed stirring rhetoric , but had no actual plan to achieve his stated goals . 
 Some of Nasser 's liberal and Islamist critics in Egypt , including the founding members of the New Wafd Party and writer Jamal Badawi , dismissed Nasser 's popular appeal with the Egyptian masses during his presidency as being the product of successful manipulation and demagoguery . Egyptian political scientist Alaa al @-@ Din <unk> blamed the 1952 revolution 's shortcomings on Nasser 's concentration of power , and Egypt 's lack of democracy on Nasser 's political style and his government 's limitations on freedom of expression and political participation . 
 American political scientist Mark Cooper asserted that Nasser 's charisma and his direct relationship with the Egyptian people " rendered intermediaries ( organizations and individuals ) unnecessary " . He opined that Nasser 's legacy was a " guarantee of instability " due to Nasser 's reliance on personal power and the absence of strong political institutions under his rule . Historian Abd al @-@ Azim Ramadan wrote that Nasser was an irrational and irresponsible leader , blaming his inclination to solitary decision @-@ making for Egypt 's losses during the Suez War , among other events . Miles Copeland , Jr . , once described as Nasser 's closest Western adviser , said that the barriers between Nasser and the outside world have grown so thick that all but the information that attest to his infallibility , indispensability , and immortality has been filtered out . 
 Zakaria Mohieddin , who was Nasser 's vice president , said that Nasser gradually changed during his reign . He ceased consulting his colleagues and made more and more of the decisions himself . Although Nasser repeatedly said that a war with Israel will start at a time of his , or Arab , choosing , in 1967 he started a bluffing game " but a successful bluff means your opponent must not know which cards you are holding . In this case Nasser 's opponent could see his hand in the mirror and knew he was only holding a pair of <unk> " and Nasser knew that his army is not prepared yet . " All of this was out of character ... His tendencies in this regard may have been accentuated by diabetes ... That was the only rational explanation for his actions in 1967 " . 
 Nasser told an East German newspaper in 1964 that " no person , not even the most simple one , takes seriously the lie of the six million Jews that were murdered [ in the Holocaust ] . " However he is not known to have ever again publicly called the figure of six million into question , perhaps because his advisors and East German contacts had corrected him on the subject . 
 = = = Regional leadership = = = 
 Through his actions and speeches , and because he was able to symbolize the popular Arab will , Nasser inspired several nationalist revolutions in the Arab world . He defined the politics of his generation and communicated directly with the public masses of the Arab world , bypassing the various heads of states of those countries — an accomplishment not repeated by other Arab leaders . The extent of Nasser 's centrality in the region made it a priority for incoming Arab nationalist heads of state to seek good relations with Egypt , in order to gain popular legitimacy from their own citizens . 
 To varying degrees , Nasser 's statist system of government was continued in Egypt and emulated by virtually all Arab republics , namely Algeria , Syria , Iraq , Tunisia , Yemen , Sudan , and Libya . Ahmed Ben Bella , Algeria 's first president , was a staunch Nasserist . Abdullah al @-@ Sallal drove out the king of North Yemen in the name of Nasser 's pan @-@ Arabism . Other coups influenced by Nasser included those that occurred in Iraq in July 1958 and Syria in 1963 . Muammar Gaddafi , who overthrew the Libyan monarchy in 1969 , considered Nasser his hero and sought to succeed him as " leader of the Arabs " . Also in 1969 , Colonel <unk> Nimeiry , a supporter of Nasser , took power in Sudan . The Arab Nationalist Movement ( ANM ) helped spread Nasser 's pan @-@ Arabist ideas throughout the Arab world , particularly among the Palestinians , Syrians , and Lebanese , and in South Yemen , the Persian Gulf , and Iraq . While many regional heads of state tried to emulate Nasser , <unk> opined that the " parochialism " of successive Arab leaders " transformed imitation [ of Nasser ] into parody " . 
 = = = Portrayal in film = = = 
 In 1963 , Egyptian director Youssef <unk> produced the film El Nasser Salah El Dine ( " Saladin The Victorious " ) , which intentionally drew parallels between Saladin , considered a hero in the Arab world , and Nasser and his pan @-@ Arabist policies . Nasser is played by Ahmed Zaki in Mohamed <unk> 's 1996 Nasser 56 . The film set the Egyptian box office record at the time , and focused on Nasser during the Suez Crisis . It is also considered a milestone in Egyptian and Arab cinema as the first film to dramatize the role of a modern @-@ day Arab leader . Together with the 1999 Syrian biopic Gamal Abdel Nasser , the films marked the first biographical movies about contemporary public figures produced in the Arab world . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1944 , Nasser married Tahia <unk> , the 22 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of a wealthy Iranian father and an Egyptian mother , both of whom died when she was young . She was introduced to Nasser through her brother , Abdel Hamid Kazim , a merchant friend of Nasser 's , in 1943 . After their wedding , the couple moved into a house in <unk> al @-@ Bakri , a suburb of Cairo , where they would live for the rest of their lives . Nasser 's entry into the officer corps in 1937 secured him relatively well @-@ paid employment in a society where most people lived in poverty . 
 Nasser and Tahia would sometimes discuss politics at home , but for the most part , Nasser kept his career separate from his family life . He preferred to spend most of his free time with his children . Nasser and Tahia had two daughters and three sons : Hoda , Mona , Khaled , Abdel Hamid , and Abdel Hakim . 
 Although he was a proponent of secular politics , Nasser was an observant Muslim who made the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1954 and 1965 . He was known to be personally incorruptible , a characteristic which further enhanced his reputation among the citizens of Egypt and the Arab world . Nasser 's personal hobbies included playing chess , American films , reading Arabic , English , and French magazines , and listening to classical music . 
 Nasser had few personal vices other than chain smoking . He maintained 18 @-@ hour workdays and rarely took time off for vacations . The combination of smoking and working long hours contributed to his poor health . He was diagnosed with diabetes in the early 1960s and by the time of his death in 1970 , he also had arteriosclerosis , heart disease , and high blood pressure . He suffered two major heart attacks ( in 1966 and 1969 ) , and was on bed rest for six weeks after the second episode . State media reported that Nasser 's absence from the public view at that time was a result of influenza . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Nasser wrote the following books , published during his lifetime : 
 Memoirs of the First Palestine War ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> عبد <unk> عن <unk> <unk> ) ( 1955 ; Akher Sa 'a ) 
 " Memoirs of the First Palestine War " , in 2 , no . 2 ( Win . 73 ) : 3 – 32 ( First English translation , 1973 , pdf @-@ file from Journal of Palestine Studies ) 
 Egypt 's Liberation : The Philosophy of the Revolution ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) ( 1955 ; Dar al @-@ <unk> ) 
 Towards Freedom ( Arabic : في <unk> <unk> ) ( 1959 ; Cairo @-@ Arabian Company ) 
 = = Honour = = 
 = = = Foreign honour = = = 
 Malaysia : Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm ( 1965 ) 
 = Progress M1 @-@ 5 = 
 Progress M1 @-@ 5 was the Progress spacecraft which was launched by Russia in 2001 to deorbit the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Mir space station before it naturally fell from orbit , potentially landing in a populated area . The Russian Aviation and Space Agency , Rosaviakosmos , was responsible for the mission . 
 Launched in January 2001 after a short delay due to a problem with Mir , on 27 January Progress M1 @-@ 5 became the last spacecraft to dock with the station . It spent two months attached to the Kvant @-@ 1 module before deorbiting the station on 23 March 2001 . Mir re @-@ entered the atmosphere with Progress M1 @-@ 5 still docked , disintegrating over the Pacific Ocean , with debris falling into the ocean at around 06 : 00 GMT . During the early stages of the unmanned Progress M1 @-@ 5 mission , a manned Soyuz was placed on standby to launch in order to complete the mission if a problem occurred . The decision to deorbit Mir attracted both praise and criticism for Rosaviakosmos , while several campaigns to save the station were conducted . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mir was the seventh and last manned space station to be launched as part of the Soviet space programme , and was the first true modular space station to be launched . The first component , the Core Module , was launched by a Proton @-@ K rocket on 19 February 1986 . This had been followed by six more modules , launched between 1987 and 1996 , all using Proton @-@ K rockets , except one which was launched aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis . Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Mir became the property of the Russian government , and the newly established Russian Aviation and Space Agency . It supported 28 long duration crews , visited by 40 manned Soyuz and Shuttle missions , whilst 64 unmanned Progress spacecraft were launched to support it . It was visited by 125 cosmonauts and astronauts , who performed 75 spacewalks . 
 During the Shuttle @-@ Mir programme , a series of American Space Shuttle missions visited Mir between 1995 and 1998 in preparation for the construction of the International Space Station . After the construction of the International Space Station began in 1998 , Russian resources were split between the two stations . In 2000 , Rosaviakosmos signed an agreement with MirCorp to lease the station for commercial use , with the Soyuz TM @-@ 30 mission , intended to prepare the station for future use and conduct some commercial research , being flown in later that year . This was to have been followed by more missions , including flights with space tourists , however due to the Russian government being concerned about MirCorp 's ability to fund these missions , Rosaviakosmos decided against funding the continued operation of Mir . 
 In November 2000 , Rosaviakosmos decided to deorbit Mir , and the next month Prime Minister Mikhail <unk> signed an order to do so . By this stage Mir was well past the end of its design life , and Rosaviakosmos General Director Yuri Koptev believed that " any of its systems could well fail at any time " . Therefore , it was decided to deorbit it whilst it was still functioning , rather than risk it falling back to Earth out of control , like Skylab in 1979 and Salyut 7 in 1991 , potentially dropping debris over a populated area . At the time , Mir was the largest spacecraft ever to reenter the Earth 's atmosphere , and there were concerns that sizeable pieces of debris , particularly from the docking assemblies , gyrodynes and external structure , could survive reentry . 
 Progress M1 @-@ 5 , which had originally been built to resupply and refuel either Mir or the International Space Station , was selected to perform the deorbit manoeuvre . Its mission earned it the nickname Hearse . It was a Progress @-@ M1 <unk> spacecraft , with the serial number 254 . An uninhabited area of the southern Pacific ocean was selected for the station to be deorbited into , as had been done with five earlier Salyut spacecraft . 
 = = Launch and docking = = 
 Progress M1 @-@ 5 was launched by a Soyuz @-@ U carrier rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome , Kazakhstan . It was originally scheduled for launch on 16 January 2001 , but by the first week of January , it was targeting 18 January . It was rolled out to the launch pad on 16 January , with the rocket departing the <unk> assembly facility at Site 2 of the cosmodrome at 02 : 00 GMT , and was erected at the launch pad , Site 1 / 5 , within two hours of the start of rollout . Launch was set for 06 : 56 : 26 GMT on 18 January . 
 On 18 January , a problem with the computers aboard Mir developed shortly before fuelling of the Soyuz @-@ U rocket was scheduled to commence , about five and a half hours before the launch was due to occur . The launch attempt was scrubbed , or cancelled , and the launch was expected to be delayed by four or five days . On 19 January , the launch was rescheduled for 24 January , giving controllers time to restart the computer and the station 's gyroscopes , which had shut down when the computer failed . 
 Preparations for the launch resumed on 22 January , and the launch occurred successfully at 04 : 28 : 42 GMT on 24 January . Following the launch , Progress M1 @-@ 5 spent three days in free flight before docking with the rear port of the Kvant @-@ 1 module of Mir at 05 : 33 : 31 GMT on 27 January . The docking port had previously been occupied by Progress M @-@ 43 , which departed at 05 : 19 : 49 on 25 January , and subsequently remained in orbit until Progress M1 @-@ 5 had docked with Mir . Progress M @-@ 43 , which had originally been launched to carry supplies and raise Mir 's orbit , in anticipation of manned flights which were never launched , was subsequently deorbited at 02 : 12 GMT on 29 January , burning up during re @-@ entry at 02 : 58 . 
 Free @-@ flights of Progress spacecraft typically lasted two days from launch to docking with Mir , however Progress M1 @-@ 5 took three days to reach Mir in order to conserve fuel for the deorbit burn . If it had launched on 18 January it would have spent four days in free flight . 
 = = After docking = = 
 Progress M1 @-@ 5 spent two months docked to Mir before the deorbit burn occurred . The gap between docking and deorbit was in order to allow the spacecraft to dock whilst Mir was still in a stable orbit , but then to allow some natural decay , or decrease in altitude , to occur in order to conserve the Progress ' fuel . Controllers determined that they should wait for the station 's orbital altitude to reach 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) before deorbiting it . In addition , RKK Energia wanted to wait until after the fifteenth anniversary of the launch of the Core Module , on 19 February . 
 Following the docking , Mir 's attitude control system was used to spin the station , to provide spin @-@ stabilisation in order to further conserve the fuel , as the station had descended to an altitude at which its gyroscopes could not be used for attitude control . The station would remain in this spin until the deorbit manoeuvres began . 
 On 20 February , Mir was predicted to descend to 250 kilometres within five days of 9 March . By 1 March , it was at an altitude of 265 kilometres ( 165 mi ) , and descending at a rate of 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) per day . On 7 March , the Russian space agency opted to delay the deorbit burn until the station reached 220 kilometres ( 140 mi ) as a result of natural decay , in order to allow more fuel for the burn , giving a greater range of options in the event of an anomaly during the deorbit manoeuvre . It was predicted that without intervention , the station would have naturally entered the atmosphere on 28 March . 
 On 12 March computers aboard Mir were reactivated ahead of deorbiting , along with the control system on 13 March . On 14 March it was announced that the procedure would be conducted on 22 March . On 19 March it was delayed one day further due to a lower than expected descent rate , with the start of the first deorbit burn being set for 00 : 31 GMT . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Progress M1 @-@ 5 carried 2 @,@ 678 kilograms ( 5 @,@ 904 lb ) of fuel with which to perform the manoeuvres to deorbit Mir . These were completed on 23 March , when three deorbit burns were made ; the first two using just docking and attitude control thrusters , and the third using the main engine as well as the thrusters . The first burn began at 00 : 32 : 28 GMT , and lasted 21 @.@ 5 minutes , leaving Mir in an orbit with a perigee of 188 kilometres ( 117 mi ) and an apogee of 219 kilometres ( 136 mi ) . The second burn , which began at 02 : 24 GMT and lasted 24 minutes , placed Mir into a 158 @-@ kilometre ( 98 mi ) by 216 @-@ kilometre ( 134 mi ) orbit . The final deorbit burn began at 05 : 07 : 36 . It was scheduled to last 20 minutes , however flight controllers decided to let the Progress burn to depletion to ensure that the station re @-@ entered as expected . The last signals from Mir were received at 05 : 30 GMT , as it passed out of range of its ground station . 
 Mir re @-@ entered the atmosphere over the southern Pacific with Progress M1 @-@ 5 still docked at 05 : 44 GMT . It began to disintegrate at 05 : 52 , beginning with the detachment of solar panels , followed by other peripheral structures . The modules then buckled , before detaching completely . Debris came down in the ocean at around 06 : 00 GMT . Debris was intended to fall at around 47 ° S 140 ° W. An official statement announced that Mir " ceased to exist " at 05 : 59 : 24 GMT . The final tracking of Mir was conducted by a United States Army site on Kwajalein Atoll . The European Space Agency , German Federal Ministry of Defence and US National Aeronautics and Space Administration also assisted with tracking Mir during its final orbit and reentry . Former cosmonaut Vladimir Solovyov , who had been a member of the first crew to visit Mir , led the mission control team which was on station during the deorbit . 
 = = Contingency planning = = 
 Like all Progress spacecraft , M1 @-@ 5 carried two docking systems , Kurs and TORU . The automated Kurs system was the primary docking system , with TORU , which required manual input , as the backup . Because Mir was unmanned at the time of its docking , and a cosmonaut aboard the station would have been required to perform a TORU docking , or to troubleshoot any other problems during the docking , the Soyuz TM @-@ 32 spacecraft was made ready for a flight to Mir should human intervention be required . The Soyuz may also have been launched if the flight control system aboard Mir failed . Cosmonauts Salizhan Sharipov and Pavel Vinogradov were originally scheduled to have been on standby for this mission , with <unk> <unk> and Yuri <unk> , the crew who eventually flew TM @-@ 32 to the International Space Station , as the backup crew . However , in December 2000 , they were replaced by Gennady Padalka and Nikolai Budarin , a crew which became known as Expedition Zero . These cosmonauts were chosen because of their training for a similar emergency mission to the International Space Station the previous year , which would have been launched if the Zvezda module had failed to dock . If a manned flight had been launched , controllers would have waited until after it had landed to begin the deorbit of Mir . 
 Progress M @-@ 43 , which had been launched in 2000 , undocked from Mir the day after Progress M1 @-@ 5 launched , and was kept in orbit until Progress M1 @-@ 5 docked . In the event that Progress M1 @-@ 5 had been unable to dock , Progress M @-@ 43 would have returned to the station and provide supplies of food and oxygen for the Soyuz crew . Progress M @-@ 43 was deorbited after Progress M1 @-@ 5 docked successfully . 
 If Progress M1 @-@ 5 had launched on 16 January , the Soyuz launch would have occurred on 10 February if it had been required . It was stood down around 22 February , after the decaying altitude of Mir made it too dangerous to send a crew to it . 
 If Mir 's main computer had failed after Progress M1 @-@ 5 had docked , then the flight plan would have been modified to use either the station 's <unk> rendezvous system , or the Progress for control . Under this plan , the third deorbit burn would have been conducted 24 hours after the first two burns , with the station being spin @-@ stabilised again between the second and third burns . Controllers also planned for a failure of Mir 's power system , which would have resulted in the deorbit being delayed one day , with all guidance and control functions being handled by the Progress spacecraft . 
 It was reported that Rosaviakosmos had taken out an insurance policy worth 200 million US dollars to cover damage caused by falling debris . The risk of debris from the station reaching land was estimated to be 3 % . Countries located near the target zone monitored events surrounding the deorbit to determine whether precautions should be taken . In New Zealand the Satellite Reentry Committee was responsible for this , whilst Emergency Management Australia handled preparations in Australia . The head of the Japanese Defense Agency , <unk> Saito , postponed a trip to the United States in case any debris fell on Japan , as the station was scheduled to pass over several Japanese islands on its final orbit . Residents of Okinawa were warned to stay indoors as the station passed overhead . Members of the South Pacific Forum requested assurance from Russia that they would not be hit by falling debris . Chan Sek Keong , the attorney general of Singapore , called for greater regulation of space debris . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The reaction to Russia 's announcement and subsequent execution of its plan to deorbit Mir was mixed . Several cosmonauts expressed regrets at the loss of the station , but support for the decision to end the programme ; Vladimir Titov described the station as " a good ship " , but said that he agreed with the decision to prioritise the International Space Station , while Vladimir Dezhurov said that he felt " sad about Mir but we have to look into the future . " 
 In November 2000 , shortly after plans to deorbit Mir were announced , members of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia passed a resolution in the Duma , the lower house of the Russian parliament , aimed at preventing it . On 8 February 2001 , a protest against the deorbiting of the station was held in Moscow , and a petition was subsequently sent to Russian president Vladimir Putin . Gennady Zyuganov , the First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation , described deorbiting the station to be " incorrect and harmful " , and the act of a " helpless , weak @-@ willed , inefficient and not very responsible " government . Iran attempted to buy the space station , with president Mohammad Khatami offering to fund it for two to three years in return for Russian assistance with cosmonaut training , however by this stage it was too late for such a transaction to be completed . 
 The major Russian ORT TV station organised a national televised debate as to what should be done with the station . Former cosmonaut Georgi Grechko suggested that it should be kept in orbit long enough to salvage any useful equipment from it , for transfer to the International Space Station or other spacecraft , however Konstantin <unk> argued that it would cost more to retrieve the equipment than to replace it . Anatoly <unk> argued that Mir should be kept because he believed that once it had been deorbited , the US would try to marginalise Russian involvement in the ISS . An online opinion poll showed 67 % support worldwide for keeping it in orbit . 
 Rosaviakosmos and RKK Energia responded to criticism of the decision in an open letter in mid February , which explained that the " actual condition of the onboard systems ... [ does ] not make possible the safe and reliable operation of Mir " , and that attempts to prolong its life " may lead to the loss of control of Mir .. and , as a result , to catastrophic consequences not only for Russia but for the whole world . " 
 The US Government welcomed the decision to deorbit Mir , as it freed up Russian resources for the International Space Station programme . The Space Frontier Foundation , however criticised the Russian government for yielding to what it claimed was pressure from the American government . SFF co @-@ founder Rick <unk> claimed that " Mir was bulldozed to make way for [ the ] International Space Station " . It had previously run a campaign called " Keep Mir Alive " , which aimed to either secure the continued operation of Mir , or to have it placed into a higher orbit , allowing it to be stored until its operation became viable . 
 In anticipation of the reentry of Mir , the owners of Taco Bell towed a target , measuring 12 by 12 metres ( 40 ft × 40 ft ) out into the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Australia . If the target was hit by a falling piece of Mir , every person in the continental United States would be entitled to a free Taco Bell taco . The company bought a sizeable insurance policy for this " gamble . " No piece of the station struck the target . A group of enthusiasts from the United States , led by Bob Citron , chartered an aircraft to fly over the Pacific and view the reentry . 
 = Babe Siebert = 
 Charles Albert " Babe " Siebert ( January 14 , 1904 – August 25 , 1939 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey left winger and defenceman who played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Montreal Maroons , New York Rangers , Boston Bruins and Montreal Canadiens . He won the 1926 Stanley Cup championship with the Maroons , and was a member of the famous " S Line " , and another with the Rangers in 1933 . 
 A physical forward known for his fighting ability while with the Maroons and Rangers , an apparent decline in his play was reversed when he switched to defence after he was traded to the Bruins . Siebert was named an all @-@ star three times after the switch and won the Hart Trophy as the NHL 's most valuable player in 1937 as a member of the Canadiens . 
 Siebert was named the head coach of the Canadiens upon his retirement as a player in 1939 . He never coached a game as he drowned in Lake Huron prior to the 1939 – 40 NHL season . The league organized an all @-@ star benefit game that raised $ 15 @,@ 000 for Siebert 's family . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1964 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in <unk> , Ontario , Siebert grew up in the nearby community of Zurich , located on the eastern shores of Lake Huron . He became obsessed with hockey at an early age , playing the game nearly every day . He played intermediate hockey in Zurich and Exeter before moving to Kitchener to play junior hockey . Though his elder brothers mocked his simple playing style — he used his size and strength to push his way through opponents — Siebert was invited to join the Kitchener <unk> in 1922 . He won the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) and eastern Canadian junior championships with Kitchener in 1922 – 23 , but lost the Memorial Cup final to the University of Manitoba . After a year of senior hockey in Kitchener , he moved on to the Niagara Falls Cataracts , winning the OHA senior championship in 1924 – 25 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Siebert was signed by the Montreal Maroons in 1925 and made his professional debut that same year . He finished second on the team with 16 goals as the Maroons finished second in the NHL standings . Montreal defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates and Ottawa Senators in the playoffs to win the NHL championship . Siebert scored three points in the 1926 Stanley Cup Final as the Maroons defeated the Western Hockey League champion Victoria Cougars to win the Stanley Cup . 
 When Hooley Smith arrived in Montreal in 1926 – 27 , Siebert was paired with Smith and Nels Stewart . The trio were known as the " S Line " and emerged as one of the top scoring lines in the NHL . Stewart was the goal scorer on the line while Smith set him up with his passing game , but it was Siebert who used his strength and speed to move the puck out of their defensive zone and to create space for his line mates . His physical style of play occasionally resulted in Siebert being brought in front of league president Frank Calder for supplementary discipline , as in December 1927 when he was suspended for a time following a violent melee with Billy Boucher of the New York Americans . When Boucher responded to an elbow by slashing Siebert over the head , the latter player responded with repeated wild swings of his own stick at Boucher , injuring him . 
 Siebert 's best offensive season came in 1931 – 32 when he finished eighth in league scoring with 39 points . It proved to be his last season with the Maroons , as the team was struggling financially and chose to sell him to the New York Rangers for cash . He went on to win his second Stanley Cup that year . He struggled offensively for much of the season , however , and it was rumoured he would be traded . The trade finally happened early in the 1933 – 34 season as he was sent to the Boston Bruins in exchange for Vic Ripley and Roy Burmeister . The deal reunited Siebert with former S Line member Nels Stewart . 
 After Eddie Shore was suspended for his assault on Ace Bailey , Bruins coach Art Ross shifted Siebert from left wing to defence . The switch rejuvenated his career ; he enjoyed a comeback season in 1934 – 35 . Frequently remaining on the ice for entire games as one of Boston 's key players , Siebert earned five votes in a 1935 Associated Press poll naming the top comeback player in sport for that year . He later scoffed at the legend of his comeback in Boston , stating that he never lost his ability to play at the same level he did with the Maroons , instead blaming Lester Patrick for improperly utilizing him in New York . 
 While Shore and Siebert were an effective pairing on defence , tensions between the two were evident . They shared a violent feud when they were opponents , and never spoke a word to the other as teammates . Though he was named a first team all @-@ star in 1935 – 36 , the Bruins decided Siebert 's career was in decline and chose to trade him to the Montreal Canadiens along with Roger Jenkins in exchange for Leroy Goldsworthy , Sammy McManus and cash following the season . He was immediately named the team 's captain , a position he retained until his retirement . In his first season with the Canadiens , Siebert earned his second all @-@ star selection and won the Hart Trophy as the most valuable player in the NHL . He earned his third consecutive all @-@ star selection in 1937 – 38 . Plagued by injuries in his final season , Siebert announced his retirement in 1939 to become the head coach of the Canadiens . 
 = = Death and family = = 
 Siebert never had the opportunity to take up his new post . On August 25 , 1939 , while vacationing with his family and swimming with his daughters at Lake Huron , he drowned attempting to retrieve an inflatable tire they were playing with . Shocked by the news , Siebert 's peers lauded his character and play , indicating that his death was a considerable loss to the game of hockey . Among them , his former manager with the Maroons , Tommy Gorman , remarked that Siebert was popular with his fellow players and was a great defenceman who " lost fairly and won modestly " . 
 At the time of his death , Siebert was visiting his cottage to celebrate the 80th birthday of his father , William . He cherished the time he had with his two daughters Judy and Joan , who were 11 and 10 years old respectively , when they witnessed his drowning . His loss represented a significant financial burden for his family as he spent nearly all of his income paying for his paraplegic wife 's medical costs . 
 The league organized an all @-@ star benefit game to aid Siebert 's widow with the goal of raising $ 15 @,@ 000 . It was the third such benefit game in NHL history . The Montreal Canadiens faced an all @-@ star team composed of the best players from the remaining teams . The all @-@ stars defeated the Canadiens 5 – 2 in the game held on October 29 , 1939 . Though organizers were disappointed with the attendance of just 6 @,@ 000 fans , they met their $ 15 @,@ 000 target . 
 A physical player and fighter on the ice , Siebert was a soft spoken family man off it . He was especially faithful to his wife , Bernice , who was left a paraplegic following complications during the birth of their second child . Fans at the Montreal Forum routinely saw him carry his wife to her seat before every home game , and then carry her out after . At home , he did the housework that his wife was unable to do . As a result , he was immensely popular with his peers and fans . 
 Siebert was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1964 , and is an honoured member of the Waterloo Region Hall of Fame . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Henry Edwards ( entomologist ) = 
 Henry Edwards ( August 27 , 1827 – June 9 , 1891 ) , known as " Harry " , was an English stage actor , writer and entomologist who gained fame in Australia , San Francisco and New York City for his theater work . 
 Edwards was drawn to the theater early in life , and he appeared in amateur productions in London . After sailing to Australia , Edwards appeared professionally in Shakespearean plays and light comedies primarily in Melbourne and Sydney . Throughout his childhood in England and his acting career in Australia , he was greatly interested in collecting insects , and the National Museum of Victoria used the results of his Australian fieldwork as part of the genesis of their collection . 
 In San Francisco , Edwards was a founding member of the Bohemian Club , and a gathering in Edwards ' honor was the spark which began the club 's traditional summer encampment at the Bohemian Grove . As well , Edwards cemented his reputation as a preeminent stage actor and theater manager . After writing a series of influential studies on Pacific Coast butterflies and moths he was elected life member of the California Academy of Sciences . Relocating to the East Coast , Edwards spent a brief time in Boston theater . This led to a connection to Wallack 's Theatre and further renown in New York City . There , Edwards edited three volumes of the journal Papilio and published a major work about the life of the butterfly . His large collection of insect specimens served as the foundation of the American Museum of Natural History 's butterfly and moth studies . 
 Edwards ' wide @-@ ranging studies and observations of insects brought him into contact with specimens not yet classified . Upon discovering previously unknown insects he would give them names , which led to a number of butterfly , moth and beetle species bearing " Hy . Edw . " ( for Henry Edwards ) as an attribution . From his theater interests to entomology , Edwards carried forward an appreciation of Shakespeare — in the designation of new insect species he favored female character names from Shakespeare 's plays . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Henry Edwards was born to Hannah and Thomas Edwards ( c . 1794 – 1857 ) at Brook House in Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye , Herefordshire , England , on August 27 , 1827 , and was christened on September 14 . From his older brother William , he picked up an interest in examining insects . He collected butterflies as a hobby , and studied them under the tutelage of Edward Doubleday . His solicitor father intended a law career for his son , but after a brief period of unsuccessful study , Edwards took a position at a counting house in London , and began acting in amateur theater . He then journeyed to join his brother William who had settled in Australia , nine miles ( 14 km ) north @-@ west of Melbourne along the bank of Merri Creek , a location then called <unk> . Aboard the sailing ship Ganges from March to June 1853 , he wrote descriptions of creatures such as the albatross that he encountered for the first time . After arriving in Melbourne , Edwards began collecting and cataloging the insects he found on his brother 's land , and further afield . Within two years , he had gathered 1 @,@ 676 species of insects , shot and mounted 200 birds , and pressed some 200 botanical specimens . This collection and that of William Kershaw were purchased by Frederick McCoy to form the nucleus of the new National Museum of Victoria . 
 The first Australian stage appearance by Edwards was with George <unk> Coppin 's company at the Queen 's Theatre in Melbourne . Later , he joined Gustavus Vaughan Brooke 's theatrical group . The part of Petruchio , the male lead in Shakespeare 's The Taming of the Shrew , was filled by Edwards at the Princess 's Theatre in Sydney in November , 1859 , playing opposite tragedian Avonia Jones as Katharine . In December that year Brooke retired from management , yielding the reins of his company to the team of Edwards and George Fawcett Rowe , English actor and playwright . Brooke continued to act under Edwards and Rowe : his starring performance in April 1860 as Louis XI in Dion Boucicault 's play of the same name was a stirring portrayal that Edwards , playing Jacques d <unk> , Duke of Nemours , recalled vividly for the rest of his life . Sharing the stage again in August , Brooke and Edwards were well received in their portrayal of twin brothers in a production of Shakespeare 's The Comedy of Errors in Melbourne , the first Australian mounting of that work . As a twist to pique public interest , Edwards and Brooke exchanged roles after two weeks ' run . However , not all of Edwards ' performances were successful : his turn at Angelo in Shakespeare 's Measure for Measure was called " invertebrate " by drama critic William John Lawrence ; in Lawrence 's estimation , Edwards and his fellow actors paled against the powerful performance of Avonia Jones as Isabella . 
 The renowned entomologist and collector William Sharp Macleay was sought out by Edwards whenever his stage appearances took him to Sydney . Beginning in 1858 , Macleay mentored Edwards and encouraged him to search for more insect specimens when his theater obligations allowed . Robust and adventuresome , Edwards occasionally trekked out into the wilds of Australia on the hunt for insects . While in Sydney , Edwards went up two times in a hot air balloon as a favor to George Coppin , narrowly avoiding severe injury or death in the first ascent . Edwards ' further travels included New Zealand , Peru , Panama and Mexico in pursuit of insects and dramatic roles . 
 = = San Francisco = = 
 In 1865 , Edwards began a 12 @-@ year residence in San Francisco , California . At the 1870 United States Census , Edwards reported himself as a non @-@ voting foreign @-@ born resident , a comedian by trade , living in a home worth $ 1 @,@ 000 . Edwards lived in San Francisco with a white woman listed in the census as " Mariana " , born in England , age 40 , and a 16 @-@ year @-@ old Chinese servant named Heng Gim . The woman Mariana was likely Edwards 's wife , the former Marianne Elizabeth Woolcott Bray who was born about 1822 – 1823 in New Street , Birmingham . In 1851 at the age of 28 , Bray married Gustavus Vaughan Brooke , and the two went to Australia to manage Brooke 's then @-@ new theater company . It was there that Edwards met Brooke and his wife , but after several years of the two men working together , Brooke remarried in February 1863 , taking Avonia Jones ( 1836 – 1867 ) as his second wife . Brooke died in an accident at sea in January 1866 , and Avonia Jones Brooke died in New York City the next year . Later reports spoke of Edwards marrying Brooke 's widow , without naming her . 
 In 1868 – 1869 Edwards leased and managed the Metropolitan Theater , and he was a founding member of the acting company of the California Theatre , which opened in January 1869 . The theater was directed and managed by actor John McCullough , and among the more notable productions was As You Like It in May 1872 , with McCullough playing Orlando and Edwards the banished Duke Senior . Walter M. Leman , who carried the part of Adam , opined in 1886 that " never since time was has Shakespeare 's charming <unk> been better put upon the stage . " 
 Edwards was one of the founders and the first vice president of the Bohemian Club , and served two terms as president , 1873 – 1875 . He hosted Shakespeare celebrations at the club in April 1873 , 1875 and 1877 , and a Bohemian Christmas celebration in December 1877 : " The Feast of Reason and Flow of Soul " . Edwards became a director of the San Francisco Art Association , and spoke for Lotta Crabtree at the dedication of Lotta 's Fountain in September , 1875 . 
 Still very much interested in insects , Edwards spent his spare time at the California Academy of Sciences studying butterflies under Hans Hermann Behr , the academy 's curator for Lepidoptera , the scientific order of moths and butterflies . Elected a member of the academy in 1867 , he concentrated on describing the structure and habits of moths and butterflies on the Pacific coast from British Columbia to Baja California . He went to visit John Muir in Yosemite Valley in June 1871 , with a letter of introduction from Jeanne Carr , the wife of California 's chief geologist Ezra S. Carr . The letter described Edwards as " one of Nature 's truest and most devoted disciples " , a <unk> who " has the keys to the Kingdom " . After the visit , Muir occasionally sent specimens from the Sierras to add to Edwards ' collection , carried to San Francisco by men such as geologist and artist Clarence King who were returning from Yosemite field study . Edwards presented a series of papers to the academy entitled Pacific Coast Lepidoptera , and classified two species as new to science . He named one <unk> <unk> for Muir , with " Hy . Edw . " as the attribution . In 1872 , Muir sent Edwards a letter , writing " You are now in constant remembrance , because every flying flower is branded with your name . " In 1873 , Edwards became the curator of entomology at the academy , and began to serve on the Publications Committee which produced the journal Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences . Beginning early that year , he befriended George Robert Crotch . Although it is sometimes claimed that he accompanied Crotch on his insect collecting tour of California , Oregon and British Columbia , Edwards was only aware of Crotch 's travels as a correspondent . Edwards independently visited British Columbia in 1873 , missing Crotch by several days at Vancouver Island . In 1874 , Edwards began to serve as one of the academy 's vice presidents , and for the academy in late 1874 after Crotch 's death from tuberculosis , he published a memorial tribute to the man . Edwards also wrote one of many tributes to academician Louis Agassiz at his death in late 1873 . At the academy on January 2 , 1877 , Edwards was elected member for life . 
 Though successful in San Francisco , Edwards decided to head for Boston and New York City to see if his career as an actor could benefit from appearances in the eastern United States . On June 29 , 1878 , somewhat fewer than 100 of his Bohemian friends gathered in the woods near Taylorville , California ( present @-@ day Samuel P. Taylor State Park ) , for a night @-@ time send @-@ off party in Edwards ' honor . Bohemian Club historian Porter Garnett later wrote that the men at the " nocturnal picnic " were " provided with blankets to keep them warm and a generous supply of liquor for the same purpose " . Japanese lanterns were used for illumination and decoration . This festive gathering was repeated without Edwards by club members the next year , and every year thereafter , eventually evolving and expanding into the club 's annual summer encampment at the Bohemian Grove , famous ( or infamous ) for the casual commingling of top politicians and powerful captains of industry in attendance . 
 = = Boston to New York = = 
 In late 1878 , Edwards joined a theater company in Boston , replacing another actor as " <unk> , Chief of Police " at a revival of the spectacle The Exiles at the Boston Theatre on Washington Street . After a four @-@ week run , he performed in other productions at the theater through the 1879 – 1880 season . In June , Edwards answered the 1880 census to report himself an England @-@ born actor living with his English wife " Marian " and his Chinese servant , Gim Hing . 
 From Boston , Edwards moved to New York to stay for some ten years , performing on stage and participating in insect studies . He was active in the Brooklyn and New York Entomological Societies . In 1881 , he co @-@ founded and edited a butterfly enthusiast 's periodical entitled Papilio , named for the genus Papilio in the swallowtail butterfly family , Papilionidae . Edwards served as editor until January 1884 when he gave the reins to his friend Eugene Murray @-@ Aaron of Philadelphia . Papilio was published until 1885 when its subscription base was merged into the more general <unk> Americana , published by the Brooklyn Entomological Society . 
 Beginning in December 1880 under Lester Wallack , the charismatic son of the theater 's founder , Edwards was associated with Wallack 's Theatre in New York , called the " finest theatre company in America " . Now in his 50s , the entomologist and actor appeared in such representative British dramatic roles as Prince <unk> in Forget Me Not , Max Harkaway in London Assurance , Baron Stein in Diplomacy , and Master Walter in The Hunchback , reprising James Sheridan Knowles 's earlier portrayal . Edwards used Wallack 's Theatre as his professional mailing address , and helped manage it upon occasion . Wallack , already head " Shepherd " of the Lambs Club , a modest meetinghouse of professional stage actors , invited Edwards to join . Once a Lamb , Edwards threw his energies in with those of Wallack and other club members to aid newspaper editor Harrison Grey Fiske in the organization of a charitable fund to support destitute actors or their widows . Wallack was made president of the resulting Actors ' Fund . A year after its first meeting on July 15 , 1882 at Wallack 's Theatre , Edwards was made secretary , a position he held for one year . His wife joined the Women 's Executive Committee of the Fund . 
 Edwards appeared in early 1882 at Palmer 's Theatre on Broadway and West 30th Street in a production of the English comedy The School for Scandal . Wallack stalwart John Gibbs Gilbert reached the height of his fame in the production , playing Sir Peter Teazle . As Sir Oliver Surface , Edwards , too , was lauded — Gilbert and Edwards shared the stage with Stella Boniface , Osmond Tearle , Gerald Eyre , Madame <unk> and Rose Coghlan . 
 Gathering together under one cover his various short subjects , essays , and elegies to fallen friends , Edwards published in 1883 a wryly humorous book entitled A <unk> Yarn , including tales of travels and stories of his time in the Bohemian Club . Dedicated to the Bohemians , " with grateful memories , and feelings of affectionate regard , " the book was favorably reviewed in the New York Tribune . This review was reprinted in the Literary News : " Mr. Edwards — remarkable for attainments in science no less than for versatile proficiency in the art of acting — presents a rare type of the union of talents greatly divergent and seldom found in one and the same person . " 
 In 1886 , Edwards was interviewed for The Theatre , a weekly magazine published in New York . Edwards was described as " unusually popular and genial " , with a " charming English " wife and a Chinese servant named Charlie who " adores his employers " and had served them for 17 years . The Edwards ' home was observed to be comfortable but decorated with an astonishing collection of wonders from around the globe . Displayed amid the biological specimens , rugs , china , furniture , and valuable photographs were paintings executed by other actors , including ones by Edward Askew Sothern and Joseph Jefferson . Edwards showed letters he had received from a wide array of notables such as writers William Makepeace Thackeray , Charles Dickens , Anthony Trollope and naturalists Charles Darwin , Louis Agassiz and John Lubbock , 1st Baron Avebury . One floor of the residence was seen to be wholly devoted to the entomologist 's collection of specimens , which Edwards said was insured for $ 17 @,@ 000 , $ 448 @,@ 000 in current value . Surrounded by his exotic possessions and " in the most perfect <unk> with his wife " , Edwards was reported to be the host of a " cultivated home " . 
 = = Last years = = 
 Two years after Alfred , Lord Tennyson , completed his Idylls of the King , a poetic telling of the King Arthur legend , Edwards and George Parsons Lathrop adapted it to the stage as a drama in four acts . The result was Elaine , a story of young love between Elaine of <unk> and Lancelot , fashioned with " flower @-@ like fragility " and " winning touches of tenderness " . Its first public presentation was a staged " author 's reading " at Madison Square Theatre on April 28 , 1887 , at which Edwards played the part of Elaine 's father , Lord <unk> . Months later it was presented by the company of A. M. Palmer , without Edwards in the cast , opening on December 6 , 1887 , at the same venue . The production proved both popular and profitable for Lathrop and Edwards . Annie Russell 's Elaine was admired for her " sweet simplicity and pathos which captured nearly every heart " . After a successful six @-@ week New York run , Palmer took Elaine on the road . 
 Actors associated with Wallack 's Theatre announced to the public that beginning in February 1888 a final series of old comedies would be revived , after which the company would be disbanded . Edwards served as stage manager for the run , and reprised several of his earlier roles including those of Max Harkaway in London Assurance and Colonel Rockett in Old Heads and Young Hearts . Taking part once again in The School for Scandal , the sixth and final play of the nostalgic series , Edwards received high praise for his depiction of a wealthy Englishman recently returned from India : " there is probably no better Sir Oliver on our stage than Mr. Edwards . " " <unk> esteemed " in the role , he was called a " sterling player " , representative " of a school which is fast disappearing " . 
 A testimonial production of Hamlet was mounted at the Metropolitan Opera House on May 21 , 1888 , to celebrate the life and accomplishments of an aging Lester Wallack , and to raise money to ease the chronic sciatica that arrested his career . " One of the greatest casts ever assembled " was formed into a company composed of Edwards as the priest , Edwin Booth as Hamlet , Lawrence Barrett as the ghost , Frank Mayo as the king , John Gibbs Gilbert as Polonius , Rose Coghlan as the player queen and Helena Modjeska as Ophelia . Other stars made cameo appearances , and Wallack was assisted up onto the stage to address the standing room crowd at intermission . Notables such as Mayor Hewitt and General Sherman were in attendance . More than $ 10 @,@ 000 was raised for Wallack 's care . In the following months , Edwards teamed with other actors and Wallack 's wife to help him write his memoir ; Wallack died in September . 
 The next year , Edwards published a significant treatise entitled Bibliographic Catalogue of the Described Transformation of North American Lepidoptera . In response to an invitation and after arranging a business contract , he traveled back to Australia to accept a position as stage manager of a theatrical company in Melbourne . Frustrated with the experience , Edwards sailed back to New York the next year with the intention of returning to acting , but poor health kept him from full enjoyment of the limelight . In March , Edwards appeared as Holofernes in Love 's Labour 's Lost at Augustin Daly 's Daly Theatre , but was often short of breath and unable to keep pace with the run — his part was given to a young Tyrone Power who also covered Edwards ' old role of Sir Oliver Surface for Daly 's road show of The School for Scandal . 
 To regain his strength , Edwards and his wife took a carriage to a rustic cottage refuge in <unk> in the Catskill Mountains but isolation , plain food and rest yielded little improvement . A physician was called and he informed Mrs. Edwards that there would be no recovery for her husband from the advanced Bright 's disease with complications from chronic pneumonia so she brought him back to New York City . Edwards died at home at 185 East 116th Street in East Harlem late on June 9 , 1891 , just hours after returning . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After his death , Edwards ' collection of 300 @,@ 000 insect specimens , one of the largest in the United States , was bought by his friends for $ 15 @,@ 000 for the financial benefit of his widow , and donated to the American Museum of Natural History ( AMNH ) as the cornerstone of their collection . Mrs. Harry Edwards also donated some of his other specimens , including two eggs of the order Rajiformes , the true rays . Museum trustees purchased the 500 volumes of entomology texts and 1 @,@ 200 pamphlets owned by Edwards to form the " Harry Edwards Entomological Library " , one of the handful of important book acquisitions made by the AMNH to expand their library in its early years . William Schaus , a student that Edwards guided and encouraged , but never met in person , went on to further define moth and butterfly characteristics in a large body of published work . 
 The " Hy . Edw . " designation appended to some butterfly species names indicates first description by Henry Edwards . This is not to be confused with the " Edw . " designation which stands for William Henry Edwards , an unrelated contemporary and correspondent of Edwards ' . At least two specimens were designated " Mrs. Hy . Edwards . " because they were collected and identified by his wife . Edwards named many butterflies in the families <unk> , Nymphalidae , Papilionidae and Lycaenidae , but his largest contribution was in the description of moth species in North America including Mexico : Arctiidae , <unk> , Hepialidae , Sesiidae , Noctuidae , Sphingidae , Lasiocampidae , <unk> , <unk> , Geometridae , Pyralidae , Saturniidae , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . In choosing names , Edwards favored female characters from the plays of William Shakespeare , such as Ophelia from Hamlet , Hermia from A Midsummer Night 's Dream , and Desdemona from Othello . For example , Edwards collected , classified and named the moth species Catocala <unk> and Catocala <unk> in 1880 , and Catocala <unk> in 1882 . 
 = = = Birth dates = = = 
 The birth date that Edwards gave as his own varied depending on the time and place he was asked . Parish records show he was christened in England on September 14 , 1827 , and corroborating this date he gave his age as 25 in June 1853 when he first arrived in Australia . However , when questioned in San Francisco for the 1870 United States Census , he gave his birth year as 1830 . Ten years later in Boston , he reported his age as 45 , implying a birth year of 1835 , but he returned to supplying the year 1830 along with the date August 27 for the brief biographical sketches used by theater and entomological publications . Two years before he died , he told a reporter from the <unk> that he was born in 1832 . A prominent obituary in The New York Times reported that his family gave his birthday as September 23 , 1830 , but that some published lists of actors ' ages , " not always trustworthy " , put his birth year at 1824 . 
 = Conisbrough Castle = 
 Conisbrough Castle is a medieval fortification in Conisbrough , South Yorkshire , England . The castle was initially built in the 11th century by William de Warenne , the Earl of Surrey , after the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . Hamelin Plantagenet , the illegitimate , parvenu son of Henry II , acquired the property by marriage in the late 12th century . Hamelin and his son William rebuilt the castle in stone , including its prominent 28 @-@ metre ( 92 ft ) -high keep . The castle remained in the family line into the 14th century , despite being seized several times by the Crown . The fortification was then given to Edmund of Langley , passing back into royal ownership in 1461 . 
 Conisbrough fell into ruin , its outer wall badly affected by subsidence , and was given to the Carey family in the 16th century . Its derelict state prevented it from involvement in the English Civil War of the 17th century and the remains were bought by the Duke of Leeds in 1737 . Sir Walter Scott used the location for his 1819 novel Ivanhoe and by the end of the 19th century the ruins had become a tourist attraction , despite the increasing industrial character of the area . 
 The state took over the management of the property in 1950 , but by the 1980s the visitor facilities were felt to be unsuitable , leading to a three @-@ way partnership being created between the local council , the state agency English Heritage and a local charitable trust to develop the castle . The keep was re @-@ roofed and re @-@ floored in the 1990s with the help of European Union funding . English Heritage took over control of the castle in 2008 and continue to operate the property as a tourist attraction . 
 The castle is made up of an inner and an outer bailey , the former surrounded by a stone curtain wall defended by six mural towers and the castle keep . The inner bailey would have included a hall , solar , chapel and other service buildings of which only the foundations survive . The design of Conisbrough 's keep is unique in England , and the historians Oliver Creighton and Stephen Johnson consider it an " architectural gem " and " one of the finest examples of late Norman defensive architecture " . The keep comprises a circular central tower with six massive buttresses ; its four floors would have included a main chamber and a private chamber for the lord above it . Although militarily weak , the design would have been a powerful symbol of Hamelin Plantagenet 's new social status as a major lord . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th – 12th centuries = = = 
 Conisbrough Castle was founded by William de Warenne , the first Earl of Surrey , who had taken part in the Norman conquest of England in 1066 and was rewarded by his father @-@ in @-@ law , William the Conqueror , with extensive estates in Yorkshire , Norfolk and Sussex . As part of these , Earl William was given the manor of Conisbrough , which had previously been owned by the late Harold Godwinson . The manor took its name from the Anglo @-@ Saxon name for the settlement , <unk> , meaning " the king 's fortress " , and formed a large estate comprising 28 townships , centred on an Anglo @-@ Saxon fortified burh at Conisbrough itself . 
 William built his castle on a rocky <unk> Limestone spur surrounded by steep banks , and the fortification included a motte , an inner bailey protected by an earth bank and palisades , an outer bailey , and possibly a timber keep . The castle was located around 175 feet ( 53 m ) above the river and would have dominated this part of the Don Valley . It was positioned directly opposite the village , which had probably contained the old Anglo @-@ Saxon burh . 
 The castle was held by William 's son , also called William , from 1088 to 1138 , and then by his son , another William , until his death in 1147 . Conisbrough and the earldom then passed through Isabel , William 's daughter , to her first husband , William de Blois , and then onto to her second husband , Hamelin Plantagenet , whom she married in 1163 . Hamelin was the illegitimate half @-@ brother of King Henry II , who had arranged the marriage , and the union brought him great wealth . Hamelin extensively rebuilt the castle around 1180 to 1190 , including constructing the stone keep ; given his parvenu status , he probably hoped to reinforce perceptions of his new elevated rank . King John visited the castle in 1201 . 
 = = = 13th – 15th centuries = = = 
 The castle continued in the ownership of Hamelin Plantagenet 's family , passing to his son William de Warenne in 1202 . William was probably responsible for the construction of new stone curtain walls around the inner bailey , destroying the former earthwork defences in the process . The inner bailey was levelled and William built a hall and service buildings inside the castle , again in stone . Conisbrough was inherited by William 's young son John de Warenne in 1239 , but he was still a minor and the castle was initially managed by his mother , Maud . 
 Under John , Conisbrough 's constables carried out a range of what the historian Stephen Johnson terms " colourful if rather unlawful dealings " ; one was ultimately charged with having conducted " devilish and innumerable oppressions " . Further work was carried out in the castle during John 's ownership , including modernising the castle hall and solar . 
 The castle passed to John 's grandson , also called John , in 1304 , who married Joan de Barr . The marriage broke down but John 's attempts to gain a divorce in 1316 failed in the law courts . John blamed Thomas , the Earl of Lancaster , for this and in response he kidnapped Thomas 's wife ; Thomas then retaliated by seizing Conisbrough Castle . Edward II intervened in the dispute and confirmed Thomas as the new owner of the castle . In 1322 , however , Thomas rebelled against the King and was executed , resulting in Edward taking control of Conisbrough himself . The King visited the castle in 1322 , and spent 40 marks on repairing both Conisbrough and the neighbouring castle of Pontefract . Edward was overthrown by his wife Isabella in 1326 and the castle was returned to John . John had hoped to pass the property to his mistress and two illegitimate sons , but he outlived them and on his death in 1347 it reverted to the control of the Crown . 
 Edward III gave the castle to his own son , Edmund of Langley , the Duke of York , who controlled it until 1402 . Edmund 's eldest son , Edward , owned it until 1415 , when it passed to Maud Clifford , the widow of Edmund 's younger son Richard , who lived there until 1446 . Richard of York then inherited the castle , and on his death in 1460 during the Wars of the Roses it passed to his son Edward , who seized the throne in 1461 , bringing Conisbrough back into Crown ownership once again . 
 = = = 16th – 19th centuries = = = 
