 = Jekyll ( TV series ) = 
 Jekyll is a British television drama serial produced by Hartswood Films and <unk> Productions for BBC One . The series also received funding from BBC America . Steven Moffat wrote all six episodes , with Douglas Mackinnon and Matt Lipsey each directing three episodes . 
 The series is described by its creators as a sequel to the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , rather than an adaptation of it , with the Robert Louis Stevenson tale serving as a backstory within the series . It stars James Nesbitt as Tom Jackman , a modern @-@ day descendant of Dr. Jekyll , who has recently begun transforming into a version of Mr. Hyde ( also played by Nesbitt ) . Jackman is aided by psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer , played by Michelle Ryan . Gina Bellman also appears as Claire , Tom 's wife . 
 Filming took place at various locations around southern England in late 2006 . The series was first transmitted on BBC One in June and July 2007 , receiving mainly positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Doctor Tom Jackman ( James Nesbitt ) , a married father of two , has abandoned his family without explanation to live in a heavily fortified basement flat . He hires psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer ( Michelle Ryan ) to help him with his unusual case . After explaining a set of elaborate security procedures to Reimer , he straps himself into a secured metal chair and undergoes a psychological transformation . 
 Reimer observes that Jackman 's alter ego exhibits rage , heightened senses , greatly superior strength and speed , and a more playful and flirtatious manner . She assures this persona she will keep his secrets just as she keeps Jackman 's , but asks for guarantees he will not harm her . After being informed of the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , Jackman 's alter ego takes Hyde 's name for his own and the two agree to form an uneasy truce . While they share a body , neither remembers what the other did while dominant . They use a micro cassette recorder to leave messages for each other . 
 Jackman began transforming into the violent , lecherous Hyde recently . Fearing for his family 's safety , he chose to isolate himself from them , but he cannot bring himself to cut off all contact , and visits his wife Claire ( Gina Bellman ) . During one such visit , Hyde assumes control and learns about Jackman 's family . 
 Miranda Callendar ( Meera Syal ) , a detective employed by Claire , learns about Hyde and informs Jackman that Jekyll and Hyde was not fiction , but a fictionalized version of actual events . Callendar shows Jackman a picture of the real Doctor Jekyll who lived in Edinburgh , Scotland in the 19th century . Jackman is startled to see that Jekyll looks exactly like him , and that he died at around Jackman 's current age ; and Callendar speculates that he is a descendant of the original Doctor Jekyll , except for the fact that Doctor Jekyll had died without children . 
 Jackman is also being stalked by a private security team led by an American named Benjamin ( Paterson Joseph ) . Unbeknownst to him , the team works for his former employers at the biotechnology firm , Klein and Utterson , and is directed by his friend Peter Syme ( Denis Lawson ) . 
 When Benjamin 's team puts Jackman 's children at risk , Hyde asserts himself , killing Benjamin and several of the men , and hospitalizing others . At the hospital he is approached by Sophia , an elderly woman who claims to be his mother , but before he can question her she disappears . 
 Jackman confronts Peter Syme , who attempts to drug him . This provokes Hyde to appear and take Syme and Claire hostage . Claire argues that they need to find a cure for Jackman 's condition . Syme insists that Klein and Utterson have had a cure for a long time . Jackman is captured and locked inside a metal coffin . 
 Reimer and Callendar confront Syme , claiming they know the truth about Jackman . Callendar theorizes that Klein and Utterson have access to cloning technology and that Jackman is Jekyll 's clone . Syme denies this and orders them taken away to be killed . 
 Syme reveals to Claire that the treatment Jackman is undergoing will stabilize into one persona : If it is Hyde , he will be kept for research in order to synthesize the potion that turned the original Jekyll into Hyde ; If it is Jackman , she is free to take him home . When the box is opened , Hyde is dominant . 
 In a flashback triggered by genetic memory , Hyde has a vision of a meeting between Jekyll and Robert Louis Stevenson , the author of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde . Stevenson agrees to write a fictional version of Jekyll 's case but reveals that he knows the truth : there is no potion . Instead , Jekyll was transformed into Hyde by his love for Alice , a maid within his household . Flashbacks into Jackman 's own life show his Hyde first manifesting fully during a seaside holiday with Claire , after the pair were accosted by hooligans . 
 Enraged by further threats to Jackman 's family , Hyde escapes from Klein and Utterson . Ms. Utterson , a ruthless redheaded American woman at the head of Klein and Utterson , takes Claire and her sons hostage at a private estate , locking the twins in miniature versions of the same coffin used on their father . 
 Tom 's alleged mother , Sophia , appears on the premises and helps Claire escape her locked bedroom . She tells Claire how Klein and Utterson had indeed tried to clone Doctor Jekyll but had been unsuccessful . Claire meets several of the failed attempts in the lowest basement of the building . They are disfigured and in a near @-@ vegetative state . Sophia explains that Jackman is a descendant of Doctor Jekyll , ( who died a virgin ) , through Mr Hyde , and by chance a perfect natural genetic duplicate , " a perfect throwback , a chance in a million " . Klein and Utterson had discovered this and had him under surveillance for almost his entire life , from when he was six @-@ months @-@ old . In order to trigger his transformation into Hyde , they created a clone of Alice , the maid whom Jekyll had loved . This clone is Claire herself . 
 Hyde tries to rescue Jackman 's family from Klein and Utterson , killing Syme and many other personnel . In the end there is a stand @-@ off , with Jackman and Claire 's sons held hostage and suffocating . The Hyde personality is apparently killed when he is shot with multiple bullets and then manages to avoid ' sharing the damage ' by taking the wounds onto himself while allowing Jackman to assume his undamaged , healthy form , leaving Doctor Jackman as the only personality . 
 Six months later , Jackman has tracked down Sophia , the woman who claimed to be his mother . When he questions her about his father , she reveals that she is the descendant of Hyde , the one through whom he had inherited the family curse from , and that it 's " never over " . As Jackman watches horrified , the powerless , tired , grey @-@ haired Sophia transforms into her own version of the Hyde persona , the feral , red @-@ headed Ms Utterson . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Jeffrey <unk> of <unk> Productions had the idea of a modern version of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde in the mid @-@ 1990s . He attempted to get it produced in the United States three times , but all three attempts fell through for various reasons . He returned to England from the west coast of the United States and joined with Hartswood Films when Elaine Cameron was scouting for ideas for a supernatural thriller . Cameron then approached Steven Moffat for a script , and a six @-@ part series was commissioned by the BBC 's Jane Tranter and John Yorke in November 2005 . BBC America signed on to provide co @-@ production funding in March 2006 . The producers regularly met with Moffat for brainstorming sessions . Cameron 's assistant took notes from these conversations , after which they would look over the notes and start the process again . The producers invited Moffat to " write anything " , with the intention of cutting the material back later . However , they were reluctant to cut material once they saw it on the page . The first episode starts with Jackman already knowing about his alter ego . Because the plot of Jekyll begins after the story has developed for the characters , Nesbitt says that the show feels like it is a second series . 
 Moffat explicitly describes the series as a sequel , rather than an adaptation , stating the Jekyll of the original story really existed , and Jackman is his " modern @-@ day descendant dealing with the same problems " . As Jekyll and Hyde is such a well @-@ known phrase , Moffat labored over what to call the series , eventually deciding upon Jekyll because that word " carries the name Hyde " . The final episode replaces the title " Jekyll " with " Hyde " . Producer Elaine Cameron says the one word title gives the series a " very modern feel " . Moffat initially named the character Jekyll rather than Jackman , but found it cumbersome to constantly explain that the book had not been written in this alternate universe . Instead he chose a version where the book exists , but changed the name to Jackman . Otherwise , Cameron felt , the character would appear stupid by not realising what was happening when turning into Hyde . 
 The scene between Tom and Katherine was expanded slightly in the sixth episode to keep their relationship active to facilitate a second series . However , no further episodes were commissioned . In an August 2007 interview , Moffat told Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger that he had a sequel written for the miniseries " should the BBC be interested " . Following Jekyll , Moffat became a co @-@ writer on Sherlock . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 James Nesbitt and his agent attended a meeting with Jane Tranter in late 2005 regarding the 2006 series of Murphy 's Law . At the conclusion of the meeting , she offered him a script for Jekyll , suggesting that he might like the role . Nesbitt took the script role as a way of putting a distance between his previous work . The casting of Nesbitt as Tom Jackman and Hyde was publicised on 12 December 2005 , but filming was not scheduled to begin until September 2006 , increasing Nesbitt 's anticipation to play the roles . Writer Steven Moffat said that the dual @-@ role required a very skilled actor , and a well @-@ known actor was necessary because it was such an expensive show to produce . The production team decided Nesbitt 's two characters would be mainly differentiated over a change in performance rather than by extensive make @-@ up because they wanted Hyde to be able to walk around in public without attracting attention . 
 Michelle Ryan , known for her long @-@ running role as Zoe Slater in the soap opera EastEnders , was revealed by tabloid newspaper The Sun to have been cast as " Jekyll 's sultry assistant " ( Katherine Reimer ) in August 2006 . Ryan believed herself to be too young for the part , though that aspect had already been written into the character . To prepare , she consulted the Royal College of Psychiatry . Ryan dyed her hair red for the role to help differentiate her from Tom Jackman 's wife . Denis Lawson was cast as Peter Syme . The actor consulted his post @-@ graduate son for information on Syme 's job . 
 Moffat initially doubted Gina Bellman 's suitability for the role of Claire Jackman because he associated her too much with Jane Christie , the character she had played in his sitcom Coupling . Moffat did not imagine the character to be as beautiful as Bellman , but her audition was so good that he revised his vision of the character . Bellman originally auditioned for the role of Katherine , but the producers wanted someone younger to play that role . However , Bellman said that she talked herself out of the role by arguing that there should be an age gap between Katherine and Claire to avoid Katherine becoming a threat to the wife . Bellman approached her role as if Claire had become caught up in Tom 's mid @-@ life crisis , an angle that impressed the producers . 
 Meera Syal was attracted to her role because Miranda was not a clichéd private detective and she thought the humour was " fresh " . During the second filming block , Mark Gatiss briefly joined the cast , playing the small but important role of Robert Louis Stevenson in flashback scenes in episode five . 
 Other roles included Paterson Joseph as Benjamin Maddox , and Linda Marlowe as Ms Utterson . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The series was filmed in two blocks of three episodes . The first three were directed by Douglas Mackinnon and the second three episodes by Matt Lipsey . It took an hour of make @-@ up each day to turn Nesbitt into Hyde ; a hairpiece lowered his hairline and prosthetics were added to his chin , nose and ear lobes . He also wore black contact lenses to make Hyde " soulless " . After many debates , the producers decided that Hyde 's imminent arrival would be indicated by the flash of a black eye . The eye imagery evolved during filming , and did not appear in the script . 
 Filming began in September 2006 with the zoo sequence from the second episode , in which Benjamin 's team have set Tom up to force out Hyde by placing his son , Eddie , in the lion 's den . Writing the sequence at a late stage in the production , Moffat wanted to compare Hyde 's natural instinct to kill to that of a lion . This was shot on location at Heythrop Zoo , a private zoo in Chipping Norton run by Jim Clubb , whose firm Amazing Animals specialises in training animals for cinema and television . The Norman Foster @-@ designed building in Chertsey , Surrey , which then housed the European Headquarters of video game designer and publisher Electronic Arts , was used as The Klein & Utterson Institute . A large country estate near Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames and in Bognor Regis was used for some of the scenes whilst on the run and in flashbacks . A disused Boys ' school in Gloucestershire , and the Hammer House in Wardour Street , Soho were used in episode six . Filming concluded on 20 December 2006 . 
 The schedule was tight for a complex production . The production team had twelve days to shoot each episode , which director Douglas Mackinnon says was the biggest challenge of the project . The required amount of material was shot for most of the episodes . However , an extra twenty minutes of material was filmed for episode six . Director Matt Lipsey recalls that the team struggled to cut the extra material whilst maintaining the integrity of the episode . Lipsey credits Moffat for not " being precious " over his material during the editing process , and points out that his willingness to cut superfluous material means that he is taken seriously when he argues for something to be retained . 
 The music was composed by Debbie Wiseman . The orchestra featured approximately 18 pieces . Some cues featured the vocals of Hayley Westenra to foreshadow the importance of a female voice . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Jekyll was broadcast on BBC One on Saturday nights from 9 p.m. A two @-@ week break occurred between showings of the third and fourth episodes because the Live Earth benefit concert was broadcast during its timeslot on 7 July . The series began airing on BBC America from 4 August , as part of a " Supernatural Saturday " programming strand . In Australia , Jekyll began broadcasting on ABC1 , Sundays at 8 @.@ 30 p.m. from 2 March 2008 with a double episode back @-@ to @-@ back each week . In Canada , Jekyll began broadcasting on Showcase , beginning at the end of August 2007 and on BBC Canada , Wednesdays at 10 : 00 p.m. from 26 March 2008 . Also in Hong Kong , Wednesday at 11 : 55 p.m. from 11 February 2009 on TVB Pearl . In the Netherlands , Jekyll was broadcast in the summer of 2009 on Sci @-@ Fi Channel . 
 Certain edits were made to the United Kingdom broadcasts in order to remove language unsuitable for Saturday night BBC One audiences . For example , a line spoken by Hyde in episode one was changed from " Who the fuck is Mr Hyde ? " to " Who the hell is Mr Hyde ? " 
 James Jackson of The Times rated the first episode four out of five stars , calling Nesbitt 's performance as Hyde " as entertainingly [ over the top ] as a dozen Doctor Who villains , with a palpable sense of menace to boot " . The conspiracy plot is praised as a storyline that distinguishes this series from other adaptations . The Daily Telegraph 's Stephen Pile criticised the script for " veering between Hammer horror and <unk> humour " and for being " cheesy " . He also criticised Hyde 's gravity @-@ defying hijinks and mistook Michelle Ryan for a model . In the same newspaper , James Walton called the first episode a combination of " a good yarn with several nicely thoughtful touches " . David Cornelius of DVDTalk was full of compliments for the series , summing up its review with the statement " six episodes , 300 minutes , not a single one of them wasted . ' Jekyll ' is this year 's finest television event " . The Australian Broadcasting Corporation , commenting on the series being part of their 2008 line @-@ up , said " This classic horror tale has been given a modern make @-@ over that will leave you on the edge of your seat and begging for more . James Nesbitt is outstanding as the new Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde " . Nesbitt was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Mini @-@ Series or Motion Picture Made for Television for his roles . Paterson Joseph received a mention in the nominations for the 2008 Screen Nation awards . 
 = = Home release = = 
 The BBFC rated all episodes as a 15 certificate on 11 June 2007 . Jekyll : Season One was released for region 2 on 30 July 2007 by Contender Home Entertainment . It includes uncut episodes , including restoration of some swearing cut from the BBC broadcasts . As DVD Verdict says about this uncut version , " the language is saucier , the violence a bit more bloody , and the sex more primal . " The disc contains audio commentaries on two episodes : producer Elaine Cameron , writer Steven Moffat and first @-@ block director Douglas Mackinnon comment on episode one , while executive producer Beryl Vertue , second @-@ block director Matt Lipsey and actress Gina Bellman comment upon the sixth episode . The set also contains two documentaries : " Anatomy of a Scene " focuses upon the production of the zoo sequence in episode two , while " The Tale <unk> " covers the evolution of the series . The first Region 1 release occurred in the United States on September 18 , 2007 , although the Region 1 Canadian release was delayed until October 9 , following the Canadian broadcast of the series on Showcase , which commenced at the end of August 2007 . 
 = István Szabó = 
 István Szabó ( born February 18 , 1938 ) is a Hungarian film director , screenwriter , and opera director . 
 Szabó is the most internationally famous Hungarian filmmaker since the late 1960s . Working in the tradition of European <unk> , he has made films that represent many of the political and psychological conflicts of Central Europe ’ s recent history , as well as of his own personal history . He made his first short film in 1959 as a student at the Hungarian Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts , and his first feature film in 1964 . 
 He achieved his greatest international success with Mephisto ( 1981 ) , which won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . Since then , most of Szabó 's films have been international co @-@ productions filmed in a variety of languages and European locations . He has continued to make some films in Hungarian , however , and even in his international co @-@ productions , he often films in Hungary and uses Hungarian talent . Szabó became involved in a national controversy in 2006 when the Hungarian newspaper Life and Literature revealed that he had been an informant of the Communist regime ’ s secret police . 
 = = Life = = 
 Born in Budapest , Szabó is the son of <unk> ( née Vita ) and István Szabó , the latter of whom was a doctor from a long line of doctors . Szabó came from a family of Jews who had converted to Catholicism , but were considered Jews by the Arrow Cross Party ( Hungarian Nazis ) . They were forced to separate and hide in Budapest sometime between October 1944 , when Nazi Germany occupied Hungary and installed the Arrow Cross in power , and February 1945 , when the Soviets defeated the German Army in Budapest . 
 Szabó survived by hiding at an orphanage , but his father died of diphtheria shortly after the German defeat . Memories of these events would later appear in several of his films . 
 In 2006 the Hungarian newspaper Life and Literature revealed that Szabó had been an informant of the Communist regime ’ s secret police . Between 1957 and 1961 , he submitted forty @-@ eight reports on seventy @-@ two people , mostly classmates and teachers at the Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts . According to historian Istvan Deak , only in one case did Szabó 's informing cause significant damage , when an individual was denied a passport . 
 After the article was published , over one hundred prominent intellectuals , including some of the people Szabó had denounced , published a letter of support for him . Szabó ’ s initial response to the article was that informing had been an act of bravery intended to save the life of former classmate Pál Gábor . When this claim turned out not to be true , Szabó admitted that his true motive had been to prevent his own expulsion from the Academy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Pre – 1964 = = = 
 As a child , Szabó wanted to be a doctor like his father . By the age of 16 , however , he had been inspired by a book by Hungarian film theorist Béla Balázs to become a film director . Upon graduation from high school , he became one of 11 applicants out of 800 who were admitted to the Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts . At the Academy , he studied with the famous director Félix <unk> , who became something of a father figure to Szabó . Among his classmates were Judit <unk> , <unk> <unk> @-@ Kovács , Janos Rozsa , Pál Gábor , Imre <unk> , Ferenc <unk> , and Zoltán <unk> . While at the Academy , Szabó directed several short films , culminating in his thesis film , <unk> ( 1963 ) , which won a prize at the International Short Film Festival Oberhausen . Thanks to János <unk> , head of the <unk> Film Studio at which he apprenticed , Szabó was given his first opportunity to direct a feature film at the age of 25 , rather than being required to spend ten years working as an assistant director . 
 The beginning of Szabó ’ s career coincided with the beginning of a “ new wave ” in Hungarian cinema , one of several new wave cinemas that occurred around this time throughout Western and Eastern Europe . The Eastern European new waves were caused by political liberalization , the decentralization of film industries , and the emergence of films as valuable commodities for export to Western European markets . The resulting films were more formally experimental , politically anti @-@ establishment , and , especially in the case of Szabó , psychologically probing than the films of the previous generation . Hungarian filmmakers in particular experienced a significant increase in freedom of expression due to the reforms of the Kádár government . 
 = = = Hungarian films , 1964 – 1980 = = = 
 Szabó 's first feature film , The Age of Illusions ( 1964 ) , is a partly autobiographical film about the struggles of Szabó ’ s generation in starting a career , encountering the obsolescence of the older generation , and establishing romantic relationships . The appearance of a poster for François Truffaut 's The 400 Blows in the background of a scene suggested Szabó 's artistic compatibility with Truffaut and the French New Wave . The film won the Silver Sail for Best First Work at the Locarno International Film Festival and a Special Jury Prize for Best Director at the Hungarian Film Festival . 
 Father ( 1966 ) is a coming of age story that displays Szabó ’ s increasing fascination with history and memory . The main character copes with the childhood loss of his father against the backdrop of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and memories of the Arrow Cross dictatorship . The film won the Grand Prix at the 5th Moscow International Film Festival and the Special Jury Prize at Locarno , and established Szabó as the most internationally famous Hungarian filmmaker of his time , as well as an auteur in the European film tradition . In 2000 , Father appeared as number 11 on a list of the 12 best Hungarian films according to a group of Hungarian film critics . 
 <unk> ( 1970 ) focuses on a young man ’ s relationship with his childhood sweetheart , told through flashbacks that include the Arrow Cross dictatorship and 1956 , and rendered in an experimental , fragmented form . This experimental tendency in Szabó ’ s films reached its apotheosis in 25 Fireman Street ( 1973 ) , which began as a short film , Dream About a House ( 1971 ) . 25 Fireman Street takes place during the course of a long , hot night in Budapest , during which the residents of a single apartment building are plagued by dream @-@ memories of pain and loss spanning thirty years , including both World Wars , the Arrow Cross dictatorship , the Communist takeover , and 1956 . While the film won the top prize at Locarno , Szabó was upset by its lack of success at the box office and at film festivals . Attributing this lack of success to the film 's complex structure , he decided to give his next film a simpler structure . 
 In Budapest Tales ( 1976 ) , Szabó traded his earlier , complex narrative structures , characterized by flashbacks and dreams , for a more linear one . At the same time , he traded the literal representation of history for an allegorical one . The film follows a disparate group of people who come together on the outskirts of an unnamed city at the end of an unnamed war to repair a damaged tram and ride it into the city . Allegorically , the film was interpreted by critics variously as representing Hungarian history specifically or universal human responses to war and reconstruction more generally . 
 Szabó 's first four full @-@ length films featured the actor András Bálint in roles based on Szabó himself . While Bálint also appeared in Budapest Tales , this was Szabó 's first feature film that did not contain a significant amount of autobiographical material . He did not make another autobiographical film until Meeting Venus , eighteen years later . 
 Budapest Tales was even less successful than 25 Fireman Street at the box office and festivals . According to author David Paul , this may explain why Szabó shifted gears even more dramatically in his next film , Confidence ( 1980 ) , in which historical events are represented straightforwardly , and are filtered through neither memory nor allegory . The film focuses on the relationship between a man and woman who are forced to share a room as they hide from the Arrow Cross toward the end of the Second World War . It garnered a Best Director award for Szabó at the Berlin Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 53rd Academy Awards . 
 = = = International co @-@ productions featuring Brandauer , 1981 – 1988 = = = 
 Szabó ’ s next three films constituted a new phase in his career — moving away from Hungarian productions , in Hungarian , written by Szabó alone , and featuring Bálint , and moving toward international co @-@ productions , in German , written by Szabó in collaboration with others , and featuring Austrian actor Klaus Maria Brandauer . The informal trilogy — Mephisto ( 1981 ) , Colonel Redl ( 1985 ) and Hanussen ( 1988 ) — features Brandauer in a series of roles based on historical figures who , as represented in the films , compromised their morals in order to climb the ladder of success within a context of authoritarian political power . In Mephisto , based on a novel by Klaus Mann , Brandauer plays an actor and theater director in Nazi Germany , a role based on Mann ’ s former brother @-@ in @-@ law Gustaf Gründgens . The film won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film , and the award for Best Screenplay at the Cannes Film Festival , and greatly increased Szabó ’ s international prestige . 
 In Colonel Redl , Brandauer plays Alfred Redl , counter @-@ intelligence chief of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire who was blackmailed into espionage for the Russians in order to prevent the revelation of his homosexuality . The film won top awards in Germany and the UK , but provoked a scandal in Austria , where several periodicals accused the film of bringing the country into disrepute . In Hanussen , Brandauer plays the real life clairvoyant performer Erik Jan Hanussen , whose growing fame brings him into increasingly close — and dangerous — contact with the Nazis . 
 = = = 1991 – present = = = 
 After his Brandauer trilogy , Szabó continued to make international co @-@ productions , filming in a variety of languages and European locations . He has continued to make some films in Hungarian , however , and even in his international co @-@ productions , he often films in Hungary and uses Hungarian talent . 
 Meeting Venus ( 1991 ) , the first of several English @-@ language films directed by Szabó — and his first comedy — is based on his experience directing Tannhäuser at the Paris Opera in 1984 . Niels <unk> plays a Hungarian directing the opera at an imaginary pan @-@ European opera company , and encountering a multitude of pitfalls that symbolize the challenges of a united Europe . An inside joke was that the multinational characters were all named with translations of " Taylor " , which is the meaning of " Szabó " . 
 With Sweet Emma , Dear <unk> ( 1992 ) , Szabó returned to a strictly Hungarian subject — this time , however , focused on a contemporary , rather than historical , social problem . The film follows two young , female teachers of Russian facing the obsolescence of their specialty after the fall of the socialist government , as well as a variety of types of sexual harassment in the new Hungary . The film won the top prize at the Berlin Film Festival . 
 Sunshine ( 1999 ) — a three @-@ hour historical epic , and an English @-@ language , international co @-@ production — was viewed by many critics as Szabó ’ s most ambitious film , and , along with Mephisto , his most important . Hungary ’ s Jews had figured in either a marginal or coded fashion in several of Szabó ’ s earlier films , produced during the socialist period when discourse around the history of the country ’ s Jews was more circumscribed . In Sunshine , for the first time , Szabó focused explicitly on this aspect of Hungarian history , which he himself had experienced as a child during the Arrow Cross dictatorship . Ralph Fiennes plays three generations in the Sonnenschein family as they experience the trials of twentieth @-@ century Hungarian Jewish history , from the late Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire through the Holocaust to the 1956 Revolution . 
 Several characters are based on real people , including the <unk> family , with their successful liquor business , the Olympic fencer Attila <unk> , and the Jewish police official Ernö <unk> . The film won European Film Awards for Best Screenwriter , Best Actor , and Best Cinematographer . It received a rating of 74 % Fresh from review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes . 
 An example of an extremely positive review was that of Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , who called it “ a movie of substance and thrilling historical sweep . ” A. O. Scott of the New York Times had a more mixed reaction , writing that , by the end , “ the movie has accumulated sufficient power and momentum to erase the memory of its earlier awkwardness . It shows such sympathy for its characters , and approaches its subject with such intelligence , that it 's easy to forgive the clumsy editing , the haphazard insertion of black @-@ and @-@ white newsreels , and the hyperventilating sexual ardor that seems to be a <unk> family curse . ” 
 In Taking Sides ( 2001 ) , Szabó returned to thematic territory he had explored in Mephisto . Stellan Skarsgård plays real life German conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler , and Harvey Keitel a U.S. Army investigator interrogating Furtwängler about his collaboration with the Nazis . The film won several awards at the Mar del Plata Film Festival in Argentina , including Best Director . 
 Being Julia ( 2004 ) , based on a novel by W. Somerset Maugham , stars Annette Bening as a famous British actress experiencing a series of romantic and professional rivalries . Bening won a Golden Globe Award for her performance . 
 In 2005 , Szabó was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 27th Moscow International Film Festival . 
 <unk> ( 2006 ) was a Hungarian production based on a 1932 novel by Zsigmond <unk> about political corruption . Sándor <unk> plays a newly elected attorney general whose relatives ( <unk> ) come out of the woodwork looking for favors . It was entered into the 28th Moscow International Film Festival . 
 The Door ( 2012 ) , an English language production based on a Hungarian novel by Magda Szabó ( no relation ) , focuses on the relationship between an affluent novelist ( Martina <unk> ) and her poor , mysterious maid ( Helen Mirren ) . It opened the 13th Tbilisi International Film Festival , and won the Michael Curtiz Audience Award at the Hungarian Film Festival of Los Angeles . 
 Szabó ’ s frequent collaborators have included actors András Bálint , Klaus Maria Brandauer , Péter <unk> , and Ildikó <unk> ; cinematographer Lajos Koltai ; and screenwriters Péter <unk> and Andrea <unk> . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Several interconnected themes run through Szabó ’ s films , the most common being the relationship between the personal and the political or historical . On the personal level , his first three feature films deal with coming of age issues , but political / historical events form the backdrop of these issues and continually rupture the attempts of the characters to lead their private lives . In an interview in 2008 , Szabó said , “ My mother once told me , ‘ We had a nice childhood and our youth was beautiful , but our life was destroyed by politics and history . ’ ” The political / historical events most commonly depicted are the dominant traumatic events of mid @-@ 20th century Hungarian and Central European history — Nazism , the Second World War , and , in Hungary — or , more accurately , Budapest — the Arrow Cross dictatorship and the Holocaust , the Communist takeover , and the 1956 Revolution . Szabó himself has frequently referred to this theme as the search for security . 
 A related theme is the moral compromises individuals make in order to succeed in immoral political systems . In an interview about Taking Sides , Szabó said , “ I don 't think that life is possible without making compromises . The question is only one of limits : how far to go . When one crosses the line , then the compromise starts to be a bad , even deadly , one . ” This theme is dominant in the Brandauer trilogy and , as Istvan Deak points out , may be related to Szabó ’ s own collaboration with the Communist secret police . 
 Another closely related theme is the arts — most often theater , but also music and film itself . In several of Szabó ’ s films — most famously in Mephisto — artists become caught up in conflicts around politics , role @-@ playing , and identity . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Szabó ’ s early films — culminating in <unk> and 25 Fireman Street — were influenced by the French New Wave in their experimentation with flashbacks , dream sequences , and unconventional narrative structures built on these techniques . 
 Szabó emphasizes iconography in his films , insofar as he tends to invest certain objects and places with symbolic meaning . Tram cars play this role in many of his films , and one becomes the central image in Budapest Tales . Budapest itself plays an important role in many of his films , including scenes of the Danube and of buildings Szabó lived in when he was a child . 
 Acting also plays a key role in Szabó ’ s films , as he values psychological complexity in his central characters . In his first several features , he tended to use the same lead actors over and over — first András Bálint , then Klaus Maria Brandauer . Consistent with this focus on acting , he frequently employs long close @-@ up shots to emphasize the play of emotions on the faces of his characters . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 In addition to writing and directing films , Szabó has also served in a variety of other capacities in the film industry , including writing and directing television movies and episodes , short films , and documentaries , as well as serving as assistant director , screenwriter , producer , and actor in films directed by others . In 1969 , he was a member of the jury at the 6th Moscow International Film Festival . 
 Szabó has directed several operas , including Tannhäuser in Paris , Boris Godunov in Leipzig , Il Trovatore in Vienna , and Three Sisters in Budapest . He has taught at film schools in Budapest , London , Berlin , and Vienna . In 1989 , he was one of the founding members of the European Film Academy , and , in 1992 , of the Széchenyi Academy of Literature and Arts . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Television = = 
 = = Appearances in documentaries = = 
 = Jim and Mary McCartney = 
 James " Jim " McCartney ( 7 July 1902 – 18 March 1976 ) and Mary Patricia McCartney ( née Mohan ) ( 29 September 1909 – 31 October 1956 ) were the parents of musician , author and artist Paul McCartney of the Beatles and Wings , and younger brother photographer and musician Mike McCartney ( better known professionally as Mike <unk> ) , who worked with the comedy rock trio the Scaffold . 
 Like many families in Liverpool , the McCartney and Mohin families are of Irish descent . Jim worked for most of his life in the cotton trade , as well as playing in ragtime and jazz bands in Liverpool , while Mary was a trained nurse and midwife . 
 The McCartney family lived in council houses during Mary 's life , but Paul later bought his father a house called Rembrandt , in Heswall , Cheshire . Jim encouraged his two sons to take up music by buying instruments for them to learn , as well as improving their education . Mary was Paul 's inspiration for the song , " Let It Be " . After Mary 's death , Jim married Angela Williams and adopted her daughter from a previous marriage , Ruth McCartney . 
 = = McCartney and Mohin = = 
 Jim 's great @-@ grandfather , James McCartney ( an upholsterer ) , was born in Ireland , but it was previously unknown where Jim 's grandfather , James McCartney II , was born . New evidence found in Scottish archives suggests that James McCartney moved with his family ( including James McCartney II ) from Ireland to Galloway , Scotland , around 1859 , before moving south and settling in Liverpool . 
 James II ( a plumber and painter ) married Elizabeth Williams in 1864 , in Liverpool . The pair were both under @-@ age when they were wed , but found a place to live together in Scotland Road . Jim 's father , Joseph " Joe " McCartney ( born 23 November 1866 ) was a tobacco @-@ cutter by trade when he married Florence " Florrie " Clegg ( born 2 June 1874 ) in the Christ Church , Kensington , Liverpool , on 17 May 1896 . Joe never drank alcohol , went to bed at 10 o 'clock every night , and the only swear word he used was " <unk> " . Florrie was known as " Granny Mac " in the neighbourhood and was often consulted when families had problems . 
 Mary 's father was born in <unk> , County Monaghan , Ireland , in 1880 , as Owen Mohan , but permanently changed his name to Mohin when he was at school to avoid confusion with many other pupils with the same surname . After moving to Liverpool , he worked as a <unk> , and married Mary Theresa <unk> from Toxteth Park , at St. Charles Roman Catholic Church , on 24 April 1905 . 
 = = = Jim = = = 
 Jim was born at 8 Fishguard Street , Everton , Liverpool and was the third eldest of seven children . The McCartney children were John ( Jack ) , Edith , James ( Jim ) , Ann , Millie , Jane ( Jin ) and Joe ( who was named after a brother who died in infancy ) . Joe and Florrie McCartney moved shortly after Jim 's birth to 3 Solva Street in Everton , which was a run @-@ down terraced house about three @-@ quarters of a mile from the Liverpool city centre , where Jim attended the Steers Street Primary School off Everton Road . After leaving school at 14 , Jim found work for six shillings a week as a cotton " sample boy " , at A. <unk> & Co . ; a cotton broker in Chapel Street , Liverpool . Jim 's job entailed running up and down Old Hall Street with large bundles of cotton that had to be delivered to cotton brokers or merchants in various <unk> . He worked ten @-@ hour days , five days a week , although he received a bonus at Christmas that was almost double his annual salary . 
 When World War II started Jim was too old to be called up for active service , as well as having previously been disqualified on medical grounds after falling from a wall and smashing his left eardrum when 10 years old . After the cotton exchange closed for the duration of the war , Jim worked as an inspector at Napier 's engineering works , which made shell cases that were later filled with explosives . He volunteered to be a fireman at night and often watched Liverpool burning from his rooftop observer 's position . Between 1940 and 1942 , Liverpool endured 68 air @-@ raids , which killed or injured more than 4 @,@ 500 of the population and destroyed more than 10 @,@ 000 homes . After the war he worked as an inspector for Liverpool Corporation 's Cleansing Department before returning to the cotton trade in 1946 . 
 Jim avidly read the Liverpool Echo or Express , liked solving crosswords and instigated discussions about varied subjects . His attitude to life was based upon self @-@ respect , perseverance , fairness and a strong work ethic . His political views were far from left @-@ wing , as he insisted that there was nothing anyone could do about the situation the working classes were in at the time , and nothing would ever change . 
 62 @-@ year @-@ old Jim was earning £ 10 a week in 1964 , but Paul suggested that his father should retire , and bought " Rembrandt " ; a detached mock @-@ Tudor house in <unk> Road , Heswall , Cheshire , for £ 8 @,@ 750 . He bought his father a horse called " Drake 's Drum " , and a couple of years later , the horse won the race immediately preceding the Grand National . 
 Jim died of bronchial pneumonia on 18 March 1976 . His second wife , Angela McCartney ( née Williams ) said that his last words were " I 'll be with Mary soon . " Jim died two days before a Wings European tour ; his eldest son was unable to attend the funeral . Jim was cremated at <unk> Cemetery , near Heswall , Merseyside on 22 March 1976 . 
 = = = Mary = = = 
 Mary Patricia Mohan was born at 2 Third Avenue , <unk> , Liverpool . After two years Mary 's father met and married his second wife , Rose , while on a trip to Monaghan , in Ireland . Rose arrived in Liverpool with two children from a previous marriage , but Mary , who had until then been looking after the Mohan family , realised that Rose did not care much for domesticity or her new husband 's children . After a year she chose to live with her aunts . In 1923 , at the age of 14 years , Mary started work as a nurse trainee at the Smithdown Road Hospital , and then took a three @-@ year training course at Walton Road Hospital in Rice Lane , Liverpool ; eventually becoming a state registered nurse . 
 Mary became a domiciliary health visitor and midwife , and was on @-@ call day or night , riding a bicycle to houses where she was needed as a midwife . Her eldest son , Paul , said his first memory was watching her cycling away when it was snowing heavily . After she had been diagnosed with cancer , Mary still carried on cycling to work , but often doubled up in pain and had trouble breathing . The day Mary was due to have a mastectomy operation , she cleaned the McCartney house and laid her two sons ' school clothes out ; ready for the next day . She said to Dill Mohin , her sister @-@ in @-@ law , " Now everything 's ready for them in case I don 't come back . " Mary died of an embolism on 31 October 1956 , after an operation to stop the spread of breast cancer . Her last words to Dill Mohin were " I would love to have seen the boys growing up . " Mary was buried on 3 November 1956 at Yew Tree Cemetery , Finch Lane , Liverpool . Paul later named his daughter Mary after his mother , and Michael released an album entitled Woman in 1972 , including the song , " Woman , " with a photo of Mary on the front cover . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Mary met her future husband during an air raid on Liverpool in 1940 , when Jim was 38 years old , and had settled into what his friends thought was , " a confirmed bachelorhood . " Mary had been too career @-@ conscious to think of marriage and , at the age of 31 years , was thought of as a spinster . They met in June 1940 , at 11 <unk> Avenue , West Derby , the McCartney family home . Mary was staying with Jim 's sister , Jin , because of the lack of accommodation in Liverpool at the time . As Mary sat quietly in an armchair , the air @-@ raid sirens sounded at 9 : 30 . At that time , the group moved to the Anderson shelter in the back garden to wait for the all @-@ clear , but as there was an intensive bombing raid , the signal did not come and everyone was thus forced to sit in the cellar until dawn . Mary talked long enough with Jim to become romantically interested in him , and thought that he was " utterly charming and uncomplicated , " as well as being entertained by his " considerable good humour . " They took out a marriage licence at Liverpool Town Hall on 8 April 1941 , and were married a week later at St. Swithin 's Roman Catholic chapel in <unk> , West Derby , on 15 April 1941 . They first lived at 10 Sunbury Road , Anfield , and then resided for a short time at 92 Broadway , Wallasey , during November 1942 . Jim 's job at <unk> was classified as war work , so the McCartneys were given a small , but temporary , prefab house at 3 Roach Avenue , Knowsley . 
 Mary 's job enabled the McCartneys to move to a ground @-@ floor flat at 75 Sir Thomas White Gardens , off St. Domingo Road in Everton , to live in a rent @-@ free flat that was supplied by her employers . They moved shortly after , in February 1946 , to 72 Western Avenue in Speke . In 1948 , the family moved again to 12 Ardwick Road ( also in Speke ) which was part of a new estate in the suburbs of Liverpool . The frequent moves to better areas were Mary 's idea , as she wanted to raise her children in the best neighbourhood possible . 
 In 1955 , the McCartney family moved for the last time to a small three @-@ bedroomed brick @-@ built terrace house at 20 Forthlin Road in Allerton , which is now owned by The National Trust . It only cost £ 1 : 6s : 0d per week , which was due to Mary 's seniority at the hospital . Before moving to Forthlin Road , Jim had been secretary of the Speke Horticultural Society , and had often sent his sons out to canvass for new members . Jim planted dahlias and <unk> in the front garden of Forthlin Road and regularly trimmed the lavender hedge , although it was Paul 's job to collect horse manure from the local streets in a bucket to be dug into the flowerbeds . As Jim was a heavy smoker , Jim would first dry and then crush sprigs of Lavender and then burn them ( like incense ) in the ashtrays to kill the smell of his cigarette smoke . 
 Money was a problem in the McCartney house , as Jim only earned up to £ 6 @.@ 00 a week , which was less than his wife . Because of their financial situation , the McCartney family could not afford to buy a television set until the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 , and never owned a car . His two sons were the first in the McCartney family line to buy cars . When The Beatles became successful , Jim had to leave Forthlin Road because fans used to stand outside and stare through the windows , which made him feel uncomfortable and nervous . Eight years after Mary 's death , Jim married Angela Williams , on 24 November 1964 . Williams had a daughter from a previous marriage , Ruth , whom Jim legally adopted . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 James Paul McCartney ( born 18 June 1942 ) and Peter Michael McCartney ( born 7 January 1944 ) were both delivered in the Walton General Hospital in Rice Lane , Liverpool , where Mary had previously worked as a nursing sister in charge of the maternity ward . Mary was welcomed back shortly before she gave birth to her first son by being given a bed in a private ward . Jim was not present at the birth as he was fighting a warehouse fire , but arrived at the hospital two hours later . 
 As Mary was a Roman Catholic and Jim a Church of England Protestant — who later turned agnostic — their children were baptised Roman Catholic but raised non @-@ denominationally , although Mary had married Jim on the promise that any children would be baptised in the Catholic faith . Although registered on his birth certificate as James Paul McCartney their first son was known as Paul thereafter . The two boys were not enrolled in Catholic schools , as their father believed that they leaned too much towards religion instead of education . Paul remembers his mother encouraging her children to use the Queen 's English and not the Liverpudlian dialect , which was unusual for the area they lived in . 
 Jim and Mary would often take Paul and Michael for a walk to the local rustic village of Hale ( home of the giant Childe of Hale 's gravesite ) . According to Paul , these frequent trips out of Liverpool to the countryside inspired his love of nature . The McCartneys had a full set of George Newnes encyclopedias which Jim encouraged Paul and Michael to use , and told his sons to look up any word they did not understand . After Paul had passed the Eleven @-@ plus Exam — meaning he would automatically gain a place at the Liverpool Institute — it was hoped that Paul would become a doctor or a teacher . Michael would also attend the Liverpool Institute two years later . After Mary 's death , Paul and Michael were sent to live with Jim 's brother Joe , and his wife Joan , for two months , so as to let their father grieve in private . Jim depended heavily on his sisters , Jin and Millie , to help around the house . Jim later took part in the running of the household , as Cynthia Lennon remembered that when she and John Lennon used to visit Forthlin Road , Jim would often answer the door with his sleeves rolled up , a tea towel in his hand and an apron tied around his waist . When Paul later played at The Cavern during lunchtimes , Jim would drop off food there that Paul would later put in the oven at Forthlin Road . Ruth remembered that Jim was funny and musical with her , but also strict when she was young , and was insistent that she learned good table manners and etiquette when speaking to people . 
 = = Music = = 
 Joe McCartney , Jim 's father , was a traditionalist who liked opera and played an E @-@ flat tuba in the local Territorial Army band that played in Stanley Park , and the Copes ' Tobacco factory Brass Band where he worked . He also played the double bass at home , sang , and hoped to interest his children in music . Jim learned how to play the trumpet and piano by ear , and at the age of 17 started playing ragtime music . Joe McCartney thought that ragtime — the most popular music of the period — was " tin @-@ can music " . Jim 's first public appearance was at St Catherine 's Hall , Vine Street , Liverpool , with a band that wore black masks as a gimmick , calling themselves the Masked Melody Makers . He later led Jim Mac 's Jazz Band in the 1920s , with his brother Jack on trombone , and composed his first tune , " Eloise " . Paul would later record it as , " Walking in The Park With Eloise " . Jim had an upright piano in the Forthlin Road front room that he had bought from Harry Epstein 's North End Music Store ( NEMS ) and Brian Epstein , Harry 's son , later became The Beatles ' manager . 
 Jim had a collection of old , 78 rpm records that he would often play , or perform his musical " party @-@ pieces " — the hits of the time — on the piano . He used to point out the different instruments in songs on the radio to his sons , and took them to local brass band concerts . Jim also taught them a basic idea of harmony between instruments , and Paul credits Jim 's tuition as being helpful when later singing harmonies with Lennon . After Mary 's death , Jim bought Paul a nickel @-@ plated trumpet as a birthday present . When skiffle music became popular , Paul swapped the trumpet for a £ 15 Framus Zenith ( model 17 ) acoustic guitar . Paul also played his father 's Framus Spanish guitar when writing early songs with Lennon . 
 With encouragement from Jim , Paul started playing the family piano and wrote " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " on it . Jim advised Paul to take some music lessons , which he did , but soon realised that he preferred to learn ' by ear ' ( as his father had done ) and because he never paid attention in music classes . After Paul and Michael became interested in music , Jim connected the radio in the living room to extension cords connected to two pairs of Bakelite headphones so that they could listen to Radio Luxembourg at night when they were in bed . 
 After first meeting Lennon , Jim warned Paul that he would get him " into trouble " , although he later allowed The Quarrymen to rehearse in the dining room at Forthlin Road in the evenings . Jim was reluctant to let the teenage Paul go to Hamburg with The Beatles until Paul said the group would earn £ 15 per week each . As this was more than he earned himself , Jim finally agreed , but only after a visit from the group 's then @-@ manager , Allan Williams , who said that Jim should not worry . Jim was later present at a Beatles ' concert in Manchester when fans surrounded drummer Pete Best , and ignored the rest of The Beatles . Jim criticised Best by saying , " Why did you have to attract all the attention ? Why didn 't you call the other lads back ? I think that was very selfish of you " . Bill Harry recalled that Jim was probably " The Beatles ' biggest fan " , and was extremely proud of Paul 's success . Shelagh Johnson — later to become director of The Beatles ' Museum in Liverpool — said that Jim 's outward show of pride embarrassed his son . Jim enlisted Michael 's help when sorting through the ever @-@ increasing sacks of fan letters that were delivered to Forthlin Road , with both composing " personal " responses that were supposedly from Paul . Michael would later have success on his own with the group The Scaffold . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Paul wrote " I Lost My Little Girl " just after Mary had died , and explained that it was a subconscious reference to his late mother . He also wrote " Golden Slumbers " at his father 's house in Heswall , and said the lyrics were taken from Ruth McCartney 's sheet @-@ music copy of Thomas Dekker 's lullaby — also called " Golden Slumbers " — that Ruth had left on the piano at Rembrandt . Hunter Davies , who was at Jim 's house at the time doing an interview for his Beatles ' biography , remembered Jim listening to an acetate disc of " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " . Davies wrote that Paul recorded the song specifically for his father , as Jim was then 64 years old and had married Angela two years previously . Paul wrote " Let It Be " , because of a dream he had in 1968 . He said that he had dreamt of his mother , and the " Mother Mary " lyric was about her . He later said , " It was great to visit with her again . I felt very blessed to have that dream . So that got me writing ' Let It Be ' . " 
 In 1974 , Paul recorded a song his father had previously written , entitled " Walking in the Park with Eloise " , which was released by Wings under the pseudonym , " The Country Hams " . The Country Hams ' single was backed with a tune entitled " Bridge on the River Suite " . Both songs can be found on the CD Wings at the Speed of Sound from The Paul McCartney Collection . 
 = M @-@ 99 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 99 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs from the Ohio state border , where it connects to State Route 15 ( SR 15 ) , north to Lansing , where it terminates at a junction with Interstate 496 ( I @-@ 496 ) and the Capitol Loop . The highway mainly serves local communities along the route as it passes through farm lands in the southern part of the state . One segment is routed concurrently with US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in Jonesville while the northern end runs through urban areas on a street named for Martin Luther King , Jr. in Lansing . 
 The current highway is the third to carry the M @-@ 99 designation . The others were located near Lake Michigan near Muskegon in the Lower Peninsula and Gulliver in the Upper Peninsula in the 1920s and 1930s . The current highway was first designated as parts of M @-@ 34 and M @-@ 64 in 1919 . These numbers were later dropped in favor of an M @-@ 9 designation in 1929 . For part of 1934 , a loop route was designated M @-@ 158 in Hillsdale County that was used for a rerouted M @-@ 9 in the area . The M @-@ 99 designation was applied to the highway in 1940 . Since then , the state has completed paving twice ; one segment was returned to gravel surface for two years in the 1950s . The southern section in Hillsdale County was rerouted in the 1960s , and sections were converted into divided highways in the late 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 15 ends at the Michigan state line just north of Pioneer , Ohio , where it becomes M @-@ 99 . The roadway travels northward from the state line on Pioneer Road , through mostly agricultural areas of Hillsdale County before reaching a junction with M @-@ 34 just west of Osseo . The trunkline turns westward on Hudson Road , which curves to the north around Baw Beese Lake just southeast of Hillsdale . M @-@ 99 passes through Hillsdale on a northwest course on Broad Street and Carlton Road , passing just a few blocks to the west of Hillsdale College . After leaving town , the road bends to the north as Olds Street as it runs parallel to the St. Joseph River to Jonesville . In that community , M @-@ 99 intersects US 12 . The two highways run concurrently through Jonesville for less than half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before M @-@ 99 returns to its northwesterly course . It leaves the town toward Litchfield continuing parallel to the river . 
 In Litchfield , M @-@ 99 enters the town from the southeast , passing near downtown where it meets the northern terminus of M @-@ 49 . The highway leaves Litchfield heading northwest on Homer Road for a few miles before bending to the north as it crosses into Calhoun County . The trunkline passes through more farmland as it runs toward Homer on Hillsdale Street . In Homer , after passing through a roundabout , M @-@ 99 meets up with M @-@ 60 and the two highways run concurrently through the town to the northeast . The road briefly splits into a divided highway near the end of the concurrency . M @-@ 99 heads north , while M @-@ 60 continues eastward . From here , M @-@ 99 continues northward on 28 Mile Road toward the city of Albion . After crossing the Kalamazoo River in downtown , M @-@ 99 merges with Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) . M @-@ 99 continues east concurrently with the business loop on Michigan Avenue passing near Albion College before heading back north to an interchange with I @-@ 94 at exit 124 ; this interchange marks the end of BL I @-@ 94 and M @-@ 99 continues northward on Eaton Rapids Road . 
 M @-@ 99 heads north through farmland to the village of Springport where it turns eastward along Main Street as it passes through the town . The highway continues easterly on Eaton Rapids Road before turning northward to cross into Eaton County . Shortly after crossing the county line , M @-@ 50 comes in from the southwest to meet up with M @-@ 99 . The two highways travel together into Eaton Rapids . Together they form Main Street in the city before they separate on the north side of town . M @-@ 50 leaves to the northwest as Dexter Road , and M @-@ 99 continues to the northeast as Canal and Michigan streets . For the next few miles , the trunkline splits into a divided highway and runs parallel to the general course of the Grand River . M @-@ 99 crosses the river southeast of <unk> after the opposing directions merge back together as an undivided highway . North of the river crossing , M @-@ 99 meets I @-@ 96 at the latter 's exit 101 on the southern border of Lansing . 
 From I @-@ 96 , the road continues north through residential neighborhoods into Lansing as Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard . The highway travels northeasterly through the southern side of the capital city , as far as Jolly Road . There it turns northward through the Old Everett Neighborhood . The street is bordered by commercial properties in this area . M @-@ 99 widens into a boulevard south of the intersection with Mount Hope Avenue before crossing the Grand River . North of the river , the highway is bordered by the site of the former Lansing Car Assembly plant , which for a century produced <unk> and other GM cars . M @-@ 99 ends at a junction with I @-@ 496 just north of the assembly plant area at exit 5 ; MLK Boulevard continues north from this interchange as the Capitol Loop . 
 M @-@ 99 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 99 were the 32 @,@ 262 vehicles daily north of Mount Hope Avenue in Lansing ; the lowest counts were the 2 @,@ 300 vehicles per day between the state line and the M @-@ 34 junction . No section of M @-@ 99 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 When the state highway system was originally signed in 1919 , M @-@ 99 was designated on a road between the Lake Michigan shoreline and M @-@ 11 ( now US 31 ) between Muskegon and Hart . This highway was decommissioned in 1929 . In 1931 , M @-@ 99 was designated on a gravel road in the Upper Peninsula from US 2 just east of Gulliver ) to Port Inland on Lake Michigan . This highway was decommissioned as well in 1939 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 In 1919 , the highway that is now M @-@ 99 was first signed as M @-@ 64 from the Ohio state line to Hillsdale and as M @-@ 34 from Hillsdale to the Litchfield area . In 1924 , the western terminus of M @-@ 34 was extended to Homer where it terminated at M @-@ 60 . Just a few years later , in 1926 , the western terminus was truncated , to end at Hillsdale , with the remainder to Jonesville becoming an extension of the M @-@ 64 . 
 In 1929 , this version of M @-@ 64 was renumbered M @-@ 9 . In 1934 , M @-@ 9 traveled on Pioneer Road in Hillsdale County , from the Ohio border before turning west on Burt Road , north on Clark Road , west on Montgomery Road then north onto Hillsdale Road . During this time a loop was planned to continue north from the corner of Pioneer and Burt Roads to Montgomery Road where it turned west and met back up with M @-@ 9 at Clark Road . This short loop was designated M @-@ 158 , however later in the year the routing of M @-@ 9 was shifted onto the M @-@ 158 alignment , eliminating that route . By the middle of 1936 , the highway was extended northward to end in Lansing . The M @-@ 9 designation was replaced with M @-@ 99 in 1940 . 
 By 1947 , M @-@ 99 was completely paved . One segment between Litchfield and Homer was converted back to gravel surface in 1952 ; a change that was reverted two years later . By 1960 , the former US 12 / M @-@ 99 concurrency through Albion was redesignated Business US 12 through the city when the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway was completed . Within a year , that business loop was redesignated BL I @-@ 94 when the US 12 designation was removed from the freeway and applied to the former US 112 ; at the same time , the US 112 / M @-@ 99 concurrency in Jonesville became US 12 / M @-@ 99 as well . 
 A new alignment of M @-@ 99 highway was opened from the Ransom area north to Osseo in 1966 ; the western terminus of M @-@ 34 was scaled back to end at the new highway near Osseo and M @-@ 99 supplanted M @-@ 34 from Osseo to Hillsdale . The divided highway section of M @-@ 99 was opened north of Eaton Rapids in 1979 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1853 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1853 Atlantic hurricane season featured eight known tropical cyclones , none of which made landfall . Operationally , a ninth tropical storm was believed to have existed over the Dominican Republic on November 26 , but HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – now excludes this system . The first system , Tropical Storm One , was initially observed on August 5 . The final storm , Hurricane Eight , was last observed on October 22 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . At two points during the season , pairs of tropical cyclones existed simultaneously . Four of the cyclones only have a single known point in their tracks due to a sparsity of data , so storm summaries for those systems are unavailable . 
 Of the season 's eight tropical cyclones , four reached hurricane status . Furthermore , two of those four strengthened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The strongest cyclone of the season , the third hurricane , peaked at Category 4 strength with 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds . With a minimum barometric pressure of 924 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) , it was the most intense tropical cyclone recorded in the Atlantic basin until the 1924 Cuba hurricane . The hurricane caused 40 fatalities after a brig went missing off the coast of North Carolina . Despite remaining offshore , Tropical Storm Five brought very strong winds to the Mexican city of Veracruz . Hurricane Eight brought strong winds and rough seas to North Florida and Georgia , causing significant damage in the latter . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 Meteorologist William C. Redfield first observed the season 's third tropical storm south of Cape Verde on August 30 , which was the first Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane ever recorded . Initially , the storm moved west @-@ northwestward and gradually strengthened , becoming a hurricane on September 1 . Over the next two days , the hurricane intensified significantly and reached Category 2 strength early on September 2 . The system strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane by September 3 , attaining its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 924 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) was recorded by the barque Hermann soon thereafter . It was the most intense storm in the Atlantic until the 1924 Cuba hurricane , a Category 5 hurricane with a minimum pressure of 910 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . The Great Havana Hurricane of 1846 may have been stronger , though it is discounted because HURDAT records did not begin until the 1851 season . 
 By September 5 , the hurricane curved toward the northwest and began to weaken . Early on September 7 , it turned northward and fell to Category 3 intensity , situated about 340 miles ( 550 km ) east of Charleston , South Carolina . The hurricane passed offshore North Carolina later that day , and its outer rainbands produced heavy rainfall along the state 's southern coastlines . The brig Albermarle was lost at sea on September 7 with 40 of its crewmen missing ; they were later presumed to have drowned . The hurricane recurved east @-@ northeastward and continued to deteriorate steadily , weakening to Category 1 status by September 9 . The storm was last observed late on September 10 , centered about 525 miles ( 845 km ) north @-@ northwest of Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The ship Gilbert Gallatin encountered the fourth hurricane of the season on September 8 , which was centered about 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) east of the third hurricane . Sustained winds were initially observed to have reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , indicative of a Category 3 hurricane . Several other ships reportedly encountered this storm as it tracked northeastward . With winds decreasing to 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , it weakened to a Category 2 hurricane on September 10 . The storm was last noted by the ship Josephine later that day , while located about 615 miles ( 990 km ) north @-@ northeast of Graciosa in the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 The sixth hurricane of the season was first observed as a tropical storm to the southeast of Bermuda on September 26 . Initially , the storm headed north @-@ northwestward , before curving north @-@ northeastward on September 27 , while bypassing Bermuda . Later that day , the storm strengthened into a hurricane . The brig Samuel and Edward encountered the hurricane on September 2 , reporting winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) ; this was the maximum sustained wind speed associated with the storm . Thereafter , the storm executed a cyclonic loop , which lasted until September 30 . It curved northeastward on October 1 and was last noted at 0600 UTC , while located about 590 miles ( 950 km ) northeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight = = = 
 The barque Edward reported a hurricane about 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of Grand Bahama on October 19 . Several other ships encountered the storm between October 19 and October 20 . It moved slowly north @-@ northwestward and gradually strengthened . On October 20 , the storm reached maximum sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane . Additionally , ships reported a minimum barometric pressure of 996 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . After weakening back to a Category 1 hurricane on October 21 , the storm veered east @-@ northeastward , avoiding a landfall in the Southeastern United States . It was last noted on October 22 , while centered about 80 miles ( 130 km ) east @-@ southeast of Charleston , South Carolina . 
 Strong winds , combined with tides in Jacksonville , Florida , pushed water over wharfs and onto Bay Street . William Gaston Captain Thomas E. Shaw reported that the gale at Brunswick , Georgia caused significant damage to the town . An engine @-@ house belonging to the Brunswick Railroad Company was flattened , as was a large cotton shed , a blacksmith shop , and a new frame house , and a number of other buildings were damaged . The new railroad wharf was washed away and its remains were floating in the harbor . Offshore , there were numerous shipwrecks , including the schooners W. Mercer , G. W. Pickering , Mary Ann , and the Steamer Planter . Additionally , the schooner James House reported " a perfect hurricane " . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the four tropical cyclones of the season , there were four others with only a single point on their track , due to the sparsity of data . The barque W.B. Bowen encountered a gale with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) near 33 @.@ 5 ° N , 69 @.@ 2 ° W on August 5 , which is located about 255 miles ( 410 km ) east of Bermuda . This system would later be listed in HURDAT records as Tropical Storm One . However , due to heavy prevailing weather , further data on this storm is unavailable . A publication by meteorologist Ivan R. Tannehill indicates that Tropical Storm Two was centered near Barbados on August 10 . However , due its weak nature – maximum sustained winds were only 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) – only a single data point is known of the storm 's path . 
 Tropical Storm Five was reported to have existed on September 21 at 20 ° N , 95 ° W , which is located in the Bay of Campeche . The <unk> and Crichton encountered a heavy " norther " upon arriving at Veracruz , Veracruz on that day . Although it was centered offshore , very strong winds were reported in Veracruz , possibly induced by the funneling effect from the Sierra Madre Oriental . Further information of this tropical storm is sparse . Two separate reports by meteorologists Ivan R. Tannehill and Edward B. Garriott indicate that the seventh tropical storm of the season existed at 15 ° N , 37 ° W on September 28 , which is located west of Cape Verde . Observations noted that maximum sustained winds reached 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . With only a single data point , no further information is available on this storm . 
 = Egon Mayer = 
 Egon Mayer ( 19 August 1917 – 2 March 1944 ) was a German Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a fighter ace credited with 102 enemy aircraft shot down in over 353 combat missions . His victories were all claimed over the Western Front and included 26 four @-@ engine bombers , 51 Supermarine Spitfires and 12 P @-@ 47 Thunderbolts . Mayer was the first fighter pilot to score 100 victories entirely on the Western Front . 
 Born in Konstanz , Mayer , who was a glider pilot in his youth , volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1937 . Following flight training he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) in 1939 . He fought in the Battle of France and claimed his first aerial victory in that campaign on 13 June 1940 . Mayer was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of the 7 . Staffel ( 7th squadron ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " in June 1941 . Two months later , following his 21st aerial victory , he received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 1 August 1941 . He claimed 16 further victories and was awarded the German Cross in Gold on 16 July 1942 . In November 1942 , Mayer was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of the III . Gruppe ( 3rd group ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " . 
 Mayer claimed his first victories over United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) four @-@ engine bombers when he shot down two B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses and a B @-@ 24 Liberator on 23 November 1942 . Together with fellow fighter ace Georg @-@ Peter Eder , Mayer developed the head @-@ on attack as the most effective tactic against the Allied daylight heavy combat box bomber formations . He received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 16 April 1943 after 63 victories . On 1 July 1943 , he replaced Walter Oesau as Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " . He claimed his 90th victory on 31 December 1943 and on 5 February 1944 became the first pilot on the Channel Front to reach 100 victories . Mayer was killed in action on 2 March 1944 while leading an attack on a USAAF bomber formation ; he was shot down by P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt escort fighters near Montmédy , France . He was posthumously awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords that day . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mayer , the son of a farmer , was born on 19 August 1917 in Konstanz at the Bodensee . Konstanz at the time was in the Grand Duchy of Baden of the German Empire . Mayer grew up on his parents ' farm named <unk> and spent his spare time at the glider airfield at the <unk> near Engen . He went to school at the Langemarck @-@ Realgymnasium — a secondary school built on the mid @-@ level Realschule to achieve the Abitur ( university entry qualification ) — in <unk> . Today , the Langemarck @-@ Realgymnasium , which had been named after the location of the World War I Battle of Langemarck , is the Hegau @-@ Gymnasium . 
 Following his graduation , Mayer volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe on 1 November 1937 . His military training began at the 2nd Air Warfare School ( Luftkriegsschule 2 ) at Gatow , on the southwestern outskirts of Berlin . He was then trained as a fighter pilot and promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 August 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday , 1 September 1939 , when German forces invaded Poland . Mayer received the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) on 25 October 1939 and was transferred to Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) , named after the after World War I fighter ace Manfred von Richthofen , on 6 December 1939 . For his entire combat career , with the exception of a brief posting to the fighter pilot school at Werneuchen , Mayer would serve in JG 2 " Richthofen " . He claimed his first aerial victory on 13 June 1940 during the Battle of France , shooting down an Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Morane @-@ Saulnier <unk> 
 In the Battle of Britain , Mayer often flew over the English Channel as the wingman of Helmut Wick . He claimed three further victories in this campaign , all over Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Supermarine Spitfires , but was himself shot down or forced to land at the French Coast . Once he had to swim in the Channel for an hour before he was rescued . At the end of 1940 Mayer had four victories to his credit and JG 2 " Richthofen " was withdrawn from combat to replenish the heavy losses it had sustained . Following a short tour as fighter pilot instructor at the Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) in Werneuchen , Mayer was sent back to the Channel Front . 
 On 10 June 1941 , Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Mayer was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 7 . Staffel ( 7th squadron ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " , based at Saint @-@ Pol @-@ <unk> . He claimed his 19th and 20th victory on 23 July 1941 and was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 1 August 1941 after his 21st aerial victory . He received the award with fellow JG 2 " Richthofen " pilots Oberleutnant Erich Leie and Oberleutnant Rudolf Pflanz on that day . The triple award presentation was recorded by the Deutsche Wochenschau ( German Weekly Review ) , a newsreel series released in the cinemas . His score had increased to 28 aerial victories by the end of 1941 . 
 Mayer received the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) on 16 July 1942 . On 19 August , his 25th birthday , Mayer shot down two Spitfires over Dieppe during Operation Jubilee , his 49th and 50th victory . 
 = = = Group commander = = = 
 Mayer was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) and was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of III . Gruppe of JG 2 " Richthofen " in November 1942 . On 23 November , Mayer claimed his first victories over United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) four @-@ engined bombers , when he shot down two B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses and a B @-@ 24 Liberator . Together with Georg @-@ Peter Eder , Mayer developed the head @-@ on attack as the most effective tactic against the Allied daylight heavy combat box bomber formations . The concept was based on a <unk> ( chain ) , three aircraft flying in a " V " formation , attacking from ahead and to the left . When in range , the attackers opened fire with a deflection burst , aiming in front of the enemy aircraft . Following the attack , the pilots would pull up sharply to the left or right . This gave the attacking fighters the best chance of avoiding the massed firepower of the bombers ' guns . 
 On 14 February 1943 , Mayer shot down three RAF Hawker Typhoons , claiming his 60th to 62nd victories . Following his 63rd victory he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 16 April 1943 , the 232nd officer or soldier of the Wehrmacht so honored . The presentation was made by Adolf Hitler in his office at the Reich Chancellery in Berlin on 11 May 1943 . Mayer was then promoted to Major ( major ) on 1 June 1943 . 
 In June 1943 , Mayer encountered Robert S. Johnson , a future ace from the 56th Fighter Group of the US Eighth Air Force . Johnson 's P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt had been badly shot @-@ up by some Focke Wulf Fw 190s during a routine mission . As Johnson limped home , with a canopy that would not open and hydraulic fluid and oil covering his windscreen , Mayer pulled alongside him in his Fw @-@ 190 . Mayer looked the wounded P @-@ 47 over , and then circled to come in from Johnson 's six @-@ o 'clock to give it the coup de grâce . The first gun pass failed to knock the heavy American fighter out of the sky . Mayer made two more runs on Johnson , without success . After running out of ammunition , Mayer pulled alongside Johnson , saluted him and headed for home . Johnson landed his plane , and counted more than 200 holes , without even moving around the airplane . He also saw that a 20 mm cannon shell had exploded just behind his headrest , which had made it impossible to open his canopy . 
 On 22 June 1943 , a flight led by Mayer encountered an RAF Spitfire unit . During the course of the engagement , he claimed one Spitfire shot down and damage to another . He shot down three USAAF P @-@ 47s on 26 June 1943 . 
 = = = Wing commander and death = = = 
 Mayer was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " on 1 July 1943 , thus succeeding Oberst ( Colonel ) Walter Oesau . Command of III . Gruppe was passed on to the Staffelkapitän of 8 . Staffel , Hauptmann Bruno <unk> . He claimed three B @-@ 17s shot down within 19 minutes on 6 September . The Eighth Air Force was targeting Stuttgart that day and lost 45 aircraft . On 1 December 1943 , Mayer shot down three P @-@ 47 Thunderbolts . His claimed aerial victories increased to 90 on 30 December 1943 . Mayer was credited with four victories on 7 January 1944 , three B @-@ 24s and one B @-@ 17 shot down in the vicinity of Orléans . On 4 February 1944 he claimed his 100th victory , the first fighter pilot on the Channel Front to achieve this mark . 
 Mayer 's final score stood at 102 when he was shot down and killed in action by a P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt near Montmédy on 2 March 1944 . Flying Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 A @-@ 6 ( factory number <unk> ) , Mayer had led his Stabsschwarm ( headquarters unit ) and elements of III . Gruppe , 14 Fw 190s in total , in an attack on B @-@ 17s in the area of Sedan , but failed to detect the fighter escort of 29 P @-@ 47s 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 meters ) above . His aircraft was seen taking hits at a range of 400 yards ( 370 meters ) in the nose and cockpit . It made a violent snap roll and went into a vertical dive , crashing within 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 kilometers ) of Montmédy . He was posthumously decorated with the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) that day . 
 Recent research by historian Norman Fortier suggests that Mayer was shot down by Lieutenant Walter Gresham of the 358th Fighter Squadron of the 355th Fighter Wing . The claim is based on gun camera footage and recollections of Mayer 's wingman , who was forced to bail out during the action . Mayer was buried at the cemetery of Beaumont @-@ le @-@ Roger , France , and in 1955 re @-@ interred at the German War Cemetery in St. <unk> de Lisieux . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Wound Badge in Silver 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots in Gold with Pennant " 300 " 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 25 October 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( May 1940 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 16 July 1942 as Oberleutnant in the 7 . / Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 1 August 1941 as Leutnant of the Reserves and pilot in Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 232nd Oak Leaves on 16 April 1943 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 51st Swords on 2 March 1944 as Oberstleutnant and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 = Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal = 
 The Alberta and Great Waterways Railway Scandal was a political scandal in Alberta , Canada in 1910 , which forced the resignation of the Liberal provincial government of Alexander Cameron Rutherford . Rutherford and his government were accused of giving loan guarantees to private interests for the construction of the Alberta and Great Waterways ( A & GW ) Railway that substantially exceeded the actual cost of construction , and which paid interest considerably above the market rate . They were also accused of exercising insufficient oversight over the railway 's operations . 
 The scandal split the Liberal Party : Rutherford 's Minister of Public Works , William Henry Cushing , resigned from his government and publicly attacked its railway policy , and a large portion of the Liberal caucus voted to defeat the government in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . Although the government survived all of these votes , and Rutherford largely placated the legislature by appointing a royal commission to investigate the affair , pressure from Lieutenant @-@ Governor George Bulyea forced Rutherford 's resignation and his replacement by Arthur Sifton . 
 The royal commission reported months after Rutherford had already resigned . The majority did not find Rutherford or his cabinet guilty of any wrongdoing , but criticized them for poor judgment , both in relation to the loan guarantees and in relation to the exemptions the A & GW received from provincial legislation ; a minority report was more sympathetic , and declared the allegations against them " disproved " . James Cornwall , a Liberal backbencher who supported Rutherford , fared somewhat worse : his personal financial involvement in the railway gave rise to " suspicious circumstances " , but he too was not proven guilty of any wrongdoing . 
 Besides provoking Rutherford 's resignation , the scandal opened rifts in the Liberal Party that took years to heal . Sifton eventually smoothed over most of these divisions , but was frustrated in his railway policy by legal defeats . He ultimately adopted a similar policy to Rutherford 's , and the A & GW was eventually built by private interests using the money raised from provincial loan guarantees . The Liberals went on to be re @-@ elected in 1913 and 1917 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Alberta 's first years as a province were optimistic ones , and one way that this optimism manifested itself was in a desire for railroads . The public , media , and politicians all called for the rapid development of new lines and expansion of existing ones . Rutherford 's Liberals had set up a framework that allowed almost anybody to enter the railroad business , but few firms had done so by 1909 . The opposition Conservatives called for the government 's direct entry into the industry . Rutherford 's government instead opted for a regime of loan guarantees : the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway and the Canadian Northern Railway ( CNR ) had their bonds , which were to pay 4 % per year over their thirty @-@ year term , guaranteed at a rate of $ 13 @,@ 000 per mile of railway constructed . The legislature had the right to increase this to $ 15 @,@ 000 . In exchange , the railways were subject to a minimum rate of line construction : the CNR was required to build 125 miles ( 201 km ) and the Grand Trunk Railway 50 miles ( 80 km ) before the end of 1909 . 
 Besides the established companies , guarantees were also offered to new companies . One company to take advantage of this was the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway , which was founded by two Kansas City bankers , William R. Clarke and Bertrand R. Clarke , and a Winnipeg accountant , William Bain . The company proposed to build a " line from Edmonton north @-@ easterly to a point at or near the west end of Lac la Biche , thence to a point at or near Fort McMurray . " Guarantees to the so @-@ called " A & GW " were more generous than to the established companies : $ 20 @,@ 000 per mile for 350 miles ( 560 km ) and $ 400 @,@ 000 for its Edmonton terminal . The bonds also paid better interest ( 5 % ) over a longer term ( fifty years ) than those of the established companies . Upon the bonds ' sale , the money was to be placed in a bank account controlled by the government , and paid to the railway as the line was constructed . 
 = = The scandal = = 
 The Rutherford government had just been resoundingly re @-@ elected in the 1909 provincial election , winning 36 of the legislature 's 41 seats , when the new legislature first met in February 1910 . There was initially no sign of controversy in relation to the A & GW Railway : William Clarke , A & GW President , had several months earlier announced that the line would be completed by the end of 1912 , ahead of schedule . When the A & GW bonds went on sale in London in November 1909 , the issue was oversubscribed . The following month , the contract for ties was awarded . Everything seemed to be progressing as planned when , at the beginning of the new legislative session , Liberal backbencher John R. Boyle asked the government a series of innocuous questions about the company and the guarantees made to it . Rutherford , Minister of Railways as well as Premier , responded to the questions in writing . Before he did so , however , a rumour began to circulate that William Henry Cushing , Minister of Public Works , had resigned from the cabinet . 
 Boyle and Conservative leader R. B. Bennett questioned Rutherford about the rumours , but Rutherford initially refused to make any announcement . The next day , however , the rumour was confirmed when the Premier read Cushing 's letter of resignation in the legislature . In this letter , Cushing gave his reasons for resigning as disagreement with the government 's railway policy , which he claimed was developed without his involvement or consent . Rutherford disagreed with this claim , and expressed his regret for Cushing 's resignation . 
 = = = J. R. Boyle 's resolution = = = 
 On February 21 , Boyle gave notice of a resolution to expropriate the rights of the A & GW and build the line directly . He asserted that the government had guaranteed to the A & GW more than was necessary , as a line of 230 miles ( 370 km ) , barely two thirds what had been guaranteed , was sufficient . The next day , Boyle further alleged that Deputy Attorney @-@ General S. B. Woods had tampered with the government 's files on the A & GW before Boyle and Bennett had viewed them . Attorney @-@ General Charles Wilson Cross strongly disputed this allegation . 
 Debate on Boyle 's resolution began February 25 , in front of a full public gallery . Cushing opened debate . He explained that the cabinet 's original intention had been for $ 20 @,@ 000 per mile to be the maximum guarantee , with less promised for more easily built portions of the line . He claimed that he had taken ill at a time that this understanding was still in place , only to have Rutherford move responsibility for railways from Cushing 's Public Works department to a new Railways department , headed by Rutherford himself . He recounted his discomfort with Rutherford 's refusal to consult with Public Works engineers on the actual costs of constructing the line , and his relief at Rutherford 's assurance that Cushing himself would be consulted . He claimed that Rutherford had not followed @-@ through on this pledge , and that , upon seeing the completed agreement between the A & GW and the government , Cushing had decided to resign . Rutherford disputed this version of events , noted that Cushing had been at all relevant cabinet meetings , and cited the report of government engineer R. W. Jones in disputing that the line could be constructed for less than $ 20 @,@ 000 per mile . 
 Boyle followed , alleging that Rutherford had privately committed the government to the $ 20 @,@ 000 figure as early as November 14 , 1908 , before a government engineer had even been appointed . He also accused the government of negligence in failing to verify the paid in capital of the A & GW before committing $ 7 @.@ 4 million of government loan guarantees to it . He closed by repeating his demand that the government expropriate the company 's rights and build the line itself . Cross rebutted for the government , questioning Cushing 's sincerity and quoting a March 1909 speech in which the then @-@ Minister of Public Works had defended the government 's railway policy against Bennett 's attacks . Cross also reminded the legislature that no money was to be paid to the A & GW until tracks were actually constructed . 
 On February 28 Liberal member and Cushing @-@ ally Ezra Riley proposed an amendment to Boyle 's resolution , striking out the proposals to expropriate and substituting a statement that " the contract and agreement entered into between the Government and the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway Company are not such as to commend them to the judgment and confidence of this house " . The same day , an amendment to this amendment was moved by Liberal John William Woolf and seconded by Liberal John Alexander McDougall . Woolf and McDougall proposed redrafting the agreement along the lines proposed by A & GW President Clarke in a letter to Rutherford . This letter suggested that the A & GW should offer to the government its construction equipment and other assets in guarantee of its construction pledges . 
 The Woolf @-@ McDougall amendment was considered friendly to the government , but Rutherford was not yet in the clear . Independent Edward Michener attacked the government for receiving only par value for the bonds when they had been sold at ten percent above par . McDougall voiced his support for Michener 's argument ; though McDougall had seconded Woolf 's pro @-@ government amendment , it became apparent that his reasons for doing so were less support for the government than a principled aversion to the province using its law @-@ making power to extricate itself from inconvenient contracts . 
 Opposition to the government came to a head March 2 when Conservative leader Bennett first spoke . Bennett was renowned as one of the province 's finest orators , and his five @-@ hour speech earned plaudits even from the Liberal Edmonton Bulletin , which praised its " splendor in diction [ and ] the physical endurance of the orator " and called it a " high water mark for parliamentary debate in Alberta " . Bennett lashed out at the government 's handling of the A & GW file , accusing it of culpable negligence in failing to properly oversee the company 's activities . He claimed to have been approached directly by " great financial interests " intent on preventing his participation in the debate . He argued that the discrepancy in the sale price of the bonds and what the government had received for them meant that Clarke and his associates had realized a profit of between $ 200 @,@ 000 and $ 300 @,@ 000 at the government 's expense . He closed with an accusation that Cross had sent an emissary to a telephone company that wanted to install an automatic telephone system in Calgary agreeing to reverse his opposition to the deal in exchange for a $ 12 @,@ 000 contribution to Cross 's campaign fund . These charges , corroborated by Cushing but hotly denied by Cross , were not related to the A & GW affair , but were designed to damage the credibility of the government 's de facto house leader on the eve of the vote on the Woolf @-@ McDougall amendment . The government side adopted similar tactics : Agriculture Minister Duncan Marshall accused Boyle of being motivated by bitterness over having been denied the <unk> of the A & GW ; Boyle admitted that he had applied for this position , but denied an accusation from Peace River MLA James Cornwall that he had requested Cornwall 's assistance in lobbying for it . 
 The Woolf @-@ McDougall amendment came to a vote the evening of March 3 . In a victory for the government , the amendment passed twenty @-@ three votes to fifteen . In addition to Michener and the legislature 's two Conservatives , the amendment was opposed by twelve of the legislature 's thirty @-@ seven Liberals , including Cushing . Charles M. O 'Brien , the legislature 's lone Socialist representative , voted with the government . 
 = = = Cabinet confusion = = = 
 On March 9 , Cross suddenly resigned . His resignation was quickly followed by that of Woods , his deputy . The next day William Ashbury Buchanan , Minister without Portfolio , did the same ; though he had voted on the government 's side on the Woolf @-@ McDougall motion , he harboured considerable doubts about the government 's railway policy . Rumours circulated that Agriculture Minister Marshall and Minister without Portfolio Prosper @-@ Edmond Lessard had also resigned , though these proved false . Buchanan , Marshall , Lessard , and Rutherford made no comment on the situation to either the press or the legislature , but Cross was more forthcoming : he said that Rutherford had told him that Cushing had been asked to re @-@ enter cabinet and had accepted , leading Cross to conclude that , in light of his public conflict with Cushing , he " could not , under the circumstances , remain a member of the Alberta government . " ( Woods , who as a deputy minister did not sit in the legislature , denied that his resignation had any political motivation at all ; he said that he had received an employment offer carrying three times his current salary . ) 
 Cushing also made public statements and , as usual , his were not in line with Cross 's . While acknowledging that Rutherford had invited him to rejoin the cabinet , he claimed that the Premier had offered Cross 's resignation as one of the terms for Cushing 's re @-@ entry . He further denied that he had ever accepted Rutherford 's offer , both because of persisting conflict between him and the Premier and because his re @-@ entry was unanimously opposed by his fellow dissident Liberals . He directly accused Cross of having fabricated his claim that Rutherford had told him that Cushing had agreed to re @-@ enter cabinet . 
 Rutherford held his silence until March 11 , when he told the legislature that he had not accepted any resignations . He said that the only vacant cabinet post was the ministry of Public Works previously held by Cushing , and that he hoped to fill it soon . In the meantime , he intended to continue governing . While he eventually acknowledged Buchanan 's resignation March 14 , Cross remained in cabinet . 
 = = = Further manoeuvring in the legislature = = = 
 Following the passage of the Woolf @-@ McDougall motion , the government took the offensive . On March 9 , Rutherford gave notice of a resolution to strike a provincial railway board , with a membership of Rutherford , Deputy Public Works Minister John Stocks , and provincial railway engineer R. W. Jones . The board would have the power to discharge any government responsibility under the Alberta Railway Act . Stocks , however , publicly repudiated the resolution , and announced that he would have nothing to do with it . 
 On March 11 , government supporter Charles Stewart attempted to disclose a scandalous rumour about Boyle in the legislature , but was ruled out of order by Speaker Charles W. Fisher . The allegation was quickly printed in the Edmonton Bulletin instead : Boyle , who expected to be named Attorney @-@ General in the event that Cushing formed a government , was accused of approaching Lucien Boudreau and Robert L. Shaw , two government supporters who were hoteliers in their extra @-@ legislative careers , and offering them immunity from prosecution for liquor license violations in exchange for their support of the insurgency . 
 That same day , Riley and Boyle moved a motion of no confidence in the government . It was defeated by a margin of twenty to seventeen . Ominously for Rutherford , two hitherto loyal Liberals , Buchanan and Henry William McKenney , switched their support to the rebels . More favourably , the ill member for Macleod , Colin Genge , was rumoured to be recovering from his illness and soon on his way to Edmonton , where he was expected to support the government ( in fact , Genge would die without ever taking his seat ) . The government was also encouraged by the motion of dissident George P. Smith to strike an apolitical commission to supervise the construction of the A & GW , since it corresponded closely to its own proposal to appoint a royal commission . 
 Rutherford gave notice of a resolution to strike this royal commission , to be composed of three judges of the provincial supreme court , March 14 . After one final attempt by the rebels to defeat the government legislatively ( which failed by three votes ) , the resolution to strike the royal commission passed the legislature unanimously the next day . The Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal was , for the time being , out of the legislature 's hands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = The commission 's inquiry = = = 
 The commission first met in Edmonton March 29 . The three commissioners — Justices David Lynch Scott , Horace Harvey , and Nicholas Beck — were joined by counsel for the insurgents ( including Bennett himself ) , Cross , Rutherford , the A & GW , and Cornwall ( who had been accused of using his involvement with the Athabasca Railway for personal benefit during the scandal ) . The evidence they heard was reported in great detail by Alberta 's press , to the initial interest of the public . Before long , however , the details grew tedious , and the public became less engaged . 
 The greatest surprise to emerge during the commission 's inquiry did not come from one of the forty @-@ six witnesses to testify , but from one who did not : A & GW President Clarke moved back to the United States , and did not return for his scheduled testimony . While this disappearance did not prove the government 's guilt , in the eyes of the press it did prove Clarke 's . As the Edmonton Journal put it , the only question left to answer was " were the members of the government simple innocents whom Clarke worked through their credulity or were they in on it with him ? " 
 = = = George Bulyea 's role = = = 
 Though it was George Bulyea , Alberta 's first lieutenant governor , who had invited Rutherford to form the province 's first government in 1905 , the Premier never fully enjoyed Bulyea 's confidence . Bulyea preferred several other candidates to Rutherford , including federal Member of Parliament ( MP ) Peter Talbot , but when these proved unwilling he acquiesced with Rutherford , the choice of Alberta Liberals . Now , with Rutherford reeling , Bulyea saw his initial doubts validated and began the search for potential successors . 
 The obvious choice was Cushing , but Bulyea felt little enthusiasm for him , doubting his political acumen ( in this opinion he was supported by other Liberal Party luminaries , including Frank Oliver , federal Minister of the Interior and proprietor of the Bulletin ) . He continued to prefer Talbot , but found that the insurgent Liberals , who favoured Cushing , would not accept him . Oliver was also a possibility , but he had no interest in leaving Ottawa . 
 Talbot suggested Arthur Sifton , the province 's chief justice . Sifton was a Liberal , but as a judge he was remote from political mudslinging . However , he had been offered the office of Premier in 1905 , when it had seemed more desirable than it did now ; would he have any interest ? The question was answered May 26 , when the legislature reconvened . Bulyea entered the house and announced that he had accepted Rutherford 's resignation and that he had asked Sifton to form a government . Sifton had accepted . 
 The arrangement had nearly fallen apart at the last moment : MLAs loyal to Cross indicated on May 25 that they would accept Sifton only if Cross remained the Attorney @-@ General , which Sifton refused . It appeared for a time that Rutherford would not resign ; after considering the matter overnight , Bulyea decided the morning of May 26 that he was in a position to force the Premier 's hand , but it proved unnecessary when Rutherford stepped down of his own volition . 
 = = = The commission 's report = = = 
 The commission reported to the legislature November 10 , 1910 . Its findings were split into two reports : a majority report from Justices Scott and Harvey , and a minority report from Justice Beck . 
 The majority report traced the origins of the A & GW scandal to 1905 , when a number of Albertans , including James Cornwall , were federally incorporated as the Athabasca Railway Company , chartered to construct a railway from Edmonton to Fort McMurray . The legal work for the incorporation had been done by the law firm of Charles Wilson Cross , Cornwall 's close friend and personal solicitor . In October 1906 Cornwall sold the ARC 's charter to a syndicate of <unk> for $ 2 @,@ 500 and a one @-@ sixth share in the syndicate . The syndicate costed out the construction of the railway , and found that cost per mile would be $ 13 @,@ 700 from Edmonton to Lac la Biche , and one thousand dollars per mile more from Lac la Biche to Fort McMurray . It decided to undertake the venture if it could get a loan guarantee of $ 13 @,@ 000 per mile from the Alberta government . 
 At the end of 1906 , syndicate members visited Alberta , where Cornwall introduced them to members of the cabinet . Negotiations between the syndicate and the government continued for several years . During this time , new construction estimates prepared by the syndicate placed the cost of the railway at between eighteen and twenty thousand dollars per mile . February 2 , 1907 , Cornwall entered into an agreement with the syndicate whereby he would receive $ 544 @,@ 000 in stock in the resulting railway company if he could secure the necessary loan guarantees ; this amount was later changed to $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 At the beginning of 1908 , Clarke appeared on the scene , and eventually acquired the syndicate 's full interest in the railway , including a purchase of Cornwall 's interest for $ 14 @,@ 500 ( of an agreed @-@ upon $ 25 @,@ 000 ) . Shortly thereafter , Clarke met with members of cabinet in Calgary ; Cushing asserted that he had not been present for this meeting , while Rutherford insisted that he had been . While no formal guarantee was made at this meeting , Clarke left it confident that he would receive the necessary loan guarantee , and proceeded with construction plans . He obtained new cost estimates for the railroad of $ 27 @,@ 000 per mile , though Clarke 's engineer confidentially advised him that it could be built for half this amount . By November 14 , 1908 , the cabinet , led by Rutherford and Cross , had agreed to the $ 20 @,@ 000 per mile guarantee . The majority report was critical of Rutherford and Cross for this , and also for setting the bonds ' interest rate at 5 percent rather than 4 percent . The stated reason for this discrepancy was that the proposed railroad was likely to be difficult and expensive to build , crossing hundreds of miles of wilderness ; in response , the report pointed out that the provincial guarantee of $ 20 @,@ 000 per mile took this difficulty into account , and that there was thus no need for a higher interest rate to lure investors . 
 The majority report also took a dim view of the exemptions from the province 's railway legislation that were built into the A & GW 's charter : unlike the province 's other railways , the A & GW was not required to have directors resident in Alberta and was exempt from the requirement that railway companies not commence business until 25 % of their capital was subscribed and 10 % paid up . The A & GW was held to a figure of less than 1 % for both , and even this requirement was met in an unusual manner : Clarke brought his personal account into overdraft to issue a $ 50 @,@ 000 cheque to the company , thereby allowing the latter to meet its capital requirements and commence operations . The company then authorized a payment of the same amount to Clarke on account of expenses incurred by him on behalf of the company ; he used this payment to clear his overdraft . 
 The majority declined to find Rutherford and Cross guilty of any wrongdoing beyond poor judgment , though its findings were hardly flattering : " As there is room for doubt that the inference of personal interest is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the circumstances related , and in view of the positive denial , it can only be said that , in the opinion of your commissioners , the evidence does not warrant the finding that there was or is any personal interest on the part of Dr. Rutherford or Mr. Cross " . Its findings with regards to Cornwall were similar : his receipt of $ 14 @,@ 500 and his expectation of $ 10 @,@ 500 more constituted " suspicious circumstances " , but these " point to no definite conclusion ; and he has denied that he received any other benefit , or was interested in any other way in the enterprise , and it must be held that the evidence does not establish the contrary . " 
 Justice Beck 's minority report was more sympathetic to all three men . Beck declared himself perfectly satisfied that Cushing , despite his protestations to the contrary , had been aware of all details of the negotiations . While acknowledging that " in some instances the wisdom of their course may be doubtful " , he accepted Rutherford 's and Cross 's explanations for their actions and labelled the accusations against them " disproved " . He felt similarly about Cornwall , concluding that by the time he was using his position to advocate for the construction of the A & GW , he was free of any pecuniary interest in it . 
 = = = Long @-@ term effects = = = 
 Sifton was selected Premier in an effort to restore party unity , and his first cabinet reflected that . There were three ministers in addition to Sifton . Charles R. Mitchell had been , like Sifton , a judge during the scandal , and was therefore unattached to either side . Duncan Marshall had been a Rutherford cabinet minister , but not one identified strongly with its railway policy . Archibald J. McLean had voted with the rebels , but not been a leader among them . The cabinet thus included members of both factions , but none of those who inspired such strong opinions as to be overly divisive . 
 In late 1910 , the new government introduced legislation to revoke the A & GW 's charter and confiscate the proceeds from the sale of bonds , which were still held by the province . In introducing the bill , Sifton made no commitment as to what would be done with the funds once confiscated . Many northern MLAs , including Cornwall and Cross , suspected that the Premier 's plans for the money did not include construction of a northern railway , and opposed the bill on that basis . Clarke re @-@ surfaced in Winnipeg to deny Sifton 's charge that the A & GW had defaulted on any of its obligations , and Conservative leader Bennett opposed the confiscation out of stated respect for private property : " Clarke I despise but Clarke I am bound to respect because this province gave him a right by charter and if I know the United States I do not think it will allow this province to take his property ' without due process of law ' . " 
 The government won the vote 25 to 14 . Once the legislation was signed into law by Bulyea , the government immediately wrote cheques drawing on the bond money . The Royal , Dominion , and Union banks , where the funds were deposited , refused payment . The government sued , and the provincial supreme court ruled in its favour in 1912 . The Royal Bank subsequently requested that the federal government use its power of disallowance to invalidate the legislation and appealed the supreme court 's decision to the British privy council , at the time Canada 's highest court of appeal . While the federal government declined to act , in 1913 the privy council found that the provincial legislature did not have the authority to confiscate money that had been raised from investors from outside of the province . 
 In its objective of smoothing over Liberal divisions , Sifton 's succession was only partially successful . Rutherford himself became increasingly distant from the party , and sought re @-@ election in the next election as an independent Liberal , opposed to Sifton 's government . In fact , he offered to campaign for the Conservatives across the province if they would agree not to run a candidate against him in his own riding ; the Conservatives declined his offer , and Rutherford was defeated . He would go on to campaign for the Conservatives in the 1921 election . On the other side , Ezra Riley , a leader of the insurgency , resigned his seat in protest of Cushing 's exclusion from the new administration ; he was defeated in the ensuing by @-@ election by a pro @-@ Sifton candidate . It is possible that supporters of Cross would have taken a similar tack , but Sifton brought him back into cabinet before the next election . With the noisiest dissidents neutralized , the Liberals enjoyed a period relatively free of intra @-@ party strife , until the Conscription Crisis of 1917 once again split the party . 
 = A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush = 
 A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush is a 1958 book by the English travel writer Eric Newby . It is an autobiographical account of his adventures in the Hindu Kush , around the Nuristan mountains of Afghanistan , ostensibly to make the first mountaineering ascent of Mir Samir . It has been described as a comic masterpiece , intensely English , and understated . Publications including The Guardian and The Telegraph list it among the greatest travel books of all time . It has sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies in paperback . 
 The book has 14 monochrome photographs taken mainly by Newby , and two hand @-@ drawn maps . The novelist Evelyn Waugh wrote a preface that mentions the book 's whimsy and its Englishness . 
 The action in the book moves from Newby 's life in the fashion business in London to Afghanistan . On the way Newby describes his very brief training in mountaineering in North Wales , a stop in Istanbul , and a nearly @-@ disastrous drive across Turkey and Persia . They are driven out to the Panjshir Valley , where they begin their walk , with many small hardships described in a humorous narrative , supported by genuine history of Nuristan and brief descriptions of the rare moments of beauty along the way . Disagreements with Newby 's Persian @-@ speaking companion Hugh Carless , and odd phrases in an antique grammar book , are exploited to comic effect . 
 The book has been reprinted many times , in at least 16 English versions and in Spanish , Chinese and German editions . While some critics consider Newby 's Love and War in the Apennines a better book , A Short Walk was the book that made him well @-@ known , and critics agree that it is both understated and very funny in an old @-@ school British way . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1956 at the age of 36 , Newby ended his London career in fashion and decided impulsively to travel to a remote corner of Afghanistan where no Englishman had ventured for 60 years . 
 He sent a telegraph to his friend the diplomat Hugh Carless , then due to take up his position as First Secretary in Tehran later that year , requesting he accompany him on an expedition to Northern Afghanistan . They were poorly prepared and inexperienced , but Newby and Carless vowed to attempt Mir Samir , a glacial and then unclimbed 20 @,@ 000 foot peak in the Hindu Kush . 
 = = The book = = 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 A Short Walk was first published in 1958 by Secker and Warburg . It has been reprinted many times since . 
 Translations include : 
 1997 : Laertes , Barcelona ( Spanish ) 
 1998 : <unk> . Marco Polo , <unk> ( Chinese ) 
 2002 : <unk> , Frankfurt am Main ( German ) 
 2005 : Goldmann , München ( German ) 
 = = = Illustrations = = = 
 The book was illustrated with 14 monochrome photographs taken by Newby or Carless ; one depicts the explorer Wilfred Thesiger in his sleeping @-@ bag . 
 There are two hand @-@ drawn maps . The " Map to illustrate a journey in Nuristan by Eric Newby and Hugh Carless in 1956 " , shows an area of 75 x 55 miles covering the Panjshir valley to the Northwest , and Nuristan and the <unk> valley to the Southeast ; it has a small inset of Central Asia showing the area 's location to the Northeast of Kabul . The other map , " Nuristan " , covers a larger area of about 185 x 140 miles , showing Kabul and Jalalabad to the South , and Chitral and the Pakistan region of <unk> to the East . 
 = = = Preface by Evelyn Waugh = = = 
 A two @-@ page preface by novelist Evelyn Waugh recommends the book , remarking on its " idiomatic , uncalculated manner " , and that the " beguiling narrative " is " intensely English " . He hopes that Newby is not the last of a " whimsical tradition " . He explains that Newby is not the other English writer of the same name and confesses ( or pretends ) that he began to read it thinking that it was the other man 's work . He sketches out the " deliciously funny " account of Newby selling women 's clothes , and the " call of the wild " ( he admits it is an absurdly trite phrase ) that led him to the Hindu Kush . Waugh ends by advising the " dear reader " to " fall to and enjoy this characteristic artifact . " 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The book contains 20 chapters , all narrated in the first person by Newby . 
 = = = = The rag trade = = = = 
 Chapter 1 Life of a Salesman 
 Newby describes his frustration with life in the fashion business or " rag trade " in London . 
 Chapter 2 Death of a Salesman 
 Newby leaves the rag trade . 
 = = = = Training = = = = 
 Chapter 3 Birth of a Mountain Climber 
 Newby and Carless receive very brief training in mountaineering technique , on boulders and small cliffs in North Wales . The inn has " splendid " waitresses who seem to be expert climbers and who take them up the Ivy Sepulchre on Dinas <unk> , as the easier Spiral Stairs route is busy . 
 = = = = Driving out = = = = 
 Chapter 4 Pera Palace 
 Newby arrives in Istanbul with his wife , Wanda , having driven across Europe . 
 Chapter 5 The Dying Nomad 
 With Carless , they drive across Turkey to Persia ( present day Iran ) . They make an emergency stop on the road , just short of a dying nomad , and with difficulty convince the police they did not cause the death . 
 Chapter 6 Airing in a Closed Carriage 
 Wanda returns home and the men cross Persia and Afghanistan , driving through Herat to Kandahar and Kabul . They had driven 5 @,@ 000 miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ) in a month . There are comic touches , as when " The proprietor Abdul , a broken @-@ toothed demon of a man , conceived a violent passion for Hugh . We sat with him drinking coffee ... ' <unk> , <unk> , soul of your father . You have ill @-@ used your motor @-@ car . ' He hit Hugh a violent blow of affection in the small of his back , just as he was drinking his coffee . ' <unk> ! ' " 
 = = = = Journey = = = = 
 Chapter 7 A Little Bit of Protocol 
 Newby and Carless try to acclimatise to the altitude with a practice walk . They visit the Foreign Ministry , hire an Afghan cook , and buy a " very short " list of supplies . Newby describes the geography of Nuristan " walled in on every side by the most formidable mountains " and a little history , with the legend of descent from Alexander the Great , the British imperial adventures , and pre @-@ war German expeditions . 
 Chapter 8 Panjshir Valley 
 They are driven out from Kabul by a servant from the Embassy . They stay in a tall mud house in a place with mulberry trees , vines and willows by a river . Hugh puts the dinner guests to sleep with a complicated story " about an anaconda killing a horse " . 
 Chapter 9 A Walk in the Sun 
 They meet their three " very small " horses and their horse @-@ drivers . The cook has to return to Kabul . Despite having horses , they decide to carry 40 pound ( 20 kg ) packs " to toughen ourselves up " . The local people insult them for carrying loads in the heat . The drivers are angry at having to walk in the heat . They agree the drivers ' pay . 
 Chapter 10 Finding our Feet 
 They walk . They get upset stomachs and blisters . They find a man " with his skull smashed to pulp " ; the head driver suggests they should leave the place immediately . Two <unk> circle overhead . 
 Chapter 11 Western Approaches 
 They become tired of each other 's company , and of the food they have brought . They come to a ruinous summer pasture village , and eat local food : boiled milk , the yellow crust that forms on cream , and fresh bread . They catch sight of their goal , Mir Samir . They find tracks of ibex and wolf . One of their drivers catches a <unk> by running after it . 
 Chapter 12 Round 1 
 They look up at the awesome West wall of the mountain above them . They walk up the glacier wearing new crampons , probing for crevasses with their ice @-@ axes . They cross the <unk> and climb " a few feet of easy rock " . Carless suggests rappelling 200 feet ( 60 m ) to the next glacier . They agree " it would be difficult " to get back if they did that . They return to their base camp and try again the next morning , again finding their way blocked . They wish the climbing waitresses from Wales were with them . 
 Chapter 13 Coming Round the Mountain 
 An injured boy is dressed in a " devilish " goatskin to draw the poison from his wounds . Newby has to eat the tail of a fat @-@ tailed sheep . They are escorted up the <unk> valley by a greedy farting albino . Newby tries to learn some phrases in the <unk> or <unk> language from a 1901 Indian Staff Corps grammar , which contains sentences such as " A lammergeier came down from the sky and took off my cock " . 
 Chapter 14 Round 2 
 Setting out at 5 a.m. , they attempt to climb the East ridge . It becomes very hot . The rock is gritty with sharp flakes of mica . They pretend to be " Damon Runyon characters trying to climb a mountain " to cheer themselves up . They get better at roped climbing . After six and a half hours the altimeter shows 18 @,@ 000 feet . They reckon they could reach the top if they tried a different gully and started at 4 a.m. They go down . Carless 's hands are red and bleeding . 
 Chapter 15 Knock @-@ out 
 They camp below a cliff . Rocks continually fall , bouncing over their heads . It is bitterly cold . There is a thunderstorm . They eat pea soup , tinned apple pudding , and jam straight from the tin . They try to sleep . They try to ascend a 70 degree ice slope . They reach the ridge , after five hours , not the estimated two . At 19 @,@ 100 feet they have a tremendous view of the Hindu Kush , the Anjuman Pass , <unk> Mir , and the mountains that border Pakistan . Choughs croak above them . They are only 700 feet below the summit , but four hours away . They turn back . " The descent was terrible . " They return to camp at 9 p.m. after climbing for 17 hours . 
 Chapter 16 Over the Top 
 Carless makes an impressive speech in Persian to convince the drivers to continue into Nuristan . They climb an extremely indistinct track to the pass . They descend into Nuristan : it grows hot . Men run to meet them : they are told they are the first Europeans ever to cross the pass ( Newby doesn 't believe this ) . They are given ice @-@ cold milk to drink . 
 Chapter 17 Going Down ! 
 They make camp in a loop of the river to reduce the risk of being murdered in the night . They are visited by two evil @-@ looking men with an ancient Martini @-@ Henry rifle , riding a horse . In the morning they try out the <unk> grammar on a man ; he understands , but speaks a variant dialect or language . Newby tells the history of the <unk> and the Russians . Their guide does not let them camp in a grove of mulberry trees full of " extremely handsome " girls and young women ; instead , he makes them camp under some cliffs in a place full of flies and excrement . They undress to wash in the river , discovering how thin they have become . 
 Chapter 18 A Room with a View 
 A large audience gathers to watch them get up and cook . There is a violent storm . They reach <unk> , " the capital of the <unk> <unk> " . The headman gives them delicious apricots and tells tales of the old days . They admire the antique rifles of many kinds that the men have , all " in a disgraceful condition " . A mullah forbids them to go to a funeral where a bullock is to be slaughtered , in a holiday atmosphere . Instead , they sit under a walnut tree beside a river , with kingfishers , butterflies , hummingbird hawkmoths , a woodpecker drilling , and have " a rare moment of peace " . Newby shakes hands with two lepers . They all have dysentery . Newby spends hours negotiating the price of a complete male <unk> costume . 
 Chapter 19 Disaster at Lake <unk> 
 Walking down from <unk> they pass hand @-@ made irrigation canals of hollowed @-@ out halved tree trunks on stone pillars . They are shown a large rock , the Sang <unk> , with an inscription said to be in Kufic script , supposedly recording the Emperor Timur Leng 's visit in 1398 A.D. Newby gives some pages of history " lifted almost in their entirety ... from Elliott [ sic ] and Dawson 's History of India , Vol . III , London , 1871 . " The emperor forcibly converted the <unk> to Islam , which Newby implies they still regret . The country becomes <unk> , with both ordinary mulberries and the king mulberry , plums , <unk> and soft apples . Then they cross a wooded country with watermills , wild raspberries and buttercups " like a summer morning in England , but a long time ago " . They climb back into the " wilderness " to <unk> , a village on a cliff , with picturesque privies over the streams . At Lake <unk> a mullah swims the horse with Newby 's camera and all their film and other possessions across the river . The headman shows a scar inflicted on him in deep snow by a black bear . 
 Chapter 20 Beyond the Arayu 
 They climb 2 @,@ 000 feet out of the valley to reach the Arayu . At Warna they rest by a waterfall with mulberry trees . They walk on . Newby dreams of cool drinks and hot baths . They struggle on over a high cold pass . The last village of Nuristan , <unk> , is peopled by Rajputs who claim to come from Arabia . They reach the top of the Arayu pass , " one of the lonely places of the earth with all the winds of Asia droning over it " . Newby feels the place will continue " whatever disasters overtook the rest of mankind " . They feel very happy going down from the pass . They meet the explorer and author of Arabian Sands , Wilfred Thesiger . He is disgusted by their air @-@ beds . 
 Maps 
 = = Reception = = 
 Edward Mace George , writing in The Guardian , notes that the book " is the comic masterpiece Newby will be remembered by " , though his finest work was Love and War in the Apennines ( 1971 ) . 
 Kari Herbert notes in The Guardian 's list of travel writer 's favourite travel books that she inherited her father , English polar explorer Wally Herbert 's " well @-@ loved copy " of Newby 's book . " Like Newby , I was in a soulless job , desperate for change and adventure . Reading A Short Walk was a revelation . The superbly crafted , eccentric and evocative story of his Afghan travels was like a call to arms . " John <unk> , in the same list , chooses Newby 's Love and War in the Apennines . The Telegraph includes it as one of its " 20 best travel books of all time " , describing Newby and Carless 's meeting with the explorer Wilfred Thesiger as a " hilarious segment " . It quotes " We started to blow up our air @-@ beds . ' God , you must be a couple of pansies , ' said Thesiger . " Outside magazine includes A Short Walk among its " 25 essential books for the well @-@ read explorer " . 
 Margalit Fox , writing Newby 's obituary in the New York Times , notes that the trip was the one that made him famous , and states that " As in all his work , the narrative was marked by genial self @-@ effacement and overwhelming understatement . " She cites a 1959 review in the same publication by William O. Douglas , later a Supreme Court judge , who called the book " a chatty , humorous and perceptive account " , adding that " Even the unsanitary hotel accommodations , the infected drinking water , the unpalatable food , the inevitable dysentery are lively , amusing , laughable episodes . " 
 The Anmore Ladies Book Club ( Gentlemen welcomed ) called the book " an understated and very humorous travel story " , with " often ' laugh out loud ' funny " descriptions . While " the writing was a bit tedious at times , the general consensus was that [ the book ] was well worth the read " . 
 Travel writer John Pilkington includes the book in his " Top 10 writer 's reads " in Geographical magazine , observing that it is " still unmatched after nearly 50 years in print " , and describing it as a " hilarious and nicely understated description of an ill @-@ fated journey " . 
 American novelist Rick <unk> enjoys the " blithely confident Brit 's " narrative style , finding echoes of its concept , structure and humour in Bill Bryson 's A Walk in the Woods . <unk> notes the hazards of the journey as crevasses , precipices , thieves , bears , disease , thirst , hunger . " Somehow they blunder on toward their whimsical destination " , he remarks , the " seductive and tickling narrative " told with " understatement , self @-@ effacement , savage wit , honed irony , and unrelenting honesty . " The reader is drawn in " by his endearingly flawed humanity . " 
 Michael Shapiro , interviewing Newby for Travelers ' Tales , calls the book " a classic piece of old @-@ school British exploration , and established Newby ’ s trademark self @-@ deprecating wry humor . " 
 In Varieties of Nostalgia in Contemporary Travel Writing , Patrick Holland and Graham Huggan observe that " travel writing , like travel itself , is generated by nostalgia " . But the " anachronistic gentleman " can only exist , they note , quoting Simon Raven , " in circumstances that are manifestly contrived or unreal " . The resulting " atmosphere of enhanced affectation is exploited to maximum comic effect " in books like A Short Walk , which they call " an acclaimed post @-@ Byronic escapade in which gentlemanly theatrics come to assume the proportions of full @-@ blown farce . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Austrian alpinist Adolf <unk> wrote in a 1966 report that in mountaineering terms Newby and Carless 's reconnaissance of the Central Hindu Kush was a " negligible effort " , admitting however that they " almost climbed it " . The climb was more warmly described in the same year as " The first serious attempt at mountaineering in that country [ the Afghan Hindu Kush ] " by the Polish mountaineer Boleslaw <unk> . 
 In January 2012 , an expedition under the auspices of the British Mountaineering Council , citing the " popular adventure book " , attempted the first winter ascent of Mir Samir , but it was cut short by an equipment theft and " very deep snow conditions and route finding difficulties " . 
 = = = Edition = = = 
 Newby , Eric ( 1974 ) . A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush . Pan . ISBN 0 @-@ 330 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 = Philip Humber = 
 Philip Gregory Humber ( / <unk> / ; born December 21 , 1982 ) is an American former professional baseball pitcher . He pitched for the New York Mets , Minnesota Twins , Kansas City Royals , Chicago White Sox , and Houston Astros in seven seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Although he debuted in the major leagues in 2006 and had worked mostly as a starter in the minor leagues , he did not become a regular MLB starter until 2011 . 
 Humber earned three Texas Little League state championships . He subsequently attended Carthage High School in Carthage , Texas , where he led the baseball team to the state championship game in 2001 , his senior season , winning state Player of the Year honors . He then attended Rice University , where he played college baseball for the Rice Owls baseball team . Humber was the winning pitcher in the clinching game of the 2003 College World Series . He has also represented the United States at the World University Baseball Championship . 
 The Mets selected Humber with the third overall selection in the 2004 MLB draft . During his minor league career , he underwent ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction , before making his MLB debut with the Mets . It took him several years to regain his ability to throw with the same velocity that he had prior to the injury . After being included in a trade to the Twins for Johan Santana , Humber struggled to establish himself . He spent a year with the Royals organization and was briefly a member of the Oakland Athletics organization , before being claimed on waivers by the White Sox in 2011 , getting an opportunity to pitch in the White Sox ' starting rotation . On April 21 , 2012 , Humber pitched the 21st perfect game in MLB history , defeating the Seattle Mariners . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Nacogdoches , Texas , Humber was raised in Carthage , Texas . Living in an area with an abundance of baseball fields , Humber grew up with a batting cage in his backyard . At the age of 11 , Humber visited the Chicago White Sox during spring training in Florida as the guest of Robert Ellis , a family friend of the <unk> , who then was a minor league baseball pitcher for the White Sox . 
 Carthage was a Texas anomaly , its baseball athletes being the most admired role models rather than its football players . As of 2004 , the Panola County Dixie League teams had won 15 state championships in the preceding 20 years and Humber played for three state champions . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Humber attended Carthage High School . The Carthage Bulldogs had won the state title in 1990 and been one of the final four teams in the state tournament in 1994 . Humber was promoted from junior varsity midway through his sophomore season . He compiled a 4 – 0 win – loss record with a low 1 @.@ 09 earned run average ( ERA ) . He went 7 – 2 as a junior , and posted a 13 – 1 record with a 0 @.@ 90 ERA and 146 strikeouts as a senior . A capable batter , he also had a .371 batting average with six home runs . Humber threw a shutout in the Texas University Interscholastic League Class 4A semifinals against Cedar Park High School in 2001 , his senior season . Although Carthage lost the state championship to Western Hills High School in baseball that year , Humber was named Texas High School Class 4A Player of the Year by the Texas Sports Writers Association . According to former Major League Baseball prospect and East Texas native Alan Move : " Back in high school , he ( Humber ) threw harder than everyone else and changed speeds pretty well and that 's all you need in high school . " 
 Humber was drafted by the New York Yankees in the 29th round of the 2001 Major League Baseball draft . As the 875th pick overall , he described himself as " more of a draft @-@ and @-@ follow " prospect . The Yankees made Humber an offer in an attempt to lure him away from his college scholarship , but he did not sign , choosing instead to attend Rice University in order to play college baseball for the Rice Owls baseball team , competing in the Western Athletic Conference ( WAC ) of NCAA Division I. 
 At Rice , Humber was coached by Wayne Graham . Humber 's first home appearance at <unk> Park was in the annual Rice Alumni game in February 2002 . After retiring his first two batters in relief , Humber faced a pair of Major League Baseball players . José Cruz , Jr. bounced the baseball off of the wall in center field and then Lance Berkman hit the ball over the scoreboard . After his inauspicious debut , he became a dominant pitcher during his three college seasons for the Rice Owls , stepping into the nationally ranked Owls ' starting rotation as a freshman . Humber finished his freshman season in 2002 with an 11 – 1 win – loss record , a 2 @.@ 78 ERA , and a WAC @-@ leading 130 strikeouts in 110 2 ⁄ 3 innings , earning National Freshman Player of the Year honors from Collegiate Baseball and All @-@ America honors from several publications — Collegiate Baseball ( Second Team ) , Baseball America ( Second Team ) and Baseball Weekly ( Third Team ) . Humber 's strikeout total was the most for an Owl freshman since 1976 . That season , Rice reached the 2002 College World Series , but lost its first two games and was eliminated . Nonetheless , Humber earned an invitation to USA Baseball 's national team trials . He was the scheduled starter in the second of the two games , which was against the Notre Dame Fighting Irish on June 17 , but the team could not hold a 3 – 2 lead in the bottom of the ninth . He then competed for the United States national baseball team at the 2002 World University Baseball Championship , which was held in Messina , Sicily . On August 7 , he earned a victory for the United States in a game against the South Korean team . The United States won the silver medal in the tournament . 
 Entering his sophomore season , he was expected to be a key part of the starting pitching rotation . The 2003 season saw the development of Rice 's " Big Three " rotation , featuring Humber and sophomore classmates Wade Townsend and Jeff Niemann . Humber developed a curveball that season , to augment his arsenal that included a fastball , changeup and split @-@ finger fastball . During the season , Humber achieved his 17th consecutive win in WAC play . He was recognized as a Third Team All @-@ American by Collegiate Baseball and was a First Team All @-@ Western Athletic Conference honoree . The trio entered the 2003 College World Series with gaudy numbers — Niemann ( 16 – 0 , 1 @.@ 63 ERA ) and Townsend ( 10 – 1 , 1 @.@ 90 ERA ) complementing Humber — and with Humber scheduled for the third game , if necessary . Humber finished with an 11 – 3 win – loss record with a 3 @.@ 30 ERA , as Rice won its first national championship in any team sport . He pitched a complete game in the decisive third game of the series , a 14 – 2 win over the Stanford Cardinal . The game established a College World Series record for largest title game margin of victory . During the season , Rice established a school record 30 @-@ game winning streak . Upon his becoming the College World Series hero , June 26 , 2003 was declared ' Philip Humber Day ' in his hometown of Carthage , Texas in his honor . Following the season , all three pitchers competed in collegiate summer baseball in the Cape Cod Baseball League ; Humber pitched for the Yarmouth – Dennis Red Sox . Baseball America rated Humber as the seventh @-@ best prospect in the Cape Cod League . 
 In his junior season of 2004 , Humber compiled a 13 – 4 win – loss record and 2 @.@ 27 ERA . He struck out 154 batters and issued only 37 walks in 115 innings . He also set the Rice single @-@ game record for strikeouts when he struck out 17 Hawaii Rainbow Warriors hitters on March 20 , 2004 . Rice entered the 64 @-@ team NCAA Baseball tournament as one of the eight national seeds . In the first game of the regional round of the tournament , Rice was upset by the Texas Southern Tigers . Humber entered the next game against the Texas A & M Aggies with the bases loaded and surrendered a first @-@ pitch grand slam to Justin <unk> . For the season , Humber totaled 154 strikeouts in 115 innings pitched . 
 Humber finished his three @-@ year career with a 35 – 8 win – loss record and 2 @.@ 80 ERA , striking out 422 in 354 innings pitched . Humber 's totals rank him with the third most wins in Rice baseball history and second most strikeouts . Among his honors for the season were selection to the 2004 Louisville Slugger All @-@ America team by Collegiate Baseball and the 2004 USA TODAY / Sports Weekly All @-@ America team . During the inaugural year for the Roger Clemens Award , which designates the top college pitcher , he was one of 10 named semifinalists . He was also among the 10 finalists for the Dick Howser Trophy in 2004 , in recognition of his performance as one of college baseball 's top players . 
 Following the early exit in the Houston Regional due to the upset by the Aggies , Humber looked forward to the Major League Baseball Draft . Niemann , and Townsend were all selected along with Humber in the first eight picks of the 2004 MLB Draft — the first time three teammates had ever gone so early in the same draft . Only twice had three teammates been taken in the first round , most recently when Steve Hosey , Tom Goodwin and Eddie Zosky of the Fresno State Bulldogs were selected in the first round of the 1989 Major League Baseball draft . Teammate David <unk> , a relief pitcher , was also selected in the first round . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = New York Mets ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 The New York Mets chose Humber out of Rice University with their first @-@ round pick in the 2004 Major League Baseball draft , the third overall selection . The Mets chose Humber over Jered Weaver and Stephen Drew , who also received consideration , as they considered Humber to be the " safe " selection . They also scouted Justin Verlander , who the Detroit Tigers had chosen with the second overall pick . It was reported that the Mets preferred Verlander , and would have chosen him if the Tigers had selected Drew . 
 On January 11 , 2005 , Humber and the Mets agreed to a five @-@ year contract , ending a long holdout the day before the Mets began their two @-@ day minicamp in Port St. Lucie , Florida . Humber and the Mets were motivated to complete a deal due to a change in federal tax law that made signing bonuses subject to Federal Insurance Contributions Act and Social Security taxes . There is some discrepancy about the value of the contract . According to MLB.com , Humber received a combined $ 3 @.@ 7 million signing bonus and contract from the Mets . The Houston Chronicle reported the contract to be a $ 4 @.@ 2 million deal with a $ 3 million signing bonus and that Humber would fly to minicamp . Six months later , Lee Jenkins of The New York Times also reported the signing bonus to be $ 3 million , but he claimed the contract was for $ 5 million in total . John Manuel of Baseball America reported the contract was worth a maximum of $ 5 @.@ 116 million , with $ 4 @.@ 2 million guaranteed . 
 Baseball America rated Humber as the 50th @-@ best prospect in baseball heading into the 2005 season . Humber entered spring training in 2005 with the Mets . There , he clashed with Mets ' pitching coach Rick Peterson , who wanted Humber to adopt a different training regimen and change the manner with which he threw the ball to the plate . The Mets front office supported Humber , telling him to pitch how he felt comfortable . 
 After the brief stint in spring training , the Mets assigned Humber to start his professional career with the St. Lucie Mets of the Class @-@ A Advanced Florida State League , where , in fourteen starts , he posted a 2 – 6 win – loss record and a 4 @.@ 99 ERA . Humber was then promoted to the Class @-@ AA Binghamton Mets of the Eastern League . In one start , Humber gave up three earned runs in four innings . Humber left the game early due to elbow pain caused by bone spurs , which required ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction ( more commonly known as Tommy John surgery ) to repair a torn ligament in his elbow . The surgery was performed by Dr. James Andrews of the American Sports Medicine Institute . Coincidentally , his Rice pitching teammates , Townsend ( Tommy John surgery ) and Niemann ( arthroscopic shoulder surgery ) , also endured major surgeries that year . Rice coach Graham , who also coached MLB starters such as Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte in college , shied away from any blame , noting that all three missed out on fall league play by holding out . In spite of his arm surgery , Humber was named the 20th @-@ best prospect in the Florida State League by Baseball America , which ranked him as the fifth @-@ best prospect in the Mets organization following the season . 
 On March 8 , he was assigned to the Mets minor league camp . After rehabilitating from surgery , Humber resumed pitching with St. Lucie in 2006 , posting a 2 @.@ 37 ERA in seven starts . He compiled a 3 – 1 win – loss record . On July 31 , 2006 , a year after his surgery , Humber was once again promoted to Binghamton , where he was 2 – 2 with a 2 @.@ 88 ERA . He was an early September call @-@ up when the Major League rosters expanded on September 1 . However , Humber did not make his Major League Baseball debut until September 24 , 2006 . He made two appearances for the Mets as a relief pitcher , pitching two innings . However , Humber was unable to obtain his pre @-@ surgery velocity . That fall , he began play in the Arizona Fall League but his participation was discontinued when he endured shoulder tendinitis . 
 Before the 2007 season , Baseball America rated Humber as the fourth @-@ best prospect in the Mets organization . That year , the Mets had nine pitchers competing for five spots in the starting rotation in spring training camp . Óliver Pérez , Tom Glavine , Orlando Hernández , and John Maine were the favorites for the spots in the rotation . Veterans Aaron Sele , Chan Ho Park and Jorge Sosa were also invited to camp so that the team could be patient with former first round draft choices Humber and Mike Pelfrey , who were considered the most promising pitchers in camp . Rated the 73rd @-@ best prospect in baseball by Baseball America prior to the 2007 season , Humber competed for a spot on the Mets roster in spring training . However , Humber was optioned to the minor leagues during spring training in 2007 . Assigned to the New Orleans Zephyrs of the Class @-@ AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , Humber had an 11 – 9 win – loss record and 4 @.@ 27 ERA in 139 innings pitched . He allowed 129 hits and walked 44 while striking out 120 batters in 25 starts . For the season , Humber finished tied for fourth in the PCL in wins and had the tenth @-@ best ERA . He had started the season by earning the PCL Pitcher of the week for the week ending April 22 . That week he allowed 2 earned runs in 13 innings of work over two starts , earning a win on April 16 against the Nashville Sounds with six innings of work and suffering a blown save after seven innings against the Albuquerque Isotopes on April 21 . He flirted with a no @-@ hitter with the Zephyrs on August 22 when he entered the ninth inning without giving up a hit to the Iowa Cubs . In his subsequent start , he allowed only an unearned run on two hits over five innings , but he was removed from the game when a batted ball hit him in the shoulder . 
 Humber was promoted to the Mets , again as a September call @-@ up , on September 2 . Though the Mets considered inserting him into the starting rotation immediately , they chose to start Pelfrey . Humber made two relief appearances for the Mets , on September 5 and 11 . The Mets , having lost eight of their previous 12 games and seen their lead over the Philadelphia Phillies in the National League East division race decrease from seven games to two , removed Pelfrey from the final rotation to give an extra day of rest to pitchers Pérez , Maine , and Pedro Martínez , and gave Humber his first Major League start on September 26 , 2007 , against the Washington Nationals , choosing him over Dave Williams . Although the Mets raced out to a 6 – 2 lead , Humber allowed five runs in four @-@ plus innings , receiving a no decision in a game the Mets eventually lost , 9 – 6 . The decision to start Humber was seen as emblematic of the Mets ' desperation . As George Vecsey wrote in The New York Times , " How did it come to this ? How did the entire Mets ' season come to depend so much on a young pitcher , Philip Humber , who had never started in the major leagues until last night ? " He concluded his three Mets appearances in the 2007 season with a 7 @.@ 71 ERA . 
 = = = Minnesota Twins ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Following the 2007 season , the Mets began to discuss trading Humber to the Minnesota Twins in a package of prospects to acquire two @-@ time Cy Young Award @-@ winning pitcher Johan Santana . Eligible to become a free agent after the 2008 season , Santana had rejected a proposed four @-@ year , $ 80 million contract extension from the Twins . Assuming that he was unlikely to resign with Minnesota , the Twins began to shop him to other MLB teams . 
 On February 2 , 2008 , the Mets traded Humber , along with outfielder Carlos Gómez and pitchers Kevin Mulvey and <unk> Guerra , to the Twins for Santana . At the time Baseball America ranked Guerra , Gomez , Mulvey and Humber the second , third , fourth and seventh @-@ best prospects in the Mets organization , respectively . 
 During spring training , the Twins assigned Humber to Santana 's former place in the Twins ' clubhouse . While trying to earn a spot in the rotation , Humber compiled 11 consecutive scoreless innings in the Grapefruit League . By late March , Humber had a spring training ERA of 1 @.@ 29 . 
 Humber spent most of the 2008 season assigned to the Twins ' Class @-@ AAA affiliate , the Rochester Red Wings of the International League . He started off slow with a 0 – 5 win – loss record and a 5 @.@ 83 ERA in his first nine starts . With Rochester , Humber eventually compiled a 10 – 8 win – loss record with a 4 @.@ 56 ERA in 31 games . He finished with a 6 – 1 win – loss record and a 2 @.@ 67 ERA in the second half . His 4 – 1 win – loss record with a 2 @.@ 74 ERA in August earned him the Minor League Pitcher of the Month Award . The Twins promoted Humber in August 2008 , and he appeared in five games for the Twins , all in relief . Humber pitched 11 2 ⁄ 3 innings , and posted a 4 @.@ 63 ERA and six strikeouts for the Twins . Following the 2008 season , Humber was out of options , and could not be sent to the minor leagues without first being subjected to waivers , where other teams could claim him . 
 Humber made the Twins ' Opening Day roster in 2009 as a long reliever . Humber struggled at the start of the 2009 season , pitching to a 12 @.@ 46 ERA over 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings , while giving up 11 hits and walking four batters . The Twins designated Humber for assignment on April 17 , 2009 to make room on their roster for Juan Morillo , who the Twins had claimed off waivers from the Colorado Rockies . Humber cleared waivers and the Twins assigned him to Rochester . The Twins recalled Humber in August 2009 due to an injury to Francisco Liriano , but outrighted him to the minor leagues ten days later . Humber was granted free agency after the 2009 season . 
 = = = Kansas City Royals ( 2010 ) = = = 
 On December 15 , 2009 , Humber signed a minor league contract with the Kansas City Royals , receiving an invitation to spring training . After he pitched to an 11 @.@ 74 ERA in four spring training games , the Royals reassigned Humber to their minor league camp on March 22 . 
 Humber was assigned to start the year with the Omaha Royals of the PCL . On June 10 , 2010 , while pitching in a game for Omaha , Humber was hit in the face on a line drive by Luis Cruz . After lying on the mound for a few minutes , he was able to get up and walk on his own to the dugout . He was then transported to a local hospital , where he received eighteen stitches . He earned the second PCL Pitcher of the Week Award of his career for play during the week ending August 1 . He won the award based on having posted a complete game 4 @-@ hit 7 @-@ strikeout shutout against the Nashville Sounds on July 30 . 
 However , Humber began to regain the velocity he had lost following Tommy John surgery in 2005 . Humber was called up by the Kansas City Royals on August 5 , 2010 , when Kansas City designated José Guillén for assignment . On August 25 , Humber pitched three relief innings for the Royals against the Detroit Tigers and earned his first MLB win . He finished the 2010 season with a 2 – 1 win – loss record and 4 @.@ 15 ERA in eight games for the Royals , including one game started . He also appeared in 21 games , 20 of them starts , for the Omaha Royals , pitching to a 5 – 6 win – loss record and 4 @.@ 47 ERA . The Royals designated Humber for assignment in December 2010 , in order to make room on the roster for newly signed Jeff Francoeur . 
 = = = Chicago White Sox ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In December 2010 , the Royals waived Humber , and he was claimed by the Oakland Athletics , who had extra room on their 40 @-@ man roster at the time of the waiver claim . However , the team subsequently filled its 40 @-@ man roster and designated Humber for assignment later that off @-@ season in order to make room on their roster for Guillermo Moscoso , who the Athletics acquired from the Texas Rangers in a trade during January 2011 . The Chicago White Sox claimed Humber off waivers from the Athletics on January 18 , 2011 . He signed a contract worth $ 500 @,@ 000 for the season . White Sox pitching coach Don Cooper worked with Humber , as he replaced his cut fastball with a slider and improved his pitching mechanics in the fashion originally recommended by Peterson in 2005 . 
 Humber debuted with the White Sox in their third game in relief . He made two pitches , both of which resulted in hits and base runners that came around to score . With Jake Peavy injured at the start of the 2011 season , the White Sox gave Humber the opportunity to pitch in their starting rotation . On April 9 , 2011 , Humber won his first start with the White Sox , pitching 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings and only allowing one run . Humber surprised the White Sox with his strong performance . On April 25 , in the sixth start of his career , he took a no @-@ hitter into the seventh inning against the New York Yankees at Yankee Stadium , but with one out Alex Rodriguez singled up the middle . He finished with seven scoreless innings . He took a no @-@ hitter into the sixth inning against the Washington Nationals on June 26 , but ended up earning a 2 – 1 loss when he surrendered a seventh inning home run to Danny Espinosa . In early July , when he led the major leagues with 103 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and held an 8 – 4 record with a 2 @.@ 69 ERA , he seemed like a probable selection for the 2011 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game . In mid @-@ July , the White Sox switched to a six @-@ man rotation . By early August , Humber was in a slump . Humber denies the extra rest affected his pitch command . He spent time on the disabled list with a facial bruise after Kosuke Fukudome lined a baseball into his face above the right eye on August 18 . After he was hit , he was very concerned for his wife : " I thought , ' I 've got to get up because she 's in the stands , ' " Humber said . " As soon as I went in [ the clubhouse ] , I asked one of the guys to call her to make sure she knew I was OK . " , adding " My main concern was cheering up my wife . " He appeared in one rehabilitation start for the Charlotte Knights of the Class @-@ AAA International League . Humber pitched seven scoreless innings in his major league return . Humber completed his first full season as an MLB starting pitcher with a 9 – 9 win – loss record with a 3 @.@ 75 ERA in 163 innings . 
 As Humber performed better in the first half of the 2011 season ( 8 – 5 , 3 @.@ 10 ERA ) than in the second half ( 1 – 4 , 5 @.@ 01 ERA ) , which he attributed to general fatigue , Humber decided to add 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) during his offseason workouts . Humber signed a one @-@ year contract in March for $ 530 @,@ 000 , above the minimum salary for a player with his level of MLB experience . In the first season in which he did not have to battle for a roster spot in spring training , he made his final spring training start in his home state near Rice at Minute Maid Park in front of many relatives . Although the 2012 Chicago White Sox 's rotation was said to be made up of five number @-@ three starters , Humber began the season as the number five starter . 
 In Humber 's 30th career start in MLB , he pitched the 21st perfect game in MLB history against the Seattle Mariners on April 21 , 2012 . It was the third perfect game in White Sox history after those thrown by Charlie Robertson and Mark Buehrle , and the 18th no @-@ hitter in White Sox history . It was Humber 's second start of the 2012 season and first career complete game . 
 Humber was named American League ( AL ) Player of the Week for the week ending April 22 . Humber went 1 – 0 with a 0 @.@ 63 ERA in 14 1 ⁄ 3 innings while striking out 16 over two starts that week , including the perfect game . He received a congratulatory phone call from President Barack Obama , a noted White Sox fan . Humber appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman , where he read the " Top Ten List " . Humber 's perfect game will be memorialized with a plaque at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . 
 Since the perfect game , Humber has struggled . He allowed 20 runs in his next three starts across 13 1 ⁄ 3 innings . He missed one month of the season due to a right elbow strain . Following the acquisition of Francisco Liriano , the White Sox removed Humber from the starting rotation . 
 = = = Houston Astros ( 2013 ) = = = 
 The Houston Astros claimed Humber off waivers on November 30 , 2012 . Humber made the Astros ' starting rotation at the start of the 2013 season . Humber lost his spot in the starting rotation to Érik Bédard after opening the season with an 0 – 7 record and an ERA of 8 @.@ 82 . Humber was designated for assignment on May 12 , after his record fell to 0 – 8 with a 9 @.@ 59 ERA . After pitching in relief for the Oklahoma City RedHawks of the PCL , the Astros selected his contract on August 12 , when they traded Wesley Wright to the Tampa Bay Rays . On October 3 , the Astros declined a $ 3 million option for 2014 , instead paying him his guaranteed $ 500 @,@ 000 and releasing him . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics = = = 
 On November 2 , 2013 , Humber signed a minor league contract with the Oakland Athletics , with an invitation to spring training . The Athletics assigned him to the Sacramento River Cats of the PCL . 
 = = = Kia Tigers = = = 
 On December 8 , 2014 , Humber signed a contract with the Kia Tigers of the Korea Baseball Organization . After pitching to a 6 @.@ 75 ERA in 50 2 / 3 innings , Humber was released by the Tigers on July 20 , 2015 . 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 On December 10 , 2015 , Humber signed a minor league deal with the San Diego Padres . Humber retired on March 29 , 2016 . 
 = = = Pitching style = = = 
 Humber relied on five pitches . He had a four @-@ seam fastball ranging from 89 to 92 miles per hour ( 143 – 148 km / h ) , a two @-@ seam fastball ( 89 to 92 miles per hour ( 143 – 148 km / h ) ) , a slider ( mid 80s ) , a changeup ( mid 80s ) , and a 12 @-@ 6 curveball ( 78 to 81 miles per hour ( 126 – 130 km / h ) ) . He used his slider against right @-@ handed hitters but preferred to use his changeup and curveball as off @-@ speed pitches against left @-@ handed hitters . Humber favored his curveball in two @-@ strike situations . He used a conventional " three @-@ quarters " arm slot to deliver his pitches . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Humber married his wife , Kristan , in November 2007 . They were introduced by mutual friends in 2005 . At the time of his perfect game , Humber 's wife was nine months pregnant with the couple 's first child , a son named John Gregory , who was born on May 1 . Humber comes from a large extended family . 
 Humber is a registered member of the Republican Party . He has the Bible verse Colossians 3 : 23 inscribed in his baseball glove . He undertook a charitable mission to the Philippines in the 2011 – 12 offseason with Brett Carroll , where they instructed children about baseball and Christianity . 
 Josh Tomlin , an MLB pitcher , is a close friend of Humber . From nearby Tyler , Texas , Tomlin competed against Humber in high school , and the two train together during offseasons . Humber is currently a Tyler resident . 
 = Jonathan Lethem = 
 Jonathan Allen Lethem ( born February 19 , 1964 ) is an American novelist , essayist and short story writer . His first novel , Gun , with Occasional Music , a genre work that mixed elements of science fiction and detective fiction , was published in 1994 . It was followed by three more science fiction novels . 
 In 1999 , Lethem published Motherless Brooklyn , a National Book Critics Circle Award @-@ winning novel that achieved mainstream success . In 2003 , he published The Fortress of Solitude , which became a New York Times Best Seller . In 2005 , he received a MacArthur Fellowship . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lethem was born in Brooklyn , New York , to Judith Frank Lethem , a political activist , and Richard Brown Lethem , an avant @-@ garde painter . He was the eldest of three children . His father was Protestant ( with Scottish and English ancestry ) and his mother was Jewish , from a family with roots in Germany , Poland , and Russia . His brother Blake became an artist , and his sister Mara became a photographer , writer , and translator . The family lived in a commune in the pre @-@ gentrified Brooklyn neighborhood of North Gowanus ( now called Boerum Hill ) . Despite the racial tensions and conflicts , he later described his bohemian childhood as " thrilling " and culturally wide @-@ reaching . He gained an encyclopedic knowledge of the music of Bob Dylan , saw Star Wars twenty @-@ one times during its original theatrical release , and read the complete works of the science fiction writer Philip K. Dick . Lethem later said Dick ’ s work was " as formative an influence as marijuana or punk rock — as equally responsible for beautifully fucking up my life , for bending it irreversibly along a course I still travel . " 
 His parents divorced when Lethem was young . When he was thirteen , his mother Judith died from a malignant brain tumor , an event which he has said haunted him and has strongly affected his writing . ( Lethem discusses the direct relation between his mother and the Bob Dylan song " Like a Rolling Stone " in the 2003 Canadian documentary Complete Unknown . ) In 2007 , Lethem explained , " My books all have this giant , howling missing [ center ] — language has disappeared , or someone has vanished , or memory has gone . " 
 Intending to become a visual artist like his father , Lethem attended the High School of Music & Art in New York , where he painted in a style he describes as " glib , show @-@ offy , usually cartoonish " . At Music & Art he produced his own zine , The Literary Exchange , which featured artwork and writing . He also created animated films and wrote a 125 @-@ page novel , Heroes , still unpublished . 
 After graduating from high school , Lethem entered Bennington College in Vermont in 1982 as a prospective art student . At Bennington , Lethem experienced an " overwhelming .... collision with the realities of class — my parents ’ bohemian milieu had kept me from understanding , even a little , that we were poor .... at Bennington that was all demolished by an encounter with the fact of real privilege . " This , coupled with the realization that he was more interested in writing than art , led Lethem to drop out halfway through his sophomore year . He hitchhiked from Denver , Colorado to Berkeley , California in 1984 , across " a thousand miles of desert and mountains through Wyoming , Utah , and Nevada , with about 40 dollars in my pocket , " describing it as " one of the stupidest and most memorable things I 've ever done . " 
 Lethem lived in California for twelve years , working as a clerk in used bookstores , including Moe 's and Pegasus & Pendragon Books , and writing on his own time . Lethem published his first short story in 1989 and published several more in the early 1990s . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = First novels = = = 
 Lethem ’ s first novel , Gun , with Occasional Music , is a merging of science fiction and the <unk> detective story , which includes talking kangaroos , radical futuristic versions of the drug scene , and cryogenic prisons . The novel was published in 1994 by Harcourt Brace , in what Lethem later described as a " delirious " experience . " I 'd pictured my first novels being published as paperback originals , " he recalled , " and instead a prestigious house was doing the book in cloth .... I was in heaven . " The novel was released to little initial fanfare , but an enthusiastic review in Newsweek , which declared Gun an " audaciously assured first novel " , catapulted the book to wider commercial success . Gun , with Occasional Music was a finalist for the 1994 Nebula Award , and placed first in the " Best First Novel " category of the 1995 Locus Magazine reader 's poll . In the mid @-@ 1990s , film producer @-@ director Alan J. Pakula optioned the novel 's movie rights , which allowed Lethem to quit working in bookstores and devote his time to writing . 
 His next book was Amnesia Moon ( 1995 ) . Partially inspired by Lethem 's experiences hitchhiking cross @-@ country , this second novel uses a road narrative to explore a multi @-@ post @-@ apocalyptic future landscape rife with perception tricks . After publishing many of his early stories in a 1996 collection , The Wall of the Sky , the Wall of the Eye , Lethem published his third novel , As She <unk> Across the Table ( 1997 ) . It starts with a physics researcher who falls in love with an artificially generated spatial anomaly called " Lack " , for whom she spurns her previous partner . Her ex @-@ partner 's comic struggle with this rejection , and with the anomaly , constitute the majority of the narrative . 
 In 1996 , Lethem moved from the San Francisco Bay Area back to Brooklyn . His next book , published after his return to Brooklyn , was Girl in Landscape . In the novel , a young girl must endure puberty while also having to face a strange and new world populated by aliens known as <unk> . Lethem has said that Girl in Landscape 's plot and characters , including the figures of a young girl and a violently protective father figure , were " very strongly influenced " by the 1956 John Wayne Western The Searchers , a movie with which he is " obsessed . " 
 = = = Mainstream success and " genre bending " = = = 
 The first novel Lethem began after returning to New York City was Motherless Brooklyn , a return to the detective theme . He maintained objective realism while exploring subjective alterity through Lionel <unk> . His protagonist has Tourette syndrome and is obsessed with language . Lethem later said that <unk> 
 ... obviously [ is ] the character I 've written with whom I most identify ... [ the novel ] stands outside myself ... It 's the only one which doesn 't need me , never did . It would have found someone to write it , by necessity . 
 Upon its publication in 1999 , Motherless Brooklyn won the National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction , The <unk> Gold Dagger for crime fiction , and the Salon Book Award ; it was named book of the year by Esquire . In 1999 , actor Edward Norton announced that he was planning to write , direct and star in a film adaptation of the novel . In March 2007 , Norton said he was still working on the screenplay . 
 According to The New York Times , the mainstream success of Motherless Brooklyn made Lethem " something of a hipster celebrity " , and he was referred to several times as a " genre bender " . Critics cited the variety of Lethem 's novels , which were alternately hard @-@ boiled detective fiction , science fiction , and autobiographical . ( Lethem credited his comfort in genre @-@ mixing to his father 's art , which " always combined observed and imagined reality on the same canvas , very naturally , very un @-@ self @-@ consciously . " ) In Time magazine , Lev Grossman classed Lethem with a movement of authors similarly eager to blend literary and popular writing , including Michael Chabon ( with whom Lethem is friends ) , Margaret Atwood , and Susanna Clarke . 
 In 2003 , Lethem commented on the concept of " genre bending " : 
 The fact is , I used to get very involved , six or seven years ago , and before that , in questions of taxonomy of genre , and in the idea — which is ultimately a political idea — that a given writer , perhaps me , could in some objective way alter or reorganize the boundaries between genres .... Nowadays , I 've come to feel that talking about categories , about " high " and " low " , about genre and their boundaries and the blurring of those boundaries , all consists only of an elaborate way to avoid actually discussing what moves and interests me about books — my own , and others ' . What I like are books in their homely actuality — the insides of the books , the mysterious movements of characters and situations and the emotions that accompany those movements . The play of sentences , their infinite variety . 
 In the early 2000s , Lethem published a story collection , edited two anthologies , wrote magazine pieces , and published the 55 @-@ page novella This Shape We 're In ( 2000 ) . This Shape We 're In was one of the first offerings from McSweeney 's Books , the publishing imprint that developed from Dave Eggers ' McSweeney 's Quarterly Concern . 
 In November 2000 , Lethem said that he was working on an uncharacteristically " big sprawling " novel , about a child who grows up to be a rock journalist . The novel was published in 2003 as The Fortress of Solitude . The semi @-@ autobiographical bildungsroman features dozens of characters in a variety of milieus , but features a tale of racial tensions and boyhood in Brooklyn during the late 1970s . The main characters are two friends of different backgrounds who grew up on the same block in Boerum Hill . It was named one of nine " Editor 's Choice " books of the year by The New York Times and has been published in fifteen languages . 
 Lethem 's second collection of short fiction , Men and Cartoons , was published in late 2004 . In March 2005 , The Disappointment Artist , his first collection of essays , was released . On September 20 , 2005 , Lethem received a MacArthur Fellowship . 
 In an interview with Armchair / Shotgun in 2009 , Lethem said of short fiction : 
 I 'm writing short stories right now , that 's what I do between novels , and I love them . I 'm very devoted to it . You know , it 's funny . There seems to be some sort of law that you only get to be celebrated for one or the other . And then a couple of people will break it . Updike did . They didn 't review his story collections by saying , " Well , these are nice , but he 's a novelist . " Or review his novels by saying , " Well , too bad he can 't do the longer stuff . " Other people tend to get patronized on one end or the other — and I 'll take it . I have a very happy life as a novelist . But the story collections I 've published are tremendously important to me . And many of the uncollected stories — or yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ collected stories — are among my proudest writings . They 're very closely allied , obviously , to novel writing . But also very distinct , and , you know , there 's no need to choose . 
 = = = 2005 – present = = = 
 In September 2006 , Lethem wrote the article , " The Genius of Bob Dylan " , a lengthy interview with Bob Dylan , which was published in Rolling Stone . The interview contained Lethem 's reflections on Dylan 's artistic achievements . It revealed Dylan 's dissatisfaction with contemporary recording techniques and his thoughts on his own status . 
 After Motherless Brooklyn and The Fortress of Solitude , Lethem decided that " [ i ] t was time to leave Brooklyn in a literary sense anyway ... I really needed to defy all that stuff about place and memory . " In 2007 , he returned as a novelist to California , where some of his earlier fiction had been set , with You Don 't Love Me Yet , a novel about an upstart rock band . The novel revolves around a woman in the band , Lucinda , who answers phones for her friend 's complaint line and uses some of a caller 's words as lyrics . According to Lethem , the book was inspired by the years he spent as the lead singer in an upstart California band in the late 1980s and early 1990s , during what he called " the unformed posturing phase of life " . The novel received mixed reviews . 
 In 2005 , Lethem had announced that he was planning to revive the Marvel Comics character Omega the Unknown in a ten @-@ issue series to be published in 2006 . After hearing of the project , Omega co @-@ creator Steve Gerber expressed personal outrage over the use of the character without his participation , though he later discussed the project with Lethem and admitted that he had " misjudged " him . In May 2006 , Marvel Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief Joe Quesada explained that the series had been delayed to 2007 , saying that " winning the MacArthur Grant put additional and unexpected demands on [ Lethem 's ] time . " The revamped Omega the Unknown series was published in ten monthly issues from October 2007 to July 2008 ; the issues were published in a single volume in October 2008 . 
 In early 2007 , Lethem began work on Chronic City , which was published on October 13 , 2009 . In July 2008 , Lethem said that Chronic City is " set on the Upper East Side of Manhattan , it ’ s strongly influenced by Saul Bellow , Philip K. Dick , Charles G. Finney and Hitchcock ’ s Vertigo and it concerns a circle of friends including a faded child @-@ star actor , a cultural critic , a hack ghost @-@ writer of autobiographies , and a city official . And it ’ s long and strange . " 
 His essay , " The Ecstasy of Influence : A Plagiarism " ( 2007 ) , is a passionate defense of plagiarism and a call for a return to a " gift economy " in the arts . He writes , 
 The kernel , the soul — let us go further and say the substance , the bulk , the actual and valuable material of all human utterances — is plagiarism ... Don 't pirate my editions ; do plunder my visions . The name of the game is Give All . You , reader , are welcome to my stories . They were never mine in the first place , but I gave them to you . 
 The essay was included in his 2011 collection , The Ecstasy of Influence : <unk> , Etc . 
 In 2011 , The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick , edited by Pamela Jackson and Lethem , was published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . Among other projects , Lethem published short books about John Carpenter 's film They Live ( published in October , 2010 as They Live ) and the Talking Heads album Fear of Music . Starting in 2011 , he served as the Roy E. Disney Professor in Creative Writing at Pomona College , a position formerly held by the late David Foster Wallace . 
 Lethem 's ninth novel , entitled Dissident Gardens , was released on September 10 , 2013 . According to Lethem in an interview with the Los Angeles Times , the novel concerns " American leftists " , very specifically " a red @-@ diaper baby generation trying to figure out what it all means , this legacy of American Communism . " Regarding the novel 's setting , Lethem said in the same interview that it is 
 " set in Queens and Greenwich Village , another New York neighborhood book , very much about the life of the city ... writing about Greenwich Village in 1958 was really a jump for me , it was as much of an imaginative leap as any of the more fantastical things I 've done . But really exciting , too . " 
 Dissident Gardens was quickly followed up in February 2015 with Lucky Alan and Other Stories , Lethem 's fifth short story collection . Lethem 's next novel , his tenth , is scheduled for publication in October 2016 . Titled A Gambler 's Anatomy , the novel 's official plot description on the Penguin Books website alludes to it concerning " an international backgammon hustler who thinks he ’ s psychic " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1987 , Lethem married the writer and artist Shelley Jackson ; they were divorced by 1997 . In 2000 , he married Julia Rosenberg , a Canadian film executive ; they divorced two years later . 
 As of 2007 , Lethem lived in Brooklyn and Berwick , Maine , with his third wife , the filmmaker Amy Barrett , and their son , Everett Barrett Lethem ( b . May 23 , 2007 ) . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = Criticism and interpretation = = 
 Cohen , Samuel . After the End of History : American Fiction in the 1990s . University of Iowa Press , 2009 . [ contains discussion of The Fortress of Solitude ] 
 Clarke , Jaime ( ed . ) . Conversations with Jonathan Lethem . Literary Conversations . University Press of Mississippi , 2012 . 
 <unk> , Matthew . Understanding Jonathan Lethem . Understanding Contemporary American Literature . University of South Carolina Press , 2015 . 
 Peacock , James . Jonathan Lethem . Contemporary American and Canadian Writers . Manchester University Press , 2012 . 
 = Nki National Park = 
 Nki National Park is a national park in southeastern Cameroon , located in its East Province . The closest towns to Nki are Yokadouma , Moloundou and <unk> , beyond which are rural lands . Due to its remoteness , Nki has been described as " the last true wilderness . " It has a large and varied ecosystem , and it is home to over 265 species of birds , and the forests of Cameroon contain some of the highest population density of forest elephants of any nation with an elephant density of roughly 2 @.@ 5 per square kilometer for Nki and neighboring Boumba Bek National Park combined . These animals are victims of poaching , which has been a major problem since an economic depression in the 1980s . The indigenous people follow in the footsteps of the poachers , attracted by the financial opportunities . The removal of logging industries from the park , on the other hand , has been a success ; it is no longer considered a major threat to Nki 's wilderness . 
 = = History = = 
 The World Wildlife Fund has been in the process of conserving the park since the 1980s , including ridding the area of the logging business . This movement , however , has been met with some criticism , especially by members of the remote village of Ndongo , Cameroon . Before WWF arrived , Ndongo was a bustling logging town of 300 residents with fairly good roads and plentiful working opportunities . Once the organization established itself , it pressured the logging companies to operate in a more environmentally friendly manner . The logging companies pulled out of the town in 1988 , leaving broken machinery and severely damaging Ndongo 's economy . According to Leonard <unk> , manager of WWF projects in southeast Cameroon , " we cannot convince a community of the need to protect forests if we don ’ t acknowledge their problems or their poverty . " 
 Today , logging is no longer a major problem , as " it would require a lot of investment to develop necessary infrastructure , such as roads , for [ its ] operations , especially in the southern portion of Nki . " According to the WWF 's scientific advisor in the region , Paul Robinson <unk> , " poaching is the biggest threat to ... Nki . " It is a result of the late 1980s economic depression in Cameroon . The indigenous people followed the poachers , attracted by the financial opportunities . They would sell their product through " intermediaries " for money and more hunting supplies . 
 Cameroonian authorities fought poaching in Nki by applying repressive measures to the indigenous population . An example of this was in January 1997 , when Bakas were forced from their homes near <unk> . These actions turned the Bakas against the WWF , which they considered " an organization of whites who want to protect animals " . Every year , poachers travel up the Dja for central Nki , where elephant ivory is abundant . Strong currents on the river are a deterrent for half the year , but after that , according to freelance journalist <unk> Pandya , the fauna is easy to prey upon . 
 Nonetheless , when Pandya of the WWF visited Nki National Park in the early 1990s , she described it as " the last true wilderness . " In 1995 , the park was named an Essential Protection Zone , its first official status . It was not formally established as a national park until the Cameroonian government decreed the creation of Boumba Bek and Nki National Parks on 17 October 2005 . This establishment was not without opposition ; the Bakas have continually asked to reduce the park 's boundaries and ask for higher usage rights , which invaded upon " their " land . 
 Cameroon and Gabon are currently working on the <unk> project , a conservation initiative leading to a land management plan which will oversee access to and use of forests . It will create a tri @-@ national " <unk> " bordered by the <unk> , Boumba @-@ Bek , Nki , and Odzala National Parks and the Dja Wildlife Reserve . This project is part of a conservation movement toward the zoning and designation of new protected areas . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 The park is located in a remote area of southeastern Cameroon , which " has helped maintain most of its pristine forest and beauty . " It has never been completely explored . Largely hilly in its terrain at an elevation of 350 – 650 m , it falls within the Sangha ecoregion . Nki is crossed by several large rivers , including the Dja River . A waterfall , Nki falls , is located on the river in the park , giving " a tinge of exoticism to the landscape . " The park is situated from latitude 2 ˚ 05 to 2 ˚ 50 N and longitude 14 ˚ 05 to 14 ˚ 50 E. It covers a surface area of 3 @,@ 093 km2 ( 1 @,@ 194 sq mi ) and straddles two administrative divisions in the East province : <unk> in Haut Nyon and Moloundou in Boumba et <unk> Division . The closest towns to Nki are Yokadouma , Moloundou and <unk> , beyond which is rural lands . 
 Seventy @-@ three <unk> , or forest clearings , have been discovered in Nki National Park . In April 2006 , while looking for elephant groups , a WWF team discovered the largest bai in the region , <unk> Bai . Dr. Mike Loomis , a member of the group , confirmed that this bai is slightly larger than Dzanga Sangha Bai ( Central African Republic ) , which had previously held the record . He also reported little human development adjacent to the bai , and noticed 21 elephants and 16 buffaloes in it simultaneously . The bai has a small creek running through its center , which sits atop a bed of rocks and sand . A large mineral pit is located next to the stream . It is the habitat of several wildlife species , the largest @-@ numbering being chimpanzees , elephants , buffaloes , and gorillas . 
 The park has a tropical climate with temperature ranging from 23 @.@ 1 – 25 ˚ C with an average annual temperature of 24 ˚ C. Its relative humidity varies between 60 and 90 % while annual rainfall is 1500 mm per year . According to the Cameroon Ministry of Agriculture , nearby Moloundou has a rainy season from September to November , a dry season from November to March , a rainy season from March to June , and a dry season from July to August . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The area around the park , as defined by the World Wildlife Fund , has a human population of 22 @,@ 882 , mostly ethnic <unk> and , despite being named a minority in Cameroon 's constitution of 18 January 1996 , Baka Pygmies . These include the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> tribes . Non @-@ indigenous employees of logging companies and traders make up a sizeable amount of the population . The population density of the region is about five people per square kilometer , concentrated along the main Yokadouma @-@ Moloundou road . The villages around the park are mostly homogeneous as there are few non @-@ natives , most of whom work as civil servants or traders . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 As with Boumba @-@ Bek to the northeast , the main type of forest is semi @-@ evergreen with an open canopy dominated by the 50 – 60 m <unk> , though it is mixed with large patches of closed evergreens . There are also some seasonally flooded Uapaca trees along the Dja River . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Nki , according to the Environmental News Service , " encompass [ es ] a biodiverse group of plants and animals . " This has been confirmed by various studies over the years . Sitatunga , chimpanzees , forest antelope ( largely duikers ) , <unk> , giant forest hogs , bush pigs , leopard , Nile crocodiles and bongos are all found in Nki National Park , along with " hundreds " of fish species . 
 The forests of Cameroon contain some of the highest population density of forest elephants of any nation , and Nki is no different , with an elephant density of roughly 2 @.@ 5 per square kilometer for Boumba Bek and Nki combined . The population has been steadily rising , from 1 @,@ 547 in 1998 to 3 @,@ 000 in 2006 . Gorillas are also reported to abundant ; there are an estimated 6 @,@ 000 adults in Nki . The park is also home to diurnal primates , such as the threatened crested monkey , De Brazza monkey , and the black colobus , who reportedly only live east of the Dja River . 
 A 20 @-@ day study held by BirdLife International discovered 265 species of birds in the park . Of these , the yellow @-@ bellied form of forest robin is widespread . In the study , a pair of Ja River scrub warblers was discovered in a 1 hectare patch of <unk> marsh ; its population must be small as there are few such marshes in Nki . Three species of forest nightjar have been observed in the park ; Bate 's and brown nightjars are common in southeastern Cameroon , while a rarer and unidentified third species ' call has been heard twice . It is likely that this is Prigogine 's nightjar , as its voice is identical to that of the only known specimen of this species which was found in the Democratic Republic of Congo . Two small owls , <unk> 's and African barred <unk> coexist in Nki , due to similar habitat requirements . 
 = Mauritius women 's national football team = 
 The Mauritius women 's national football team is a women 's association football team that represents the country of Mauritius . They have played two matches in their history , playing Réunion on 3 June 2012 and 25 November 2012 . As Réunion are not a FIFA member , this match was not recognised by FIFA . They are controlled by the Mauritius Football Association and are members of FIFA , the Confederation of African Football ( CAF ) , and the Council of Southern Africa Football Associations ( COSAFA ) . As of 2012 the head coach is Alain Jules . The development of women 's football in the country and in Africa as a whole faces a number of challenges , with a programme for women 's football not being created in the country until 1997 . FIFA gives money to the Mauritius Football Association , 10 % of which is aimed at developing football in the country in areas that include women 's football , sport medicine and futsal . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team and Mauritius was no exception with a women 's football programme only being established in the country in 1997 . As of January 2013 , the team has not played in , nor have they scheduled , any FIFA sanctioned matches . The only match they have played to date was against Réunion on 3 June 2012 in Saint @-@ Denis . This match ended in a 3 – 0 defeat . A return match was planned for July 2012 in Mauritius , but this was put back to November 2012 . The match was played in <unk> on 25 November 2012 , with Réunion winning again , this time by 2 goals to 1 . 
 Mauritius was scheduled to compete in several competitions , which they ended up withdrawing from before playing a single match . The list includes the 2002 Confederation of Southern African Football Associations women 's tournament in Harare , Zimbabwe from which they withdrew . In 2005 , Zambia was supposed to host a regional Council of Southern Africa Football Associations ( COSAFA ) women 's football tournament , with several countries agreeing to send teams including South Africa , Zimbabwe , Mozambique , Malawi , Seychelles , Mauritius , Madagascar , Zambia , Botswana , Namibia , Lesotho and Swaziland . The tournament eventually took place in 2006 , but Mauritius did not send a team . Beyond that , they were scheduled to participate in the 2008 Women 's U @-@ 20 World Cup qualification , where they were scheduled to play Zimbabwe in the preliminary round ; however , Zimbabwe withdrew from the competition giving Mauritius an automatic bye into the first round . In that round Mauritius was supposed to play South Africa , but withdrew from the competition . 
 As of 2012 , the head coach is Alain Jules . As of March 2012 , the team was not ranked in the world by FIFA , as it had not yet participated in any matches against other FIFA members . 
 = = Recruitment and organisation = = 
 Women 's football in Africa as a whole faces several challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women in the wider society , and fundamental gender inequality present in the society that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . Another problem with the development for the national team , one faced throughout the continent , is if quality female football players are found , many leave the country seeking greater opportunity in Northern Europe or the United States . 
 Women 's football was formally established in Mauritius in 1997 . As of 2009 , there was no national or regional women 's competition but a school competition existed . There are 17 clubs for women over the age of 16 and four youth clubs in the country . The country has three national women 's football teams : senior , under @-@ 15 , and under @-@ 19 . In the period between 2002 and 2006 , none of them played even one international match . 10 % of the money from the FIFA Financial Assistance Programme ( FAP ) is targeted at the technical development of the game , which includes women 's football , sport medicine and futsal . This compares to 15 % for men 's competitions and 4 % for youth football development . Between 1991 and 2010 in Mauritius , there was no FIFA FUTURO III regional course for women 's coaching , no women 's football seminar held in the country and no FIFA MA course held for women / youth football . 
 = = Players = = 
 Players called for the two leg 2016 Africa Women Cup of Nations qualification matches against Botswana in March 2016 . 
 Head coach : Alain Jules 
 = Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) = 
 " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " is an instrumental by English musician George Harrison , released as the opening track of his 1974 album Dark Horse . It was also the B @-@ side of the album 's second single – which was " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " in North America and most other territories , and " Dark Horse " in Britain and some European countries . Among Harrison 's post @-@ Beatles solo releases , the track is the first of only two genuine instrumentals he released from 1970 onwards – the other being the Grammy Award @-@ winning " Marwa Blues " , from his 2002 album Brainwashed . 
 Harrison recorded " Hari 's on Tour " in April 1974 at a spontaneous session held at his home , Friar Park . A slide guitar @-@ based composition , the track also features saxophonist Tom Scott and the latter 's jazz @-@ rock band L.A. Express , who were touring as Joni Mitchell 's backing group at the time . It was the first Harrison song to feature Scott , who became a regular collaborator and served as band leader during Harrison 's only series of concerts in North America , the highly publicised " Dark Horse Tour " with Ravi Shankar . " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " was played as the opening number throughout this tour , over November and December 1974 . 
 Although music critics and Harrison biographers have generally viewed the album track in an unfavourable light , several concert reviewers identified it as an effective opener for the shows . " Hari 's on Tour " is one of only two songs from the 1974 tour to have been released officially , after a live version was included on the limited @-@ edition Songs by George Harrison 2 EP in 1992 . This live recording was taken from the Washington , DC stop on the tour , during which Harrison met with President Gerald Ford at the White House . 
 = = Background = = 
 George Harrison first worked with jazz saxophonist , flautist and arranger Tom Scott in April 1973 , during the Los Angeles sessions for Ravi Shankar 's Shankar Family & Friends album . The two musicians also contributed to Ringo Starr 's album Ringo around that time , as well as Cheech & Chong 's Los <unk> . Outside of his session work , Scott 's main activities were leading his band , L.A. Express , and backing Joni Mitchell , both live and in the studio . Just as Harrison had long combined elements of Hindustani classical music with Western rock and gospel , and was now moving towards the funk and soul genres , Scott 's solo work fused jazz , funk , pop and Middle Eastern influences . His collaborations with Mitchell also coincided with her move from confessional folk songwriting towards pop and jazz , and eventually avant garde . 
 Harrison , Scott and Mitchell soon developed a mutual rapport , according to L.A. Express bassist Max Bennett . In addition to carrying out further sessions for Shankar Family & Friends in Los Angeles , in March 1974 , Harrison had begun spending time there trying to set up his own record label , with the winding down of the Beatles ' Apple Records from mid 1973 onwards . In August 1973 , rumours in the music industry claimed that Harrison , Bob Dylan , Joan Baez and Paul Simon were forming a label together ; in fact , Harrison founded Dark Horse Records , one of the first releases of which was the Shankar album , and Dylan temporarily signed with David Geffen 's Asylum Records , which was Mitchell 's label . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 Mitchell 's tour in support of her critically acclaimed Court and Spark album arrived in London in April 1974 . While backstage at her and Scott 's show at the New Victoria Theatre , Harrison invited the five members of the L.A. Express to come out to his Oxfordshire home , Friar Park , the following day . Bennett recalls that they arrived by limousine and he mistook the property 's grand gatehouse for the main residence . 
 Scott later told music journalist Michael Gross that only a social visit was planned , but the band were impressed with Friar Park 's 16 @-@ track home studio , FPSHOT , and Harrison suggested they record something . The first song they worked on was an untitled instrumental tune that later became known as " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " , for which Scott made a lead sheet for the band . Part of the title was taken from " Hari Georgeson " , the latest pseudonym adopted by Harrison when working with non @-@ EMI / Capitol artists , since he was still contracted to Apple until January 1976 . 
 Harrison played slide guitar on the track , in his preferred open E tuning , adopting a similar sound to the one he had used three years earlier on John Lennon 's song " How Do You Sleep ? " Aside from Scott and Bennett 's contributions , on saxophone and bass , respectively , the other musicians were Robben Ford ( electric guitar ) , Roger Kellaway ( piano ) and John Guerin ( drums ) . Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , writes that the tune predominantly uses major chords , with the " main melodic interest " coming with a shift to C # minor seventh , which provides " a moment of softening sweetness " . Leng notes the contrast between Harrison 's Fender Stratocaster " roaring into action " on this song and the " opulence " of his previous album , Living in the Material World , and suggests that Harrison now " just wanted to be one of the boys " in a " working , rocking band " . The engineer at the session was Phil McDonald . 
 According to Scott , the basic track took " a couple of hours " before they had a satisfactory take . The musicians then recorded a second song , " Simply Shady " , which , like " Hari 's on Tour " , would be included on Harrison 's forthcoming album , Dark Horse . The five band members stayed over at Friar Park before Ford , Bennett , Kellaway and Guerin left for Denver the following day . Scott says he stayed on and worked further with Harrison at FPSHOT ; in addition to the various horn parts , he played organ on " Hari 's on Tour " . 
 In the same interview with Gross , for Circus Raves magazine , Scott recalled that he was the first Western musician that Harrison approached about joining him and Shankar for a tour of the United States and Canada later in the year . The tour would be the first in North America by a former Beatle since the group 's 1966 US visit , and Harrison 's first live performances since his staging of the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 . Rather than include Beatles material on the 1974 tour , however , Harrison planned to present a varied program combining rock , soul / R & B , jazz , funk and Indian classical music . Eight Arms to Hold You authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter suggest that " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " was written " simply as a show opener " for the North American concerts , which would also feature Harrison 's former Apple Records protégé Billy Preston . 
 Although his 1969 experimental album Electronic Sound consists of Moog synthesizer sounds and the 1968 Wonderwall Music soundtrack is almost entirely devoid of vocals , out of all the tracks released by Harrison as a solo artist after the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 , " Hari 's on Tour " is a rare example of a genuine instrumental composition . Only 2002 's " Marwa Blues " stands as another . Among other projects they worked on together through to the early 1980s , Harrison played on the instrumental " Appolonia ( <unk> ) " , from Scott 's 1975 album New York Connection , and Scott helped produce Harrison 's debut on Dark Horse Records , Thirty Three & 1 / 3 . 
 = = North American tour and album release = = 
 Harrison 's <unk> of his time to Dark Horse acts Ravi Shankar and Splinter during 1974 resulted in him having to rush @-@ record much of Dark Horse while preparing for the North American tour . Due to the pressure , Harrison developed laryngitis during rehearsals and damaged his voice . As well as placing further importance on the instrumentals in his setlist , which included " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " and Scott 's track " Tom Cat " , Harrison 's depleted vocals marred the concerts for many observers . 
 In addition , while many critics admired the adventurousness of the musical program and reviewed the shows favourably , others , particularly in music publications such as Rolling Stone , wrote scathingly of Harrison 's reluctance to acknowledge the Beatles ' legacy , together with his willingness to share the spotlight so readily with Shankar 's orchestra of classical musicians and Preston . In his role as band leader , Scott spoke out in support of Harrison 's musical direction and refuted reports that the tour was not going well ; instead , he told Circus Raves , audience reaction had been " radically different from city to city " and dependent on whether concertgoers chose to listen , or came expecting to hear the Beatles . 
 Harrison played " Hari 's on Tour " as the opening song throughout the tour , which began on 2 November 1974 in Vancouver and ended in New York on 20 December . It was preceded by a recording of Monty Python 's " The Lumberjack Song " , played through the concert PA while the band took the stage . As the many bootlegs from the tour reveal , early on in each performance of " Hari 's on Tour " , Harrison often called out a greeting to the city or town in question . Some concert reviewers referred to the song as " Hari Good Boy Express " or " Hari Good Bye Express " . The first of these two titles is how Harrison named the track on the preliminary artwork included in the 2014 reissue of Dark Horse . 
 The studio version appeared as the opening track on Dark Horse , followed by " Simply Shady " . Due to the delay in its completion , the album was released on 9 December in North America , towards the end of the Harrison – Shankar tour , and a few days before Christmas in Britain . Although Christmas shows in the UK had been under consideration , no such performances took place , and Harrison 's only tour after 1974 would be a series of Japanese concerts in December 1991 with Eric Clapton . Following its initial release , " Hari 's on Tour " was issued as the B @-@ side to the second single off the album – " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " in the United States , Canada and a number of other territories , and " Dark Horse " in Britain and some other European countries . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Contrasting with his successes as a solo artist since 1970 , Dark Horse earned Harrison the worst critical notices of his career . " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " drew a favourable response during the 1974 tour , however , as reviewers commented on the energy with which the band performed the piece . In his feature article on the West Coast concerts , for Rolling Stone , Ben Fong @-@ Torres described the song as a " well @-@ arranged , tension @-@ and @-@ release number " , while the Pacific Sun called it " a zingy and classically melodic instrumental ... a touchstone of the Harrison style " . Reviewing the second show of the tour , D.P. Bond of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer wrote : " Harrison 's opening instrumental piece was beautiful : the fullest , finest explosion of rock ' n ' roll that I think I have ever heard . " 
 The NME 's Bob Woffinden wrote a notably unfavourable assessment of the Dark Horse album , in which he found " Hari 's on Tour " to be " an unevenly paced boogie thing that has George blowing most of his licks straightaway and Tom Scott coming on with a few quasi @-@ Jnr . Walker bursts " . Woffinden continued : " Which , you feel , would not be a bad <unk> for the real meat to follow . Unfortunately , Hari 's vegetarian . " In an equally unfavourable review of the album , Jim Miller of Rolling Stone dismissed the track as " banal " . Harrison biographer Alan Clayson refers to Hari 's on Tour " as " an instrumental that went in one ear and out the other " , while in The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , critics Roy Carr and Tony Tyler described it as sounding like " a backing track from which the vocal line has mysteriously been deleted " . Author Elliot Huntley acknowledges that the musicians " performed brilliantly " on the recording , but adds , " unfortunately brilliant musicians alone do not a good song make " . 
 Echoing the magazine 's earlier support for the tour , Brian Harrigan of Melody Maker praised Harrison 's " nifty slide guitar " on the opening song and throughout the album , which he felt " should certainly do a tremendous amount to salvage George 's battered reputation " . In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner similarly opined that " Hari 's on Tour " " boasts some mean licks " while commenting that neither the tour nor the album " warrant [ ed ] all the abuse they got " . Writing more recently for AllMusic , Richard Ginell describes the recording as " Tom Scott 's L.A. Express churning out all @-@ pro <unk> jazz / rock " and adds that the song " gets the doomed project off to a spirited start " . 
 Simon Leng views this " neat instrumental " as a collaborative effort between Harrison and Scott , and a logical step for the guitarist , given Harrison 's early appreciation of Chet Atkins ' instrumentals . Leng regrets Harrison 's apparent abandoning of his " meticulous approach " to recording in favour of uncharacteristic spontaneity , and concludes : " Ultimately , this good @-@ time guitar showcase is as relevant as Dylan 's ' Nashville Skyline Rag ' . " Ian Inglis writes of Scott 's soprano sax producing an " atmosphere of anticipation " similar to a successful film or television theme , and identifies " Hari 's on Tour " as an indication that Harrison , some years before his career became focused on movie production , was able to " effectively incorporate the conventions of a soundtrack within the codes of rock " . Reviewing the 2014 reissue of Dark Horse , Joe Marchese of The Second Disc describes the track as " a bright opening to an album that would considerably darken in tone " . 
 = = Live version = = 
 Harrison recorded and filmed several of the 1974 concerts for a planned release , but only live versions of this instrumental and " For You Blue " have ever been issued officially . In 1992 , " Hari 's on Tour " appeared on the four @-@ song EP accompanying Songs by George Harrison 2 , a limited @-@ edition , hand @-@ bound book produced by Genesis Publications . Text accompanying this disc gives the recording information as simply " live in Washington DC in 1974 " , referring to Harrison 's 13 December show at the Capital Centre in Landover , Maryland , a suburb of Washington . The book was limited to a print run of 2500 and published on 22 June 1992 . 
 Described by Leng as " the leading performers of the period " , Harrison 's tour band comprised Scott and Robben Ford from the L.A. Express , Preston on keyboards , jazz percussionist Emil Richards , the rhythm section of Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark , and additional horn players Jim Horn and Chuck Findley . Jim Keltner joined as second drummer midway through the tour , and some of Ravi Shankar 's musicians played during Harrison 's portion of each show . The sound heard during the opening seconds of " Hari 's on Tour " is a sarangi , played by Sultan Khan , who was one of the fifteen musicians in Shankar 's orchestra . 
 The Washington stop was among the highlights of the tour . At the invitation of Jack Ford – son of US president Gerald Ford – Harrison , Shankar , Scott , Preston and others in the entourage visited the White House on 13 December , where Harrison met with President Ford . Surprised at the " good vibes " there so soon after the Watergate hearings , Harrison asked Ford to personally intercede in both John Lennon 's struggle to be allowed to remain in the United States , and the US Treasury 's audit of the funds raised through the Concert for Bangladesh . 
 Madinger and Easter write that this released version of the song is most likely a composite of performances from the evening show at Landover and the 6 December matinee performance at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens . As with all the tracks from the highly priced Songs by George Harrison volumes , " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " is available unofficially on bootleg compilations such as Pirate Songs . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – slide guitar , acoustic guitar 
 Tom Scott – saxophones , horn arrangement , organ 
 Robben Ford – electric guitar 
 Roger Kellaway – piano 
 Max Bennett – bass 
 John Guerin – drums 
 uncredited – tambourine 
 = Vine Street , London = 
 Vine Street is a street in Westminster , London , running from Swallow Street , parallel to Regent Street and Piccadilly . It is now a dead end that was shortened from a longer road in the early 18th century owing to the building of Regent Street . 
 From the 18th to 20th century , it was home to Vine Street Police Station , which grew from a watch @-@ house into one of the busiest police stations in the world . The Marquess of Queensberry was charged with libel against Oscar Wilde here in 1895 . There was also a court house in the 18th and early 19th century . The street 's association with law has led to it being grouped with Bow Street and Marlborough Street on the standard British Monopoly board . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The street is approximately 70 feet ( 21 m ) long and is a dead end , running east and parallel to Piccadilly near Piccadilly Circus . It consists mainly of the rear facades of buildings facing onto other streets . It connects to Swallow Street at its western end and an alleyway , Piccadilly Place halfway along . At the eastern end , the Man in the Moon Passage provides foot access to Regent Street . The nearest tube station is Piccadilly Circus . 
 = = History = = 
 The street is named after The Vine , an 18th @-@ century public house , which in turn may have been named after a former vineyard that was based at this location in Roman times . It was documented on <unk> as Little Swallow Street in 1675 . It was laid out around 1686 and originally ran further , along what is now the Man in the Moon Passage . John Rocque 's Map of London , 1746 shows Vine Street extending from Piccadilly northeast to Warwick Street . In 1720 , the main properties on the street were a brewery and a carpenter 's yard . 
 Vine Street was split into two sections following the construction of Regent Street between 1816 and 1819 . The Man in the Moon Passage was created at this time , named after a former pub at this location . The northern section towards Warwick Street was renamed Great Vine Street , and then a branch of Warwick Street itself . It ceased to exist after the reconstruction of the Regent Street Quadrant in 1920 . 
 In 1853 , Charles <unk> purchased several small houses at the end of Vine Street so they could be redeveloped into St James 's Hall , Piccadilly . A rear entrance to the hall backed onto the street . The hall was demolished in 1905 and replaced by the Piccadilly Hotel , which also backs onto Vine Street . 
 = = = Police and law = = = 
 Vine Street has long been associated with the police and law . Around 1751 @-@ 2 , a court house was built at the western end of the street , on the corner of what is now Piccadilly Place . It closed in 1836 following the reorganisation of the court system around Westminster and was subsequently occupied by the lawyer Edward <unk> . 
 The Vine Street Police Station was at No. 10 . It was originally built as a watch @-@ house around 1767 , and rebuilt following a fire in 1786 that destroyed several properties on and around the street . A school operated on the first floor , and two cells were in the basement . A further storey was added to the building in 1816 . It was renamed Vine Street Police Station in 1829 following the establishment of the Metropolitan Police District . The school moved from the building to Swallow Street in 1836 , where it stayed before closing in 1881 . The police station went on to become one of the main stations in Central London . In 1850 , it was extended over the 18th century courthouses . At one point in the 19th century it was one of the busiest police stations in the world . An Arts and Crafts extension wing was built on the station in 1897 , that faced onto Swallow Street . The Man in the Moon pub , adjacent to the station , was bought by the police receiver in 1931 . 
 The station closed in 1940 ( along with nearby Marlborough Street Magistrates Court ) to be replaced with an integrated West End Central Police Station at Savile Row , with the street being renamed Piccadilly Place . A subsequent rise in foot traffic around the area , and associated crime , led to the station being re @-@ opened in 1966 , with the street being renamed back to Vine Street in 1972 . The police station closed in 1997 and the building was demolished in 2005 for redevelopment . 
 = = Events and incidents = = 
 The Dutch artist Peter Scheemakers moved into a house on the western edge of Vine Street around 1741 . He stayed there until 1769 , when he returned to Antwerp . 
 On 2 September 1791 , composer Frantisek Kotzwara died at prostitute Susannah Hill 's house at No. 5 Vine Street from erotic asphyxiation following a sexual act that involved tying his neck to a doorknob . Hill was charged with Kotzwara 's murder but later acquitted . 
 In 1895 , the Marquess of Queensbury was charged at Vine Street Police Station with libel against Oscar Wilde . This ultimately led to Wilde 's arrest and subsequent imprisonment . On 29 May 1901 , the stonemason James <unk> reported he had information about the murder of Mary Ann Austin but refused to reveal details anywhere except the Vine Street Police Station . The information was discarded by the Metropolitan Police as little value . 
 In 1928 , an officer working at the station was sacked after it was revealed he had been gathering bribes from local nightclubs and brothels , acquiring over £ 17 @,@ 000 ( now £ 924 @,@ 000 ) in the process . The officer subsequently committed suicide and the station is believed to be haunted by his ghost . Related incidents include reports of papers being inexplicably moved , and an officer hearing footsteps despite knowing he was the only one in the station . 
 The street and station is mentioned in the Pogues ' song " The Old Main Drag " on their 1985 album Rum Sodomy & the Lash . It refers to the station and street 's unpopularity with some of London owing to their distrust of the police force . Because of its relatively hidden location and proximity to Piccadilly Circus , the street suffers from crime , which has led to Westminster City Council gating off the Man in the Moon Passage so service vehicles can access connecting buildings safely . 
 The street features as a property with a purchase price of £ 200 on the British Monopoly board . It is one of a group of three , coded orange , with connections to law , and is named after the police station . The other two orange properties , Bow Street and Marlborough Street , which are both valued at £ 180 , are named after the Bow Street Runners and Marlborough Street Magistrates Court respectively . Since the Man in the Moon is now closed , students on a Monopoly board pub crawl drink in one of the nearby pubs , such as those on Swallow Street , instead . 
 = 4 Minutes = 
 " 4 Minutes " is a song by American singer and songwriter Madonna from her eleventh studio album Hard Candy ( 2008 ) , featuring vocals by American singers Justin Timberlake and Timbaland . It was released as the lead single from the album on March 17 , 2008 , by Warner Bros. Records . According to Madonna , the song is about saving the environment and " hav [ ing ] a good time while we are doing it " . She also cited the song as the inspiration for the documentary I Am Because We Are ( 2008 ) . 
 The song was recorded at Sarm West Studios , in London , while the mixing of the track was finished at The Hit Factory studio , in Miami . Sound engineer Demo Castellon first worked on the vocals and then on the beats , while the synths were composed by Timbaland and Danja . An uptempo dance @-@ pop song with an urban and hip hop style , " 4 Minutes " incorporates Timbaland 's characteristic bhangra beats and the instrumentation used in the song includes brass , foghorns and cowbells . The song 's lyrics carry a message of social awareness , inspired by Madonna 's visit to Africa and the human suffering she witnessed in the continent . 
 " 4 Minutes " received positive reviews from critics , who called it a busy dance track and complimented its music , which was compared to that of a marching band . Some reviewers noted that it was Madonna who appeared more of a featured artist on the track , rather than Timberlake . The song peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , giving Madonna her 37th top @-@ ten single , breaking the record previously held by Elvis Presley , as the artist with most top @-@ ten hits . It remains Madonna 's best @-@ selling digital single in the United States , with sales of over three million copies . Internationally , " 4 Minutes " topped the chart in 21 countries , including Australia , Canada , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom . 
 In the song 's accompanying music video , Madonna and Timberlake sing and run away from a giant black screen that devours everything in its path . At the end of the video , both of them are consumed by the screen . " 4 Minutes " was performed by Madonna on the promotional tour for Hard Candy and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . In the latter , the song served as the opener of the rave segment , where Madonna wore a futuristic robotic outfit . During performances of the song , Timberlake and Timbaland appeared on video screens and sang their lines . The song received two Grammy Award nominations for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals and Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical at the 2009 ceremony . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 Following the release of her tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) , Madonna wanted to record more dance music . When asked by producer Stuart Price what kind of music appealed to her , Madonna replied that she loved the records of singer Justin Timberlake and producer Timbaland , so she collaborated with them . " 4 Minutes " was written by all three artists , along with Nate " Danja " Hills , and produced by Timbaland , Timberlake and Danja . The song , initially named " 4 Minutes to Save the World " , was one of the last to be produced for Madonna 's album Hard Candy . In an interview with MTV News , Madonna said that the concept of the song was developed through discussions with Timberlake . She further explained the meaning of the song : 
 I don 't think it 's important to take it too literally . I think the song , more than anything , is about having a sense of urgency ; about how we are you know , living on borrowed time essentially and people are becoming much more aware of the environment and how we 're destroying the planet . We can 't just keep distracting ourselves we do have to educate ourselves and wake up and do something about it . You know at the same time we don 't want to be boring and serious and not have fun so it 's kind of like well if we 're going to save the planet can we have a good time while we are doing it ? 
 Madonna clarified that her age did not have anything to do with the sense of urgency reflected in the track ; instead , it was just something that she had in mind for a long time and with " 4 Minutes " , the sense seeped into her music . Ingrid Sischy from Interview magazine said that the song felt like a ballad for the world , containing " the sounds of a great big marching band . It 's a giant dance song " . Madonna agreed with Sischy and responded that the song was " a funny paradox " and was one of the inspirations behind her documentary I Am Because We Are ( 2008 ) . The documentary dealt with the acute suffering and food shortage afflicting the African nation of Malawi . 
 = = Recording and mixing = = 
 The recording sessions for " 4 Minutes " took place at Sarm West Studios in West London , on a 72 @-@ channel SSL <unk> scratching tool . Paul Tingen from Sound on Sound magazine interviewed mixing and recording engineer Demacio " Demo " Castellon , who recalled that he did not attend the first recording sessions because he was working on another project . Over half of the song was already done by the time Castellon arrived , leaving him to do the programming in the intro and the end . At Sarm , Timbaland and Danja used Akai MPC3000 and Ensoniq ASR @-@ 10 sampling drum machines , Yamaha Motif workstation and synths to build the backing track for " 4 Minutes " . Castellon explained that the recording session took longer than expected . In total 46 tracks were used for drums and percussion and 16 stereo tracks for the bass . The whole session included 100 tracks , and further mixing was done on Pro Tools . 
 In the case of ' 4 Minutes ' , Tim had a vision from the beginning of how things should go , especially sonically ... When I opened up the session of ' 4 Minutes ' , there was so much going on that I knew right away that the hard part would be to make sure that the vocals would cut through and were right in the pocket . Beginning with working on the vocals was the only way to achieve this . After that I formed all the other parts around the vocals . The other challenge was to make sure that everything in the track sounded clear and that you could hear every instrument , every syllable , every breath . Also , I do almost always work linear in time on a track . It 's easier , because when you 're done , you 're done . So I keep working on section after section , until I get to the end of the track and then I know the whole mix is pretty close . 
 Castellon said that he did not want the SSL 's internal automation to interfere with his blending of the music , instead used Pro Tools , with automatic levels . According to him , he " then ran everything through the SSL , on which [ he ] did EQ , compression and panning . " The mixing of the track was made at The Hit Factory studio , in Miami on a 96 @-@ channel SSL J @-@ series desk . Considering the quantity of recorded backing tracks , Castellon 's challenge was to make sure that the music did not overpower the vocals . He accomplished this by first mixing the vocals , then adding the music and the drums , which was an unusual method for him . Minimal digital plug @-@ ins were employed for the mix as Castellon preferred the sound of outboard gear . 
 After the mixes were done , Castellon began working on Timbaland 's introduction , and continued with Madonna and Timberlake 's vocals . On Timbaland 's vocals , he utilized the SSL 's EQ to reduce " some bottom end " , and he set input levels to avoid clipping . For Madonna and Timberlake he used SSL 's dynamic range compression , and on Madonna 's voice he applied " an eighth @-@ note delay from a [ Lexicon ] <unk> " , a reverb from Eventide <unk> for the verse , and [ TC Electronic ] <unk> for the hook . " These digital signal processors were employed to give Madonna 's vocals a sense of stereophonic space . Castellon applied Waves Audio " Renaissance Compressor " plug @-@ in to control the level of kick drum . He recalled that " there was one particular kick sound there that clashed with the other tracks , so Tim replaced it with another kick that had a very different note and sound . " Using a <unk> D2 equalizer let him " match the sound of that new kick drum to the other kick drum sounds " . Once the drums and percussion were added , the recording and mixing of " 4 Minutes " was finished . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " 4 Minutes " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song , composed in an urban , hip hop style . It incorporates the effect of a marching band , a clanging beat and instrumentation from a brass that is played in a " scale @-@ like riff " , as described by Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone . Other musical instruments used are foghorns and cow bells . In " 4 Minutes " , Madonna and Timberlake sing and trade verses , the rhythm moves towards a hard clanging beat as Madonna sings the lines that the " road to hell is paved with good intentions . " Madonna and Timberlake start singing the chorus with Timberlake singing the line of " We 've only got four minutes to save the world " . The track continues in the same momentum in the second verse and second chorus whence the track ends where every beat ceases except for Timbaland 's characteristic bhangra beats , the brass riffs and Madonna singing the words " tick @-@ tock " repeatedly , after which it ends . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is written in the key of G minor and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 115 beats per minute . Timbaland 's bhangra beats are featured at the start and the end of the song . Madonna and Timberlake 's vocal range spans two octaves , from F3 to Bb5 . The song has a sequence of D – G – C – F – B ♭ – D in the verses and E ♭ 5 – D5 – C5 – D5 in the chorus , as its chord progression . The lyrics of " 4 Minutes " carry a message of social awareness , inspired by Madonna 's visit to Africa and the human suffering she witnessed . Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated that " [ h ] <unk> , the song sounds as if four minutes is the time taken for a song to be a guaranteed pop hit or the time required for a quickie ; in reality it is the only song from Hard Candy album which contains a message of social awareness in it . " The sound of a clock ticking away emphasizes this message further . Madonna explained in New York magazine that the line " The road to hell is paved with good intentions " did not relate to her charity work . Instead it was her question to herself : " Do I understand this opinion that I 've adopted or this Zeitgeist that I 've allowed myself to be swept up in ? Because you could have the best intentions but not have enough information and make huge mistakes . " Regarding the line " Sometimes I feel what I need is a you intervention " , Madonna explained , " [ y ] <unk> , meaning , sometimes I think you need to save me . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Caryn Ganz called it " a loud , busy , energetic track " , and commented that Timberlake did " his best Michael Jackson impression " . Billboard music reviewer and editor Chuck Taylor said that with the song , Madonna " is poised to score her first top 10 hit since 2005 's ' Hung Up ' . [ ... ] There 's an awful lot going on in the busy dance track [ ... ] but the trade @-@ off chorus between Madge and Justin of ' We 've only got four minutes to save the world ' is hooky enough unto itself to sell the song . " He added that the song " qualifies as an event record between superpowers [ Madonna and Timberlake ] who not only share equal billing , but sound gangbusters together . " Mark Savage of BBC described the sound as " so futuristic it could realistically have been beamed in from the end of the world . " Andy Gill of The Independent called " 4 Minutes " one of Hard Candy 's saviors . He noted that " the Mardi Gras marching @-@ band bumping <unk> along " , is one of the album 's " most ambitious offerings . " Joey Guerra of Houston Chronicle compared the track to the work of Nelly Furtado and felt that the composition was " a bid for radio play . " 
 According to Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , the song is an " advertisement for the rest of the album . " Chris Williams of Entertainment Weekly called it a " flirty duet " . Ben Thompson of The Guardian said : " It has a hard to escape sense that all concerned are going through the motions [ of life ] – effortlessly , sometimes brilliantly . " Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe believed that the song is " chart @-@ topper for its sheer star power as well as instant musical allure , and on the eve of Madonna 's 50th birthday [ ... ] ' 4 Minutes ' feels a lot like an icon 's can 't @-@ miss gift to herself . " However , she noticed that the " shift in the power structure [ is nowhere ] more blatant than on ' 4 Minutes ' , where Madonna sounds like a featured guest trying to keep pace with Timbaland 's colossal beats and Timberlake 's nimble melody . " Freedom du Lac of The Washington Post complimented the song for being busy and brassy . She commented : " [ P ] <unk> by a <unk> marching @-@ band beat [ ... ] it 's one of the most thrilling things Madonna has done in this decade . " 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic praised the melodic and rhythmic hook , but was disappointed that Madonna 's voice is " drowned out by Timbaland 's farting four @-@ note synth – which might not have been so bad if the tracks were fresher and if the whole enterprise didn 't feel quite so <unk> mechanical . " At the 51st Grammy Awards , " 4 Minutes " garnered Madonna , Timberlake and Timbaland a nomination in the Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals category . Dutch musician Junkie XL also earned a nomination in the Best Remixed Recording , Non @-@ Classical category for his remix of the song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " 4 Minutes " debuted at number 68 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the issue dated April 5 , 2008 , based solely on airplay . Within a week , the song had jumped 65 places , reaching number three on the chart . This leap was spurred by first @-@ week digital sales of 217 @,@ 000 , enabling the song to enter Billboard 's Digital chart at number two , behind Mariah Carey 's single " Touch My Body " . The song became Madonna 's first top @-@ ten single since " Hung Up " ( 2005 ) , and was her 37th Hot 100 top @-@ ten hit , breaking the record previously held by Elvis Presley . " 4 Minutes " was also her highest @-@ charting single on the Hot 100 since " Music " reached the top of the chart in 2000 . For Timberlake , " 4 Minutes " became his ninth top @-@ ten hit . On the Pop 100 chart , the song reached a peak of two . " 4 Minutes " was a success on Billboard 's dance charts , topping both the Hot Dance Club Play and the Hot Dance Airplay charts . Almost five months after its release , " 4 Minutes " was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of two million paid digital downloads . " 4 Minutes " was the tenth most downloaded song in the United States in 2008 with sales of 2 @.@ 37 million , according to Nielsen SoundScan , and has sold over three million copies as of July 2012 . 
 In Canada , Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems ( BDS ) confirmed that " 4 Minutes " debuted at the top of the Canadian Contemporary Hit Radio chart . This marked the first time any song entered at the top of the CHR chart in BDS history . The song debuted at number 27 on the Canadian Hot 100 on March 27 , 2008 , and topped the chart the next week . By the end of the year , " 4 Minutes " was the fifth best selling digital song in Canada with sales of 143 @,@ 000 copies , and ranked fourth on the year @-@ end tabulation of the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 " 4 Minutes " was also a success in Australia and New Zealand . The song debuted at number three on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , and ascended to the number @-@ one position two weeks later , where it stayed for three consecutive weeks . " 4 Minutes " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for the shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , " 4 Minutes " made its debut at number 14 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and ascended to the top ten , finally peaking at number three . The song has been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 In the United Kingdom , " 4 Minutes " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number seven . The song became Madonna 's 60th UK top @-@ ten single . It debuted on the airplay charts at number 19 , with first week tallies of 564 plays and 27 @.@ 10 million listeners . The song rose to the top of the chart on April 20 , 2008 ( for the week ending date April 26 , 2008 ) , with sales of 40 @,@ 634 copies , thus giving Madonna her 13th British number @-@ one single . It remained at the top for four weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , it was the ninth best @-@ selling song of 2008 and has sold 530 @,@ 000 copies there as of 2016 , being certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . " 4 Minutes " was also number one on Billboard 's European Hot 100 Singles for four weeks . Overall , " 4 Minutes " reached number one in 21 countries worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by French duo Jonas & François in London , United Kingdom . It featured choreography by Jamie King , who worked on Madonna 's Confessions , Re @-@ Invention and Drowned World tours as well as her video for the single " Sorry " ( 2006 ) . Japanese hip hop dancing duo <unk> Serve also made an appearance in the video . Before its release , Rolling Stone said that in the video Madonna and Timberlake act as if they were " superheroes " while they evade multiple obstacles . In the video , Madonna wore a cream colored corset , glistening black boots and styled her hair in platinum blond waves while Timberlake wore mainly denims and a scarf around his neck . Regarding the idea behind the music video , Madonna said that " it was <unk> " . She explained that the video was shot like a march past ; " It 's a movement , and we want to take everybody with us . " About the idea of a black screen devouring everything , Madonna said , 
 None of us did [ understand the concept of the black screen ] . It was just , you know , it 's very conceptual . We basically gave the song to the two French directors [ Jonas & François ] and they came up with the only concept that I thought was interesting , with this black sort of amorphous graphic line slowly eating up the world . I just liked that as a concept . 
 The video used soft focus , gentle lighting and airbrushing looks on Madonna . It starts with Timbaland chanting the opening line in front of a giant timer screen that counts down from four minutes . As he sings , a black geometric patterned screen comes from behind and engulfs all of the musical devices present . Madonna and Timberlake enter a house but run away from it after finding the screen there , which starts eating the hands and legs of the inhabitants of the house , thus showing their insides . After a number of shots showing Madonna and Timberlake jumping on and over cars to escape from the screen , they finally move into a supermarket . The screen follows them , consuming the long lines of stalls and the people present there . As the second chorus starts , they arrive in front of the screen where Timbaland is singing . After choreographed dancing , Madonna performs a back arch as the timer reaches zero time . The last " tick @-@ tock , tick @-@ tock " sound is heard , Madonna and Timberlake dance again on a long stage ; the black screen approaches them from both sides . The video ends with both of them kissing , and the black screen devouring them . Timberlake 's bones and ribs , and Madonna 's cheeks are seen in the last shot . 
 Regarding the video , Madonna said it was like " [ g ] <unk> goody gum drops " , referring to the candy @-@ oriented theme of the album . Virginia Heffernan from The New York Times called the video heart @-@ pounding , and compared its momentum with the music video of " Thriller , " In the Air Tonight " and " Shadows of the Night " . However , Eric Wilson from the same newspaper commented that the video did not yield a breakout Madonna look compared to her videos from the 1980s . Singer Miley Cyrus created her own version of the video and posted it on her YouTube channel . Madonna responded to it in her own video and said , " All you people out there who are making videos to my new single , ' 4 Minutes , ' keep up the good work , nice job . " " 4 Minutes " was nominated for an award at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards in the " Best Dancing in a Video " category , but lost to the Pussycat Dolls ' single " When I Grow Up " . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 The song was performed during the Hard Candy Promo Tour and Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) . At the promotional tour , " 4 Minutes " was performed as the third song of the setlist . Madonna wore a shiny black outfit with black tails , Adidas track pants and high @-@ heeled , lace @-@ up boots for the performance . Justin Timberlake made an appearance alongside Madonna , at the Roseland Ballroom in New York , to perform the song . As Timbaland appeared on the video screens , the beat of the song started . The four side @-@ stage video screens began to glide across the stage , and swiveled around to reveal Timberlake behind one and Madonna behind the other . They performed the song in a similar choreography from the music video . 
 During " 4 Minutes " performance on the Sticky & Sweet Tour , Madonna wore a futuristic robotic outfit designed by <unk> . She coupled it with metallic plates on her shoulder and a wig with long curled hair . Madonna and her dancers emerged from behind backdrops , on which Timbaland and Timberlake appeared , to perform their lines . An apparent duet between Madonna and Timberlake ensues , with Timberlake singing and dancing his part from the screens . He joined Madonna in person , for the show at Los Angeles 's Dodger Stadium on November 6 , 2008 , the same show in which Britney Spears appeared alongside Madonna to perform " Human Nature " . They performed " 4 Minutes " in similar fashion to the promotional tour choreography . Timbaland sang his part of the song in person on November 26 , 2008 at Dolphins Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . " 4 Minutes " was also used as mashups during the performance of songs like " Vogue " and " Hung Up " . 
 " 4 Minutes " was used in the film Get Smart ( 2008 ) , in a scene and its film credits . It was one of the songs covered by the cast of Glee during the April 20 , 2010 episode " The Power of Madonna " . The fictional character Kurt Hummel , portrayed by Chris Colfer , sang Madonna 's parts while Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) sang Timberlake 's . In the episode , the song is performed during a routine by the high @-@ school cheering squad , accompanied by the school band . The version was released both as a digital downloadable single and on the EP , Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna . " 4 Minutes " cover charted on the Hot Digital Songs of Billboard at number 55 on May 8 , 2010 , while reaching number 89 and number 70 on the Billboard Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100 , respectively . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals , background vocals , executive producer 
 Justin Timberlake – writer , vocals , producer 
 Timbaland – writer , vocals , producer , drum programming , recording 
 Danja – writer , producer , keyboard instrument 
 Demacio " Demo " Castellon – programming , mixing , scratching and recording at Sarm West Studios ( London ) and The Hit Factory Studios ( Miami ) 
 Marcella Araica – mixing , scratching 
 Ron Taylor – protools editing 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Hard Candy album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Greed ( film ) = 
 Greed is a 1924 American silent film , written and directed by Erich von Stroheim and based on the 1899 Frank Norris novel McTeague . It stars Gibson Gowland as Dr. John McTeague , ZaSu Pitts as his wife Trina Sieppe and Jean Hersholt as McTeague 's friend and eventual enemy Marcus Schouler . The film tells the story of McTeague , a San Francisco dentist , who marries his best friend Schouler 's girlfriend Trina . Shortly after their engagement , Trina wins a lottery prize of $ 5 @,@ 000 , at that time a substantial sum . Schouler jealously informs the authorities that McTeague had been practicing dentistry without a license , and McTeague and Trina become impoverished . While living in squalor , McTeague becomes a violent alcoholic and Trina becomes greedily obsessed with her winnings , refusing to spend any of them , despite how poor she and her husband have become . Eventually McTeague murders Trina for the money and flees to Death Valley . Schouler catches up with him there for a final confrontation . 
 Stroheim shot more than 85 hours of footage and obsessed over accuracy during the filming . Two months were spent shooting in Death Valley for the film 's final sequence and many of the cast and crew became ill . Greed was one of the few films of its time to be shot entirely on location . Stroheim used sophisticated filming techniques such as deep @-@ focus cinematography and montage editing . He considered Greed to be a Greek tragedy , in which environment and heredity controlled the characters ' fates and reduced them to primitive bête <unk> ( human beasts ) . 
 During the making of Greed , the production company merged into Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , putting Irving Thalberg in charge of the production . Thalberg had fired Stroheim a few years earlier at Universal Pictures . Originally almost eight hours long , Greed was edited against Stroheim 's wishes to about two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours . Only twelve people saw the full @-@ length 42 @-@ reel version , now lost ; some of them called it the greatest film ever made . Stroheim later called Greed his most fully realized work and was hurt both professionally and personally by the studio 's re @-@ editing of it . 
 The uncut version has been called the " holy grail " for film archivists , amid repeated false claims of the discovery of the missing footage . In 1999 Turner Entertainment created a four @-@ hour version of Greed that used existing stills of cut scenes to reconstruct the film . Greed was a critical and financial failure upon its initial release , but by the 1950s it began to be regarded as one of the greatest films ever made ; filmmakers and scholars have praised it for its influence on subsequent films . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 John McTeague is a miner working in Placer County , California . A traveling dentist calling himself Dr. " Painless " Potter visits the town , and McTeague 's mother begs Potter to take her son on as an apprentice . Potter agrees and McTeague eventually becomes a dentist , practicing on Polk Street in San Francisco . 
 Marcus Schouler brings Trina Sieppe , his cousin and intended fiancée , into McTeague 's office for dental work . Schouler and McTeague are friends and McTeague gladly agrees to examine her . As they wait for an opening , Trina buys a lottery ticket . McTeague becomes enamored with Trina and begs Schouler for permission to court Trina . After seeing McTeague 's conviction , Schouler agrees . Trina eventually agrees to marry McTeague and shortly afterwards her lottery ticket wins her $ 5 @,@ 000 . Schouler bitterly claims that the money should have been his , causing a rift between McTeague and Schouler . After McTeague and Trina wed , they continue to live in their small apartment with Trina refusing to spend her $ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 Schouler leaves the city to become a cattle rancher . Before he goes he secretly reports McTeague for practicing dentistry without a license in order to ruin his former friend . McTeague is ordered to shut down his practice or face jail . Even though she has saved over $ 200 in addition to the original $ 5 @,@ 000 from the lottery ticket , Trina is unwilling to spend her money . Money becomes increasingly scarce , with the couple forced to sell their possessions . McTeague finally snaps and bites Trina 's fingers in a fit of rage . Later he leaves to go fishing to earn money , taking Trina 's savings ( now totaling $ 450 ) . 
 Trina 's bitten fingers become infected and have to be amputated . To earn money she becomes a janitor at a children 's school . She withdraws the $ 5 @,@ 000 from the bank to keep it close to her , eventually spreading it on her bed so she can sleep on it . McTeague then returns , having spent the money he took and asks Trina for more . The following day McTeague confronts Trina at the school . After a heated argument McTeague beats Trina to death and steals her $ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 Now an outlaw , McTeague returns to Placer County and teams up with a prospector named <unk> . Headed towards Death Valley , they find a large quantity of quartz and plan to become millionaires . Before they can begin mining , McTeague senses danger and flees into Death Valley with a single horse , the remaining money and one water jug . Several marshals pursue him , joined by Schouler . Schouler wants to catch McTeague personally and rides into Death Valley alone . 
 The oppressive heat slows McTeague 's progress . Schouler 's progress is also beginning to wane when he spies McTeague and moves in to arrest him . After a confrontation , McTeague 's horse bolts and Schouler shoots it , puncturing the water container . The water spills onto the desert floor . The pair fight one last time , with McTeague proving the victor ; however , Schouler has handcuffed himself to McTeague . The film ends with McTeague left in the desert with no horse , no water , handcuffed to a corpse and unable to reach the remaining money . 
 = = = Sub @-@ plots = = = 
 Von Stroheim 's original edit contained two main sub @-@ plots that were later cut . The point of these sub @-@ plots was to contrast two possible outcomes of Trina and McTeague 's life together . The first depicted the lives of the junkman Zerkow and Maria Miranda <unk> , the young Mexican woman who collects junk for Zerkow and sold Trina the lottery ticket . Maria often talks about her imaginary solid gold dining set with Zerkow , who becomes obsessed by it . Eventually , believing she has riches hidden away , Zerkow marries her . He often asks about it , but she gives a different answer each time he mentions it . Zerkow does not believe her and becomes obsessed with prying the truth from her . He murders her and after having lost his mind , leaps into San Francisco Bay . 
 The second sub @-@ plot depicts the lives of Charles W. Grannis and Miss Anastasia Baker . Grannis and Baker are two elderly boarders who share adjoining rooms in the apartment complex where Trina and McTeague live . Throughout their time at the apartment complex , they have not met . They both sit close to their adjoining wall and listen to the other for company , so they know almost everything about each other . They finally meet and cannot hide their long @-@ time feelings for each other . When they reveal their love , Grannis admits he has $ 5 @,@ 000 , making him just as rich as Trina . But this makes little difference to them . Eventually , they marry and a door connects their rooms . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Gibson Gowland as Dr. John McTeague , a dentist 
 ZaSu Pitts as Trina Sieppe , McTeague 's wife 
 Jean Hersholt as Marcus Schouler , McTeague 's friend 
 Prologue 
 Jack Curtis as McTeague 's father 
 Tempe Pigott as McTeague 's mother 
 Florence Gibson as a hag 
 Erich von <unk> as Dr. ' Painless ' Potter , a travelling dentist 
 Sieppe Family 
 Chester Conklin as Hans ' Popper ' Sieppe , Trina 's father 
 Silvia Ashton as ' <unk> ' Sieppe , Trina 's mother 
 Austen Jewell as August Sieppe , Trina 's younger brother 
 Oscar <unk> as Max Sieppe , Trina 's younger brother 
 Otto <unk> as Moritz Sieppe , Trina 's younger brother 
 Joan Standing as Selina , Trina 's cousin 
 Max Tyron as Uncle Rudolph <unk> , Trina 's uncle 
 <unk> 
 Dale Fuller as Maria Miranda <unk> , Zerkow 's wife 
 Cesare Gravina as Zerkow , a junkman 
 Frank Hayes as Charles W. Grannis , proprietor of the Modern Dog Hospital 
 Fanny Midgley as Miss Anastasia Baker , Grannis ' neighbor and later wife 
 Friends and Neighbors at Polk Street 
 Hughie Mack as Mr. Heise , the harness maker 
 E. ' Tiny ' Jones as Mrs. Heise 
 J. Aldrich Libbey as Mr. <unk> 
 Reta <unk> as Mrs. <unk> 
 S.S. Simon as Joe <unk> 
 Hugh J. McCauley as the photographer 
 William Mollenhauer as the <unk> 
 Others 
 William Barlow as the Minister 
 Lon Poff as the man from the lottery company 
 James F. Fulton as <unk> , a prospector 
 James Gibson as a Deputy 
 Jack McDonald as the Sheriff of Placer County 
 Erich von Stroheim as the balloon vendor 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 Greed is based on the American author Frank Norris 's 1899 novel McTeague : A Story of San Francisco . Stroheim 's interest in McTeague can be traced back to January 1920 , when he told a journalist that he wanted to film the novel . He had himself lived in San Francisco in the early 1910s , living there in poverty like that of the story 's characters . He eventually moved to Los Angeles and worked his way up in the film industry under pioneering director D. W. Griffith . By 1919 he had become a successful director at Universal Film Manufacturing Company , although one with a reputation of going over budget and over schedule . 
 Upon the appointment of Irving Thalberg as general manager at Universal , Stroheim 's excesses were no longer tolerated . After Thalberg 's shutdown of his 1921 picture Foolish Wives ( which had been shooting nonstop for eleven months ) , and after six weeks of filming Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round , Stroheim was finally fired from the studio on October 6 , 1922 . This was a step unprecedented in Hollywood and heralded a new era in which the producer and the studio held artistic power over actors and directors . However , by this time Stroheim had received several offers of contracts with other studios , even before being fired from Universal . He had met with executives of the Goldwyn Company on September 14 , 1922 , less than a month before , and he formally signed with them in late November . 
 Stroheim chose his new studio because of the level of artistic freedom he was offered , which he had been denied at Universal under Thalberg . Since March 1922 Goldwyn had been run by Abe Lehr , who publicly promised that " each director will have his own staff and will be given every facility in putting into production his own individuality and personality . " Stroheim signed a one @-@ year , three @-@ feature deal with Goldwyn on November 20 , 1922 . The deal stipulated that each feature would be between 4 @,@ 500 and 8 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 400 and 2 @,@ 600 m ) long , cost no more than $ 175 @,@ 000 and be completed in fourteen weeks . It also promised von Stroheim $ 30 @,@ 000 for each completed film . 
 Lehr initially wanted Stroheim to film a big @-@ budget version of The Merry Widow , which the producer saw as a guaranteed hit . Stroheim convinced Lehr to let him make Greed first , promising low costs . A press release of February 1923 said that although Stroheim had " run rather freely to large sets in the past , [ he ] seems to have reformed — or surrendered — for it is announced that he will not build any sets at all . " 
 Stroheim wrote a highly detailed 300 @-@ page script that contained camera movements , composition and tint cues . Among the changes that he made to Norris 's novel was giving McTeague the first name of John and omitting Norris 's anti @-@ Semitism . McTeague had been filmed once before as Life 's Whirlpool , a five @-@ reel short by William A. Brady 's World Pictures , starring Broadway star Holbrook Blinn as McTeague , which had been released in 1916 . Film critics disliked this version and Stroheim later criticized Blinn 's performance . According to film historian Kevin Brownlow , Life 's Whirlpool was also shot on location in Death Valley . 
 Stroheim was known for his meticulous perfectionism and attention to detail , as well as his insolence towards studio executives . Working on Greed , Stroheim set out to make a realistic film about everyday people and rejected the Hollywood tropes of glamor , happy endings and upper @-@ class characters . Before shooting began , Stroheim told a reporter : 
 It is possible to tell a great story in motion pictures in such a way that the spectator forgets he is looking at <unk> Gertie <unk> , the producer 's pet and discovers himself intensely interested , just as if he were looking out of a window at life itself . He will come to believe that what he is gazing at is real — a cameraman was present in the household and nobody knew it . They went on in their daily life with their joys , fun and tragedies and the camera stole it all , holding it up afterward for all to see . 
 In early January 1923 Stroheim arrived in San Francisco , where he scouted locations and finished writing the shooting script . While researching for Greed , he attended society functions in town and met many friends of Frank Norris , including his brother Charles and his sister @-@ in @-@ law Kathleen . To capture the authentic spirit of the story , Stroheim insisted on filming on location in San Francisco , the Sierra Nevada mountains , the Big Dipper Mine in Iowa Hill , and Death Valley . He rented some of the actual buildings that had inspired scenes in the novel . Other locations included Cliff House and San Francisco Bay . 
 Norris had similarly scouted settings for his novel and chose the upstairs of a building on the corner of Polk and California street as McTeague 's dentist office , as well as many of the saloons and lunch counters in the area . Stroheim discovered that many of the locations that Norris had described , such as Polk Street , had been destroyed in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake , but he was able to find suitable period locations on Hayes and Laguna streets . For authenticity , Stroheim had no sets built in San Francisco and only redecorated existing locations , such as saloons , butcher shops , and wooden shacks , thus saving on construction costs . 
 Despite the strict conditions of Stroheim 's initial contract , Goldwyn approved the lengthy shooting script before filming began . Production Manager J. J. Cohn later explained that " they thought they could control him when the time comes . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 With the exception of Jean Hersholt , all of the main actors in Greed were regulars of Stroheim 's earlier films , a group dubbed the " Stroheim Stock Company . " Gibson Gowland had previously appeared in Blind Husbands and returned to the U.S. from Scotland for the role of John McTeague . Cesare Gravina , who played the junkman Zerkow , and Dale Fuller , the lottery @-@ ticket seller Maria , had both appeared in Foolish Wives and would later appear in The Merry Widow . Other actors in Stroheim 's Stock Company included Sidney Bracey , Mae Busch , George Fawcett , Maude George , Hughie Mack and George Nichols . 
 Trina was the most difficult role to cast , and ZaSu Pitts was hired at the last minute , after Stroheim had rejected both Claire Windsor and Colleen Moore . Pitts had previously acted only in comedic roles ; Greed was her first dramatic part . The actress later appeared in both The Wedding March and Hello , Sister ! Stroheim said that Pitts was " the greatest psychopathological actress in the American cinema " and that " she should not be in comedy , for she is the greatest of all <unk> . " 
 Stroheim had met casually with Jean Hersholt to discuss the role of Marcus Schouler , but he was initially reluctant to cast him . However , after Hersholt adjusted his appearance and wardrobe to more closely resemble Schouler , Stroheim changed his mind on the spot . With the exception of Gowland , Stroheim shot extensive screen tests of all the other actors at Goldwyn with cinematographer Paul Ivano . A scene from the Goldwyn film Souls for Sale is thought to be behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Stroheim directing Greed , but it actually depicts him directing Hersholt during one of these screen tests . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in San Francisco on March 13 , 1923 , and lasted until late June . Despite the initial contract between von Stroheim and Goldwyn , Lehr agreed to double the film 's budget to $ 347 @,@ 000 three days after shooting began . Von Stroheim had already worked twenty @-@ hour days for over two months of pre @-@ production and collapsed on set after a few days of filming . He remained in good health for the remainder of the shoot . This was not the only mishap on set ; during scenes shot at San Francisco Bay , Cesare Gravina got double pneumonia , making von Stroheim bitterly ashamed that Gravina 's entire performance was later cut from the film , despite the actor 's dedication to the role . Hersholt was knocked out by Gowland during the picnic scene in which McTeague and Schouler fight , and Pitts was almost run over by a trolley . In late May , Lehr visited von Stroheim on the set and praised the footage that he had seen , saying that " it has atmosphere , color and realism that could not possibly have been reproduced in the studio . " 
 One scene that von Stroheim re @-@ shot at the studio 's insistence depicted a younger McTeague in his apprenticeship with Potter . In the scene McTeague is too embarrassed to examine the teeth of a young woman and Potter has to take over . A thinly disguised ZaSu Pitts portrayed the woman so that the audience would see a resemblance to Trina , but the studio insisted that the scene was confusing and von Stroheim agreed to re @-@ shoot it . Von Stroheim also conceded his original vision when shooting the bar confrontation between McTeague and Schouler . The director wanted to have a knife thrower actually throw a real knife at Gibson Gowland 's head . Von Stroheim was overruled by Gowland himself , who refused to allow such a dangerous stunt . A special @-@ effect shot was used instead . 
 After filming in San Francisco wrapped in late June , the production traveled to Death Valley . Most Hollywood films that required desert scenes settled for the local Oxnard dunes north of Los Angeles , but von Stroheim insisted on authenticity . Death Valley had no roads , hotels , gas stations , or running water and was occupied by tarantulas , scorpions and poisonous snakes . The nearest populated area to the shoot was 100 miles ( 160 km ) away and insurance coverage was denied . Filming in Death Valley lasted for two months during midsummer , allowing actors Gowland and Hersholt time to grow the beards necessary for the sequence . Some members of the production reported temperatures between 91 and 161 ° F ( 33 and 72 ° C ) , but the highest temperature officially recorded in Death Valley during the period was 123 ° F ( 51 ° C ) . Of the 43 members of the cast and crew who worked on the Death Valley sequence , 14 became ill and were sent back to Los Angeles . 
 While shooting , crew members would collapse of heat exhaustion every day . Hersholt spent a week in the hospital after shooting was completed , suffering from internal bleeding . Hersholt claimed to have lost 27 pounds ( 12 kg ) , and was covered in blisters by the end of filming . Despite the hardship Hersholt said that he considered it the best role of his career . In order to motivate Hersholt and Gibson during the scene where they fight , von Stroheim yelled at them , " Fight , fight ! Try to hate each other as you both hate me ! " Throughout filming , von Stroheim brought musicians on set to help create mood for the actors . He continued to use this for the Death Valley scenes with a harmonium and violin player . A theme , inspired by the music of Ruggero Leoncavallo , was composed and played throughout production . Other music used included the popular songs " Nearer , My God , to Thee , " " Hearts and Flowers , " " Oh Promise Me , " and " Call Me Thine Own . " 
 Filming moved to Placer County , California , on September 13 and continued for less than a month . The Big Dipper Mine had been closed for ten years , so von Stroheim convinced the Goldwyn Company to lease and renovate it for filming . While first visiting Placer County during pre @-@ production , von Stroheim had met Harold Henderson , a local resident and fan of Norris whose brother had worked in the mine in the 1890s . Von Stroheim hired Henderson to oversee the renovation of the mine and other locations in Iowa Hill . Von Stroheim also wanted to restore the local cemetery for a newly invented scene depicting McTeague 's mother 's funeral , but the Goldwyn Company turned down this proposal . Inside the mine , von Stroheim usually shot at night between 9 pm and 6 am . Cinematographer William H. Daniels later said that von Stroheim insisted on descending 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 900 m ) underground for realism , even though the setting would have looked exactly the same at 100 feet ( 30 m ) . Filming was completed on October 6 , 1923 , after 198 days . Despite his original contract stipulating that all films be under 8 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) , von Stroheim shot a total of 446 @,@ 103 feet ( 135 @,@ 972 m ) of footage for the film , running approximately 85 hours . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Stroheim 's biographer Arthur Lennig compared the director 's visual style to that of D. W. Griffith but felt that " unlike Griffith , who viewed scenes as though through a fourth wall , Stroheim shot from many sides and from different angles ; he also used deep @-@ focus , meaningful foregrounds and effective camera movement . " Greed 's lighting included high contrast , chiaroscuro techniques with pools or shafts of lights illuminating an otherwise dark space . Examples of this technique include the scene where McTeague begs Trina for money in a pool of moonlight and the merry @-@ go @-@ round scene in which characters alternate between appearing only as dark silhouettes and being fully lit . 
 Daniels was especially proud of the wedding scene , which has a funeral procession visible through the window and was difficult to light properly . Greed has often been praised for its use of deep @-@ focus cinematography , seventeen years before its more @-@ famous application in Citizen Kane . Daniels sometimes used incandescent lights instead of studio arc lights , due to the constraints of his locations . He later said that Stroheim " was one of the first to insist on no make @-@ up for men , on real paint on the walls which were shiny , real glass in the windows , pure white on sets and in costumes ... everything up to then had been painted a dull brown " to mask the scratches on worn @-@ down film prints . Although not officially credited , Ernest B. Schoedsack worked on the picture as a camera operator . 
 Stroheim favored " Soviet @-@ style " montage editing . Greed often uses dramatic close @-@ ups and cuts instead of long takes . One exception to this is the scene in which Schouler becomes angry with McTeague and breaks his pipe , which was shot in one long , unbroken take . Stroheim also used symbolic cross @-@ cutting for dramatic effect , such as his use of animals in the film and a shot of a train when McTeague and Trina first kiss . In 1932 film theorist Andrew Buchanan called Stroheim a montage director , stating that " each observation would be captured in a ' close @-@ up ' and at leisure , he would assemble his ' shots ' in just the order which would most forcibly illustrate the fact . " In the 1950s film critic André Bazin praised Stroheim 's use of mise en scène and noted his " one simple rule for directing . Take a close look at the world , keep on doing so and in the end it will lay bare for you all its cruelty and ugliness . " 
 Despite Stroheim 's reputation as a perfectionist , Greed contains anachronisms . In the scenes on Polk Street , the main characters are clothed in 1890s fashions , but the extras wear 1920s clothing . Stroheim did his best to avoid such historical mistakes ; he shot only those buildings that were from the era Greed was set in , and he kept motor vehicles out of sight while filming . Daniels stated that , despite his desire for authenticity , Stroheim sometimes had walls knocked out of real locations to achieve a desired camera position . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Frank Norris 's novel belongs to the literary school of naturalism founded by French author Émile Zola . McTeague depicts the fate of its lower @-@ class characters in terms of heredity and their environment , with the belief that " man 's nature , despite free will , is determined by genetic and environmental factors " and that heredity controls fate , despite efforts at upward mobility . This literary style was influenced by Charles Darwin and portrayed characters whose higher states of being , the rational and compassionate , are in conflict with their lower states , the bête humaine ( human beast ) . McTeague was first published in 1899 and was inspired by an October 1893 murder case in which Patrick Collins , a poor husband with a history of beating his wife Sarah , finally stole her money and stabbed her to death at her San Francisco workplace . Sarah Collins worked at the Lest Norris kindergarten , which was financed by Norris 's family . 
 Von Stroheim did not see Greed as political and told a journalist that he considered it to be like a Greek tragedy . Despite the characters ' struggles with poverty and class , von Stroheim followed the naturalist technique of portraying characters whose lives are driven by fate and their inner nature . Von Stroheim employed variations of this theme in his other films , which often involved a commoner falling in love with an aristocrat or royal . 
 One of the cinematic techniques by which von Stroheim portrayed naturalism was animal symbolism . In Greed McTeague is associated with a canary , only briefly mentioned in the novel . Von Stroheim altered Norris 's original ending and has McTeague release the canary in Death Valley . McTeague buys Trina a female canary as a wedding gift and early in their marriage von Stroheim cuts from a shot of them kissing to birds fluttering wildly in their cage . Another scene with animal imagery includes cross @-@ cutting between a cat attempting to pounce on the canaries in the scene where Schouler bids goodbye to McTeague and Trina without telling them that he has informed on McTeague . Dogs , cats and monkeys are associated with various supporting characters . Von Stroheim also used the naturalist technique of giving characters specific objects , gestures or phrases that repeat throughout the film as a visual leitmotif . For example , Trina tugs on her lips and McTeague fiddles with his birdcage . 
 Throughout his career von Stroheim used grotesque imagery and characters . This is most apparent in the wedding @-@ banquet scene , which includes a midget , a hunchback , a woman with buck teeth and a boy on crutches . The wedding guests violently and crudely devour their meal like animals . This scene was unlike any other in films of that period , which treated meals with dignity and a sense of communion . Other instances of grotesque imagery include Trina 's fingers becoming infected and amputated . Von Stroheim contrasted love scenes between McTeague and Trina with their ugly , lower @-@ class environment , such as the sewer with the dead rat and a garbage truck driving by as they kiss . 
 As in his other films , von Stroheim used Christian imagery and symbols , such as crosses and churches . Trina first shows signs of greed on Easter Sunday and is murdered by McTeague on Christmas Eve . Christmas Eve was often depicted in von Stroheim 's films and was close to the date of his father 's death . Lennig asserted that the character of McTeague 's father ( who was only briefly mentioned in the novel ) is based on von Stroheim 's own father , while McTeague 's mother is a tribute to von Stroheim 's mother , to whom Greed is dedicated . Von Stroheim stated that he considered all of his good qualities to have come from his mother and all of his bad qualities to have come from his father . 
 = = Editing = = 
 = = = Initial editing = = = 
 Editing Greed took almost a year and von Stroheim 's contract did not include payment for his post @-@ production work . He and his chief film cutter Frank Hull worked on the film for several months before completing a rough cut . Von Stroheim was indecisive during editing . He felt restricted by his contract 's limitation on the length of the film . Von Stroheim colored certain scenes with gold tinting by using the Handschiegl Color Process , in which individual frames are hand colored with stencils . Von Stroheim credited himself in the beginning titles with " Personally directed by Erich von Stroheim . " 
 Other than studio personnel , only twelve people saw the original 42 @-@ reel version of Greed at a special screening in January 1924 ; they included Harry Carr , Rex Ingram , Aileen Pringle , Carmel Myers , Idwal Jones , Joseph Jackson , Jack <unk> , Fritz <unk> , Welford Beaton , Valentine Mandelstam , and Jean Bertin . After the screening Jones , Carr and Ingram all agreed that they had just seen the greatest film ever made and that it was unlikely that a better film would ever be made . Carr wrote a review of the advance screening where he raved that he " saw a wonderful picture the other day — that no one else will ever see ... I can 't imagine what they are going to do with it . It is like Les Miserables . Episodes come along that you think have no bearing on the story , then 12 or 14 reels later it hits you with a crash . For stark , terrible realism and marvelous artistry , it is the greatest picture I have ever seen . But I don 't know what it will be like when it shrinks to 8 reels . " Jonathan Rosenbaum suggested that Carr was most likely referring to a cut sequence early in the film that introduced all of the characters who lived in McTeague 's building . The forty @-@ minute scene depicted what the tenants did on a Saturday afternoon , and established cinematic atmosphere without furthering the plot . Rosenbaum compared the cut sequence to novels of the 19th century and to the first few hours of Jacques Rivette 's Out 1 . Jones publicly praised the advance screening and compared Greed to The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari and Dr. Mabuse the Gambler . However , Welford Beaton of The Film Spectator disliked the 42 @-@ reel version and criticized its excessive use of close @-@ ups . 
 Many sources claim that the 42 @-@ reel version was only ever intended to be a rough cut , and that Von Stroheim chose to cut it down to 24 reels by March 18 , 1924 , with the intention of screening it with intermissions over two nights . The director had difficulty cutting the film down , telling his friend Don Ryan , " I could take out sequences and thus get the job over in a day . That would be child 's play . But I can 't do it . It would leave gaps that could only be bridged through titles . When you do such a thing you have illustrated subtitles instead of a motion picture . " Von Stroheim later claimed that at this time the Goldwyn Company wanted him to shoot a scene of McTeague waking up in his dentist chair , showing the entire film to have been a bad dream . While von Stroheim was editing the 24 @-@ reel cut June Mathis , who was the head of the Goldwyn Story Department , had made her own 13 @-@ reel version of Greed by January 21 , 1924 . She ordered even more cuts to be made on January 29 , but then left for Rome in early February to oversee the production of Ben @-@ Hur and was uninvolved in the film 's editing for several months . 
 After having completed the 24 @-@ reel cut of Greed , von Stroheim told Goldwyn executives that he could not cut another frame . Goldwyn producers thought that this version was still too long and told him to cut it to a more manageable length . Von Stroheim then sent the film to his friend , director Rex Ingram , who turned it over to his editor , Grant Whytock . Whytock had worked with von Stroheim on The Devil 's Pass Key and was familiar with the director 's style and tastes . Whytock initially proposed that it be split in two , with one 8 @-@ reel film ending with the wedding and a second 7 @-@ reel film ending at Death Valley . Whytock eventually cut the film down to 18 reels . His only major cut was the entire subplot of Zerkow and Maria , which he thought was " very distasteful . " Otherwise he simply cut down scenes and cut out 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 400 m ) of quick " flash " shots that only lasted a few frames . However , Whytock 's version of Greed retained the prologue and other subplots , as well as much of the humor that was later cut out of it . 
 Whytock and Ingram screened their version of Greed to studio executives , who responded favorably to it but worried that the tragic ending would be hard to sell to the public . Ingram then sent the 18 @-@ reel version to von Stroheim and told him , " If you cut one more frame I shall never speak to you again . " On April 10 , 1924 , the Goldwyn Company officially agreed to merge with Metro Pictures , putting von Stroheim 's nemesis Thalberg directly in charge of Greed . Von Stroheim and Louis B. Mayer had a lengthy confrontation over the film 's editing , which according to both men ended with von Stroheim claiming that all women were whores and Mayer punching him . Mayer disliked the film because of its lack of glamor , optimism or morality and considered it to be a guaranteed flop . 
 = = = Studio editing = = = 
 MGM executives screened Greed at full length once to meet contractual obligations . Idwal Jones , a San Francisco critic , attended the all @-@ day screening and wrote that while some of the scenes were compelling , Stroheim 's desire that " every comma of the book [ be ] put in " was ultimately negative . MGM then took control and re @-@ edited it . The studio ordered June Mathis to cut it down further ; she assigned the job to an editor named Joseph Farnham . Farnham was a well @-@ known " titles editor , " who patched scenes together using title cards to keep continuity . His contributions to Greed include the notorious title cards " Such was McTeague " and " Let 's go over and sit on the sewer , " which were <unk> at for years . Eventually Farnham reduced Greed to 10 reels , totaling 10 @,@ 607 feet ( 3 @,@ 233 m ) . Von Stroheim said that the film " was cut by a hack with nothing on his mind but his hat . " He later bitterly lamented that Greed was made before the financial success of Eugene O 'Neill 's four @-@ hour play Strange Interlude in 1928 . Von Stroheim angrily disowned the final version , blaming Mathis for destroying his masterpiece . 
 One week before Greed 's release the New York State Motion Picture Committee ( which censored films ) demanded several more cuts on moral grounds . These cuts included the administration of ether in the dental scenes and certain instances of foul language . Although these cuts were made to prints that were screened in New York State , the footage was kept in many other prints . 
 = = = Difference between von Stroheim 's cut and MGM 's cut = = = 
 The main cuts to Greed were the elimination of its two sub @-@ plots and other entire sequences , while individual scenes were often not touched . Commenting about the cuts made in the film to the Los Angeles Times , Thalberg stated : 
 This whole story is about greed — a progressive greed . It is the story of the way greed grew in Trina 's heart until it obsessed her . I found that the junk dealer 's greed was so much greater than hers that it almost destroyed the theme . His intense greed drowned out Trina 's greed just as a steam whistle drowns out a small street noise . Instead of hurting the picture , throwing out this junk dealer 's story made the picture stronger . 
 Thalberg also stated that he " took no chances in cutting it . We took it around to different theaters in the suburbs , ran it at its enormous length , and then we took note of the places at which interest seemed to droop . " 
 Individual scenes or sequences that were cut include McTeague and Trina 's early , happy years of marriage , the sequence showing McTeague and Trina eventually moving into their shack , the family life of the Sieppe family before Trina 's marriage , the prologue depicting McTeague 's mother and father at the Big Dipper mine and McTeague 's apprenticeship . Other cuts included the more suggestive and sexual close @-@ up shots depicting McTeague and Trina 's physical attraction to each other , the scenes after McTeague has murdered Trina and roams around San Francisco and Placer County , additional footage of Death Valley , additional footage of Trina with her money , and a more gradual version of Trina 's descent into greed and miserly obsession . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release and critical reviews = = = 
 Greed premiered on December 4 , 1924 , at the Cosmopolitan Theatre in Columbus Circle , New York City , which was owned by William Randolph Hearst . Frank Norris had once worked for Hearst as a foreign correspondent during the Spanish – American War and Hearst praised Greed , calling it the greatest film he had ever seen . Hearst 's newspapers promoted the film , but MGM did very little advertising . At the time of the release von Stroheim was in Los Angeles , having begun production on The Merry Widow on December 1 . In May 1926 Greed was released in Berlin , where its premiere famously caused a riot at the theater that may have been instigated by members of the then @-@ fledgling Nazi party . 
 Greed received mostly negative reviews . The trade paper Harrison 's Report said that " [ i ] f a contest were to be held to determine which has been the filthiest , vilest , most putrid picture in the history of the motion picture business , I am sure that Greed would win . " Variety Weekly called it " an out @-@ and @-@ out box office flop " only six days after its premiere and claimed that the film had taken two years to shoot , cost $ 700 @,@ 000 and was originally 130 reels long . The review went on say that " nothing more morbid and senseless , from a commercial picture standpoint , has been seen on the screen for a long , long time " and that despite its " excellent acting , fine direction and the undoubted power of its story ... it does not entertain . " In its December 1924 – January 1925 issue , Exceptional Photoplays called it " one of the most uncompromising films ever shown on the screen . There have already been many criticisms of its brutality , its stark realism , its <unk> . But the point is that it was never intended to be a pleasant picture . " In the February 1925 issue of Theatre Magazine , Aileen St. John @-@ <unk> wrote that " the persons in the photoplay are not characters , but types — they are well selected , weighed and completely drilled . But they did not act ; they do not come to life . They perform their mission like so many uncouth images of miserliness and repugnant <unk> . " Mordaunt Hall of the New York Times gave the film a mostly positive review in regards to the acting and directing while criticizing how it was edited , writing that MGM " clipped this production as much as they dared ... and are to be congratulated on their efforts and the only pity is that they did not use the scissors more generously in the beginning . " In a Life Magazine article , Robert E. Sherwood also defended MGM 's cutting of the film and called von Stroheim " a genius ... badly in need of a stopwatch . " Iris Barry of the Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) disliked the tinting , saying " a not very pleasing yellow tinge is smudged in . " A March 1925 review in <unk> magazine stated , " perhaps an American director would not have seen greed as a vice . " 
 A more favorable review came from Richard Watts , Jr. of the New York Herald Tribune , who called Greed " the most important picture yet produced in America ... It is the one picture of the season that can hold its own as a work of dramatic art worthy of comparison with such stage plays as What Price Glory ? and Desire Under the Elms . " The April 20 , 1925 , edition of The Montreal Gazette claimed it " impresses as a powerful film " and described the " capacity audience " screening as " one of the few pictures which are as worthy of serious consideration ... which offer a real and convincing study of life and character and that secure their ends by artistic and intellectual means rather than by writing down to the level of the groundlings . " The review went on to describe the direction as " masterly , " citing " its remarkable delineation of character development and the subtle touches which convey ideas through vision rather than the written word , an all too @-@ rare employment of the possibilities of the cinema play as a distinct branch of art capable of truthful and convincing revelation and interpretation of life 's realities . " A review in Exceptional Photoplays stated that " Mr. von Stroheim has always been the realist as Rex Ingram is the romanticist and Griffith the sentimentalist of the screen , and in Greed he has given us an example of realism at its starkest . Like the novel from which the plot was taken , Greed is a terrible and wonderful thing . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Greed was a financial disappointment . On its initial run , it earned $ 224 @,@ 500 in the United States , $ 3 @,@ 063 in Canada and $ 47 @,@ 264 in other markets . In total it earned $ 274 @,@ 827 . Von Stroheim 's biographer Arthur Lennig stated that according to MGM 's records the final cost of Greed was $ 546 @,@ 883 . Another biographer , Richard <unk> , stated that its final cost was $ 665 @,@ 603 : $ 585 @,@ 250 for the production , $ 30 @,@ 000 for von Stroheim 's personal fee , $ 54 @,@ 971 for processing and editing , $ 53 @,@ 654 for advertising and $ 1 @,@ 726 for Motion Picture dues . 
 Arthur Lennig asserted that MGM 's official budget for Greed was suspiciously high for a film with no stars , no built sets , a small crew and inexpensive film stock . Lennig suspects that MGM averaged the film 's cost with the more expensive The Merry Widow in order to prevent von Stroheim from getting a percentage of the more profitable film . The Merry Widow ended up being a hit and earned more profits than Greed had lost ; it cost $ 614 @,@ 961 but earned $ 996 @,@ 226 on its initial run . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his final years , von Stroheim said that " of all my films , only Greed was a fully realized work , only Greed had a total validity . " In 1926 a British foundation of Arts and Sciences requested a copy of the original version of Greed to keep in their archive , but their request was denied by MGM . Henri Langlois screened the studio version of Greed for von Stroheim in 1950 . Von Stroheim said , " It was for me an exhumation . It was like opening a coffin in which there was just dust , giving off a terrible stench , a couple of vertebra and a piece of shoulder bone . " He went on to say that " It was as if a man 's beloved was run over by a truck , maimed beyond recognition . He goes to see her in the morgue . Of course , he still loves her but it 's only the memory of her that he can love — because he doesn 't recognize her anymore . " 
 In the early 1950s Greed 's reputation began to grow and it appeared on several lists of the greatest films ever made . In 1952 at the Festival Mondial du Film et des Beaux Arts de Belgique , Greed was named the fifth greatest film ever made , with such directors as Luchino Visconti , Orson Welles and Billy Wilder voting for it . Later in 1952 Sight and Sound magazine published its first list of the " ten greatest films ever made . " Greed was tied for 7th place on that list , with such critics as Andre Bazin , Lotte Eisner , Curtis Harrington , Penelope Houston and Gavin Lambert voting for it . In 1962 it was tied for 4th on the same list . Since 1972 it has failed to reach a spot on the top ten . The Cinémathèque royale de Belgique released a list of " the most important and <unk> American films of all time " in 1978 . Greed was third on its list after Citizen Kane and Sunrise : A Song of Two Humans . In a University of Southern California list of the " 50 Most Significant American Films " made by the school 's Performing Arts Council , Greed was listed as number 21 . In 1991 Greed was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " 
 Among those who have praised Greed over the years are Sergei Eisenstein ; Joseph von Sternberg , who said , " We were all influenced by Greed " ; Jean Renoir , who called it " the film of films " ; and Ernst Lubitsch , who called von Stroheim " the only true ' novelist ' " in films . More recently Guillermo del Toro called it " a perfect reflection of the anxiety permeating the passage into the 20th century and the absolute dehumanization that was to come . " and Norbert <unk> said that " the last shot of the movie is unforgettable . " Jonathan Rosenbaum has stated that Greed was a major influence on the style and content of many films . Stroheim 's shots filming the sun predated Akira Kurosawa 's better @-@ known uses of the technique in Rashomon ( 1950 ) . Rosenbaum compared specific shot set @-@ ups in Greed to shots in King Vidor 's The Crowd , Jean Renoir 's Le Crime de Monsieur Lange , Orson Welles 's The Magnificent Ambersons , Howard Hawks ' To Have and Have Not and Michelangelo Antonioni 's L <unk> . In addition , he likened certain plot elements or characters in Greed to John Huston 's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre ( 1948 ) , Alfred Hitchcock 's Rear Window ( 1954 ) , Claude Chabrol 's Les <unk> Femmes ( 1960 ) and Elaine May 's Mikey and Nicky ( 1975 ) . Rosenbaum singled out Stroheim 's influence on May , an American director , with Mikey and Nicky centering on the disintegration of a friendship over money and sex , and including grotesque elements and characters caught between innocence and corruption . Rosenbaum also asserts that Orson Welles ' use of satirical caricatures in all of his films is in " the spirit of von Stroheim . " 
 The two films most commonly compared to Greed are Huston 's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre and Welles ' The Magnificent Ambersons . Rosenbaum believes that besides Huston 's film ending with gold being lost in the desert and similarities between Trina 's descent into madness with Fred C. Dobbs own obsessions , the two films have little else in common . The Magnificent Ambersons and Greed both have characters who struggle with class differences that lead to their downfall . Ambersons was famously edited down drastically by its studio and the cut footage is now lost . Rosenbaum goes on to state that Greed influenced the methods in which novels are adapted into films and filmmakers like Welles , Huston and Bill Forsyth followed von Stroheim 's example by re @-@ arranging the plot and adding new scenes to their films while still remaining faithful to the intentions of the original novels . The 1994 Jonathan Lynn film Greedy pays tribute to the film by giving the main characters the last name McTeague . 
 Attempts to reconstruct the uncut version of Greed without use of the lost footage first began in 1958 . At the Brussels International Exposition , the Cinémathèque royale de Belgique named Greed as one of the twelve greatest films ever made and simultaneously published von Stroheim 's original , uncut script for Greed , which came directly from von Stroheim 's personal copy preserved by his widow Denise <unk> . This publication led to three separate books that all used von Stroheim 's script in order to reconstruct the original version of the film and compare it to the released version : a French book edited by Jacques @-@ G. Perret in 1968 and two versions edited by Joel <unk> and Herman G. Weinberg , both in 1972 . Weinberg 's book utilized 400 individual stills and production photos to reconstruct the uncut version of Greed , the first time that images from the uncut version were publicly available . 
 In 1999 , Turner Entertainment ( the film 's current rights holder ) decided to recreate , as closely as possible , the original version by combining the existing footage with over 650 still photographs of the lost scenes ( many of which had been used in Weinberg 's book ) , in accordance with an original continuity outline written by von Stroheim . All materials were provided by the Margaret Herrick Library . This restoration runs almost four hours . It was produced by film preservationist Rick Schmidlin and edited by Glenn Morgan . Schmidlin restored many characters and sub @-@ plots from the original version . A new musical score was composed by Robert Israel . The reconstruction cost $ 100 @,@ 000 to produce . Schmidlin called the finished product " a reconstruction of Von Stroheim 's lost narrative . " It premiered at the 1999 Telluride Film Festival and was later screened at the Venice Film Festival and the Pordenone Silent Film Festival before being aired on Turner Classic Movies in December 1999 . Film critic Todd McCarthy called the restored version of Greed a triumph . Roger Ebert called Greed a masterpiece and said that the restored Schmidlin cut illustrates the " prudish sensibilities [ that ] went into MGM 's chop job . " Rosenbaum praised the project , but claimed it could only be considered a " study version . " The re @-@ construction won a special citation from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards . 
