 By the 16th century Conisbrough Castle was in a poor state of repair , and a royal survey carried out in 1537 and 1538 showed that the gates , bridge and parts of the walls had collapsed in a spectacular land slippage , and that one floor of the keep had also fallen in . The collapse of the walls was a consequence of the instability of the top soil on top of the limestone spur , which was a mixture of clay and sandstone ; once the clay was washed away over time , the remaining sandstone proved extremely unstable and liable to crack . 
 Henry VIII gave the ruins to the Carey family , who retained it until it passed by marriage into first the <unk> and then the Coke families . The castle was not involved in the events of the English Civil War in the 17th century , and escaped the slighting that affected many similar properties , probably because the collapse of the outer walls had already made it indefensible and of little military value . In 1737 , after the death of Edward Coke , the castle and the surrounding manor were bought by Thomas Osborne , the Duke of Leeds , for £ 22 @,@ 500 . 
 In 1811 the novelist Sir Walter Scott passed by the castle and later used it as the location for his novel Ivanhoe , published in 1819 . Scott only had a partial view of the property from the road and the events portrayed in the novel , set at the end of the 12th century , are fictitious ; Scott believed the castle to have been Saxon in origin , a view shared by many 19th century commentators . Although the writer John Wainwright was still able to praise the " picturesque view " around the castle in 1826 , the antiquarian <unk> Smith commented with concern in 1887 on the changing character of the location , in particular the factories that were growing up around the new railway line and the " murky atmosphere " the industrial works created . 
 In 1859 Francis D 'Arcy @-@ Osborne , the Duke of Leeds , died , leaving Conisbrough to his nephew , Sackville Lane @-@ Fox , the Baron Conyers . The keep remained in good condition , but by 1884 it was apparent that repairs were needed and the antiquarian George Clark recommended urgent work to repair the stonework . If finances allowed it , he also urged the reinstallation of a roof and wooden floors . Limited repairs were subsequently approved by the trustees of Lord Conyers , although Clark 's colleague , A. Ellis , expressed concerns that railings to protect the visitors who routinely climbed to the top of the keep had not been funded . A reported £ 500 was spent by the trustees renovating the castle ruins , including the construction of a lodge in the outer bailey for the castle keeper , completed in 1885 , and improvements to the footpaths . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 Conisbrough Castle was bought by the Conisbrough local council in the 1940s , who placed the castle into the guardianship of the Ministry of Public Works in 1949 , but retained the freehold ownership of the land . Two sets of archaeological excavations were carried out on the site between 1967 and 1969 , exposing the foundations of the buildings in the inner bailey , and then from 1973 to 1977 , examining options for future visitor facilities . By 1984 , when the government agency English Heritage took over the management of the property , the condition of the visitor services was unsatisfactory and the industrial character of the surrounding area was discouraging tourists . 
 In response , English Heritage and Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council formed a three @-@ way agreement in 1988 with the Ivanhoe Trust , a local charity designed to generate new employment in the region . Under this agreement the trust would manage the site , English Heritage would maintain the historic fabric of the castle , while the council would construct a new visitors ' centre . A new , controversial visitor 's centre was built in the style of a collection of jousting tents , while the floors and roof of the keep were reinstalled between 1993 and 1995 with European Union funding , in an attempt to limit the erosion of the castle stonework . 
 Visitor numbers following the investments fell far short of expectations , however , and by 2006 had settled at around 30 @,@ 000 each year , only slightly above the level in the early 1980s . The external facilities did not age well and funding shortages led to the new audio @-@ visual effects in the keep being turned off to save money . Discussions between the three partners about the future of the castle took place , but relations broke down and English Heritage resumed the direct management of the castle in 2008 . 
 The castle was closed for a £ 1 @.@ 1 million programme of renovations in 2013 , funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund , as part of which a new visitors ' centre and visitor facilities were constructed . The castle is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building and as an Ancient Monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Inner and outer baileys = = = 
 Conisbrough Castle has an outer and an inner bailey , approximately 260 by 120 feet ( 79 by 37 m ) and 290 by 205 feet ( 88 by 62 m ) across respectively . The castle was entered through the outer bailey , a rectangular enclosure protected by earthworks , which would have contained the castle 's barns , stables and other service facilities . A drawbridge on the northern side of the outer bailey , now replaced by an earth causeway , linked it with the inner bailey . 
 The oval inner bailey was formed by scarping and counter @-@ scarping the natural contours of the hill , producing a bank , now largely destroyed , and a protective ditch . The early 13th @-@ century curtain wall is mostly of roughly dressed , coursed stone , up to 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) thick and 35 feet ( 11 m ) high , with two sections repaired with ashlar facings . The wall was defended by six mural towers along its southern and western sides , of which three still survive reasonably intact , and strengthened with pilaster buttresses along the northern edge . The bases of the walls and the towers were splayed , spreading their weight out more broadly , but their footings are only 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 ft 0 in ) deep in places . A barbican protected the link from the drawbridge to the gatehouse of the inner bailey , complete with an additional corner turret . The remains of the collapse of the curtain wall are still visible in the ditch . 
 Various buildings were constructed along the inside of the inner bailey wall of similar rough stonework to the curtain wall , but only their foundations remain today . In the south @-@ west corner was the solar block , containing the solar and various chambers . Along the north side was the hall , pushed into an awkward corner of the curtain wall , 70 by 30 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) in size and originally probably built two storeys high . Initially constructed with a central hearth , a fireplace was added into the outer wall in the later 13th century . Alongside the hall were a kitchen and pantry , the former with a cellar . On the south @-@ east side of the inner bailey was the castle chapel , 20 by 40 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 by 12 @.@ 2 m ) across . 
 = = = Keep = = = 
 Conisbrough 's keep was positioned on the north @-@ east side of the inner bailey . It is an important medieval survival : the historian Sidney Toy considered it to be " one of the finest keeps in England " , the historian Oliver Creighton describes it as an " architectural gem " and Stephen Johnson as " one of the finest examples of late Norman defensive architecture " . 
 The keep comprises a central circular tower , 62 feet ( 19 m ) in diameter , with six , large solid buttresses projecting outwards to form an hexagonal design , unique in England . It was made from <unk> limestone and 28 metres ( 92 ft ) tall with walls up to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) thick in places . It has four floors : a ground floor that serves as a basement and a vaulted stone support for the chamber above ; the first floor , through which the keep was accessed ; two upper floors and a roof walk , which was probably covered by a <unk> and defended by battlements . 
 The current concrete stairs to the keep are modern , and the original medieval stairway , made from timber and stone , would have incorporated a drawbridge just before the castle doors . The basement contained a well , which could also be drawn from the 1st floor through a hole in the stone floor . 
 The keep was designed as a private tower for Hamelin Plantagenet , rather than a grander residence . As a result , it was not designed to accommodate several different households and its layout was simpler than that seen at the contemporary keep of Orford Castle , for example . The 2nd and the 3rd floor would have served as the main chamber and the lord 's private chamber , forming a vertical sequence of rooms , with a vaulted , hexagonal chapel leading off the private chamber , cut into one of the buttresses . 
 Most of the castle would have been very dark due to the lack of natural light . The main chamber , however , had a large window , 1 foot 10 inches ( 0 @.@ 56 m ) by 4 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 42 m ) , with deep recesses to allow for the thickness of the walls ; two carved seats sat alongside the window . A similar window was placed above it in the private chamber . The keep had relatively advanced fireplaces and flues for this period , the fireplace in the main chamber being exceptionally large and decorated with stone columns and carved capitals . 
 Conisbrough Castle was probably similar to two other castles owned by the Warren earls . Hamelin Plantagenet was also responsible for the development of Mortemer Castle in France , where a similar keep was built on top of a motte , and Conisbrough might also have had resemblances to Sandal Castle in the north of England , also owned by the earls . The keep 's design was poor from a military perspective , as although the central circular tower would have had defensive advantages , the buttresses introduced 12 vulnerable corners into the stonework , and the keep itself had no arrow slots to permit the defenders to fire on any attackers . Rather than being designed primarily for military defence , it was intended to symbolise and reinforce Hamelin 's lordship and new social status . 
 = Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington = 
 " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 26 , 1991 . In the episode , Lisa enters in an essay contest to write an essay about America 's greatness . When she wins it , she and the family travel to Washington , D.C. where the finals are to be held . Lisa is dismayed after witnessing a bribery scandal in the Senate . In her final essay , she disdains and condemns the government system , which leads to the arrest of the corrupt congressman who accepted the bribe . While Lisa fails to win the contest , her faith in government is restored . 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and directed by Wes Archer , and it was the first episode for which Al Jean and Mike Reiss served as show runners . It features multiple references to the 1939 film Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , including the scene in which Lisa appeals to Lincoln 's statue at the Lincoln Memorial for advice . Other Washington landmarks referenced in the episode include the Jefferson Memorial , the Watergate Hotel , the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts , the White House , the National Air and Space Museum , and the Washington Monument . 
 The episode acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 , and was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . It received mostly positive reviews from television critics , who praised the episode for its satire on American politics . However , the timber industry criticized the scene in which Lisa witnesses a timber industry lobbyist offering a bribe to the congressman in order to demolish the Springfield Forest . The scene was described as " an easy shot at hard @-@ working people whose only crime is to have been born in a timber town . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer takes an interest in the Reading Digest magazine after a copy is sent to the Simpson family 's residence . In the magazine , he notices an ad for a children 's contest in which an essay must be written about what makes America great . Lisa chooses to enter , takes a trip to Springfield Forest , and is inspired to write her essay when she sees the forest 's natural beauty and when a bald eagle lands right by the branch she is sitting under . Lisa 's article is approved for entry in the national finals in Washington , D.C. after the contest judge observes Homer 's poor vocabulary and realizes that he could not have written Lisa 's essay for her . 
 While Bart and Homer abuse the all @-@ expense @-@ paid perks of their trip , Lisa visits famous monuments for inspiration . At one particular monument , she overhears a corrupt congressman , Bob Arnold , taking a bribe from a representative of a logging industry to demolish Springfield Forest . Heartbroken and disillusioned by the dishonesty of government officials , Lisa tears up her essay and writes a more painful yet truthful essay to show the patriotic judges . The new essay , entitled " Cesspool on the Potomac " , disdains and condemns the government system of corruption and greed , and mentions the names of those involved in the bribery . Lisa 's essay causes a ruckus and elicits a hostile reaction from the judges and audience . Messages are quickly sent around the capital regarding Lisa 's speech and Arnold is arrested , expelled from his job , and sent to jail . Lisa 's essay does not win because of its content , but with the news of the congressman arrested and having become a born @-@ again Christian while in prison , her faith in government is restored , while the contest winner commends Lisa for her courage and honesty . The episode ends with Bart <unk> the annoying pianist that performed at the contest and as Lisa berates him , Bart tells her that she was the one who inspired him to stand up for what he believes in . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by George Meyer . It is one of The Simpsons creator Matt Groening 's favorite episodes of the earlier seasons because he thought it took the show to another level . Meyer said he has a " deep suspicion of social institutions and tradition in general , " which affected the way he wrote the episode . Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who had written for The Simpsons since the start of the show , took over as show runners for the third season . Their first episode as show runners was " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " and they felt a lot of pressure about running the show . Jean and Reiss were so pressured that they did six to seven rewrites of the script to make it funnier . Jean said " one reason for doing all these rewrites is because I kept thinking ' It 's not good enough . It 's not good enough ' , " and Reiss added that " we were definitely scared . We had never run anything before , and they dumped us on this . " 
 Wes Archer directed " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " , which was one of the first episodes to feature the Simpson family traveling to a real @-@ life location . Because much of the episode takes place outside of Springfield , new background and character designs had to be animated . The Simpson family visits several real @-@ life landmarks in Washington , which the animators were able to draw with the help of photographs from the animation studio 's library . The Simpsons director David Silverman grew up in the Washington area so he was able to help out with the designs . Marge 's voice actor , Julie Kavner , said she loved the charm of the family " just being on a trip and experiencing the hotel room they 're staying at , and the integrity of Bart 's character . You know , you just want to kill him for doing all those tricks and pranks . " Jean believes this is one of the secrets of show 's success , the fact that it is about a family and the writers can use experiences from their own or their family 's life as an inspiration in their writing . He thought " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " was a perfectly constructed episode in that sense . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title and plot of the episode is a parody of the 1939 film Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , in which the character Jefferson Smith comes to Washington with patriotic enthusiasm , but is shocked to see evidence of corruption in the government . The Tampa Tribune 's Curtis Ross called this reference one of the best film references in The Simpsons ' history . Lisa 's visit to the Lincoln Memorial is a direct reference to Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , in which Smith appeals to Lincoln 's statue for inspiration like Lisa did in the episode . In his book Abraham Lincoln in the Post @-@ Heroic Era , Barry Schwartz writes that the scene with Lisa at the crowded monument shows how " thoroughly Lincoln 's moral and emotional significance has waned . " Mark Reinhart writes in the book Abraham Lincoln on Screen that the scene sums up " with brilliant wit " the American society 's " annoying and ultimately useless tendency to ask [ themselves ] ' What would Lincoln have done ? ' whenever [ they ] face a political or social dilemma . " Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was once again referenced on The Simpsons in the season fourteen episode " Mr. <unk> Goes to Washington " . 
 In addition to the Lincoln Memorial , other Washington , D.C. landmarks visited include the Jefferson Memorial , the Watergate Hotel ( where the family stays ) , the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts , the White House , the National Air and Space Museum , and the Washington Monument . When the family visits the White House , they encounter former First Lady Barbara Bush in the bathtub of one of the many bathrooms . Another American landmark mentioned in the episode is Mount Rushmore . The scene mentioning that landmark could imply that Springfield is Springfield , South Dakota since Mount Rushmore is in South Dakota . In addition , Lisa proposes that the family attend the memorial of the fictional Winifred Beecher Howe , an early crusader for women 's rights who later appeared on the unpopular 75 @-@ cent coins according to Lisa . This is a reference to the Susan B. Anthony dollar coin , which was only minted for three years and never became popular . 
 The episode makes references to several real @-@ life persons . The piano @-@ playing satirist who annoys Bart is a reference to Mark Russell and / or Tom Lehrer . Bob Arnold , the corrupt congressman , tells Lisa that there are quite a few women senators , but Lisa asserts that there are only two . At the time of airing there were indeed only two female senators : Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas and Barbara Mikulski of Maryland . Then @-@ President George H. W. Bush is featured briefly in the episode . Shortly after it aired , Bush disparaged The Simpsons in a speech during his re @-@ election campaign on January 27 , 1992 . At that point family values were the cornerstone of Bush 's campaign platform , so he gave the following speech at the National Religious Broadcasters ' convention in Washington : " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " As a result , Bush appeared in future episodes in a more negative light . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " has been labeled as a satire on American politics . Michael Bitzer , in an edited book by Joseph Foy and Stanley Schultz entitled Homer Simpson Goes to Washington , said this episode " espouses the virtues , vices , and varieties of American political culture , public opinion , and ultimately the American Dream . " Bitzer also wrote that The Simpsons , through " skillful " use of satire , demonstrates with this episode " insights into the underlying political culture and public opinion of the United States ' governing system ( and , more broadly , society at large ) . " In his book Gilligan Unbound : Pop Culture in the Age of Globalization , Paul Arthur Cantor said he was amazed by how far the episode " willing to take its corrosive satire of national politics . " He said it " attacks the federal government at its foundation , the patriotic myths upon which its legitimacy lies . It makes fun of the very process by which patriotism is inculcated in the nation 's youth , the hokey contests that lead children to outdo each other in <unk> effusions . " When the corrupt congressman is arrested , Lisa proclaims " The system works ! " Benedict Anderson wrote in the book The Spectre of Comparisons that series creator Matt Groening " assumes that his tickled audience is confident that the system barely works [ ... ] So why does he need to show a patriot at all , especially one who is a deluded little female block @-@ head ? Probably because he , too , wishes to be seen as giving America another chance . Mr. Lisa guarantees his good intentions . " 
 Günter Beck , a lecturer for the German Academic Exchange Service ( DAAD ) at the Haifa Center for German and European Studies at the University of Haifa in Israel , compared Lisa 's role in the episode to the nineteenth @-@ century American poet and philosopher Henry David Thoreau . He writes that Lisa stands up against the public 's indifference towards the political system that Thoreau criticized , and comments that the emphasis should be " on the brave moral decision to stand up for principles and against the broad public . By this courageous act , ' to do what is right ' , an individual could save the well @-@ being of the whole community . And indeed , Lisa ’ s bravery is the impulse for the state ’ s representatives to carry out their democratic obligations , so she can gladly notice ' The system works ! ' — her trust in democracy and its institutions is restored . Thoreau on the other hand , had no lasting trust in the system but only in the people themselves and in the individual ’ s capacity to realize development and democracy . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and re @-@ releases = = = 
 " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 26 , 1991 . The episode finished 36th in the ratings for the week of September 23 – 29 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 9 million viewing households . The Simpsons was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children and In Living Color . " Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington " and the episode " When Flanders Failed " were released on videocassette in 1999 , entitled The Best of the Simpsons . The episode was later included on the Simpsons season three DVD set that was released on August 26 , 2003 . Wes Archer , David Silverman , Matt Groening , Al Jean , Mike Reiss , and Julie Kavner participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It was named the third best episode of The Simpsons by Sarah Culp of The Quindecim , and one of the ten best episodes by Jim Schembri of The Age . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , praised the episode for being one of the best Lisa @-@ centric episodes , and called Lisa 's talk with Thomas Jefferson and her nightmare vision of politicians as pigs " especially worthy of note . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a 4 @.@ 5 rating and said it is one of the best episodes featuring Lisa , " complete with poignant observations about politics . " He particularly enjoyed the appearance of Barbara Bush at the White House . The Austin American @-@ Statesman 's Steven Stein said this was the first episode of The Simpsons he saw . Even though he did not understand half of the pop culture references , by the end of the episode he was a " Simpsons convert . " He thought there was " something exotic about an issue as serious as political corruption being dealt with in a cartoon and being interrupted by jokes about beer and , yes , doughnuts . " 
 The episode was praised for its political satire . Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict called the episode a " biting political satire in the guise of a children 's oratory contest " , that " signifies that this season of the series will be all over the map , both emotionally and logically . " Gibron added : " Everything , from the Reader 's Digest rants to the formulaic speeches of the youths , has a resounding ring of truth . And once the story moves to Washington D.C , our nation 's capital is in for a royal <unk> as well . " Bryce Wilson of Cinema Blend said the episode solidified the series ' politically satirical voice as it " bitch slapped the Bush administration " that would later <unk> The Simpsons . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson , however , gave the episode a more negative review , stating that it " has its moments but never seems like one of the series ’ better programs . Part of that stems from its somewhat icky ending . The show exhibits a tone that feels more appropriate to a less biting and cynical series . It starts well with Homer ’ s obsession with Reading Digest . After that , the show seems more erratic , and it remains pretty average overall . " 
 = = = Response from the timber industry = = = 
 According to The Plain Dealer 's Rodney Ferguson , the timber industry was insulted by the scene in which a timber industry lobbyist offers a bribe to the corrupt congressman so that he can demolish Springfield Forest . The Oregon Lands Coalition , a pro @-@ timber group in Salem , Oregon , " bombarded " the producers of the show with phone calls and mail protesting the episode . The coalition said it portrayed loggers unfairly and is " allowing itself to be used by environmental extremists . " In an open letter to The Simpsons executive producer James L. Brooks , the coalition wrote : " Rather than approach this issue with genuine concern for Mother Earth , you took an easy shot at hard @-@ working people whose only crime is to have been born in a timber town . " Karen Clark , a payroll clerk for a timber company in <unk> , Oregon , said : " The Simpsons portrayed us as greedy , bribery @-@ type people . It didn 't portray us as the everyday people — mothers , fathers , good members of society — that we are . " Luke Popovich , vice president of the American Forest Council , wrote a letter to the show 's producer to protest " the fuzzy @-@ headed characterizations that pass for political correctness , the thinking in Hollywood where people are not very serious about these issues , but interested in pushing the right hot buttons , scoring the right points with audiences . " 
 The Simpsons creator Matt Groening responded to the criticism in an interview with TV Guide , in which he said he did " research on the ecological damage caused by clear @-@ cutting and over @-@ logging [ and ] it 's really appalling . " Jackie Lang , a timber industry activist in Salem who helped lead the protest against the Fox network and Groening , said she was appalled by Groening 's response , and " he will be sorry he ever made it . " Jake Hogan , supervising producer of the show , defended Groening : " [ The episodes ] are just little stories , little comedies — stories that make people laugh . " On October 15 , 1991 , Groening issued another statement the public , in which he said : " So now a few lumber companies have joined the nuclear power industry , right @-@ wing preachers and high @-@ ranking Republicans in attacking The Simpsons . We must be doing something right . I must point out The Simpsons is a cartoon show — not 60 Minutes . Later in the show , the same lobbyist proposed drilling for oil in Teddy Roosevelt 's head at Mount Rushmore . Please don 't tell the oil companies about this . " 
 David Reinhard of The Oregonian commented on the criticism : " Hollywood <unk> can always make a group from the great American hinterland look ridiculous when it zeroes in on one show , particularly if that show is a cartoon . And the Oregon Lands Coalition 's protest was a bit of an overreaction . But the environmental sloganeering of The Simpsons as well as Groening 's cartoon commentary are symptomatic of a Hollywood and a popular culture that are hostile to the concerns and values of most Americans . " After the episode aired , media researchers Robert Lichter and Linda S. Lichter found in a study of prime @-@ time television that when shows dealt with business themes , 89 percent portrayed businessmen as swindlers or liars . 
 The same day Groening released his second statement , The Simpsons publicist Antonia Coffman was invited by Wayne <unk> , sales manager of Hull @-@ Oakes Lumber Co. in <unk> , Oregon , to visit Oregon and see " responsible timber management . " <unk> said they wanted to show the producers " how we log , how we manufacture , what goods we produce for everyone and how we replant for future generations . What most timber companies are interested in is a balanced program . " 
 = History of the flags of Romania = 
 The colors of the national flag of Romania ( Romanian : <unk> României ) have a long history . Red , yellow and blue were found on late 16th @-@ century royal grants of Michael the Brave , as well as shields and banners . Thus , the late 13th century <unk> armorial shows the coat of arms of the Wallachian ruler Litovoi as consisting of a shield of ten vertically alternating gold @-@ and @-@ red bands , which were the colors of the coat of arms of the Second Bulgarian Empire , of which Wallachia was part . The same two colors , gules and or , also appeared on the late 15th century flag and coat of arms of Moldavia , during the reign of Stephen the Great [ 1 ] . Then , from the late 16th century until the mid @-@ 17th century , the historical coat of arms of Transylvania gradually developed as a shield party per fess , consisting of a black eagle on blue background in the upper field , a dividing red band in the middle , and seven red towers on golden background in the lower field . Finally , in the last quarter of the 18th century , Bukovina gets its own coat of arms from the Habsburg Empire , a blue @-@ and @-@ red shield party per pale with a black aurochs ' head in the middle , and three golden six @-@ pointed stars surrounding it . During the Wallachian uprising of 1821 , they were present on the canvas of the revolutionaries ' flag and its fringes ; for the first time a meaning was attributed to them : " Liberty ( sky @-@ blue ) , Justice ( field yellow ) , Fraternity ( blood red ) " . 
 = = Tricolor = = 
 The tricolor was first adopted in Wallachia in 1834 , when the reforming domnitor Alexandru II Ghica submitted naval and military colors designs for the approval of Sultan Mahmud II . The latter was a “ flag with a red , blue and yellow face , also having stars and a bird ’ s head in the middle ” . Soon , the order of colors was changed , with yellow appearing in the center . When the flags were handed over for use , Ghica remarked : 
 In 1840 , in order to differentiate the military colors from the war flag , Ghica adopted a new design for the former : a red @-@ yellow @-@ blue tricolor , with red on top and stripes of equal width . In the center was a white shield bordered with gold and decorated with the Wallachian eagle , wearing the princely crown and with a cross in its beak . 
 In 1848 , the flag adopted for Wallachia by the revolutionaries that year was a blue @-@ yellow @-@ red tricolor ( with blue above , in line with the meaning “ Liberty , Justice , Fraternity ” ) . Already on 26 April , according to Gazeta de Transilvania , Romanian students in Paris were hailing the new government with a blue , gold and red national flag , “ as a symbol of union between Moldavians and <unk> ” . 
 Decree nr . 1 of 14 / 26 June 1848 of the provisional government mentioned that “ the National Flag will have three colors : blue , yellow , red ” , emblazoned with the words “ <unk> <unk> ” ( <unk> , <unk> or “ Justice , Fraternity ” , in the Romanian transitional alphabet ) . It differed from earlier tricolors in that the blue stripe was on top , the princely symbol was eliminated from the corners , as was the crown atop the eagle at the end of the flagpole , while a motto was now present . These flags were blessed the following day , being intended for use by the National Guard . Today only the Slatina city guard ’ s flag survives . On the blue stripe appear the words ( <unk> <unk> or “ Fraternity , Justice ” ) , on the yellow — ( <unk> <unk> or “ Olt County ” ) and on the red — ( <unk> Slatina or “ The City of Slatina ” ) . It is 124 centimeter long and 110 centimeter wide . The existence of similar flags is confirmed by records , which in some cases even mention the manufacturer ’ s price . Thus , the police observer ’ s flag ( made of <unk> or cloth <unk> on both sides ) and that of the Bucharest dorobanţi detachment ( made of Tibet wool ) together cost 192 lei and 10 <unk> . Decree nr . 5 of 18 June ordered garrisons to store old flags in warehouses : “ it being necessary to change flags , new flags will soon be sent to you ” . On 25 June , General Christian Tell asked the provisional government to approve the manufacture of six flags ( three for the infantry and three for the cavalry ) , following which they would be “ submitted to the provisional government for approval ” . His request was granted on 11 July , though the flags were not distributed until 11 September , in a solemn ceremony . On 30 June , Metropolitan Neofit , as prime minister , gave the following disposition : “ the standards of liberty will be raised on all buildings , and the insignia will be carried ” . These symbols were widely employed in demonstrations and raised on public buildings , boats , warships , etc . 
 Nevertheless , decree nr . 252 of 13 / 25 July 1848 , issued because “ it has not [ yet ] been agreed how the national standards should be designed ” , defined the flag as three vertical stripes , possibly influenced by the French model . The shades were “ dark blue , light yellow and carmine red ” ; as for order , “ near the wood comes blue , then yellow and then red fluttering ” . 
 Petre <unk> @-@ Năsturel observes that from a heraldic point of view , on the French as well as the revolutionary Wallachian flag , the middle stripe represents a heraldic metal ( argent and or respectively ) . Other writers believe that the tricolor was not an imitation of the French flag , instead embodying an old Romanian tradition . This theory is supported by a note from the revolutionary foreign minister to Emin Pasha : “ the colors of the band that we the leaders wear , as well as all our followers , are not of modern origin . We have had our flags since an earlier time . When we received the tricolor insignia and bands we did not follow the spirit of imitation or fashion ” . 
 Earlier , at the Sibiu Conference of 26 April / 8 May 1848 , Transylvanian revolutionaries had also adopted a blue @-@ white @-@ red national flag ( vertical , according to the memoirs of George <unk> ) . It was emblazoned with the words “ <unk> <unk> <unk> ” ( “ <unk> <unk> <unk> ” ) . A number of contemporary sources attests these colors ( including the Blaj newspaper <unk> <unk> and Alexandru <unk> <unk> ’ s <unk> a <unk> din Dacia <unk> ) . They had a twofold significance : their importance in Romanian costume and their union of the Transylvanian principality ’ s old colors ( blue and red ) with the white symbolizing peace . It appears that the two specimens with blue @-@ yellow @-@ red stripes preserved today at the National Museum of Romanian History were made later to commemorate the events at Blaj ; yellow replaced white as a symbol of Romanian Transylvanians ’ desire to join Romania . 
 After the revolution was quelled , the old flags were restored and the revolutionaries punished for having worn the tricolor . In 1849 , domnitor Barbu Dimitrie <unk> adopted a new design for military colors that nevertheless preserved the colors ’ horizontal layout and only changed decorative elements . Similar to the 1834 flag , this one lasted until 1856 . 
 During the <unk> of three ( October 1858 @-@ January 1859 ) , as the acting regents did not have the right to inscribe their initials on military flags , the monograms of the Wallachian <unk> were replaced by eagles . 
 = = = Merger legend = = = 
 After 1860 , a legend arose stating that the national tricolor had been formed by merging the colors of the Moldavian and Wallachian flags , probably out of a desire to reconcile all parties to the choice of the Wallachian revolutionary flag of 1848 for all of Romania . This legend was also convenient with respect to the colors attributed to the two principalities ’ flags at the time ( red and blue for Moldavia and blue and yellow for Wallachia ) . 
 The legend inspired a number of artworks , including a painting by Constantin Lecca . Wishing to depict the brotherhood between Moldavians and Wallachians , he chose a passage from the Bistriţa Chronicle : “ In the year <unk> ( 1506 ) , October 28 , prince Ioan Bogdan Voievod entered the <unk> land with all his troops to the place <unk> , near the hillock <unk> , on that side of the <unk> ; and there arrived an emissary from Radu Voievod [ ... ] who begged prince Bogdan Voievod to make peace with Radu Voievod , because ‘ you are Christians and from the same people ’ ( said he ) ; and many words were exchanged between them and much begging was made [ ... ] and prince Bogdan Voievod , seeing so much begging , followed his wishes and made peace ” . Lecca ’ s painting shows the two <unk> shaking hands in the center . The flags of Moldavia ( blue @-@ red ) and of Wallachia ( yellow @-@ blue ) can also be seen , although these color combinations have not been attested prior to 1832 – 34 . 
 P. V. Năsturel contests this legend , noting that the red @-@ yellow @-@ blue tricolor predated the union of the principalities and that the three colors , arrayed vertically , represent the flag of the Romanian nation in all lands inhabited by Romanians . 
 In 1848 , the tricolor was present in <unk> and Râmnicu <unk> ( on opposite sides of the principalities ’ border ) during demonstrations of fraternity held by Moldavians and Wallachians , while in 1857 , around the time of the Moldavian Ad hoc Divan , the civilian population adopted the tricolor as a symbol of union , a fact observed by Count Alexandre Walewski , French foreign minister . 
 Also that year , the minister of foreign affairs of the Wallachian provisional government assured the extraordinary envoy of the Porte , Suleiman Pasha , that the flag 's three colors had existed “ for a long time ; our ancestors bore them on their standard and their flags . So they are not a borrowing or an imitation from the present or a threat for the future ” . 
 Another of Lecca ’ s paintings shows the assassination of Michael the Brave in 1601 . Also depicted is the united standard of the three provinces , with yellow on top ( Wallachia ) , red in the middle ( Moldavia ) and blue below ( Transylvania ) . This hypothesis of the three colors ' union has appeared in historical literature , also engendering skepticism regarding the arguments deployed in its favor . 
 = = Flags of the United Principalities = = 
 On 6 February 1859 , on his first journey to Bucharest since being elected domnitor of Wallachia , Alexandru Ioan Cuza was greeted at the edge of the city of Buzău by the commander of the dorobanţi , who was carrying a tricolor flag . The sight deeply moved Cuza . 
 Until 1861 the old flags of Moldavia and Wallachia were used alongside the tricolor . On 22 June of that year , Cuza decreed the tricolor as the United Principalities ’ official civil flag . 
 The flag was the red @-@ yellow @-@ blue Romanian tricolor , with horizontal stripes . Neither the order of stripes nor the proportion of the civil flag are known . This is first described in <unk> <unk> din 1866 : “ the tricolor flag , divided in three stripes , red , yellow and blue and laid out horizontally : red above , blue below and yellow in the middle ” . Some sources suggest that the top stripe was blue until 1862 ( as in the revolutionary Wallachian tricolor of 1848 ) , replaced that year by red . An approximate ratio of 1 : 3 has been suggested , although the princely and army flags , both preserved , had a 2 : 3 proportion . As for symbolism , P. V. Năsturel asserts that “ from 1859 to 1866 it represented just what it had done in 1848 : liberty , justice , fraternity " . 
 The flag gained a degree of international recognition . Relating prince Cuza ’ s May – June 1864 journey to Constantinople , doctor Carol Davila observed : “ The Romanian flag was raised on the great mast , the Sultan ’ s kayaks awaited us , the guard was armed , the Grand Vizier at the door ... The Prince , quiet , dignified , concise in his speech , spent 20 minutes with the Sultan , who then came to review us ... Once again , the Grand Vizier led the Prince to the main gate and we returned to the Europe Palace , the Romanian flag still fluttering on the mast ... ” 
 = = = Princely flag = = = 
 A rather worn tricolor is found today in the collections of the National Museum of Romanian History , with inventory number <unk> . Rectangular in shape ( with a 2 : 3 ratio ) , it is made up of three silk strips laid out horizontally ( with red on top . In the center @-@ right of the flag is painted the Wallachian eagle , a cross in its beak and clutching the symbols of princely power , while the Moldavian aurochs appears on the center @-@ left , a six @-@ pointed star between its horns . Six inclined tricolor flags surround the two symbols ( three on the left and three on the right ) ; their flagpoles probably crossed near the bottom , which is now lost . Each flag has a blue ribbon above it and at the tips of their flagpoles are found , one on each side , a Wallachian eagle , the edge of a lance and a Moldavian aurochs . On the red strip are found stitched a princely crown , situated in the center so as to mark the two coats of arms , and the statement “ <unk> <unk> — <unk> <unk> . <unk> A. <unk> I ! ” ( “ The Union of the Principalities — the joy of Romanians . Long Live A. Ioan I ! ” ) on both sides of the crown and now partially faded . The flagpole ends in a metal sphere topped by an eagle . 
 Researchers differ on the origin and date of this flag . Col. Dr. Alexandru Vasile and Dr. Maria <unk> consider that this was the United Principalities ’ official flag . The latter dates it to 1859 , the period immediately after the Union , as does Dan <unk> . Mario to believes it was a military colors used between 1859 and 1861 . 
 Elena <unk> and Cornelia Apostol believe it was a princely flag designed in 1862 , after the full union of the two entities , proclaimed on 11 / 24 December 1861 . Indeed , Cuza only adopted the title “ Alexandru Ion I ” after this date . 
 After Cuza ’ s abdication , the flag was kept at the Bucharest Army Arsenal until 1919 , when it was transferred to the National Military Museum . It has been at its present location since 1971 . 
 It seems that this specimen was preceded by another , dating to 1859 , featuring a tricolor canvas with somewhat smaller dimensions . In this flag , the blue strip is on top , while the two principalities ’ coats of arms are no longer surrounded by flags . Today the inscription on the blue strip is illegible , but differed from that found on the other flag . 
 Another princely flag , rather different from contemporary designs , is a silk tricolor with vertical stripes ( blue hoist ) and a princely crown painted in the center . It was raised whenever the domnitor was present at <unk> Castle . Today it is found at the Suceava History Museum , part of the Bukovina Museum Complex . 
 = = = Military colors = = = 
 Article 45 of the Paris Convention ( 1858 ) provided that “ the armies of both countries will keep their present flags ; but these flags will feature , in the future , a blue banderole , in conformity with the design attached to the present Convention ” . 
 On 18 March 1863 , the War Minister , General Ion Emanuel Florescu , asked Cuza to approve a design for army flags , agreed upon by the government in its session of 12 March . The flags featured the national tricolor ( horizontal stripes , with red on top ) , over which was a Roman eagle with a cross in its beak . In a solemn order of the day on 19 March , Cuza decided : “ Considering that the army , following the union , should have but one flag ; keeping in mind that the true emblem of Romania can only be the Roman eagle , [ ... ] we have decreed and do decree what follows : the Roman eagle with cross in its mouth shall be placed , as the emblem of Romania , above the army ’ s flags [ ... ] ” 
 The resulting designs , distributed on 1 September 1863 , differ somewhat from those legislated in March . This , the Roman eagle , wings outstretched , wearing the princely crown , carries the princely scepter in its right talon and the sword in its left ; on its breast appears an open shield topped by the princely crown . On the left of the shield , over azure and gold , is the Wallachian eagle ( a cross in its beak , in left profile and wearing the princely crown ) ; on the right , over red and azure , is the Moldavian aurochs with a star between its horns . Hanging from the scepter and sword is a red ribbon with gold @-@ embossed letters : “ HONOR ET <unk> ” ( “ honor and Fatherland ” ) . In the fly corners the prince ’ s initial is stitched , surrounded by a laurel wreath ; all are golden . Each flag also had inscribed the unit that bore it . The cloth part was 122 centimeter long and 100 centimeter wide . A metal Roman eagle was affixed to the tip of the flagpole . Although the order of 19 March had the Moldavian symbol in the right , nevertheless the first on the shield is the Wallachian eagle . The design was most likely adopted due to customary usage that arose after Bucharest became the single capital in February 1862 . 
 These flags were distributed to the following units : 
 With the occasion of handing over the flags , Cuza delivered the following speech : 
 These flags were used until 1866 when , after Cuza ’ s abdication , they were changed . Four army flags of the 1863 design are preserved today . 
 = = Romanian flags until 1918 = = 
 Article 124 of the 1866 Constitution of Romania provided that “ the colors of the United Principalities will be Blue , Yellow and Red ” . The order and placement of the colors were decided by the Assembly of Deputies in its session of 26 March 1867 . Thus , following a proposal by Nicolae Golescu , they were placed just as in 1848 . The commission ’ s work continued on 30 March as well ; following an affirmative vote by the Senate , these wrapped up with the adoption , on 12 / 24 April 1867 , of the “ Law for fixing the arms of Romania ” . 
 According to this , the flag ’ s colors had to be placed vertically in the following order : blue hoist , yellow in the middle and red fly . The country ’ s coat of arms was placed only on army and princely flags , in the center ; civilian flags remained without a coat of arms . The same distinction was made between flags for the naval war fleet and the civilian fleet . 
 The rapporteur Mihail Kogălniceanu , who also conveyed the opinion of Cezar Bolliac , Dimitrie Brătianu , Constantin Grigorescu , Ion <unk> , Nicolae Golescu and Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino , said : “ The tricolor flag as it is today is not ( as the minister claims ) the flag of the Union of the principalities . It is much more : it is itself the flag of the Romanian nation in all lands inhabited by Romanians ” . 
 The “ Law for modifying the country ’ s arms ” of 11 / 23 March 1872 did not change these provisions , only the design of the coat of arms . The design proposed by Ştefan Dimitrie <unk> was adopted . 
 = = = Princely and royal standard = = = 
 According to the laws of 1867 and 1872 , the princely ( later royal ) standard was identical to that of the army , with the country ’ s coat of arms in the center . 
 Nevertheless , when these were produced a slightly different design was adopted : the yellow stripe was twice as wide as the red and blue ones , and the canvas had a 1 : 1 ratio . Each corner of the flag had sewn into it a silver royal crown . The crown prince ’ s standard was identical except that it lacked the crowns in the corners . 
 An album dating to the end of the 19th century and the October 1917 National Geographic Magazine show the flags as having stripe ratios of 1 : 3 : 1 . 
 = = = Military colors = = = 
 Right after Alexander John Cuza ’ s abdication , the military units ’ military colors were replaced with a new 1866 design ; instead of the coat of arms , the name of the company appeared on the standards . However , the eagle at the edge of the flagpole was preserved . 
 The flags distributed to the Civic Guard , re @-@ established in March 1866 , had a different design — the colors were vertical , in the center was found the respective city ’ s coat of arms and not the national one , and the eagle at the end of the lance was larger and featured the shield of the United Principalities on its breast . P. V. Năsturel classifies these as 1867 design flags and describes them in detail : the canvas was 114 centimeter long and 95 centimeter wide ( so a 5 : 6 ratio ) and in the center was painted the respective city ’ s coat of arms , covered with a golden mural crown . In the corners , surrounded by laurel wreaths , the number of the legion was stitched in Roman numerals . Golden fringes surrounded the canvas , with tassels from the same fabric hanging at the corners . The eagle at the end of the flagpole had its wings facing downward , had the princely crown on its head and carried a sceptre in its right hand and a sword in its left ; all were made of gold . A shield was carved into the eagle ’ s breast , with the Wallachian eagle in the first half and the Moldavian aurochs ’ head in the second . Above the sword and sceptre a ribbon passed bearing the inscription “ Honor et Patria ” . On 11 September 1867 , Prince Carol I solemnly handed over these flags to the Civic Guards . 
 In 1873 it was decided that the 1866 design military flags would be replaced with the 1872 design , following the Law for the modification of the national coat of arms of 1872 . Design @-@ wise , these fall into several generations . 
 Flags produced in 1873 ( 24 flags and 10 standards ) , of which only one , the Firemen ’ s , survived in 1900 , were square , 150 centimeter on each side . In its center was painted , on a maroon background surrounded by a closed wreath of silver laurels , Romania ’ s middle coat of arms . The monogram of Prince Carol was in the corners , surrounded by a laurel crown , while the flagpole was topped by a metal eagle with the motto “ <unk> şi Patria ” ( " honor and Fatherland " ) as well as the unit ’ s number and name . The cavalry flags had canvases of reduced dimensions ( 45 centimeter ) , while the decorative elements were <unk> and not painted . All these insignia were distributed to the units on 14 October 1874 , on the field at <unk> . 
 Flags produced between 1877 and 1882 differ slightly from the preceding ones . On 17 July 1877 , just ten units created after 1874 received this design , at the <unk> army headquarters . On this occasion , Prince Carol addressed the following words to his troops : “ In giving you the corps ’ flag , I entrust the honor of Romania , which I thus place under the shield of courage , to your devotion and self @-@ denial . For the first time the solemn occasion arises where you receive the flag on the day before going onto the field of honor ; seek to crown it with an undying glory . Never forget that the flag is the symbol of the fatherland ... ” 
 These two categories of flags were replaced with new ones in 1902 , on the 25th anniversary of the Romanian War of Independence . 
 Small details differentiate flags produced between 1882 and 1897 from their predecessors . The canvas was square , 156 centimeter to a side ; a ribbon of tricolored thread ending in tassels was attached to the flagpole . The lions holding up the coat of arms had gold teeth and claws this time , while the coat of arms was no longer bordered in maroon . In the middle of the shield , the coat of arms of the House of Hohenzollern was surrounded by a gold border . 
 These three generations were realized by the Romanian state at Berlin ’ s <unk> et Comp house . In 1896 , war minister Anton Berindei , observing that “ the way in which [ the flags ] are woven and the materials used leave something to be desired , as their canvas gets cut and breaks ” , addressed an order to General Ioan Argetoianu , president of the joint commission and inspector general of the military engineers : “ I have the honor of asking you to take measures so that the commission over which you preside can make a detailed description of the flags and standards in existence , on the materials from which they must be produced , dimensions , etc . In the work to be done the law of 8 March 1872 [ ... ] which decided the national insignia and flag , will be kept in mind ” . 
 Thus , beginning with the 1897 design flags , the ratio was 2 : 3 , the entire national coat of arms appeared in the center ( with modifications made after 1881 ) , and the wreath that surrounded it was sometimes open . 
 Most of the flags belonging to divisions that took part in World War I were handed to them in 1902 or in 1908 @-@ 1916 , and were used until 1929 when they were transferred to the Military Museum . These are similar to the 1897 design , although after King Carol died on 10 October 1914 , King Ferdinand ’ s monogram began appearing in the corners . Their dimensions vary from 90 × 65 centimeter to 115 × 73 centimeter . 
 Along with the military colors , through High decrees nr . 355 of February 1871 and nr . 1467 of 21 August 1873 , designs for stakes were defined for each infantry corps , as well as battalion pennants . The latter substituted for military colors where necessary ( each regiment had just a single flag ) , and were vertical tricolors , as provided by the 1867 and 1872 laws regarding Romania ’ s coats of arms . 
 A flag was also established for Romania ’ s Coast Guard . According to the October 1917 National Geographic , this was identical to the national flag , except that the yellow stripe featured a blue anchor and cable , above which was a silver royal crown . 
 Also in this period there appeared laws and regulations providing how the military colors should be used , guarded and saluted . Thus , High decree nr . 1451 of 18 August 1873 specified that the flag should be carried by the regiment ’ s adjutant junior officer , aided by the flag @-@ bearing officer . Likewise , the composition of the infantry ’ s flag guard was regulated . This was composed of five sergeants , of whom two in the first row , flanking the adjutant junior officer and having the assistant officer on the right , and three in the second row , behind the first . The “ Regulation concerning infantry exercises and maneuvers ” provided that during military maneuvers the flag ( or pennant ) should be in the center of the second battalion if the regiment was composed of three battalions or in the center of the first battalion if the regiment had only two . The flag @-@ bearer , chosen by the colonel , was not integrated into any subdivision of the battalion . The same regulation listed in its index the honors due to the flag , as well as the manner of saluting with the flag , with the specification that this was reserved for the princely family . 
 = = = Romanian flags in Transylvania , Banat , Bukovina and Bessarabia = = = 
 Transylvania , Banat , Bukovina and Bessarabia were provinces of the Austro @-@ Hungarian and Russian empires with substantial Romanian populations . In 1918 , the year they joined Romania , favorable conditions arose for the Romanians there to express openly their desire to unite with the “ Motherland ” . 
 In Bessarabia , the Moldavian Democratic Republic was created on 2 December 1917 and declared independence on 24 January 1918 . In May 1917 , the heraldist Paul Gore had written a Russian @-@ language study , “ The National colors of the Romanians in Bessarabia ” , which sought to demonstrate that <unk> should use the Romanian tricolor correctly : “ A certain esteem for the national past and just a little courage are needed to defend your national legal rights . In no way do I insist that our national flag composed of three stripes colored blue , yellow and red have these stripes arranged vertically . Let these stripes , in the order indicated , be horizontal . But the colors and their order we must preserve , especially because all three of these colors are also in the Coat of Arms of Bessarabia , which represents , if we eliminate the border made up of the Imperial colors , precisely the ancient coat of arms of the Moldavian Principality , and it is known that flags must be designed according to the exact rules of heraldry , according to the colors of the field and the emblems of the corresponding coats of arms ” . 
 With this perspective in mind , the heraldist Silviu <unk> @-@ Tabac considers Gore the moral author of the flag of the Moldavian Democratic Republic . This was a blue @-@ yellow @-@ red tricolor with horizontal stripes and the coat of arms in the center of the yellow field and the inscription “ Republica <unk> <unk> şi <unk> ” ( “ The Moldavian and Independent Democratic Republic ” ) in the center of the blue field . The flag of <unk> <unk> was similar , except that “ <unk> <unk> ” was written on the blue field and the coat of arms , with larger dimensions , was placed in the middle , over yellow and red . 
 The republic ’ s military colors were fashioned “ several weeks before 6 December [ 1917 ] , when the parade of Moldavian troops from Bessarabia took place ” . These were also tricolors ; on one side was written the regiment ’ s number in silver thread , and on the other , stretching all across the flag , the letters “ R M ” . 
 In Transylvania , many Romanian flags were produced in anticipation of the Great National Assembly at Alba Iulia . These were horizontal blue @-@ yellow @-@ red tricolors , echoing the 1848 revolution . The images on glass captured at the Assembly by photographer <unk> <unk> show a massive throng above whom flutter numerous such flags , some of the canvases inscribed with a motto . 
 The National Museum of Romanian History holds three flags from Assembly participants and the coat of arms of a fourth , which belonged to the Alba Iulia national guard . The first tricolor has dimensions of 235 × 100 centimeter , and each of its stripes ends on the fly in a corner with the tip turned outside . The wooden flagpole is painted black . On second tricolor , 130 × 75 centimeter , just the yellow and red stripes survive , and both end in a corner with the tip on the outside . The third flag is woolen and 190 × 120 centimeter . Its colored stripes all end in a sharp angle with the tip outside ; to each one is sewn a tassel in the respective color . A tricolor ribbon with a tassel on either end is attached to the flagpole . 
 = = Flags of Greater Romania = = 
 After Greater Romania came into being , the tricolor remained the official flag , with stripes arranged vertically and without a coat of arms in the center . 
 = = = Royal standards = = = 
 On 24 April 1922 new designs for royal standards were adopted . 
 The king ’ s standard consisted of a red @-@ maroon square flag , bordered by a yellow strip with blue triangles . There were thirteen blue triangles to a side , with an additional four in the corners . The country ’ s lesser coat of arms was found in the middle of the flag ; beneath it was placed the cross of the Order of Michael the Brave . After ascending the throne in 1930 , King Carol II stretched the cross to the edge of the standard , “ as a symbol of heroic royalty ” , and placed the lesser coat of arms above it . When his remains were returned to Romania in 2003 , his coffin was draped in this standard . 
 The queen ’ s standard was similar to the king ’ s , but the cross was missing . The crown prince ’ s standard was dark blue , with a red border and yellow triangles ; the lesser coat of arms was in the center . The royal princes ’ flag was similar but lacked a border . In 1940 , when Queen Helen returned to Romania , a flag was designed for the queen mother . This was similar to the queen ’ s standard but also lacked a border . 
 = = = Flags and standards of public officials = = = 
 Contemporary <unk> albums ( for instance the 1939 edition of Flaggenbuch ) display a number of flags and standards of interwar Romanian public officials . The war minister ’ s flag was a tricolor square with the letter “ M ” in white found on the blue stripe . The other ministers had similar flags but without the “ M ” . The jack employed by Romanian vessels was a yellow square bordered red with the coat of arms in the center . The ship captains ’ standard was the national flag with a royal crown in the center . Pilot boats ’ standard consisted of a national flag bordered in white . The flag ’ s ratio was 3 : 6 and the thickness of the border 2 ; altogether , it had a 10 : 13 ratio . River police had as their standard a blue square with a white “ P ” in the center . The standard of the postal division of the Romanian Maritime Service had a white field ( ratio 4 : 5 ) , with the fly ending in a sharp interior angle . A square national flag with the royal crown in the center appeared in the canton . A blue cord hung from the tricolor , catching a golden postal horn . 
 = = = Military colors = = = 
 Military flags were tricolors with the national coat of arms painted in the center . In the corners were found the golden monograms of Kings Ferdinand I , Carol II ( two designs ) or Michael I , crowned and surrounded by a wreath of golden oak leaves . The flagpoles ended in a metal eagle with wings facing downward , crowned and carrying a cross in its beak . 
 = = = Naval flags = = = 
 Admirals ’ flags ( including <unk> and rear admirals ’ ) , shown in the 1939 Flaggenbuch , were square Romanian tricolors . The Chief of the Naval General Staff had two white stars on the blue stripe of his flag and two crossed anchors ; the three elements were one beneath the other . The vice admiral ’ s flag did not have the anchors , while the rear admiral ’ s standard had just one star on the blue stripe . 
 Naval captains and commanders had a longer red stripe on their standard , ending in an angle pointing inward ; the ratio was about 11 : 13 . Deputy commanders of ships had a tricolored triangle for their emblem , in a 2 : 3 ratio . 
 = = = Naval flags of World War II = = = 
 Shortly before World War II , the flags of military vessels were changed . A specific design was adopted , the yellow portion taking the form of a cross with widened arms . The following models are shown in Flaggenbuch , 1939 : 
 = = Flags of the Romanian People ’ s Republic = = 
 On 30 December 1947 , Romania was proclaimed a people ’ s republic and all the kingdom ’ s symbols were outlawed , including the coats of arms and the tricolor flags that showed them . On 8 January 1948 , Decree nr . 3 was issued , regarding specifications for the powers of the Presidium of the Romanian People ’ s Republic . At article 7 , this provided that the republic ’ s new coat of arms should be “ composed of : a tractor , a group of three chimneys against the field of a rising sun , surrounded by bound ears of wheat , tied by a ribbon with the inscription Republica <unk> Română and the initials R. P. R. at the end of the ears ” . Article 8 dealt with the national flag : “ the colors of the Romanian People ’ s Republic are : blue , yellow and red , arranged vertically , and having in the center of the yellow field the Coat of Arms of the Republic ” . 
 According to article 101 of the 1948 Constitution , “ The flag of the Romanian People ’ s Republic is composed of the colors : blue , yellow and red , arranged vertically . In the middle is placed the national coat of arms ” . The 1952 Constitution , at article 103 , added a little detail : “ The flag of the Romanian People ’ s Republic has the colors red , yellow and blue , arranged vertically with blue near the lance . In the middle is placed the coat of arms of the Romanian People ’ s Republic ” . Neither the colors ’ shades nor the flag ’ s proportions were specified . According to provisions of the 1952 Constitution , a five @-@ pointed red star appeared at the upper edge of the coat of arms ( itself altered in March 1948 ) , something that was also reflected on flags and official Romanian standards . 
 = = = Military colors ; standards = = = 
 On 28 July 1950 the Great National Assembly issued Decree nr . 189 for the establishment of the military colors of the Armed Forces of the Romanian People ’ s Republic , as well as standards for the Military Air Force and the Naval Forces . Article 2 defined the units ’ military colors as follows : “ three silk stripes colored red , yellow and blue , arranged vertically with blue situated near the flagpole . On the edges the flag has yellow metal fringes of wire , while the fly corners each have a tassel of the same wire . On the side oriented from the flagpole to the right , in the middle , is placed the coat of arms of the R. P. R. in natural colors . Above the coat of arms , on the same side , in an arched line , is written with letters of golden wire : ‘ Pentru Patria noastră ’ ( ‘ For our Fatherland ’ ) . On the other side and in the middle of the flag , the emblem worn on the uniforms of officers of the Armed Forces of the R. P. R. is applied . Under the emblem is written straight , with letters of golden wire , the unit ’ s name . The flagpole ends in an ogive @-@ shaped tip , within which is found a five @-@ pointed star , in the center of which are written the initials RPR ” . The law ’ s annex also specified the dimensions of the flag ( 100 centimeter long by 60 centimeter wide ) , the coat of arms and the emblem ( 20 centimeter high ) , the fringes ( 5 centimeter long ) , the flagpole ( 250 centimeter long ) and of the ogive ( 15 centimeter long by 7 centimeter wide ) . 
 Article 3 described the Air Force ensign : “ it is made of sky @-@ blue silk . The ensign is rectangular , with each face having applied to it 18 red silk strips in the form of sunrays . On the edges , the ensign has fringes and tassels the same as on the military colors . In the middle of the face oriented from the flagpole to the right is affixed the coat of arms of the R. P. R. , while in the middle of the other face is affixed the emblem worn on the uniforms of officers belonging to the Armed Forces of the R. P. R. The coat of arms of the R. P. R. , the emblem and the inscriptions are identical to those of the military colors ” . The annex specified the dimensions of the ensign and the decorative elements , which were identical to those of the military colors . In the center of the flag , a ray had an angle of 10 ˚ . Also specified was the shade of blue to be used on the flag : “ iron blue ” . 
 Article 4 described the Romanian Navy ’ s ensign thus : “ made of two pieces of white and blue silk , rectangular , laid horizontally , the blue one , beneath , having a width of 20 centimeter , while the white one , above , having a width of 40 centimeter . The coat of arms of the R. P. R. is applied to the middle of the white surface on the face oriented from the flagpole to the right , while on the other face , also in the middle of the while surface , the emblem worn on the uniforms of officers belonging to the Armed Forces of the R. P. R. is applied . The coat of arms , the emblem , the inscriptions , the fringes and the tassels are the same as those of the military colors ” . The annex specified the flag ’ s dimensions ( also 100 × 60 centimeter ) and those of the coat of arms ( also 20 centimeter high ) , as well as its distance to the edges of the white strip ( 11 centimeter above and 9 centimeter below ) . The words “ Pentru Patria noastră ” ( “ For our Fatherland ” ) were found on the white strip above the coat of arms , while “ Republica <unk> Română ” and the unit ’ s name were placed in the middle of the blue strip . 
 Decree nr . 190 of 1950 , published in the same issue of <unk> Oficial , established the design of Army soldiers ’ , officers ’ and generals ’ emblems . The officers ’ emblem was a five @-@ pointed , red @-@ enamelled star 34 centimeter in diameter . In the center were two circles : the first , with a radius of 15 centimeter , was enamelled yellow and touched the star ’ s interior angles , while the second , which had a radius of 11 centimeter , was enamelled blue and in the center had the golden initials “ R. P. R. ” 
 The following year , Decree nr . 124 of 20 July 1951 for the modification of art . 4 of Decree nr . 189 altered the Navy ’ s ensign . The new regulation provided for three separate insignia : the flag of Navy land units , the flag of Navy ships and the flag of Coast Guard ships . 
 The Navy ’ s land units had as their flag “ two pieces of silk , colored white and blue , rectangular in shape , laid horizontally , the blue piece below , and the white one above . In the middle of the white area facing from the flagpole to the right is affixed the coat of arms of the Romanian People ’ s Republic , in natural colors , while on the other side , also in the middle of the white area , is affixed the symbol worn on the uniforms of officers belonging to the Armed Forces of the Romanian People ’ s Republic . The coat of arms , emblem , inscriptions , fringes and tassels are the same as those of the military colors described in article 2 [ of Decree nr . 189 of 1950 ] ” . According to this decree ’ s annex , the flag ’ s dimensions were 100 × 60 centimeter , the blue strip being 20 centimeter wide and the white 40 centimeter , the coat of arms was 20 centimeter high and it was 11 centimeter away from the top edge of the white strip and 9 centimeter away from the bottom . 
 Navy ships had an ensign consisting of a “ piece of ordinary rectangular canvas , with the colors white and blue printed on either side , in two stripes laid horizontally , the blue one below . The coat of arms of the Romanian People ’ s Republic , in natural colors , is affixed to the middle of the white area on both sides . The ensign does not have fringes or tassels [ and ] is supplied with cords and a mechanism for raising it on the stern beam or the mast ” . The ensign for Coast Guard ships was different from that of Navy ships only in the color of the lower stripe — Coast Guard green . The law ’ s annex described proportions for the ensign ’ s various elements ; the actual dimensions were to be fixed by the Armed Forces Ministry and the Interior Ministry depending on the ship ’ s size and the place where the ensign was raised . Thus , the flag was 0 @.@ 6 times as wide as it was long , being divided thus : 1 ⁄ 3 colored stripe and 2 ⁄ 3 white stripe . The coat of arms was to be 1 ⁄ 3 the height of the flag ’ s width , being placed 1 ⁄ 6 of this width away from the edges of the white stripe . 
 Between 1953 and 1964 , due to a spelling reform , the country ’ s name was written on flags as <unk> and not România . 
 Decree nr . 93 of 17 April 1954 for the modification of art . 4 of Decree nr . 189 established new <unk> devices : the ensign of auxiliary Navy ships ( the previous ensign continuing in use only for battleships ) and pennants for Navy battleships , auxiliary Navy ships and Coast Guard vessels . 
 The ensign of auxiliary Navy ships was made of an “ ordinary canvas , rectangular and blue . In the upper corner on the side where it attaches to the cord , it has imprinted on both sides the colors white and light blue , in two horizontal stripes , the white one above . To the middle of the white area , on both sides , is affixed the coat of arms of the Romanian People ’ s Republic , in natural colors ” . This ensign ’ s proportions were indicated in the annex . It was 0 @.@ 6 times as wide as it was long : the upper left part of the standard was similar in proportion to the basic elements of the battleship standard , while its dimensions were 0 @.@ 5 of the flag ’ s length and 0 @.@ 3 of its width . 
 Navy and Coast Guard vessels had a masthead pennant made of an “ ordinary rectangular canvas , red for Navy battleships , blue for auxiliary Navy ships and green for Coast Guard ships [ the width is 0 @.@ 6 of the length ] . At the edge near the cord , the colors white and light blue are imprinted on both sides , in two horizontal stripes , for Navy ships and white and light green on Coast Guard ships [ in proportions of 2 ⁄ 3 and 1 ⁄ 3 respectively ; this area ’ s length is 0 @.@ 075 that of the pennant ’ s length ] . In both cases white shall be above . The coat of arms of the Romanian People ’ s Republic , in natural colors is affixed to the middle of the white area on both sides [ with a height 1 ⁄ 3 of the pennant ’ s width and located 1 ⁄ 4 and 1 ⁄ 6 of this width away from the edges of the white area ] . At the other end , the pennant is cut in the form of a sharp angle pointing inward [ the cut was 1 @.@ 2 times as deep as the length of the white and colored area near the cord ] . The ships ’ <unk> is provided with a cord and a mechanism for being raised on a tall mast ” . The proportions of the pennant ’ s component elements were indicated in the annex , with the actual dimensions remaining to be decided by the Armed Forces Ministry and the Interior Ministry . 
 = = Flags of the Socialist Republic of Romania = = 
 The Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Romania , adopted in 1965 , provided the following in article 118 : “ The flag of the Socialist Republic of Romania has the colors red , yellow and blue , arranged vertically , with blue near the flagpole . The coat of arms of the Socialist Republic of Romania is affixed to the middle ” . 
 Decree nr . 972 of 5 November 1968 regarding the insignia of the Socialist Republic of Romania ( RSR ) described in detail the coat of arms , seal , flag and state anthem of the republic . The attached commentary noted that , in the absence of corresponding regulations , “ there have appeared mistaken interpretations of these [ constitutional specifications ] , incorrect or diverging usages of the state insignia ” . Chapter IV of the decree is entirely devoted to describing the flag and the protocol for its use . Thus , the flag is defined as having a ratio of 2 : 3 , with the colored stripes of equal dimensions . The regular colors were printed in the annex and not expressly named . The coat of arms was placed in the center ; its height was 2 ⁄ 5 the flag ’ s width . As before , it was provided that the flag ’ s proportions could differ for ornamental purposes , but the coat of arms must always be in the center , vertical . Articles 13 @-@ 21 specifically and exhaustively covered flag protocol , describing where it was to be raised permanently and temporarily ( art . 13 ) , the protocol for raising it outside the country ’ s borders ( art . 14 ) and during demonstrations by socialist organizations ( art . 15 ) , the conditions for lowering it to half @-@ staff ( art . 16 , 17 and 18 , with art . 20 describing exceptions to the rule ) , the conditions and manner for draping caskets with the flag ( art . 19 ) , as well as the place of the Romanian flag in case it flew besides one or more foreign flags ( art . 21 ) . 
 = = = Flags of the President , Prime Minister and Minister of the Armed Forces = = = 
 The President of the RSR ( until 1974 the President of the Council of State ) and the prime minister had their own standard , a square Romanian tricolor with a white edge and a red border beyond that ; the RSR ’ s coat of arms was in the center , 2 ⁄ 3 the height of the tricolor ’ s width . The standard was decorated with fringes of golden thread and tassels of the same material . The flag of the Minister of the Armed Forces of the RSR consisted of a white pennant in a 1 : 2 ratio . The flag of the RSR was placed in the canton , while two red five @-@ pointed stars occupied the fly . 
 = = = Military colors and standards = = = 
 Military colors and standards adopted during the Romanian People ’ s Republic were modified or completely changed by Decree nr . 106 of 24 December 1966 regarding regulations for granting the military colors of units and large units from all military branches , modifying the display protocol for ensigns and pennants of navy and Coast Guard ships , establishing a distinctive emblem and commanders ’ emblems for navy and Coast Guard vessels , a jack for navy ships and a distinctive ensign for Coast Guard ships . 
 In the attached commentary , it was mentioned that the previous regulations were no longer valid , primarily because : 
 military colors of naval land units no longer featured the national flag colors , but only white and blue ; 
 ensigns and pennants of the Navy and Coast <unk> ships no longer featured the national flag colors and thus — even at close distances — Romanian ships could be confused with those of other nations ; 
 the air force flag was no longer necessary , as it did not correspond to the new organization of the military ’ s aviation branch . 
 Article 2 of the decree provided that “ the military colors are granted by the Council of State of the Romanian Socialist Republic to units and large units from all military branches from the Armed Forces Ministry , as well as to units from the Internal Affairs Ministry , at their founding . The flag is granted , depending on the case , at the initiative of the armed forces minister or the internal affairs minister . The granting of the flag is done in the name of the Council of State of the Romanian Socialist Republic by a representative of the armed forces , respectively of the internal affairs minister ” . The first clause of this article was modified thus by Decree nr . 150 of 19 June 1974 regarding the modification of certain laws and decrees : “ the flag is granted by presidential decree to units and large units of all military branches from the Armed Forces Ministry , as well as to units from the Internal Affairs Ministry , at their founding ” . 
 Ensigns of navy and Coast Guard vessels consisted of the military colors of the respective units . 
 The pennant was the device that indicated a ship was armed and commanded by a navy officer . It consisted of an “ ordinary canvas , in the shape of an isosceles triangle , with the base toward the attaching mechanism and with the flag colors and coat of arms of the Romanian Socialist Republic printed on both sides ” . 
 The jack was “ an ordinary square canvas , having printed on both sides the flag colors and coat of arms of the Romanian Socialist Republic . Two crossed white anchors of the same size as the coat of arms are affixed to the blue area ” . 
 The distinctive ensign of Coast Guard vessels consisted of “ an ordinary white rectangular canvas , with the half near the attaching mechanism green , upon which is affixed a white anchor ” . 
 The dimensions of these insignia , as well as their manner of use , were left to the Armed Forces Ministry to decide by regulation . 
 Decree nr . 90 of 27 April 1977 regarding the establishment of military colors for patriotic guards and the regulation of its granting created a special symbol for units of the Patriotic Guards . This was similar to military colors of military units , with the exception of the inscription on the flag ’ s reverse side — “ <unk> <unk> ” — in an arched line above the coat of arms , and the administrative unit in which the formation was located ( the municipality or county ) , in a straight line beneath the coat of arms . Its dimensions were indicated in the annex : the canvas was 100 centimeter long and 66 centimeter wide , the text was 6 centimeter high , the fringes 5 centimeter long , the flagpole 240 centimeter long and 4 centimeter wide , while the ogive at the end of the flagpole was 15 centimeter high . According to the Decree , the flag was granted to a unit by commanders of county @-@ level or Bucharest @-@ level Patriotic Guards , or by representatives of the General Staff of the Patriotic Guards from the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party , following a presidential decree for this purpose . Patriotic Guards that distinguished themselves in training exercises for national defense and that comprised at least 2000 fighters were eligible to receive flags . 
 = = = Naval rank flags = = = 
 Decree nr . 1016 of 1966 created a legal framework for the establishment of distinctive rank flags and commanders ’ rank flags , which were raised on Navy and Coast Guard ships , in accordance with the services ’ sailing regulations . 
 A distinctive rank flag was raised when “ the general secretary of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party , the president of the Council of State of the Romanian Socialist Republic or the president of the Council of Ministers of the Romanian Socialist Republic [ was ] on an official visit ” aboard ship . 
 The commanders ’ rank flag was flown in similar situations for : “ the minister of the armed forces of the Romanian Socialist Republic , the commander of the navy , the commander of a large unit of ships of the commander of a group of ships temporarily constituted ” . 
 The form , colors and dimensions of the flags remained to be fixed by regulation . 
 = = Flag of the Romanian Revolution of 1989 = = 
 Starting on 17 December 1989 , during the revolution at Timișoara , the coat of arms of the Romanian Socialist Republic began to be removed from flags , being viewed as a symbol of Nicolae Ceauşescu ’ s dictatorial regime . Most often , this was accomplished by cutting or ripping out the middle of the yellow stripe , giving rise to the term " the flag with the hole " . 
 Decree @-@ Law nr . 2 of 27 December 1989 regarding the membership , organization and functioning of the Council of the National Salvation Front and of the territorial councils of the National Salvation Front provided at article 1 , among other matters , that “ the national flag is the traditional tricolor of Romania , with the colors laid out vertically , in the following order , starting from the flagpole : blue , yellow , red ” . 
 = = Storage , restoration and conservation of old flags = = 
 In the 19th century , after a modern army was established in the two Danubian Principalities , old military and princely flags were deposited at the Army Arsenal . In 1919 these were all transferred to the National Military Museum . Flags that witnessed the Romanian War of Independence were replaced in 1902 and kept until 1928 @-@ 29 in the throne room of the Royal Palace , after which they entered the Military Museum ’ s collection . In 1971 a significant number of old flags was given to the National History Museum . 
 In 1966 , there were 1075 Romanian and foreign flags at the Central Military Museum , of which 949 were original , including the flagpole , top decoration and canvas , 42 were copies and reconstructions , and for 84 , just the flagpole and decoration remained . Together with other categories of flags , standards , ship flags , pennants , sashes and ties , the collection reached 1248 items . By the mid @-@ 2000s , the museum ’ s flag and standard collection counted 10 @,@ 826 objects . 
 A majority of Romania ’ s older flags have a field that is either deteriorated ( some are missing almost entirely ) or slashed by bullets or swords . 
 Museum experts have taken steps to preserve flags , including : introducing and stitching a double tulle into the majority of flags ( starting in the 1930s ) , washing certain dust @-@ covered flags using special methods , placing dark protective covers over the flags to shield the fabric from light , replacing seriously deteriorated exemplars with copies , photographing flags in order to avoid repeated manipulation , and climate @-@ controlling storage areas and exhibit halls . Certain flags are also subject to restoration work . 
 = = Acts of heroism under the flag = = 
 During the Romanian War of Independence , Romanian troops were inspired to bravery by their flag ’ s presence . During an attack on 30 August 1877 , Captain Nicolae Valter <unk> fell in action while inserting the 8th line Regiment ’ s flag into the parapet of the <unk> redoubt . Troops from the 3rd cavalry Regiment were among the first to enter Pleven , wading through the Vit with the flag before them . 
 Following these acts of bravery , the military colors were decorated in a solemn ceremony on 8 October 1878 . Units that participated in the Siege of <unk> ( 6th line infantry Regiment , dorobanţi Regiments 6 , 10 , 13 and 14 ) , that fought at Pleven ( 6th line infantry Regiment , dorobanţi Regiments 6 and 14 , vânători Battalions 2 and 4 , cavalry Regiments 3 and 7 ) , and <unk> and Vidin ( 6th line infantry Regiment , 3rd artillery Regiment ) received the Danube Crossing Cross ( <unk> <unk> Dunării ) . The 13th dorobanţi Regiment also received the Order of the Star of Romania , along with three other regiments , while vânători Battalion 2 received the Great Cross of the Order of the Star of Romania . Among the others decorated were the 9th dorobanţi Regiment and the 4th and 6th line infantry Regiments . Moreover , on 23 September 1879 in Galaţi , the flag of the 6th line infantry Regiment received the Military Bravery medal from Prince Milan IV of Serbia . 
 World War I also saw sacrifices in defense of the military colors , as a symbol of the duty to defend the nation ’ s land and military honor . In October 1916 , the flag guard of Neagoe Basarab infantry Regiment 83 met a cavalry patrol of the German Army . Although one of his arms was sliced off , the regimental flag @-@ bearer stood his ground until his comrades jumped to his defense and saved the flag . A month later , the <unk> infantry Regiment 1 found itself in dire circumstances , deciding to bury the flag in a peasant ’ s yard in <unk> . It was recovered in autumn 1918 after the occupying foreign armies had been driven out . Coast Guard Regiment 1 also faced difficulty in fighting at the Olt Defile . Then , the unit commander decided to bury the eagle from atop the flag , while the canvas was wrapped around the body of a troop who snuck through the confusion . The flag was placed back on a pole in Moldavia and took part in the 1917 campaigns . At the end of the war , it was decorated with the Order of Michael the Brave , the Commemorative Cross of the War of 1916 @-@ 1918 and the Victoria medal . 
 Many other military colors were decorated at war ’ s end . To name but a few examples , heavy artillery Regiment 1 received the Order of the Star of Romania ( rank of knight with swords ) and the ribbon of Military Virtue . Heavy artillery Regiment 4 was decorated with the Order of the Star of Romania and the Commemorative Cross of the War of 1916 @-@ 1918 . The Mircea Regiment 32 received the Order of Michael the Brave . Infantry Regiment 70 , “ giving proof of the noblest spirit of sacrifice and a powerful patriotism ” , received the Order of Michael the Brave Class III and the Commemorative Cross 1916 @-@ 1918 . 
 During World War II , units ’ flags that appeared in battle were also decorated . In action on the Western Front , ant @-@ aircraft artillery Regiment 6 and vânători Regiment 2 were decorated with the Order of Aeronautic Virtue with swords . Among the units that received the Order of Michael the Brave with swords were cavalry Regiment 2 , which distinguished itself in battles on the Someş and Mureş rivers and in Czechoslovakia , infantry Regiment 96 , which broke through the Tisza and liberated Budapest , Regiments 18 artillery and 34 infantry , and Battalions 7 and 8 vânători de <unk> . 
 = The Boat Race 1977 = 
 The 123rd Boat Race took place on 19 March 1977 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford won by seven lengths , their biggest margin of victory for more than 90 years . It was the first time in the history of the event that one of the crews , Oxford , used a plastic boat as opposed to a wooden one . It was also the first race to have an official sponsor in Ladbrokes . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by seven lengths . Cambridge won the 32nd Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a " hotly contested point of honour " between the two universities . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1976 race by six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 68 victories to Oxford 's 53 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Both crews rowed in monocoque boats for the first time in the history of the race ; Oxford used a <unk> shell ( combining carbon fibre and plastic ) for the first time , while Cambridge raced in a prototype developed by Imperial College London . Journalist and author Christopher Dodd referred to the boats as " the most up @-@ to @-@ date boats that the rowing world has seen " . The race was sponsored for the first time , by British betting company Ladbrokes , who would sponsor the event until the 1987 race when they were replaced by Beefeater Gin . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 9 @.@ 5 lb ( 86 @.@ 7 kg ) , just over 6 pounds ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Returning Cambridge cox Joe Manser , at 9 st 11 lb , weighed 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) more than his counterpart Colin Moynihan . Along with Manser , Cambridge saw the return of just one other former Blue in David Searle , while Oxford 's crew included three Boat Race participants in Bob Mason , Crispin Money @-@ Coutts and John Wiggins . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford started the race as " one of the strongest favourites of all time " , with The Guardian 's Christopher Dodd writing that " Oxford have some world @-@ class pedigree " . They won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Within thirty seconds of the start , and in calm conditions , Oxford were a length ahead at Fulham F.C. They moved further ahead to a two @-@ length lead by the Mile Post , and a six @-@ second advantage over the Light Blues . Oxford extended their lead to three lengths and nine seconds by the time both crews shot Hammersmith Bridge , where the crews were subjected to choppy water , but between there and Chiswick Steps , Oxford raced further ahead , gaining at least two further lengths on Cambridge . Twenty seconds ahead at Barnes Bridge , the Dark Blues continued to press home their advantage , and passed the finishing post in a time of 19 minutes 28 seconds , 22 seconds ahead of Cambridge . It was Oxford 's third victory in four years , and the seven @-@ length margin of victory was their greatest since their win in the 1898 race . 
 In the 13th running of the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by seven lengths in a time of 19 minutes 35 seconds . It was Goldie 's first victory since 1974 . Cambridge won the 32nd Women 's Boat Race , their fourteenth victory in fifteen years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford stroke Andy Michelmore was surprised by the conditions : " we couldn 't extend ourselves until the very end . " Of the rough water , Michelmore 's cox , Moynihan , said " a sinking was possible . We shipped , I think , a couple of inches of water and I was more than apprehensive " . 
 = MDNA World Tour ( album ) = 
 MDNA World Tour is the fourth live album by American singer and songwriter Madonna . It was released on September 6 , 2013 , by Live Nation Entertainment and Interscope Records as a full concert on all formats including a double @-@ disc CD , DVD , and Blu @-@ ray . Madonna had embarked on The MDNA Tour for promotion of her twelfth studio album MDNA . The tour was a commercial success although it courted a number of controversies . The performances at the American Airlines Arena in Miami , Florida during the North American leg of The MDNA Tour were documented for video release . The recording was directed by Danny B. Tull and Stephane Sennour who included footage from other shows of the tour . 
 Madonna had spent six months editing the footage from the films and together with Tull and Seymour she developed the video for the songs she had performed as a mini @-@ movie . Shot as a documentary , MDNA World Tour included the best shots available from different locations of the tour , while emphasizing Madonna 's impact on the younger generation of artists . Prior to the release , a concert television special , Madonna : The MDNA Tour , was broadcast in the United States by Epix on June 22 , 2013 . A premiere took place The Paris Theater , in New York City the same month . 
 The release received mixed reviews from critics , with one group of reviewers commending the technicality and the visuals attached with the show , while others noting the absence of Madonna 's hit songs from the set list . After the release , news outlets around the world wrote about bad manufacturing of the CD and DVD , with many buyers reportedly choosing to return their purchase . Within a week Interscope released a statement , <unk> the Blu @-@ ray discs in the United States . 
 MDNA World Tour was a moderate success commercially . It reached the top of the album charts in Hungary , and top @-@ ten in France , Israel , Italy , Russia , and Spain , though failed to achieve high chart positions similar to the singer 's previous live releases in the United States and United Kingdom . However , MDNA World Tour became a success on the DVD charts of most nations , earning a triple platinum certification in Brazil , platinum certifications in Canada and Portugal , and finally a gold certification in Poland . The release topped the US Billboard Top Music Videos chart with sales of 11 @,@ 000 copies , becoming her sixth consecutive and tenth video to top the chart — the most for any artist . 
 = = Background and tour = = 
 On March 23 , 2012 , Madonna released her twelfth studio album , entitled MDNA , by Interscope Records . The singer worked with a variety of producers such as Alle Benassi , Benny Benassi , Demolition Crew , Free School , Michael Malih , <unk> , William Orbit and Martin Solveig on the album . An electronic album , MDNA lyrically explores themes such as partying , love for music , infatuation , as well as heartbreak , revenge and separation . The album received generally positive reviews from music critics . Upon its release , it debuted at number one in many countries worldwide , including Australia , Canada , Italy , Spain , the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 To promote the album , Madonna embarked on The MDNA Tour , which was her ninth concert tour . The tour visited America , Europe and the Middle East , while also marking the singer 's first performances in the United Arab Emirates , Ukraine , Scotland and Colombia . Described by her as " the journey of a soul from darkness to light " , The MDNA Tour was divided into four sections : Transgression , where guns and violence was the main theme , Prophecy , where a mix of joyful songs that bring people together are performed , Masculine / Feminine , a combination of sensuality and fashion with a few of Madonna 's classic songs performed in a French Cabaret @-@ style , and Redemption , which Madonna labelled as " a big party and celebration " . The tour received positive reviews , but courted many controversial subjects such as violence , firearms , human rights , nudity and politics . Nevertheless , it was a commercial success and many venues were instantly sold out . After completion , it was dubbed the highest @-@ grossing tour of 2012 by Billboard . Total gross was $ 305 @.@ 2 million from 88 sold @-@ out shows , becoming the tenth highest @-@ grossing tour of all time and surpassing Celine Dion 's Taking Chances World Tour as the second highest @-@ grossing tour among female artists , behind Madonna 's own Sticky & Sweet Tour . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Initially , the filming of the concert was planned for the shows in Colombia , but due to conflicts with the directors ' schedule , those shows were not filmed . Instead , Madonna announced on her Facebook page that the November 19 and 20 shows in Miami , at the American Airlines Arena , will be filmed for the upcoming tour DVD and Blu @-@ ray release . After accepting the award for Top Touring Artist at the 2013 Billboard Music Awards , Madonna confirmed that she had just finished editing the DVD of the concert , with Billboard predicting the video release to be in September 2013 . It was officially announced by Madonna 's website that the video album for the tour will be released on August 26 , 2013 , by Live Nation and Interscope Records ; the date was later changed to September 6 and 9 for non @-@ US countries and September 10 for US . It documented the November 19 and 20 shows at the American Airlines Arena , but also will include footage from other concert dates . The documentary was directed by Danny B. Tull and Stephane Sennour — who also directed the YouTube concert special MDNA : Live à l 'Olympia and the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary Inside the DNA of MDNA — and was produced by Madonna . MDNA World Tour is Madonna 's tenth live video album and was released on both DVD and Blu @-@ ray . Madonna had spent six months editing the footage from the films and together with Tull and Seymour she constructed each of the performances in the video as a mini @-@ movie . 
 According to Entertainment Weekly , MDNA World Tour shed light on the impact Madonna has had on the younger generation of artists , dancers , and general fans " who refuse to conform for conformity 's sake " . Tull took the best moments from the 88 different concerts of the tour , to create a cohesive documentary . He recalled that there were numerous footage available from the tour and they had to find the " perfect " shot for Madonna . He gave an example that the performance of " Like a Prayer " had cuts from 50 countries alone . " It was really intense . I think I looked down one day and I was like , ' Oh , my fingers are about to fall off ' . But it was worth it " , Tull concluded . A preview for the DVD was first shown at the Billboard Music Awards and another preview was released in June 2013 , showing the singer performing " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " on the tour , the lead single from MDNA . Another video showed Madonna auditioning for the dancers , while singing an acoustic version of her 2001 single , " Don 't Tell Me " . 
 A television broadcast of the concert , titled Madonna : The MDNA Tour , aired on Epix in the United States on June 22 , 2013 . The concert premiered at 8 p.m. EST on Epix 's TV network and online at <unk> and on Epix apps . On June 18 , the concert special had a world premiere screening at The Paris Theater , in New York City , with Madonna attending the event in a press conference with the media , celebrities , and fans . A contest was released just for US residents , who had the chance to win two invitations for the special event . The singer wore a black tuxedo and a top hat to the premiere , the ensemble being a tribute to actress Marlene Dietrich and her similar attire in the 1930 film , Morocco . During the Q & A , Madonna recalled how difficult it was to sometimes perform on the tour , but she and her troupe nevertheless did it . At the end of the session , she showed a trailer from her secretprojectrevolution film with photographer Steven Klein ; the one @-@ minute clip featured her background dancers and showed the singer being dragged on the floor . Other shots included Madonna wielding a gun , her dancers in underwear , and religious iconography . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Arnold Wayne Jones from the Dallas Voice gave the album four out of five stars , writing that the show " has all of the Material Girl 's majesty and fetishistic eroticism , merged with lots of disturbing , violent imagery and a huge catalog of songs " . Jones concluded that Madonna was more provocative than before with the release . Chuck Campbell from The Republic gave the album three and a half stars out of five , writing that " an ambitious woman like Madonna will not let herself become a nostalgia act " . He added that Madonna makes that clear every time she goes on tour : " she 's living in the moment , and she 's all about her newest material . " The Advocate 's review for the release was positive , saying that the DVD affirms the fact that Madonna 's " musical reign continues " . Entertainment Focus ' Pip Ellwood felt that the highlights of the record were the live performances of " Human Nature " and " Like a Prayer " . He concluded the review by saying that " Making perfect use of her dancers , the video screens and the sets , the MDNA World Tour is one of [ Madonna 's ] most spectacular to date and she still performs with the passion and the energy she always has done . If you went to the show then get your copy of this and treat it like a souvenir . If you didn 't you need to check it out as it 's one of the best shows she 's ever done . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic awarded the release three out of five stars , saying that " there are unexpected musical moments that do make MDNA World Tour worth hearing " , including the performance of " Like a Virgin " and " Like a Prayer " . However , he felt that the CD release was unnecessary since the album would be a better experience with its video . 
 The North Jersey Media Group gave the DVD 2 @.@ 5 starts out of five , saying that Madonna felt to be " overly " attached to her contemporary songs than her classic releases . They added " that plodding through overlong arrangements of inconsequential songs — from the annoyingly vocoder @-@ treated ' Revolver ' early to the throwaway dance cut ' Celebration ' at the end — will leave listeners wondering why so many substantial hits were given only a nod , if anything at all . " A review by Kevin Taft in online website " Edge on the Net " was overall negative . Taft noticed that Madonna 's vocals were altered and mixed so much that it sounded disembodied and did not match the singer 's lips . He was " shocked " to find that the audio CDs also contained the badly mixed songs . The reviewer explained that " The choice to have the backing track turned down so low doesn 't help much either . In fact , it makes it sound as if Madonna is on a cabaret stage with a five @-@ piece band ... For the six months it took Madge to edit her concert , one would wish she got her vocals to match her lips . " However , Taft commended the overall show and the technical brilliance accompanying it . 
 In an online chat with website Reddit , Madonna addressed the concerns regarding the mastering issues with the DVD and Blu @-@ ray in Europe , saying that she was horrified about the glitches and her record label was solving it . She concluded by saying that " [ I ] spent 6 months editing and doing the sound mix for the DVD the last thing I want to hear is that the fans aren 't getting the fruits of my labor . " On September 23 , 2013 , Interscope Records announced that they were recalling all the Blu @-@ ray discs issued in US , after hearing continuous reports of glitches in the sound from consumers , adding that an " error in manufacturing " compromised the 5 @.@ 1 audio of the discs . The announcement also added the following : 
 " Interscope Records would like to make consumers of Madonna 's MDNA World Tour Blu @-@ ray disc aware that the concert will be seen at its most optimal quality by properly adjusting the settings on your television to ' Normal / Movie ' mode rather than ' Dynamic / Enhanced ' mode . Older Blu @-@ ray players or those without a firmware upgrade may experience glitches when navigating the Blu @-@ ray menu . Follow the manufacturer 's instructions to upgrade firmware . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , MDNA World Tour failed to debut within the top @-@ forty of the Billboard 200 , unlike her previous live albums , and entered at number 90 with 4 @,@ 000 copies sold becoming her 26th entry on the chart . However , it entered at number one on the Top Music Videos chart with sales of 11 @,@ 000 copies , becoming her sixth consecutive and tenth video to top the chart — the most for any artist . MDNA World Tour was preceded by Madonna ( four weeks at number @-@ one in 1985 ) , Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour ( 10 weeks in 1986 ) , Ciao Italia : Live from Italy ( eight weeks in 1988 ) , The Immaculate Collection ( four weeks in 1991 ) , Drowned World Tour 2001 ( one week in 2001 ) , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret ( two weeks in 2006 ) , The Confessions Tour ( two weeks in 2007 ) , Celebration : The Video Collection ( one week in 2009 ) and Sticky & Sweet Tour ( one week in 2010 ) . Keith Caulfield from Billboard noted that the debut on the Billboard 200 was with considerably lesser sales than the preceding album , Sticky & Sweet Tour , which entered the chart at number ten with sales of 28 @,@ 000 copies and atop the Top Music Videos with 5 @,@ 000 copies . Caulfield theorized that the only availability of MDNA World Tour as a digital album and CD on demand from Amazon.com hindered its ranking on the chart and issuing the album on the traditional music release formats of CD @-@ DVD combo would have increased sales . The following week , MDNA World Tour held on to the top spot of the Top Music Videos chart , with an additional sales of 3 @,@ 000 copies . MDNA World Tour became the 29th best selling music video on the year end tabulation of Billboard . 
 A midweek prediction by Music Week magazine had MDNA World Tour listed at position 37 of the UK Albums Chart . It ultimately debuted at number 55 on the chart with sales of 1 @,@ 759 copies while topping the DVD chart of the country with bigger first week sales of 5 @,@ 599 copies . MDNA World Tour became Madonna 's first live release not to enter the top @-@ twenty of the UK Albums Chart , after the top @-@ twenty placements at number 18 ( 14 @,@ 449 sales ) with I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret ( 2006 ) , number seven ( 22 @,@ 227 sales ) with The Confessions Tour ( 2007 ) and number 17 ( 12 @,@ 405 sales ) with Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2010 ) . The album 's highest placement was in Hungary , where it reached the top of the chart . It also attained top ten positions in France , Israel , Italy , Russia and Spain , while reaching top twenty in Poland and Portugal . Its lowest position was attained in Belgium Flanders region , where it failed to enter the top 100 of the Ultratop chart , reaching a peak of number 116 . MDNA World Tour was successful on the DVD listings of most of the nations , reaching the top of the charts of 17 providers . However , in Australia the album version was disqualified from charting in the ARIA Albums Chart , but it reached the top of the DVD charts for the issue of September 16 , 2013 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies additional lyrics by 
 Track list adapted from AllMusic . 
 " Express Yourself " also contains a sample of Lady Gaga 's song " Born This Way " but the use is not credited in the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Directors – Danny B. Tull , Stephane Sennour 
 Production company – Semtex Films 
 Producer – Madonna 
 Executive producers – Arthur Fogel , Guy Oseary , Sara <unk> 
 Photography – Mark Ritchie 
 Film editing – Madonna , Danny Tull 
 Costume designer – Arianne Phillips , Jean Paul Gaultier , Riccardo Tisci 
 Credits adapted from MDNA World Tour CD liner notes : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Indirect land use change impacts of biofuels = 
 The indirect land use change impacts of biofuels , also known as ILUC , relates to the unintended consequence of releasing more carbon emissions due to land @-@ use changes around the world induced by the expansion of croplands for ethanol or biodiesel production in response to the increased global demand for biofuels . 
 As farmers worldwide respond to higher crop prices in order to maintain the global food supply @-@ and @-@ demand balance , pristine lands are cleared to replace the food crops that were diverted elsewhere to biofuels ' production . Because natural lands , such as rainforests and grasslands , store carbon in their soil and biomass as plants grow each year , clearance of wilderness for new farms translates to a net increase in greenhouse gas emissions . Due to this change in the carbon stock of the soil and the biomass , indirect land use change has consequences in the GHG balance of a biofuel . 
 Other authors have also argued that indirect land use changes produce other significant social and environmental impacts , affecting biodiversity , water quality , food prices and supply , land tenure , worker migration , and community and cultural stability . 
 = = History = = 
 The estimates of carbon intensity for a given biofuel depend on the assumptions regarding several variables . As of 2008 , multiple full life cycle studies had found that corn ethanol , cellulosic ethanol and Brazilian sugarcane ethanol produce lower greenhouse gas emissions than gasoline . None of these studies , however , considered the effects of indirect land @-@ use changes , and though land use impacts were acknowledged , estimation was considered too complex and difficult to model . A controversial paper published in February 2008 in <unk> by a team led by Searchinger from Princeton University concluded that such effects offset the ( positive ) direct effects of both corn and cellulosic ethanol and that Brazilian sugarcane performed better , but still resulted in a small carbon debt . 
 After the Searchinger team paper , estimation of carbon emissions from ILUC , together with the food vs. fuel debate , became one of the most contentious issues relating to biofuels , debated in the popular media , scientific journals , op @-@ eds and public letters from the scientific community , and the ethanol industry , both American and Brazilian . This controversy intensified in April 2009 when the California Air Resources Board ( CARB ) set rules that included ILUC impacts to establish the California Low @-@ Carbon Fuel Standard that entered into force in 2011 . 
 In May 2009 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) released a notice of proposed rulemaking for implementation of the 2007 modification of the Renewable Fuel Standard ( RFS ) . EPA 's proposed regulations also included ILUC , causing additional controversy among ethanol producers . EPA 's February 3 , 2010 final rule incorporated ILUC based on modelling that was significantly improved over the initial estimates . 
 The UK Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation program requires the Renewable Fuels Agency ( RFA ) to report potential indirect impacts of biofuel production , including indirect land use change or changes to food and other commodity prices . A July 2008 RFA study , known as the Gallager Review , found several risks and uncertainties , and that the " quantification of GHG emissions from indirect land @-@ use change requires subjective assumptions and contains considerable uncertainty " , and required further examination to properly incorporate indirect effects into calculation methodologies . A similarly cautious approach was followed by the European Union . In December 2008 the European Parliament adopted more stringent sustainability criteria for biofuels and directed the European Commission to develop a methodology to factor in GHG emissions from indirect land use change . 
 = = Studies and controversy = = 
 Before 2008 , several full life cycle ( " Well to Wheels " or <unk> ) studies had found that corn ethanol reduced transport @-@ related greenhouse gas emissions . In 2007 a University of California , Berkeley team led by Farrel evaluated six previous studies , concluding that corn ethanol reduced GHG emissions by only 13 percent . However , 20 to 30 percent reduction for corn ethanol , and 85 to 85 percent for cellulosic ethanol , both figures estimated by Wang from Argonne National Laboratory , are more commonly cited . Wang reviewed 22 studies conducted between 1979 and 2005 , and ran simulations with Argonne 's <unk> model . These studies accounted for direct land use changes . Several studies of Brazilian sugarcane ethanol showed that sugarcane as feedstock reduces GHG by 86 to 90 percent given no significant land use change . Estimates of carbon intensity depend on crop productivity , agricultural practices , power sources for ethanol distilleries and the energy efficiency of the distillery . None of these studies considered ILUC , due to estimation difficulties . Preliminary estimates by Delucchi from the University of California , Davis , suggested that carbon released by new lands converted to agricultural use was a large percentage of life @-@ cycle emissions . 
 = = = Searchinger and Fargione studies = = = 
 In 2008 Timothy Searchinger , a lawyer from Environmental Defense Fund , concluded that ILUC affects the life cycle assessment and that instead of saving , both corn and cellulosic ethanol increased carbon emissions as compared to gasoline by 93 and 50 percent respectively . Ethanol from Brazilian sugarcane performed better , recovering initial carbon emissions in 4 years , while U.S. corn ethanol required 167 years and cellulosic ethanol required a 52 years payback period . The study limited the analysis a 30 @-@ year period , assuming that land conversion emits 25 percent of the carbon stored in soils and all carbon in plants cleared for cultivation . Brazil , China , and India were considered among the overseas locations where land use change would occur as a result of diverting U.S. corn cropland , and it was assumed that new cropland in each of these regions correspond to different types of forest , savanna or grassland based on the historical proportion of each converted to cultivation in these countries during the 1990s . 
 Fargione and his team published a separate paper in the same issue of <unk> claiming that clearing lands to produce biofuel feedstock created a carbon deficit . This deficit applies to both direct and indirect land use changes . The study examined six conversion scenarios : Brazilian Amazon to soybean biodiesel , Brazilian Cerrado to soybean biodiesel , Brazilian Cerrado to sugarcane ethanol , Indonesian or Malaysian lowland tropical rainforest to palm biodiesel , Indonesian or Malaysian peatland tropical rainforest to palm biodiesel , and U.S. Central grassland to corn ethanol . The carbon debt was defined as the amount of CO2 released during the first 50 years of this process of land conversion . For the two most common ethanol feedstocks , the study found that sugarcane ethanol produced on natural cerrado lands would take about 17 years to repay its carbon debt , while corn ethanol produced on U.S. central grasslands would result in a repayment time of about 93 years . The worst @-@ case scenario is converting Indonesian or Malaysian tropical peatland rainforest to palm biodiesel production , which would require about 420 years to repay . 
 = = = = Criticism and controversy = = = = 
 The Searchinger and Fargione studies created controversy in both the popular media and in scientific journals . Robert <unk> observed that Searchinger 's " indirect analysis " approach is pseudo @-@ scientific and can be used to " prove anything " . 
 Wang and Haq from Argonne National Laboratory claiming : the assumptions were outdated ; they ignored the potential of increased efficiency ; and no evidence showed that " U.S. corn ethanol production has so far caused indirect land use in other countries . " They concluded that Searchinger demonstrated that ILUC " is much more difficult to model than direct land use changes " . In his response Searchinger rebutted each technical objection and asserted that " ... any calculation that ignores these emissions , however challenging it is to predict them with certainty , is too incomplete to provide a basis for policy decisions . " 
 Another criticism , by Kline and Dale from Oak Ridge National Laboratory , held that Searchinger et al. and Fargione et al . " ... do not provide adequate support for their claim that <unk> cause high emissions due to land @-@ use change " , as their conclusions depends on a misleading assumption because more comprehensive field research found that these land use changes " ... are driven by interactions among cultural , technological , biophysical , economic , and demographic forces within a spatial and temporal context rather than by a single crop market " . Fargione et al. responded in part that although many factors contributed to land clearing , this " observation does not diminish the fact that biofuels also contribute to land clearing if they are produced on existing cropland or on newly cleared lands " . Searching disagreed with all of Kline and Dale arguments . 
 The U.S. biofuel industry also reacted , claiming that the " Searchinger study is clearly a ' worst case scenario ' analysis ... " and that this study " relies on a long series of highly subjective assumptions ... " Searchinger rebutted each claim , concluding that NFA 's criticisms were invalid . He noted that even if some of his assumptions are high estimates , the study also made many conservative assumptions . 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 In February 2010 , <unk> estimated that planned expansion of Brazilian sugarcane and soybean biofuel plantations through 2020 would replace rangeland , with small direct land @-@ use impact on carbon emissions . However , the expansion of the rangeland frontier into Amazonian forests , driven by cattle ranching , would indirectly offset the savings . " Sugarcane ethanol and soybean biodiesel each contribute to nearly half of the projected indirect deforestation of 121 @,@ 970 km2 by 2020 , creating a carbon debt that would take about 250 years to be repaid .... " 
 The research also found that oil palm would cause the least land @-@ use changes and associated carbon debt . The analysis also modeled livestock density increases and found that " a higher increase of 0 @.@ 13 head per hectare in the average livestock density throughout the country could avoid the indirect land @-@ use changes caused by biofuels ( even with soybean as the biodiesel feedstock ) , while still fulfilling all food and bioenergy demands . " The authors conclude that intensification of cattle ranching and concentration on oil palm are required to achieve effective carbon savings , recommending closer collaboration between the biofuel and cattle @-@ ranching sectors . 
 The main Brazilian ethanol industry organization ( UNICA ) commented that such studies missed the continuing intensification of cattle production already underway . 
 A study by Arima et al. published in May 2011 used spatial regression modeling to provide the first statistical assessment of ILUC for the Brazilian Amazon due to soy production . Previously , the indirect impacts of soy crops were only anecdotal or analyzed through demand models at a global scale , while the study took a regional approach . The analysis showed a strong signal linking the expansion of soybean fields in settled agricultural areas at the southern and eastern rims of the Amazon basin to pasture encroachments for cattle production on the forest frontier . The results demonstrate the need to include ILUC in measuring the carbon footprint of soy crops , whether produced for biofuels or other end @-@ uses . 
 The Arima study is based on 761 municipalities located in the Legal Amazon of Brazil , and found that between 2003 and 2008 , soybean areas expanded by 39 @,@ 100 km ² in the basin 's agricultural areas , mainly in Mato Grosso . The model showed that a 10 % ( 3 @,@ 910 km ² ) reduction of soy in old pasture areas would have led to a reduction in deforestation of up to 40 % ( 26 @,@ 039 km ² ) in heavily forested municipalities of the Brazilian Amazon . The analysis showed that the displacement of cattle production due to agricultural expansion drives land use change in municipalities located hundreds of kilometers away , and that the Amazonian ILUC is not only measurable but its impact is significant . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 = = = = California LCFS = = = = 
 On April 23 , 2009 , California Air Resources Board ( CARB ) approved the specific rules and carbon intensity reference values for the California Low @-@ Carbon Fuel Standard ( LCFS ) that take effect January 1 , 2011 . CARB 's rulemaking included ILUC . For some biofuels , CARB identified land use changes as a significant source of additional GHG emissions . It established one standard for gasoline and alternative fuels , and a second for diesel fuel and its replacements . 
 = = = = = Controversy = = = = = 
 The public consultation process before the ruling , and the ruling itself were controversial , yielding 229 comments . ILUC was one of the most contentious issues . On June 24 , 2008 , 27 scientists and researchers submitted a letter saying , " As researchers and scientists in the field of biomass to biofuel conversion , we are convinced that there simply is not enough hard empirical data to base any sound policy regulation in regards to the indirect impacts of renewable biofuels production . The field is relative new , especially when compared to the vast knowledge base present in fossil fuel production , and the limited analyses are driven by assumptions that sometimes lack robust empirical validation . " The New Fuels Alliance , representing more than two @-@ dozen biofuel companies , researchers and investors , questioned the Board intention to include indirect land use change effects into account , wrote " While it is likely true that zero is not the right number for the indirect effects of any product in the real world , enforcing indirect effects in a piecemeal way could have very serious consequences for the LCFS .... The argument that zero is not the right number does not justify enforcing a different wrong number , or penalizing one fuel for one category of indirect effects while giving another fuel pathway a free pass . " 
 On the other side , more than 170 scientists and economists urged that CARB , " include indirect land use change in the lifecycle analyses of heat @-@ trapping emissions from biofuels and other transportation fuels . This policy will encourage development of sustainable , low @-@ carbon fuels that avoid conflict with food and minimize harmful environmental impacts .... There are uncertainties inherent in estimating the magnitude of indirect land use emissions from biofuels , but assigning a value of zero is clearly not supported by the science . " 
 Industry representatives complained that the final rule overstated the environmental effects of corn ethanol , and also criticized the inclusion of ILUC as an unfair penalty to domestic corn ethanol because deforestation in the developing world was being tied to U.S. ethanol production . The 2011 limit for LCFS means that Mid @-@ west corn ethanol failed , unless current carbon intensity was reduced . Oil industry representatives complained that the standard left oil refiners with few options , such as Brazilian sugarcane ethanol , with its accompanying tariff . CARB officials and environmentalists counter that time and economic incentives will allow produces to adapt . 
 UNICA welcomed the ruling , while urging CARB to better reflect Brazilian practices , lowering their estimates of Brazilian emissions . 
 The only Board member who voted against the ruling explained that he had a " hard time accepting the fact that we 're going to ignore the comments of 125 scientists " , referring to the letter submitted by a group of scientists questioning the ILUC penalty . " They said the model was not good enough ... to use at this time as a component part of such an historic new standard . " CARB advanced the expected date for an expert working group to report on ILUC with refined estimates from January 2012 to January 2011 . 
 On December 2009 the Renewable Fuels Association ( RFA ) and Growth Energy , two U.S. ethanol lobbying groups , filed a lawsuit challenging LCFS ' constitutionality . The two organizations argued that LCFS violated both the Supremacy Clause and the Commerce Clause , jeopardizing the nationwide ethanol market . 
 = = = = EPA Renewable Fuel Standard = = = = 
 The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 ( EISA ) established new renewable fuel categories and eligibility requirements , setting mandatory lifecycle emissions limits . EISA explicitly mandated EPA to include " direct emissions and significant indirect emissions such as significant emissions from land use changes . " 
 EISA required a 20 % reduction in lifecycle GHG emissions for any fuel produced at facilities that commenced construction after December 19 , 2007 to be classified as a " renewable fuel " ; a 50 % reduction for fuels to be classified as " biomass @-@ based diesel " or " advanced biofuel " , and a 60 % reduction to be classified as " cellulosic biofuel " . EISA provided limited flexibility to adjust these thresholds downward by up to 10 percent , and EPA proposed this adjustment for the advanced biofuels category . Existing plants were grandfathered in . 
 On May 5 , 2009 , EPA released a notice of proposed rulemaking for implementation of the 2007 modification of the Renewable Fuel Standard , known as RFS2 . The draft of the regulations was released for public comment during a 60 @-@ day period , a public hearing was held on 9 June 2009 , and also a workshop was conducted on 10 – 11 June 2009 . 
 EPA 's draft analysis stated that ILUC can produce significant near @-@ term GHG emissions due to land conversion , but that biofuels can pay these back over subsequent years . EPA highlighted two scenarios , varying the time horizon and the discount rate for valuing emissions . The first assumed a 30 @-@ year time period uses a 0 percent discount rate ( valuing emissions equally regardless of timing ) . The second scenario used a 100 @-@ year time period and a 2 % discount rate . 
 On the same day that EPA published its notice of proposed rulemaking , President Obama signed a Presidential Directive seeking to advance biofuels research and commercialization . The Directive established the Biofuels Interagency Working Group , to develop policy ideas for increasing investment in next @-@ generation fuels and for reducing their environmental footprint . 
 The inclusion of ILUC in the proposed ruling provoked complaints from ethanol and biodiesel producers . Several environmental organizations welcomed the inclusion of ILUC but criticized the consideration of a 100 @-@ year payback scenario , arguing that it underestimated land conversion effects . American corn growers , biodiesel producers , ethanol producers and Brazilian sugarcane ethanol producers complained about EPA 's methodology , while the oil industry requested an implementation delay . 
 On June 26 , 2009 , the House of Representatives approved the American Clean Energy and Security Act 219 to 212 , mandating EPA to exclude ILUC for a 5 @-@ year period , vis a vis RFS2 . During this period , more research is to be conducted to develop more reliable models and methodologies for estimating ILUC , and Congress will review this issue before allowing EPA to rule on this matter . The bill failed in the U.S. Senate . 
 On February 3 , 2010 , EPA issued its final RFS2 rule for 2010 and beyond . The rule incorporated direct and significant indirect emissions including ILUC . EPA incorporated comments and data from new studies . Using a 30 @-@ year time horizon and a 0 % discount rate , EPA concluded that multiple biofuels would meet this standard . 
 EPA 's analysis accepted both ethanol produced from corn starch and biobutanol from corn starch as " renewable fuels " . Ethanol produced from sugarcane became an " advanced fuel " . Both diesel produced from algal oils and biodiesel from soy oil and diesel from waste oils , fats , and greases fell in the " biomass @-@ based diesel " category . <unk> ethanol and cellulosic diesel met the " cellulosic biofuel " standard . 
 The table summarizes the mean GHG emissions estimated by EPA modelling and the range of variations considering that the main source of uncertainty in the life cycle analysis is the GHG emissions related to international land use change . 
 = = = = = Reactions = = = = = 
 UNICA welcomed the ruling , in particular , for the more precise lifecycle emissions estimate and hoped that classification the advanced biofuel designation would help eliminate the tariff . 
 The U.S. Renewable Fuels Association ( RFA ) also welcomed the ruling , as ethanol producers " require stable federal policy that provides them the market assurances they need to commercialize new technologies " , restating their ILUC objection . 
 RFA also complained that corn @-@ based ethanol scored only a 21 % reduction , noting that without ILUC , corn ethanol achieves a 52 % GHG reduction . RFA also objected that Brazilian sugarcane ethanol " benefited disproportionally " because EPA 's revisions lowered the initially equal ILUC estimates by half for corn and 93 % for sugarcane . 
 Several Midwestern lawmakers commented that they continued to oppose EPA 's consideration of the " dicey science " of indirect land use that " punishes domestic fuels " . House Agriculture Chairman Collin Peterson said , " ... to think that we can credibly measure the impact of international indirect land use is completely unrealistic , and I will continue to push for legislation that prevents unreliable methods and unfair standards from burdening the biofuels industry . " 
 EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson commented that the agency " did not back down from considering land use in its final rules , but the agency took new information into account that led to a more favorable calculation for ethanol " . She cited new science and better data on crop yield and productivity , more information on co @-@ products that could be produced from advanced biofuels and expanded land @-@ use data for 160 countries , instead of the 40 considered in the proposed rule . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 As of 2010 , European Union and United Kingdom regulators had recognized the need to take ILUC into account , but had not determined the most appropriate methodology . 
 = = = = UK Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation = = = = 
 The UK Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation ( <unk> ) program requires fuel suppliers to report direct impacts , and asked the Renewable Fuels Agency ( RFA ) to report potential indirect impacts , including ILUC and commodity price changes . The RFA 's July 2008 " Gallager Review " , mentioned several risks regarding biofuels and required feedstock production to avoid agricultural land that would otherwise be used for food production , despite concluding that " quantification of GHG emissions from indirect land @-@ use change requires subjective assumptions and contains considerable uncertainty " . Some environmental groups argued that emissions from ILUC were not being taken into account and could be creating more emissions . 
 = = = = European Union = = = = 
 On December 17 , 2008 , the European Parliament approved the Renewable Energy Sources Directive ( COM ( 2008 ) 19 ) and amendments to the Fuel Quality Directive ( Directive 2009 / 30 ) , which included sustainability criteria for biofuels and mandated consideration of ILUC . The Directive established a 10 % biofuel target . A separate Fuel Quality Directive set the EU 's Low Carbon Fuel Standard , requiring a 6 % reduction in GHG intensity of EU transport fuels by 2020 . The legislation ordered the European Commission to develop a methodology to factor in GHG emissions from ILUC by December 31 , 2010 , based on the best available scientific evidence . 
 In the meantime , the European Parliament defined lands that were ineligible for producing biofuel feedstocks for the purpose of the Directives . This category included wetlands and continuously forested areas with canopy cover of more than 30 percent or cover between 10 and 30 percent given evidence that its existing carbon stock was low enough to justify conversion . 
 The Commission subsequently published terms of reference for three ILUC modeling exercises : one using a General Equilibrium model ; one using a Partial Equilibrium model and one comparing other global modeling exercises . It also consulted on a limited range of high @-@ level options for addressing ILUC to which 17 countries and 59 organizations responded . The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food and several environmental organizations complained that the 2008 safeguards were inadequate . UNICA called for regulators to establish an empirical and " globally accepted methodology " to consider ILUC , with the participation of researchers and scientists from biofuel crop @-@ producing countries . 
 In 2010 some NGOs accused the European Commission of lacking transparency given its reluctance to release documents relating to the ILUC work . In March 2010 the Partial and General Equilibrium Modelling results were made available , with the disclaimer that the EC had not adopted the views contained in the materials . These indicate that a 1 @.@ 25 % increase in EU biofuel consumption would require around 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 hectares ( 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ) of land globally . 
 The scenarios for varied from 5 @.@ 6 @-@ 8 @.@ 6 % of road transport fuels . The study found that ILUC effects offset part of the emission benefits , and that above the 5 @.@ 6 % threshold , ILUC emissions increase rapidly increase . For the expected scenario of 5 @.@ 6 % by 2020 , the study estimated that biodiesel production increases would be mostly domestic , while bioethanol production would take place mainly in Brazil , regardless of EU duties . The analysis concluded that eliminating trade barriers would further reduce emissions , because the EU would import more from Brazil . Under this scenario , " direct emission savings from biofuels are estimated at 18 Mt CO 
 2 , additional emissions from ILUC at 5 @.@ 3 Mt CO 
 2 ( mostly in Brazil ) , resulting in a global net balance of nearly 13 Mt CO 
 2 savings in a 20 years horizon . The study also found that ILUC emissions were much greater for biodiesel from vegetable oil and estimated that in 2020 even at the 5 @.@ 6 % level were over half the greenhouse gas emissions from diesel . 
 As part of the announcement , the Commission stated that it would publish a report on ILUC by the end of 2010 . 
 = = = = = Certification system = = = = = 
 On June 10 , 2010 , the EC announced its decision to set up certification schemes for biofuels , including imports as part of the Renewable Energy Directive . The Commission encouraged E.U. nations , industry and NGOs to set up voluntary certification schemes . EC figures for 2007 showed that 26 % of biodiesel and 31 % of bioethanol used in the E.U. was imported , mainly from Brazil and the United States . 
 = = = = = Reactions = = = = = 
 UNICA welcomed the EU efforts to " engage independent experts in its assessments " but requested that improvements because " ... the report currently contains a certain number of inaccuracies , so once these are corrected , we anticipate even higher benefits resulting from the use of Brazilian sugarcane ethanol . " UNICA highlighted the fact that the report assumed land expansion that " does not take into consideration the agro @-@ ecological zoning for sugarcane in Brazil , which prevents cane from expanding into any type of native vegetation . " 
 Critics said the 10 % figure was reduced to 5 @.@ 6 % of transport fuels partly by exaggerating the contribution of electric vehicles ( EV ) in 2020 , as the study assumed EVs would represent 20 % of new car sales , two and six times the car industry 's own estimate . They also claimed the study " exaggerates to around 45 percent the contribution of bioethanol — the greenest of all biofuels — and consequently downplays the worst impacts of biodiesel . " 
 Environmental groups found that the measures " are too weak to halt a dramatic increase in deforestation " . According to Greenpeace , " indirect land @-@ use change impacts of biofuel production still are not properly addressed " , which for them was the most dangerous problem of biofuels 
 Industry representatives welcomed the certification system and some dismissed concerns regarding the lack of land use criteria . UNICA and other industry groups wanted the gaps in the rules filled to provide a clear operating framework . 
 The negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council of European Ministers continue . A deal is not foreseen before 2014 
 = Endgame ( Megadeth album ) = 
 Endgame is the twelfth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . It was released on September 15 , 2009 through Roadrunner Records and was produced by Dave Mustaine and Andy Sneap . Endgame was the first album to feature guitarist Chris Broderick , following Glen Drover 's departure in 2008 , and was the band 's last studio album with bassist James LoMenzo ; original bassist David Ellefson rejoined the band several months after the album 's release . 
 There are eleven tracks on the album , with lyrics inspired by subjects ranging from The Lord of the Rings and the financial crisis of 2007 – 08 , to insanity , torture and crime . Two singles were released from the album : " Head Crusher " and " The Right to Go Insane " ; the former was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 2010 Grammy Awards . Endgame entered the Billboard 200 at number nine , and reached number one on the U.S. Top Hard Rock Albums chart . As of April 2011 it has sold about 150 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. The album received generally positive reviews from music critics , and was thought to continue the success of the band 's previous album , United Abominations ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 On May 27 , 2009 , Megadeth frontman and guitarist Dave Mustaine confirmed twelve songs were complete and the group was currently mixing and mastering the record . The first preview from Endgame was a six @-@ minute video featuring Sneap describing the process of mixing " Head Crusher " at his studio in Derbyshire , England . In the video , he called the upcoming album " old @-@ school " . Endgame was recorded at the band 's studio , " Vic 's Garage " , in San Marcos , California . The track listing was initially revealed on July 2 , 2009 , although several track titles were later shortened for the final release . The album was produced by Andy Sneap , who also produced Megadeth 's previous album , United Abominations . 
 Mustaine said of the album : " It is fast , it is heavy , there is singing , yelling , speaking , and guest voices ( maybe not singing – more like in " Captive Honour " ) , the soloing is insane . " He described it as a riff @-@ oriented album , less melodic than the band 's mid @-@ to @-@ late 90s material . Mustaine had saved a number of old rehearsal tapes , which were used as the album 's starting point . The band members had online chats with fans on their website while recording , which according to Mustaine , helped lift the band 's enthusiasm . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 On the September 10 , 2009 edition of the Alex Jones Show , Jones suggested the title and cover of Endgame was inspired by the film Endgame , which he wrote and directed . Jones stated he had sent Mustaine a copy of the film after Mustaine made an appearance on the Alex Jones Show in 2008 . This was later confirmed by Mustaine in a subsequent appearance on Jones ' show . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Megadeth finished recording the album on May 19 , and on June 18 , the album title was announced to be Endgame . The cover artwork was released online on July 27 , 2009 . John <unk> , who designed the cover for United Abominations , returned for the album cover for Endgame The release date for Endgame was announced on the Megadeth official website as September 15 , 2009 , and Metal Hammer was the first to review the album track by track . A week after its release , the album had sold 45 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and 8 @,@ 200 copies in Canada , debuting at number nine on the Billboard 200 , one place lower than the debut of United Abominations in 2007 . The album placed first on the Hard Rock Albums chart and second on the Rock Albums chart . 
 On May 10 , 2009 , Mustaine announced on <unk> that some music from Megadeth would appear in the film Land of the Lost to help promote Endgame . Whether the music was to be from the album was not clear . During the message Mustaine left on <unk> , it was stated there was new music playing in the background of the message . Ultimately , parts of the song " The Right To Go Insane " , can be heard near the end of the film . Another song from the album , " This Day We Fight ! " , was used as a playable song on Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock . As promotion for Endgame , Megadeth performed " Head Crusher " on the September 17 , 2009 , edition of Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . 
 Megadeth toured in support of the album , beginning in Grand Rapids , Michigan , in November 2009 and ending on December 13 , in Las Vegas , Nevada . The tour featured Machine Head , Suicide Silence , Warbringer , and <unk> . Megadeth , Slayer , and Testament were set to embark on the American Carnage tour on January 18 , but it was postponed until summer due to Slayer frontman Tom Araya 's undergoing back surgery . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Endgame 's lyrical themes are diverse . " This Day We Fight ! " drew inspiration by Aragorn 's plea to his fighters from the Lord of the Rings trilogy . " 44 Minutes " is about the North Hollywood shootout of 1997 and the title is derived from the film 44 Minutes : The North Hollywood Shoot @-@ Out based on the event . " 1 @,@ 320 " was written about nitro fuel funny cars . Mustaine said " Bite the Hand " was written " about the greed of the fiduciary leaders of the financial world and how they just didn 't care about the responsibility they had to the public . " The title track was written " about a bill that ex @-@ President George W. Bush signed into law that gave him the power to put American citizens in detention centers here in the United States " . 
 " The Hardest Part of Letting Go … Sealed With a Kiss " is a two @-@ part song which Mustaine wrote for his wife . PopMatters reviewer Adrien Begrand called it a " twisted love song " . " Head Crusher " , describes the medieval torture device of the same name . Mustaine said " How The Story Ends " was inspired by the teachings of Sun Tzu . Begrand describes " The Right to Go Insane " as " [ Mustaine 's ] usual ' I ’ m slowly going nuts ' shtick " ; however , Mustaine stated the song was " about having been wiped out , like so many Americans , from the recession and potential depression years of 2000 [ sic ] " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The album 's lead single was " Head Crusher " . According to Roadrunner Records ' website , a download of " Head Crusher " was available for 24 hours on July 7 , starting at 11 : 00 AM Eastern Time Zone . The availability of the download ended the morning of July 8 . The track was previously available for listening by calling Dave Mustaine 's number through the <unk> , a service he launched that enables musicians to connect to their audience over the phone . The song was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 52nd annual Grammy Awards – the band 's first Grammy nomination since the 1997 song " Trust " – and received a music video directed by Bill Fishman . 
 The second single , " The Right to Go Insane " , was released eight months later . A music video for it was released in April 2010 and featured then @-@ recently @-@ returned bass player David Ellefson . The video 's plot is roughly based on the story of Shawn Nelson , an unemployed plumber who rampaged through San Diego in a stolen M60 Patton tank . The video premiered at a show in Austin , Texas on March 26 during the anniversary tour for Rust in Peace . The song hit position 34 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Endgame received generally positive reviews from critics . Stephanie Burkett from BBC Music said the album is " their most reliable and proficient album since Rust in Peace . " She also noted that Megadeth " are once again asserting their right to be considered one of the best and most consistent heavy metal groups on the planet . " Chad Bowar of About.com awarded four and a half stars saying , " Megadeth is still at the top of their game . Endgame has some old @-@ school moments , but also modern ones . 2007 ’ s United Abominations garnered a lot of critical praise and was on many year @-@ end best of lists that year ... Endgame is even better . " AllMusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia said " Megadeth 's second release for Roadrunner , Endgame , whose title apparently refers to " coming full circle " rather than any sort of goodbye , and finds the latest iteration of Megadeth – debuting new guitarist Chris Broderick ( ex @-@ Nevermore , Jag Panzer ) – working primarily within their technical thrash comfort zone ( think Peace Sells through Rust in Peace ) , with only a few latter @-@ day elements and rare experimental diversions . " 
 Adrien Begrand of Popmatters noted " not a moment is wasted on Endgame " and said " it 's all due to Mustaine sticking to his strengths , and with the extraordinarily talented Broderick as his new wingman , the record positively scorches with an intensity we haven ’ t heard since Rust in Peace . With its furious back @-@ and @-@ forth solos , opening instrumental ' Dialectic Chaos ' wastes no time in showcasing that dynamic between Mustaine and Broderick , and combined with the pure speed of ' This Day We Fight ! ' , longtime fans will be instantly reminded of the bracing ' Into the Lungs of Hell ' / ' Set the World Afire ' one @-@ two punch that kicks off 1988 's great So Far , So Good ... So What ! . " Mark Eglinton of The Quietus described the album as " a return to form " for Megadeth . Rock guitarist Slash gave a favorable review to Endgame via Twitter . Also , Q gave the album three stars out of five and said : " Endgame starts with an instrumental before hitting the kind of rhythms that once earned Megadeth the tag ' state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art speed @-@ metal @-@ band ' . " 
 Endgame has since been regarded as a high point of the band 's later career . It follows upon two well @-@ received predecessors , while the band started to change its musical direction on the following two albums . In 2013 , WhatCulture included Endgame as number five on its " Top 5 Megadeth albums " list , behind Killing is My Business ... and Business is Good ! . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Miran Pastourma = 
 Miran Pastourma is a famed pastourma and <unk> charcuterie business and market in Athens , Greece . The market has been in operation since 1922 . It is considered the charcuterie of the connoisseurs . Despite the Greek economic crisis , Miran is expanding its business and has doubled in size to accommodate increased demand . The founder of the shop , Miran Kourounlian , is thought to be the man who brought pastourma to Athens for the first time . Miran is considered the largest company of its kind in the European Union . The flavour of pastourma coming from the historical enterprise permeates Euripides Street in the centre of Athens . Miran and its neighbor <unk> Cold Cuts are considered two of the historical establishments of Athens . Miran has been in the same spot in <unk> Street since its opening in 1922 . Miran is the recipient of multiple gourmet prizes . 
 = = History = = 
 The Miran Pastourma market was founded in Athens in 1922 by Miran Kourounlian , a refugee of the Armenian genocide who managed to escape to Constantinople from his native Kayseri . He eventually settled in Athens , Greece via Chios and then <unk> . At the time , Miran Kourounlian was already experienced in making <unk> and <unk> and decided to establish a self @-@ named charcuterie business on 45 <unk> Street near the Omonoia Square of Athens . 
 The market soon became popular throughout Athens , as it was one of the few pastourma and soutzouki sellers in the city . The company became even more popular when Miran Kourounlian 's son Bedros took over management in 1960 and began distributing the products throughout Greece . The store originally occupied an area of 3 m2 . In 1983 Bedros expanded the Miran product factory to 1300 m2 . After the death of Bedros in the 1990s , the family business was passed to his heirs , brothers Miran and Krikor Kourounlian , who manage the business today . 
 = = Today = = 
 Miran Pastourma serves pastourma and soutzouki in its original location on 45 <unk> Street . In 1994 , the third generation of the Kourounlian pastourma makers has started a further expansion of the business both inside Greece and to the European Union . Under the management of Miran and Krikor Kourounlian , the company obtained a European Union export code in 1994 . It is now distributing products throughout the European Union and other countries . Miran has taken control of the Athens store while his brother Krikor oversees the factory , which produces between seven and ten tons of processed meat products yearly . 
 According to current manager Miran Kourounlian , the company 's success is due to its traditional preparation methods and the quality of the beef , which is superior overall to that found in Greece , since it is imported from Argentina . He believes that Greek meat lacks a " consistent quality " . Miran Kourounlian has stated in an interview that some of the customers of his store have been patrons since the 1940s and 1950s . 
 Miran has continued to grow despite Greece 's economic crisis , doubling in size . To celebrate the occasion , the grandson of Miran along with his brother Krikor and their father Bedros organised a party where they introduced their new product , pastourma made of camel meat . 
 Milan 's products include imported and Greek processed meats , cheese and spices . The <unk> have also signed agreements with similar enterprises in Europe under which the foreign enterprises will tailor their recipes according to the Miran product specifications so that their products will appeal to Greek consumers . The company 's products can now be found in major Greek supermarket chains . A postal @-@ delivery system for their products has been established to reach the internal Greek market . The delivery is free inside Greece and the meat is packed in special polystyrene packaging with dry ice to preserve freshness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Greek edition of Elle magazine includes Miran 's charcuterie in its list of the best of its kind . 
 According to the Ethnos newspaper , Miran 's meat for pastourma has been described as excellent . Ethnos and Elle praise Miran for cutting the pastourma by hand rather than with a cutting machine . Miran is also commended for aging the meat naturally and not in a warehouse . 
 Real Taste and Style magazine praises Miran <unk> as " the historical place for those seeking rare tastes " and " an art which started with Miran Kourounlian and which has been continued by his progeny " . The same magazine mentions that the Miran store is found in the best tourist guidebooks for Athens . 
 <unk> magazine describes Miran as the " Mecca of soutzouki " and mentions that the Miran soutzouki is made from lamb as well as beef and has been mixed with all the " beautiful and hot spices of planet Earth " . 
 = = Prizes = = 
 Gold medal for soutzouki . 
 Gold medal for rural sausage of partial maturation . 
 Silver medal for <unk> . 
 <unk> Gourmet Prize . 
 = = Products = = 
 Miran products include : 
 = Grave Circle A , Mycenae = 
 Grave Circle A in Mycenae is a 16th @-@ century BC royal cemetery situated to the south of the Lion Gate , the main entrance of the Bronze Age citadel of Mycenae , southern Greece . This burial complex was initially constructed outside the fortification walls of Mycenae , but was ultimately enclosed in the acropolis when the fortifications were extended during the 13th century BC . Grave Circle A and Grave Circle B , the latter found outside the walls of Mycenae , represent one of the major characteristics of the early phase of the Mycenaean civilization . 
 The circle has a diameter of 27 @.@ 5 m ( 90 ft ) and contains six shaft graves , where a total of nineteen bodies were buried . It has been suggested that a mound was constructed over each grave , and funeral stelae were erected . Among the objects found were a series of gold death masks , additionally beside the deceased were full sets of weapons , ornate staffs as well as gold and silver cups . The site was excavated by the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1876 , following the descriptions of Homer and Pausanias . One of the gold masks he unearthed became known as the " The Death Mask of Agamemnon " , ruler of Mycenae according to Greek mythology . However , it has been proved that the burials date circa three centuries earlier , before Agamemnon is supposed to have lived . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the end of the 3rd millennium BC ( circa 2200 BC ) , the indigenous inhabitants of mainland Greece underwent a cultural transformation attributed to climate change , local events and developments ( i.e. destruction of the " House of Tiles " ) , as well as to continuous contacts with various areas such as western Asia Minor , the Cyclades , Albania , and Dalmatia . These Bronze Age people were equipped with horses , surrounded themselves with luxury goods , and constructed elaborate shaft graves . The acropolis of Mycenae , one of the main centers of Mycenaean culture , located in Argolis , northeast Peloponnese , was built on a defensive hill at an elevation of 128 m ( 420 ft ) and covers an area of 30 @,@ 000 m2 ( 320 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The Shaft Graves found in Mycenae signified the elevation of a new Greek @-@ speaking royal dynasty whose economic power depended on long @-@ distance sea trade . Grave Circles A and B , the latter found outside the walls of Mycenae , represent one of the major characteristics of the early phase of the Mycenaean civilization . 
 = = History = = 
 Mycenaean shaft graves are essentially an Argive variant of the rudimentary Middle Helladic funerary tradition with features derived from Early Bronze Age traditions developed locally in mainland Greece . Grave Circle A , formed circa 1600 BC as a new elite burial place , was probably first restricted to men and seems to be a continuation of the earlier Grave Circle B and correlates with the general social trend of higher burial investment taking place throughout entire Greece that time . The Grave Circle A site was part of a larger funeral place from the Middle Helladic period . At the time it was built , during the Late Helladic I ( 1600 BC ) , there was probably a small unfortified palace on Mycenae , while the graves of the Mycenaean ruling family remained outside of the city walls . There is no evidence of a circular wall around the site during the period of the burials . The last interment took place circa 1500 BC . 
 Immediately after the last interment , the local rulers abandoned the shaft graves in favour of a new and more imposing form of tomb already developing in Messenia , south Peloponessus , the tholos . Around 1250 BC , when the fortifications of Mycenae were extended , the Grave Circle was included inside the new wall . A double ring peribolos wall was also built around the area . It appears that the site became a <unk> ( sacred precinct ) , while a circular construction , possibly an altar was found above one grave . The burial site had been replanned as a monument , an attempt by the 13th century BC <unk> rulers to appropriate the possible heroic past of the older ruling dynasty . Under this context , the land surface was built up to make a level precinct for ceremonies , with the stelae over the graves being re @-@ erected . A new entrance , the Lion Gate , was constructed near the site . 
 = = Findings = = 
 Grave Circle A , with a diameter of 27 @.@ 5 m ( 90 ft ) , is situated on the acropolis of Mycenae southeast of the Lion Gate . The site is surrounded by two rows of slabs , while the space between the rows was filled with earth and roofed with slabs . The Grave Circle contains six shaft graves , the smallest of which is measured at 3 @.@ 0 m by 3 @.@ 5 m and the largest measured at 4 @.@ 50 m by 6 @.@ 40 m ( the depth of each shaft grave ranges from 1 @.@ 0 m to 4 @.@ 0 m ) . Over each grave a mound was constructed and stelae were erected . These stelae had been probably erected in memory of the Mycenaean rulers buried there ; three of them depict chariot scenes . 
 A total of nineteen bodies – eight men , nine women and two children – were found in the shafts , which contained two to five bodies each ( with the exception of Grave II , which was a single burial ) . Among the findings , boars ' tusks were found in Grave IV , as well as five golden masks in Graves IV and V. One of them , the supposed Mask of Agamemnon , was found in Grave V. Additionally , gold and silver cups , including Nestor 's Cup and the Silver Siege <unk> , were found by the side of the deceased . A number of gold rings , buttons and bracelets were also found . Most of the graves were equipped with full sets of weapons , especially swords , and the figural depictions of the objects show fighting and hunting scenes . 
 Many objects were designed to signify the social rank of the deceased , for instance , decorated daggers , which were objects d 'art and cannot be considered real weapons . Ornate staffs as well as a scepter from Grave IV clearly indicate a very significant status of the deceased . Items such as bulls ' heads with a double axe display clear Minoan influences . At the time that the Grave Circle was built , the Mycenaeans had not yet conquered Minoan Crete . Although it seems that they recognized the Minoans as the providers of the finest in design and craftsmanship , most of the objects decorated in Minoan style and buried in Grave Circle A are not of Minoan but of indigenous craftsmanship . On the other hand , certain motifs such as fighting and hunting scenes are clearly of Mycenaean style . 
 = = Excavations = = 
 The site of Mycenae was the first in Greece to be subjected to modern archaeological excavation . It was excavated by the German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1876 . Schliemann , inspired by Homer ’ s descriptions in the Iliad , in which Mycenae is termed " abounding in gold " , began digging there . He was also following the accounts of the ancient geographer Pausanias who , during the 2nd century AD , described the once prosperous site and mentioned that according to a local tradition , the graves of Agamemnon and his followers , including his charioteer Eurymedon and the two children of Cassandra , were buried within the citadel . What Schliemann discovered in his excavation satisfied both his opinion of Homer 's historical accuracy and his craving for valuable treasures . Among the objects he unearthed in Grave Circle A was a series of gold death masks , including one he proclaimed " The Death Mask of Agamemnon " . Schliemann cleared five shafts and recognized them as the graves mentioned by Pausanias . He stopped his exploration after the fifth grave was explored , believing that he had finished excavating the Grave Circle , however a year later Panagiotis <unk> found a sixth shaft grave . 
 It has since been proven that the burials in Grave Circle A date from 16th century BC , before the traditional time of the Trojan War ( 13th @-@ 12th century BC ) , in which Agamemnon is supposed to have participated . 
 = = Historical inferences = = 
 The valuable objects found in the graves suggest that powerful rulers were buried in this site . Although Agamemnon was supposed to have lived centuries later , these graves might have belonged to the former ruling dynasty of Mycenae – according to Greek mythology , the <unk> . 
 In the 2006 History Channel documentary , The Exodus Decoded , it was suggested that some of the objects are related to the events of the Exodus , the departure of the Israelites from ancient Egypt . It was argued that the Tribe of Dan is linked with the Danaans of the Greek mythology , though this view is not widely supported . 
 = Patterns in nature = 
 Patterns in nature are visible regularities of form found in the natural world . These patterns recur in different contexts and can sometimes be modelled mathematically . Natural patterns include symmetries , trees , spirals , meanders , waves , foams , tessellations , cracks and stripes . Early Greek philosophers studied pattern , with Plato , Pythagoras and Empedocles attempting to explain order in nature . The modern understanding of visible patterns developed gradually over time . 
 In the 19th century , Belgian physicist Joseph Plateau examined soap films , leading him to formulate the concept of a minimal surface . German biologist and artist Ernst Haeckel painted hundreds of marine organisms to emphasise their symmetry . Scottish biologist D 'Arcy Thompson pioneered the study of growth patterns in both plants and animals , showing that simple equations could explain spiral growth . In the 20th century , British mathematician Alan Turing predicted mechanisms of morphogenesis which give rise to patterns of spots and stripes . Hungarian biologist Aristid Lindenmayer and French American mathematician Benoît Mandelbrot showed how the mathematics of fractals could create plant growth patterns . 
 Mathematics , physics and chemistry can explain patterns in nature at different levels . Patterns in living things are explained by the biological processes of natural selection and sexual selection . Studies of pattern formation make use of computer models to simulate a wide range of patterns . 
 = = History = = 
 Early Greek philosophers attempted to explain order in nature , anticipating modern concepts . Plato ( c 427 – c 347 BC ) — looking only at his work on natural patterns — argued for the existence of universals . He considered these to consist of ideal forms ( εἶδος eidos : " form " ) of which physical objects are never more than imperfect copies . Thus , a flower may be roughly circular , but it is never a perfect mathematical circle . Pythagoras explained patterns in nature like the harmonies of music as arising from number , which he took to be the basic constituent of existence . Empedocles to an extent anticipated Darwin 's evolutionary explanation for the structures of organisms . 
 In 1202 , Leonardo Fibonacci ( c 1170 – c 1250 ) introduced the Fibonacci number sequence to the western world with his book Liber Abaci . Fibonacci gave an ( unrealistic ) biological example , on the growth in numbers of a theoretical rabbit population . In 1917 , D 'Arcy Wentworth Thompson ( 1860 – 1948 ) published his book On Growth and Form . His description of phyllotaxis and the Fibonacci sequence , the mathematical relationships in the spiral growth patterns of plants , is classic . He showed that simple equations could describe all the apparently complex spiral growth patterns of animal horns and mollusc shells . 
 The Belgian physicist Joseph Plateau ( 1801 – 1883 ) formulated the mathematical problem of the existence of a minimal surface with a given boundary , which is now named after him . He studied soap films intensively , formulating Plateau 's laws which describe the structures formed by films in foams . 
 The German psychologist Adolf <unk> ( 1810 – 1876 ) claimed that the golden ratio was expressed in the arrangement of plant parts , in the skeletons of animals and the branching patterns of their veins and nerves , as well as in the geometry of crystals . 
 Ernst Haeckel ( 1834 – 1919 ) painted beautiful illustrations of marine organisms , in particular <unk> , emphasising their symmetry to support his faux @-@ Darwinian theories of evolution . 
 The American photographer Wilson Bentley ( 1865 – 1931 ) took the first <unk> of a snowflake in 1885 . 
 In 1952 , Alan Turing ( 1912 – 1954 ) , better known for his work on computing and codebreaking , wrote The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis , an analysis of the mechanisms that would be needed to create patterns in living organisms , in the process called morphogenesis . He predicted oscillating chemical reactions , in particular the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction . These activator @-@ inhibitor mechanisms can , Turing suggested , generate patterns of stripes and spots in animals , and contribute to the spiral patterns seen in plant phyllotaxis . 
 In 1968 , the Hungarian theoretical biologist Aristid Lindenmayer ( 1925 – 1989 ) developed the L @-@ system , a formal grammar which can be used to model plant growth patterns in the style of fractals . L @-@ systems have an alphabet of symbols that can be combined using production rules to build larger strings of symbols , and a mechanism for translating the generated strings into geometric structures . In 1975 , after centuries of slow development of the mathematics of patterns by Gottfried Leibniz , Georg Cantor , Helge von Koch , Wacław Sierpiński and others , Benoît Mandelbrot wrote a famous paper , How Long Is the Coast of Britain ? Statistical Self @-@ Similarity and Fractional Dimension , crystallising mathematical thought into the concept of the fractal . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Living things like orchids , hummingbirds , and the peacock 's tail have abstract designs with a beauty of form , pattern and colour that artists struggle to match . The beauty that people perceive in nature has causes at different levels , notably in the mathematics that governs what patterns can physically form , and among living things in the effects of natural selection , that govern how patterns evolve . 
 Mathematics seeks to discover and explain abstract patterns or regularities of all kinds . Visual patterns in nature find explanations in chaos theory , fractals , logarithmic spirals , topology and other mathematical patterns . For example , L @-@ systems form convincing models of different patterns of tree growth . 
 The laws of physics apply the abstractions of mathematics to the real world , often as if it were perfect . For example , a crystal is perfect when it has no structural defects such as dislocations and is fully symmetric . Exact mathematical perfection can only approximate real objects . Visible patterns in nature are governed by physical laws ; for example , meanders can be explained using fluid dynamics . 
 In biology , natural selection can cause the development of patterns in living things for several reasons , including camouflage , sexual selection , and different kinds of signalling , including mimicry and cleaning symbiosis . In plants , the shapes , colours , and patterns of flowers like the lily have evolved to optimise insect pollination ( other plants may be pollinated by wind , birds , or bats ) . European honey bees and other pollinating insects are attracted to flowers by a radial pattern of colours and stripes ( some visible only in ultraviolet light ) that serve as nectar guides that can be seen at a distance ; by scent ; and by rewards of sugar @-@ rich nectar and edible pollen . 
 = = Types of pattern = = 
 = = = Symmetry = = = 
 Symmetry is pervasive in living things . Animals mainly have bilateral or mirror symmetry , as do the leaves of plants and some flowers such as orchids . Plants often have radial or rotational symmetry , as do many flowers and some groups of animals such as sea anemones . Fivefold symmetry is found in the echinoderms , the group that includes starfish , sea urchins , and sea lilies . 
 Among non @-@ living things , snowflakes have striking sixfold symmetry : each flake is unique , its structure forming a record of the varying conditions during its crystallisation , with nearly the same pattern of growth on each of its six arms . Crystals in general have a variety of symmetries and crystal habits ; they can be cubic or octahedral , but true crystals cannot have fivefold symmetry ( unlike quasicrystals ) . Rotational symmetry is found at different scales among non @-@ living things including the crown @-@ shaped splash pattern formed when a drop falls into a pond , and both the spheroidal shape and rings of a planet like Saturn . 
 Symmetry has a variety of causes . Radial symmetry suits organisms like sea anemones whose adults do not move : food and threats may arrive from any direction . But animals that move in one direction necessarily have upper and lower sides , head and tail ends , and therefore a left and a right . The head becomes specialised with a mouth and sense organs ( <unk> ) , and the body becomes bilaterally symmetric ( though internal organs need not be ) . More puzzling is the reason for the fivefold ( <unk> ) symmetry of the echinoderms . Early echinoderms were bilaterally symmetrical , as their larvae still are . Sumrall and Wray argue that the loss of the old symmetry had both developmental and ecological causes . 
 = = = Trees , fractals = = = 
 Fractals are infinitely self @-@ similar , iterated mathematical constructs having fractal dimension . Infinite iteration is not possible in nature so all ' fractal ' patterns are only approximate . For example , the leaves of ferns and <unk> ( Apiaceae ) are only self @-@ similar ( pinnate ) to 2 , 3 or 4 levels . Fern @-@ like growth patterns occur in plants and in animals including bryozoa , corals , <unk> like the air fern , <unk> argentea , and in non @-@ living things , notably electrical discharges . Lindenmayer system fractals can model different patterns of tree growth by varying a small number of parameters including branching angle , distance between nodes or branch points ( <unk> length ) , and number of branches per branch point . 
 Fractal @-@ like patterns occur widely in nature , in phenomena as diverse as clouds , river networks , geologic fault lines , mountains , coastlines , animal coloration , snow flakes , crystals , blood vessel branching , and ocean waves . 
 = = = Spirals = = = 
 Spirals are common in plants and in some animals , notably molluscs . For example , in the nautilus , a cephalopod mollusc , each chamber of its shell is an approximate copy of the next one , scaled by a constant factor and arranged in a logarithmic spiral . Given a modern understanding of fractals , a growth spiral can be seen as a special case of self @-@ similarity . 
 Plant spirals can be seen in phyllotaxis , the arrangement of leaves on a stem , and in the arrangement ( <unk> ) of other parts as in composite flower heads and seed heads like the sunflower or fruit structures like the pineapple and snake fruit , as well as in the pattern of scales in pine cones , where multiple spirals run both clockwise and anticlockwise . These arrangements have explanations at different levels – mathematics , physics , chemistry , biology – each individually correct , but all necessary together . Phyllotaxis spirals can be generated mathematically from Fibonacci ratios : the Fibonacci sequence runs 1 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 13 ... ( each subsequent number being the sum of the two preceding ones ) . For example , when leaves alternate up a stem , one rotation of the spiral touches two leaves , so the pattern or ratio is 1 / 2 . In hazel the ratio is 1 / 3 ; in apricot it is 2 / 5 ; in pear it is 3 / 8 ; in almond it is 5 / 13 . In disc phyllotaxis as in the sunflower and daisy , the florets are arranged in Fermat 's spiral with Fibonacci numbering , at least when the flowerhead is mature so all the elements are the same size . Fibonacci ratios approximate the golden angle , 137 @.@ 508 ° , which governs the curvature of Fermat 's spiral . 
 From the point of view of physics , spirals are lowest @-@ energy configurations which emerge spontaneously through self @-@ organizing processes in dynamic systems . From the point of view of chemistry , a spiral can be generated by a reaction @-@ diffusion process , involving both activation and inhibition . Phyllotaxis is controlled by proteins that manipulate the concentration of the plant hormone auxin , which activates meristem growth , alongside other mechanisms to control the relative angle of buds around the stem . From a biological perspective , arranging leaves as far apart as possible in any given space is favoured by natural selection as it maximises access to resources , especially sunlight for photosynthesis . 
 = = = Chaos , flow , meanders = = = 
 In mathematics , a dynamical system is chaotic if it is ( highly ) sensitive to initial conditions ( the so @-@ called " butterfly effect " ) , which requires the mathematical properties of topological mixing and dense periodic orbits . 
 Alongside fractals , chaos theory ranks as an essentially universal influence on patterns in nature . There is a relationship between chaos and fractals — the strange <unk> in chaotic systems have a fractal dimension . Some cellular automata , simple sets of mathematical rules that generate patterns , have chaotic behaviour , notably Stephen Wolfram 's Rule 30 . 
 Vortex streets are zigzagging patterns of whirling vortices created by the unsteady separation of flow of a fluid , most often air or water , over obstructing objects . Smooth ( laminar ) flow starts to break up when the size of the obstruction or the velocity of the flow become large enough compared to the viscosity of the fluid . 
 <unk> are sinuous bends in rivers or other channels , which form as a fluid , most often water , flows around bends . As soon as the path is slightly curved , the size and curvature of each loop increases as helical flow drags material like sand and gravel across the river to the inside of the bend . The outside of the loop is left clean and unprotected , so erosion accelerates , further increasing the meandering in a powerful positive feedback loop . 
 = = = Waves , dunes = = = 
 Waves are disturbances that carry energy as they move . Mechanical waves propagate through a medium – air or water , making it oscillate as they pass by . Wind waves are sea surface waves that create the characteristic chaotic pattern of any large body of water , though their statistical behaviour can be predicted with wind wave models . As waves in water or wind pass over sand , they create patterns of ripples . When winds blow over large bodies of sand , they create dunes , sometimes in extensive dune fields as in the Taklamakan desert . Dunes may form a range of patterns including crescents , very long straight lines , stars , domes , parabolas , and longitudinal or Seif ( ' sword ' ) shapes . 
 <unk> or crescent dunes are produced by wind acting on desert sand ; the two horns of the crescent and the slip face point downwind . Sand blows over the upwind face , which stands at about 15 degrees from the horizontal , and falls on to the slip face , where it accumulates up to the angle of repose of the sand , which is about 35 degrees . When the slip face exceeds the angle of repose , the sand avalanches , which is a nonlinear behaviour : the addition of many small amounts of sand causes nothing much to happen , but then the addition of a further small amount suddenly causes a large amount to avalanche . Apart from this nonlinearity , <unk> behave rather like solitary waves . 
 = = = Bubbles , foam = = = 
 A soap bubble forms a sphere , a surface with minimal area — the smallest possible surface area for the volume enclosed . Two bubbles together form a more complex shape : the outer surfaces of both bubbles are spherical ; these surfaces are joined by a third spherical surface as the smaller bubble bulges slightly into the larger one . 
 A foam is a mass of bubbles ; foams of different materials occur in nature . <unk> composed of soap films obey Plateau 's laws , which require three soap films to meet at each edge at 120 ° and four soap edges to meet at each vertex at the tetrahedral angle of about 109 @.@ 5 ° . Plateau 's laws further require films to be smooth and continuous , and to have a constant average curvature at every point . For example , a film may remain nearly flat on average by being curved up in one direction ( say , left to right ) while being curved downwards in another direction ( say , front to back ) . Structures with minimal surfaces can be used as tents . Lord Kelvin identified the problem of the most efficient way to pack cells of equal volume as a foam in 1887 ; his solution uses just one solid , the <unk> cubic honeycomb with very slightly curved faces to meet Plateau 's laws . No better solution was found until 1993 when Denis Weaire and Robert Phelan proposed the Weaire – Phelan structure ; the Beijing National Aquatics Center adapted the structure for their outer wall in the 2008 Summer Olympics . 
 At the scale of living cells , foam patterns are common ; <unk> , sponge spicules , <unk> exoskeletons and the calcite skeleton of a sea urchin , <unk> rugosa , all resemble mineral casts of Plateau foam boundaries . The skeleton of the <unk> , <unk> <unk> , a beautiful marine form drawn by Haeckel , looks as if it is a sphere composed wholly of hexagons , but this is mathematically impossible . The Euler characteristic states that for any convex polyhedron , the number of faces plus the number of vertices ( corners ) equals the number of edges plus two . A result of this formula is that any closed polyhedron of hexagons has to include exactly 12 pentagons , like a soccer ball , Buckminster Fuller geodesic dome , or fullerene molecule . This can be visualised by noting that a mesh of hexagons is flat like a sheet of chicken wire , but each pentagon that is added forces the mesh to bend ( there are fewer corners , so the mesh is pulled in ) . 
 = = = Tessellations = = = 
 Tessellations are patterns formed by repeating tiles all over a flat surface . There are 17 wallpaper groups of tilings . While common in art and design , exactly repeating tilings are less easy to find in living things . The cells in the paper nests of social wasps , and the wax cells in honeycomb built by honey bees are well @-@ known examples . Among animals , bony fish , reptiles or the pangolin , or fruits like the Salak are protected by overlapping scales or osteoderms , these form more @-@ or @-@ less exactly repeating units , though often the scales in fact vary continuously in size . Among flowers , the Snake 's Head Fritillary , Fritillaria meleagris , have a tessellated <unk> pattern on their petals . The structures of minerals provide good examples of regularly repeating three @-@ dimensional arrays . Despite the hundreds of thousands of known minerals , there are rather few possible types of arrangement of atoms in a crystal , defined by crystal structure , crystal system , and point group ; for example , there are exactly 14 Bravais lattices for the 7 lattice systems in three @-@ dimensional space . 
 = = = Cracks = = = 
 Cracks are linear openings that form in materials to relieve stress . When an elastic material stretches or shrinks uniformly , it eventually reaches its breaking strength and then fails suddenly in all directions , creating cracks with 120 degree joints , so three cracks meet at a node . Conversely , when an inelastic material fails , straight cracks form to relieve the stress . Further stress in the same direction would then simply open the existing cracks ; stress at right angles can create new cracks , at 90 degrees to the old ones . Thus the pattern of cracks indicates whether the material is elastic or not . In a tough fibrous material like oak tree bark , cracks form to relieve stress as usual , but they do not grow long as their growth is interrupted by bundles of strong elastic fibres . Since each species of tree has its own structure at the levels of cell and of molecules , each has its own pattern of splitting in its bark . 
 = = = Spots , stripes = = = 
 Leopards and ladybirds are spotted ; angelfish and zebras are striped . These patterns have an evolutionary explanation : they have functions which increase the chances that the offspring of the patterned animal will survive to reproduce . One function of animal patterns is camouflage ; for instance , a leopard that is harder to see catches more prey . Another function is signalling — for instance , a ladybird is less likely to be attacked by predatory birds that hunt by sight , if it has bold warning colours , and is also <unk> bitter or poisonous , or mimics other distasteful insects . A young bird may see a warning patterned insect like a ladybird and try to eat it , but it will only do this once ; very soon it will spit out the bitter insect ; the other ladybirds in the area will remain unmolested . The young leopards and ladybirds , inheriting genes that somehow create <unk> , survive . But while these evolutionary and functional arguments explain why these animals need their patterns , they do not explain how the patterns are formed . 
 = = = Pattern formation = = = 
 Alan Turing , and later the mathematical biologist James Murray , described a mechanism that spontaneously creates spotted or striped patterns : a reaction @-@ diffusion system . The cells of a young organism have genes that can be switched on by a chemical signal , a morphogen , resulting in the growth of a certain type of structure , say a darkly pigmented patch of skin . If the morphogen is present everywhere , the result is an even pigmentation , as in a black leopard . But if it is unevenly distributed , spots or stripes can result . Turing suggested that there could be feedback control of the production of the morphogen itself . This could cause continuous fluctuations in the amount of morphogen as it diffused around the body . A second mechanism is needed to create standing wave patterns ( to result in spots or stripes ) : an inhibitor chemical that switches off production of the morphogen , and that itself diffuses through the body more quickly than the morphogen , resulting in an activator @-@ inhibitor scheme . The Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction is a non @-@ biological example of this kind of scheme , a chemical oscillator . 
 Later research has managed to create convincing models of patterns as diverse as zebra stripes , giraffe blotches , jaguar spots ( medium @-@ dark patches surrounded by dark broken rings ) and ladybird shell patterns ( different geometrical layouts of spots and stripes , see illustrations ) . Richard Prum 's activation @-@ inhibition models , developed from Turing 's work , use six variables to account for the observed range of nine basic within @-@ feather pigmentation patterns , from the simplest , a central pigment patch , via concentric patches , bars , chevrons , eye spot , pair of central spots , rows of paired spots and an array of dots . More elaborate models simulate complex feather patterns in the Guinea fowl , <unk> meleagris , in which the individual feathers feature transitions from bars at the base to an array of dots at the far ( distal ) end . These require an oscillation created by two inhibiting signals , with interactions in both space and time . 
 Patterns can form for other reasons in the vegetated landscape of tiger bush and fir waves . Tiger bush stripes occur on arid slopes where plant growth is limited by rainfall . Each roughly horizontal stripe of vegetation effectively collects the rainwater from the bare zone immediately above it . Fir waves occur in forests on mountain slopes after wind disturbance , during regeneration . When trees fall , the trees that they had sheltered become exposed and are in turn more likely to be damaged , so gaps tend to expand downwind . Meanwhile , on the windward side , young trees grow , protected by the wind shadow of the remaining tall trees . Natural patterns are sometimes formed by animals , as in the Mima mounds of the Northwestern United States and some other areas , which appear to be created over many years by the burrowing activities of pocket gophers . 
 In permafrost soils with an active upper layer subject to annual freeze and thaw , patterned ground can form , creating circles , nets , ice wedge polygons , steps , and stripes . Thermal contraction causes shrinkage cracks to form ; in a thaw , water fills the cracks , expanding to form ice when next frozen , and widening the cracks into wedges . These cracks may join up to form polygons and other shapes . 
 = = = Pioneering authors = = = 
 Fibonacci , Leonardo . Liber Abaci , 1202 . 
 <unk> translated by Sigler , Laurence E. Fibonacci 's Liber Abaci . Springer , 2002 . 
 Haeckel , Ernst . <unk> der Natur ( Art Forms in Nature ) , 1899 – 1904 . 
 Thompson , D 'Arcy Wentworth . On Growth and Form . Cambridge , 1917 . 
 = = = General books = = = 
 Adam , John A. Mathematics in Nature : Modeling Patterns in the Natural World . Princeton University Press , 2006 . 
 Ball , Philip . Nature 's Patterns : a tapestry in three parts . 1 : Shapes . 2 : Flow . 3 : Branches . Oxford , 2009 . 
 Murphy , Pat and Neill , William . By Nature 's Design . Chronicle Books , 1993 . 
 Rothenberg , David . Survival of the Beautiful : Art , Science and Evolution . Bloomsbury Press , 2011 . 
 Stevens , Peter S. Patterns in Nature . Little , Brown & Co , 1974 . 
 Stewart , Ian . What Shape is a Snowflake ? Magical Numbers in Nature . Weidenfeld & Nicolson , 2001 . 
 = = = Patterns from nature ( as art ) = = = 
 <unk> , Bernard . Patterns of the Earth . Phaidon Press , 2007 . 
 Macnab , Maggie . Design by Nature : Using Universal Forms and Principles in Design . New Riders , 2012 . 
 Nakamura , Shigeki . Pattern Sourcebook : 250 Patterns Inspired by Nature .. Books 1 and 2 . Rockport , 2009 . 
 O 'Neill , Polly . Surfaces and Textures : A Visual Sourcebook . Black , 2008 . 
 Porter , Eliot , and Gleick , James . Nature 's Chaos . Viking Penguin , 1990 . 
 = Crabble Athletic Ground = 
 The Crabble Athletic Ground , also known as The Crabble or simply <unk> is a football stadium located in the northern Dover suburb of River , Kent , England . It was the home of the various incarnations of Dover F.C. from 1931 until the club folded in 1983 . Since then it has been the home of Dover Athletic F.C. , and it was also the temporary home of Margate F.C. between 2002 and 2004 , when the club 's Hartsdown Park stadium was being redeveloped . The stadium has two seated stands and two covered terraces and holds a total of 5 @,@ 745 fans ( including 1 @,@ 010 seats and 3 @,@ 642 covered terracing ) , although in the past , crowds larger than that figure could be accommodated . It also has a clubhouse , which the club completely redeveloped in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1896 , a syndicate of local businessmen began a project to create a sports complex at the site known as Crabble Meadows on the outskirts of Dover . The word Crabble , which is also found in the name of a local corn mill , derives from the Old English <unk> hol , meaning a hole in which crabs are found . The project was an extremely costly one but was completed in 1897 , and football was first played on the Crabble site in the same year . In 1902 , the original owners of the site , beset by financial problems , contemplated selling the land for redevelopment but eventually sold the site to the town council for £ 5 @,@ 500 . The pitch was shared by the town 's cricket and football teams , with the cricketers being given priority , which meant that the football team was forced to begin and end its season either with a long run of consecutive away matches or by playing matches at other , less satisfactory , venues in the town . To resolve the issue , the council opted to lay out a new football pitch further up the hillside , behind the lower pitch 's pavilion . The first match played on the " upper pitch " took place in September 1931 , with a small stand being constructed the following year . The football club then used the upper pitch whenever the lower pitch was unavailable due to cricket commitments . 
 Dover F.C. applied for permission to build a grandstand on the southern side of the " upper pitch " in 1947 , but the application was rejected . Three years later , the club was permitted to extend the existing small stand on the opposite side and in 1951 , Dover F.C. moved to the upper pitch on a permanent basis , initially paying the council rent of £ 300 a year . The final match on the lower pitch took place on 26 March 1951 , and the first on the upper pitch was held eleven days later , when Fulham were Dover 's opponents in a friendly . Due to a shortage of bolts , the grandstand had not actually been completed at this time . Covered terracing at the Town End , where fans had previously stood on the hillside , was added soon afterwards . Floodlights were added in 1961 and inaugurated with a match against a Chelsea XI . 
 Dover F.C folded in 1983 , but the newly formed Dover Athletic took over the ground and continued to make improvements . When the team won the Southern League championship in 1990 , however , promotion to the Football Conference was refused on the grounds that the stadium did not meet the standard required by the higher division . Subsequently , new turnstiles were installed and two new terraces were built behind the goals . The seating in the main stand was replaced and a second grandstand was added on the opposite side of the pitch . These improvements meant that the club was able to gain promotion after its second Southern League title in 1993 . In the 2002 – 03 and 2003 – 04 seasons , Margate F.C. played home fixtures at the stadium while redevelopment work took place at their own Hartsdown Park ground . What was originally intended to be a short @-@ term arrangement ended up lasting for two years as the redevelopment work stalled . 
 Between 2003 and 2004 , the ground was known as the Hoverspeed Stadium under the terms of a sponsorship deal . In 2007 , the club announced that under another such arrangement , the stadium would be known as the SeaFrance Crabble Stadium , however a year later it was announced that the deal would not be renewed due to the ferry operator 's financial constraints . On 1 July 2008 , the club announced local car dealership Perry 's as the club 's new main sponsor , with the stadium being rebranded as the Perry 's Crabble Stadium . In 2008 the club launched a project to replace the existing clubhouse with a new £ 200 @,@ 000 building featuring a larger bar , better audio @-@ visual facilities and a high quality kitchen . The club hopes the new building will become a popular venue for social and business functions . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The lower pitch at Crabble was used by Kent County Cricket Club as one of its home venues for first @-@ class cricket matches from 1907 to 1976 , a total of 106 first @-@ class matches being played there . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium is known for its unusual location , being set into the side of a hill . It has two seated stands and two covered terraces . The Main Stand , which has been in place since 1951 , occupies the length of one side of the pitch and has a roof supported by numerous columns , which obscure the view for some fans . Identical covered terraces for standing spectators are behind both goals , which also suffer from an obstructed view . The small Family Stand occupies a portion of the side opposite the Main Stand . The remainder of this side of the ground is taken up by the clubhouse , toilets and other club facilities . Unlike most football stadiums , the club directors ' lounge is set atop one of the stands . In December 2009 the Football Association gave the stadium 's facilities an A grade , meaning that it meets the minimum standard for entry to the Football League . 
 The stadium is approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) from <unk> railway station , which lies on Southeastern 's Chatham Main Line from London Victoria to Dover Priory . Dover Priory itself is further away , but connecting bus services are available . Parking is available around the perimeter of the adjacent rugby club . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance ever recorded at the ground was recorded when " just under 7 @,@ 000 " fans were in attendance for a match between Dover F.C. and Folkestone on 13 October 1951 . Current club Dover Athletic 's record home attendance is the crowd of 5 @,@ 645 for the match against Crystal Palace in the FA Cup on 4 January 2015 . 
 = Dan Paul = 
 Daniel " Dan " Perkins Smith Paul ( July 22 , 1924 – January 24 , 2010 ) was an American attorney best known for arguing the landmark case Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo before the Supreme Court of the United States . The decision established the principle that government could not force a newspaper to publish content . 
 Paul was born in Jacksonville , Florida , grew up in Daytona , Florida , and was educated at Harvard University , receiving degrees in law and public administration . Setting up practice in Miami , Florida , he specialized in First Amendment and environmental law . His clients included the Miami Dolphins of American football and newspapers such as The Miami Herald and the Wall Street Journal . For his active role in city politics , Paul was nicknamed " the father of Metro " . On June 13 , 2015 supporters led by <unk> Miami , the Urban Environment League and New Tropics named a four ( 4 ) acre Biscayne Bay waterfront site after Dan Paul . The site , owned by Miami @-@ Dade County , was formerly called Parcel B and in 1996 the Miami Heat had promised to turn the site into a public park including a mini @-@ soccer field . Supporters , now including several elected officials , demand the County force the Heat to honor its promise . The site will now be called the Dan Paul park . ( 16 ) 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dan Paul was born in Jacksonville , Florida on July 22 , 1924 , to Henry Paul , a pharmacist , and Cornelia Smith Paul , a county tax collector . After growing up in Daytona , he attended Harvard University , receiving a law degree in 1948 and a master 's degree in public administration in 1949 . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 Paul began to practice in Miami , Florida in 1949 with the firm of Loftin , Anderson , Scott , McCarthy and Preston . In 1954 he formed a partnership with Francis Sams , specializing in corporate law . Over the next decade , he established himself as one of Miami 's most prominent attorneys . In 1966 , the Miami News called him " Dade 's knight " and wrote of him that " the name Dan Paul comes up in so many civic controversies that it is hard to keep up with him " . Paul eventually became known as " the father of Metro " . 
 In 1967 , a suit filed by Paul against a plan to <unk> and expand the Florida Legislature reached the US Supreme Court . The Court struck down the plan . Paul stated that he had filed the suit because " it would greatly hurt the future of Florida to let the Legislature grow to such monstrous proportions that we would cease to have effective government . " 
 One of Paul 's specialties was environmental law , and he represented the National Audubon Society in a late @-@ 1960s lawsuit to stop an airport from being constructed in the Florida Everglades , a protected region of subtropical wetlands . He also acted as a parks activist , protesting the removal of sidewalks designed by Brazilian architect Roberto <unk> Marx . Paul played a major role in amending Miami 's city code to block the construction of buildings within fifty feet of the shore . 
 Paul worked for a time in partnership with Parker Thomson in one of the most prominent legal practices in Miami , Paul and Thomson . By the end of their practice , 28 percent of Paul and Thomson 's time was devoted to pro bono work . However , the partners split acrimoniously in 1983 . In the 1970s and ' 80s , Paul also acted as general counsel for the Miami Dolphins of American football . 
 In 2001 , Harvard established a professorship in his name at the John F. Kennedy School of Government . 
 = = = First Amendment law = = = 
 Paul represented the Miami Herald for more than three decades , as well as working for the New York Times , Wall Street Journal , and NBC . James Goodale , a First Amendment specialist , described Paul after his death as " an important figure in freedom @-@ of @-@ press matters nationally and particularly in Florida ... In Florida , in particular , he was a leader in resisting subpoenas for reporters ' sources . " 
 Paul is best known for acting as the chief lawyer for the Herald in Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo , a 1974 US Supreme Court case . In the case , a political candidate , Pat Tornillo Jr . , had requested that the Herald print his rebuttal to an editorial criticizing him , citing Florida 's " right @-@ to @-@ reply " law , which mandated that newspapers print such responses . The Herald challenged the law , and the case was appealed to the Supreme Court . 
 The Court unanimously overturned the Florida statute under the Press Freedom Clause of the First Amendment , ruling that " Governmental compulsion on a newspaper to publish that which ' reason ' tells it should not be published is unconstitutional . " The decision showed the limitations of a 1969 decision , Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. Federal Communications Commission — in which a similar " Fairness Doctrine " had been upheld for radio and television — establishing that broadcast and print media had different Constitutional protections . The decision is considered a landmark in First Amendment law . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Paul never married . For hobbies , he enjoyed tennis , <unk> , and waterskiing . 
 On January 9 , 1980 , Paul was attacked by an 18 @-@ year @-@ old guest , Bradley Schlegel , at his home in Star Island . Schlegel stabbed Paul in the face , chest , arms , and back , and Paul subsequently underwent plastic surgery to repair the wounds . Schlegel was charged with attempted murder , possession of a weapon , and attempted robbery . He initially contended that Paul had made aggressive sexual advances to him , prompting him to stab Paul in self @-@ defense . Schlegel later pleaded no contest to a charge of aggravated battery . 
 Paul died at his home in Miami on January 24 , 2010 , of Parkinson 's disease . 
 = Gulf Stream = 
 The Gulf Stream , together with its northern extension towards Europe , the North Atlantic Drift , is a powerful , warm , and swift Atlantic ocean current that originates in the Gulf of Mexico and stretches to the tip of Florida , and follows the eastern coastlines of the United States and Newfoundland before crossing the Atlantic Ocean . The process of western intensification causes the Gulf Stream to be a northward accelerating current off the east coast of North America . At about 40 ° 0 ′ N 30 ° 0 ′ W , it splits in two , with the northern stream , the North Atlantic Drift , crossing to Northern Europe and the southern stream , the Canary Current , recirculating off West Africa . 
 The Gulf Stream influences the climate of the east coast of North America from Florida to Newfoundland , and the west coast of Europe . Although there has been recent debate , there is consensus that the climate of Western Europe and Northern Europe is warmer than it would otherwise be due to the North Atlantic drift which is the northeastern section of the Gulf Stream . It is part of the North Atlantic Gyre . Its presence has led to the development of strong cyclones of all types , both within the atmosphere and within the ocean . The Gulf Stream is also a significant potential source of renewable power generation . 
 The Gulf Stream is typically 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) wide and 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) to 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) deep . The current velocity is fastest near the surface , with the maximum speed typically about 2 @.@ 5 metres per second ( 5 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 = = History = = 
 European discovery of the Gulf Stream dates to the 1512 expedition of Juan Ponce de León , after which it became widely used by Spanish ships sailing from the Caribbean to Spain . A summary of Ponce de León 's voyage log , on April 22 , 1513 , noted , " A current such that , although they had great wind , they could not proceed forward , but backward and it seems that they were proceeding well ; at the end it was known that the current was more powerful than the wind . " Its existence was also known to Peter Martyr d <unk> . 
 Benjamin Franklin became interested in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns . In 1768 , while in England , Franklin heard a curious complaint from the Colonial Board of Customs : Why did it take British packets several weeks longer to reach New York from England than it took an average American merchant ship to reach Newport , Rhode Island , despite the merchant ships leaving from London and having to sail down the River Thames and then the length of the English Channel before they sailed across the Atlantic , while the packets left from Falmouth in Cornwall ? 
 Franklin asked Timothy Folger , his cousin twice removed ( Nantucket Historical Society ) , a Nantucket island whaling captain , for an answer . Folger explained that merchant ships routinely crossed the then @-@ unnamed Gulf Stream — identifying it by whale behavior , measurement of the water 's temperature and the speed of bubbles on its surface , and changes in the water 's color — while the mail packet captains ran against it . Franklin worked with Folger and other experienced ship captains , learning enough to chart the Gulf Stream and giving it the name by which it is still known today . He offered this information to Anthony Todd , secretary of the British Post Office , but it was ignored by British sea captains . 
 Franklin 's Gulf Stream chart was published in 1770 in England , where it was mostly ignored . Subsequent versions were printed in France in 1778 and the U.S. in 1786 . 
 = = Properties = = 
 The Gulf Stream proper is a western @-@ intensified current , driven largely by wind stress . The North Atlantic Drift , in contrast , is largely thermohaline circulation – driven . In 1958 the oceanographer Henry Stommel noted that " very little water from the Gulf of Mexico is actually in the Stream " . By carrying warm water northeast across the Atlantic , it makes Western and especially Northern Europe warmer than it otherwise would be . 
 However , the extent of its contribution to the actual temperature differential between North America and Europe is a matter of dispute , as there is a recent minority opinion within the science community that this temperature difference ( beyond that caused by contrasting maritime and continental climates ) is mainly due to atmospheric waves created by the Rocky Mountains . 
 = = Formation and behaviour = = 
 A river of sea water , called the Atlantic North Equatorial Current , flows westward off the coast of Central Africa . When this current interacts with the northeastern coast of South America , the current forks into two branches . One passes into the Caribbean Sea , while a second , the Antilles Current , flows north and east of the West Indies . These two branches rejoin north of the Straits of Florida . 
 The trade winds blow westward in the tropics , and the westerlies blow eastward at mid @-@ latitudes . This wind pattern applies a stress to the subtropical ocean surface with negative curl across the north Atlantic Ocean . The resulting Sverdrup transport is equatorward . 
 Because of conservation of potential vorticity caused by the northward @-@ moving winds on the subtropical ridge 's western periphery and the increased relative vorticity of northward moving water , transport is balanced by a narrow , accelerating poleward current , which flows along the western boundary of the ocean basin , outweighing the effects of friction with the western boundary current known as the Labrador current . The conservation of potential vorticity also causes bends along the Gulf Stream , which occasionally break off due to a shift in the Gulf Stream 's position , forming separate warm and cold eddies . This overall process , known as western intensification , causes currents on the western boundary of an ocean basin , such as the Gulf Stream , to be stronger than those on the eastern boundary . 
 As a consequence , the resulting Gulf Stream is a strong ocean current . It transports water at a rate of 30 million cubic meters per second ( 30 <unk> ) through the Florida Straits . As it passes south of Newfoundland , this rate increases to 150 million cubic metres per second . The volume of the Gulf Stream dwarfs all rivers that empty into the Atlantic combined , which barely total 0 @.@ 6 million cubic metres per second . It is weaker , however , than the Antarctic Circumpolar Current . 
 The Gulf Stream is typically 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) wide and 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) to 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) deep . The current velocity is fastest near the surface , with the maximum speed typically about 2 @.@ 5 metres per second ( 5 @.@ 6 mph ) . As it travels north , the warm water transported by the Gulf Stream undergoes evaporative cooling . The cooling is wind @-@ driven : Wind moving over the water causes evaporation , cooling the water and increasing its salinity and density . When sea ice forms , salts are left out of the ice , a process known as brine exclusion . These two processes produce water that is denser and colder ( or , more precisely , water that is still liquid at a lower temperature ) . In the North Atlantic Ocean , the water becomes so dense that it begins to sink down through less salty and less dense water . ( The convective action is not unlike that of a lava lamp . ) This downdraft of cold , dense water becomes a part of the North Atlantic Deep Water , a <unk> stream . Very little seaweed lies within the current , although seaweed lies in clusters to its east . 
 = = Localised effects = = 
 The Gulf Stream is influential on the climate of the Florida peninsula . The portion off the Florida coast , referred to as the Florida current , maintains an average water temperature at or above 13 ° C ( 55 ° F ) during the winter . East winds moving over this warm water move warm air from over the Gulf Stream inland , helping to keep temperatures milder across the state than elsewhere across the Southeast during the winter . Also , the Gulf Stream 's proximity to Nantucket , Massachusetts adds to its biodiversity , as it is the northern limit for southern varieties of plant life 2002 , and the southern limit for northern plant species , Nantucket being warmer during winter than the mainland . 
 The North Atlantic Current of the Gulf Stream , along with similar warm air currents , helps keep Ireland and the western coast of Great Britain a couple of degrees warmer than the east . However , the difference is most dramatic in the western coastal islands of Scotland . A noticeable effect of the Gulf Stream and the strong westerly winds ( driven by the warm water of the Gulf Stream ) on Europe occurs along the Norwegian coast . Northern parts of Norway lie close to the Arctic zone , most of which is covered with ice and snow in winter . However , almost all of Norway 's coast remains free of ice and snow throughout the year . Weather systems warmed by the Gulf Stream drift into Northern Europe , also warming the climate behind the Scandinavian mountains . 
 = = Effect on cyclone formation = = 
 The warm water and temperature contrast along the edge of the Gulf Stream often increase the intensity of cyclones , tropical or otherwise . Tropical cyclone generation normally requires water temperatures in excess of 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) . Tropical cyclone formation is common over the Gulf Stream , especially in the month of July . Storms travel westward through the Caribbean and then either move in a northward direction and curve toward the eastern coast of the United States or stay on a north @-@ westward track and enter the Gulf of Mexico . Such storms have the potential to create strong winds and extensive damage to the United States ' Southeast Coastal Areas . 
 Strong extratropical cyclones have been shown to deepen significantly along a shallow frontal zone , forced by the Gulf Stream itself during the cold season . Subtropical cyclones also tend to generate near the Gulf Stream . 75 percent of such systems documented between 1951 and 2000 formed near this warm water current , with two annual peaks of activity occurring during the months of May and October . Cyclones within the ocean form under the Gulf Stream , extending as deep as 3 @,@ 500 metres ( 11 @,@ 500 ft ) beneath the ocean 's surface . 
 = = Possible renewable power source = = 
 The theoretical maximum energy dissipation from Gulf Stream by turbines is in the range of 20 @-@ 60 GW . One idea , which would supply the equivalent power of several nuclear power plants , would deploy a field of underwater turbines placed 300 meters ( 980 ft ) under the center of the core of the Gulf Stream . Ocean thermal energy could also be harnessed to produce electricity utilizing the temperature difference between cold deep water and warm surface water . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Some of the RMS Titanic 's victims , whose bodies were buoyed by lifebelts but were never found by rescue or recovery ships sent to find them , are surmised to have been carried away in the Gulf Stream . 
 = Black Brunswickers = 
 The Brunswicker Ducal Corps , in German : <unk> Braunschweigisches Korps , commonly known as the Black Brunswickers in English and the Schwarze <unk> ( " Black Troop " , also translated as " Black Horde " or " Black Host " ) or Schwarze Legion ( " Black Legion " ) in German were a military unit in the Napoleonic Wars . The corps was raised from volunteers by German @-@ born Frederick William , Duke of Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel ( 1771 – 1815 ) . The Duke was a harsh opponent of Napoleon Bonaparte 's occupation of his native Germany . Formed in 1809 when war broke out between the First French Empire and the Austrian Empire , the corps initially comprised a mixed force , around 2 @,@ 300 strong , of infantry , cavalry and later supporting artillery . 
 Most units of the corps wore black uniforms , leading to the " black " nicknames of the unit , though some light units ( such as sharpshooters and uhlans ) wore green uniforms . The Brunswickers wore a silvered skull badge on their hats . Their title originated from Duke Frederick William , who claimed the Duchy of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , which the French had abolished in order to incorporate its lands into the French satellite Kingdom of Westphalia . The Black Brunswickers earned themselves a fearsome reputation over the following decade , taking part in several significant battles including the pre @-@ Waterloo engagement at Quatre Bras on 16 June 1815 , where the Duke lost his life . However , recruiting , the replacement of casualties , and finance had always been problematic , and the corps was disbanded in the early 1820s . 
 The exploits of the Brunswickers caught the British Victorian public imagination : an example of this can be found in John Everett Millais 's painting The Black Brunswicker . Completed in 1860 , the painting depicts a Brunswicker in his black uniform bidding goodbye to an unnamed woman . 
 = = Formation and early years = = 
 = = = War of the Fifth Coalition = = = 
 In 1806 the Duke of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg , Charles William Ferdinand , was fatally wounded during the Prussian defeat at the Battle of Jena @-@ Auerstedt . Following Prussia 's defeat and the collapse of the Fourth Coalition against Napoleon , his duchy remained under French control . Rather than permit the Duke 's heir , Frederick William , to succeed to his father 's title , Napoleon seized the duchy and , in 1807 , incorporated it into his newly created model Kingdom of Westphalia ruled by his brother Jérôme . Two years later in 1809 the Fifth Coalition against Napoleon was formed between the Austrian Empire and the United Kingdom . The dispossessed Frederick William , who had been a strenuous critic of French domination in Germany , seized this opportunity to seek Austrian help to raise an armed force . To finance this venture he mortgaged his principality in Oels . In its initial incarnation ( dated to 25 July 1809 ) , the 2300 @-@ strong ' free ' corps consisted of two battalions of infantry , one Jäger battalion , a company of sharpshooters , and a mixed cavalry contingent including Hussars and Uhlans . 
 Despite a successful campaign with their Austrian allies , the defeat of the latter at the Battle of Wagram on 6 July 1809 led to the Armistice of Znaim on 12 July . Frederick William refused to accept this and led his Schwarze <unk> ( " Black Host " ) into Germany , succeeding in briefly taking control of the city of Brunswick . Faced with superior Westphalian forces , the Brunswickers conducted a remarkable fighting retreat across Germany , twice holding off the pursuing armies at the Battle of Halberstadt and the Battle of <unk> ; finally being evacuated by the Royal Navy from the mouth of the River Weser . Landing in England , the duke was welcomed by his cousin and brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Prince Regent ( later King George IV ) and the Black Brunswickers entered British service . During the next few years , the Brunswickers earned themselves a sound reputation through service with the British in the Peninsular Campaign . However , steady attrition in battles and skirmishes through Portugal and Spain , combined with a lack of political support and financial difficulties , led to a situation where the unit 's imminent disbandment looked likely . 
 = = = Peninsular War = = = 
 When organized for British service , the corps was renamed the Brunswick Oels Jäger and Brunswick Oels Hussar Regiments . Prussians represented a large part of the original officer corps , while the enlisted men were motivated by German patriotism . However , once the Oels entered English service , they were cut off from their natural recruiting grounds . Compelled to enlist men from the prisoner of war camps to fill up the ranks , the quality of soldiers in the Oels decreased . Worse , the King 's German Legion obtained the best of the German recruits , leaving the Oels with the less desirable ones . In addition to Germans , the Oels recruited Poles , Swiss , Danes , Dutch , and Croats . Charles Oman , the Peninsular War historian , calls the Oels a " motley crew , much given to desertion " and records one occasion where ten men were caught deserting in a body . Of these , four were shot and the rest flogged . 
 Nevertheless , the Brunswick Oels Jägers gave a good account of themselves during the war . The regiment — really a single battalion — arrived in Portugal in early 1811 . The Duke of Wellington distributed one company to the 4th Division and two companies to the 5th Division as skirmishers , while the remaining nine companies served in the newly formed 7th Division . The Oels remained in this organization until the end of the war in April 1814 . During this period , the Oels served in most of the major battles including Fuentes de Onoro , Salamanca , Vitoria , the Pyrenees , Nivelle , the Nive , and <unk> . 
 = = Waterloo campaign = = 
 Following Napoleon 's disastrous invasion of Russia in 1812 , and his subsequent retreat back into France , Frederick William was able to return to Brunswick in 1813 to reclaim his title . He also took the opportunity to replenish the ranks of his Black Brunswickers . Upon Napoleon 's escape from Elba in 1815 he once more placed himself under the Duke of Wellington 's command and joined the allied forces of the Seventh Coalition in Belgium . The " Brunswick Corps " , as it is called in the order of battle for the Waterloo Campaign , formed up as a discrete division in the allied reserve . Its strength is given as <unk> men , composed of eight infantry battalions ; one Advance Guard or <unk> , one Life Guard or Leib @-@ Bataillon , three Light and three Line Battalions . They were supported by both a horse and foot artillery battery of eight guns each . Also included were a regiment of Brunswicker Hussars and a single squadron of Uhlans were often attached to the allied cavalry corps . 
 = = = Battle of Quatre Bras = = = 
 Quatre Bras was a hamlet at a strategic crossroads on the road to Brussels . French control of it would not only threaten the city , but divide Wellington 's Allied army from Blucher 's Prussians . At 14 : 00 on 16 June 1815 , after some initial skirmishing , the main French force under Marshall Ney , approached Quatre Bras from the south . They came up against the 2nd Netherlands Division who had formed a line well in advance of the crossroads . Facing three French infantry divisions and a cavalry brigade , the Dutch and Nassau troops were forced back but did not break . Reinforcements arrived at 15 : 00 , being a Dutch cavalry brigade , Picton 's 5th British Division , followed closely by the Brunswick Corps . The sharpshooters of the Brunswick Advance Guard regiment were sent to support Dutch skirmishers in <unk> Wood on the Allied right ( western ) flank ; the rest of the corps took up a reserve position across the Brussels road . The Black Duke reassured his inexperienced troops by walking up and down in front of them , calmly puffing on his pipe . 
 A French infantry attack was halted by the allied front line , which was attacked in turn by French cavalry . Wellington moved the Brunswick infantry into the front line , where they were subjected to intense French artillery fire , forcing <unk> to fall back a short distance . As a mass of French infantry advanced up the main road , the Black Duke led a charge by his uhlans , but they were beaten back . Swept by canister shot at short range , the Brunswickers broke and rallied at the crossroads itself . At this point , the Duke , who was reforming his troops , was hit by a musket ball , which passed through his hand and into his liver . He was rescued by the men of the Lieb Regiment , who carried him back using their muskets as a stretcher . He died shortly afterwards . The Duke 's final words , to his aide Major von Wachholtz , were : 
 Mein lieber Wachholtz , wo ist denn Olfermann ? ( My dear Wachholtz , where is Olfermann ? ) 
 Colonel Elias Olfermann was the Duke 's Adjutant general , who assumed immediate command of the corps . Wellington then ordered the Brunswick hussars to make an unsupported counterattack on the French light cavalry brigade , but they were driven off by heavy fire . Later in the battle , French cuirassiers broke the Allied front line and were only prevented from taking the crossroads by the Brunswick infantry who had formed themselves into squares . By 21 : 00 , Allied reinforcements , including the newly arrived Brunswick 1st and 3rd Light Regiments , had driven the French back to their starting positions . Brunswick losses that day amounted to 188 killed and 396 wounded . 
 = = = Battle of Waterloo = = = 
 Only two days later , on Sunday 18 June , the Duke of Wellington positioned his Anglo @-@ Allied Army along a ridge near the village of Waterloo , in order to block Napoleon 's advance along the road to Brussels . The Brunswick Corps formed part of Wellington 's Reserve Corps , under his personal command . In that capacity , they were kept well behind the crest of the ridge and avoided casualties during the opening French bombardment . In the early part of the afternoon , the British Foot Guards moved down the slope to reinforce the Château d <unk> , which was under fierce French attack ; the Brunswick Corps was brought forward to take their place . 
 At about 16 : 00 , Marshall Ney decided to attempt to break the centre right of the Allied line with his cavalry . 4 @,@ 800 French horsemen charged up the hill and into the Allied infantry , who had formed themselves into squares to resist them . In all , 9 @,@ 000 cavalry were involved in repeated attacks on the Allied squares but were unable to break any of them , including the Brunswickers , whom some British officers regarded as “ shaky ” . The Brunswick Hussars and Uhlans , who formed part of the 7th British Cavalry Brigade , made harrying attacks on the French whenever they retired to regroup . Eventually , Ney had no choice but to abandon the attacks . 
 The French capture of the fortified farm of La Haye Sainte had left a gap in the centre of Wellington ’ s line , and the Brunswick infantry were brought along to fill it . It was here that Napoleon sent one of two attacks by his Imperial Guard in a last gasp effort to break Wellington ’ s army . Faced with the veterans of the Grenadiers of the Middle Guard , the inexperienced Brunswickers broke from the line and " fell back in disorder " , but rallied when they reached the cavalry reserve in the rear . The same fate befell the Nassau Infantry Regiment and two British battalions . Finally , the Guards were halted and thrown back when they were surprised by a flank attack from Dutch troops . The Brunswick Corps had recovered sufficiently to participate in the allied “ General Advance ” that swept the French army from the field . British sources give the number of Brunswickers killed in action that day as 154 with 456 wounded and 50 missing . 
 In the following days , they escorted 2 @,@ 000 French prisoners back to Brussels and then marched on to Paris . They finally returned to Brunswick on 6 December 1815 . 
 = = Uniform = = 
 The Brunswickers were awarded various nicknames by their contemporaries , including the Black Crows , the Black Legion and the Black Horde . However , although the uniforms of the individual units that comprised the corps were , as the names suggest , predominantly black , they varied in their details . 
 Infantry units in 1809 wore a black <unk> or " Polish coat " , a type of frock coat derived from a Lithuanian garment called a <unk> which had six pairs of black lace fastenings down the front . A tall collar showed the regimental colour . Trousers were black with a blue stripe ; footwear was black shoes with buttoned gaiters . They wore a shako on their heads , with the skull or a hunting horn badge for light infantry , also a black feather or horsehair plume . The shako , backpack and other equipment were of Austrian design and manufacture . The Sharpshooter companies wore a dark green Prussian @-@ style <unk> and a tall hat of Austrian origin with an elongated brim turned @-@ up at one side . In the Peninsular War , the <unk> was replaced by a short black <unk> or cavalry @-@ style tunic . Equipment and badges of rank were of British pattern . 
 The hussar cavalry were garbed in a black , light blue collared <unk> , sometimes with a black <unk> . Black overalls were worn over tight breeches of the hussar style . The hussars also wore a black <unk> . The sword and equipment were originally of Austrian design . The Uhlan squadron wore a green <unk> or lancer 's jacket with red facings and a traditional czapka cap , their uniform being a copy of the Austrian Graf von <unk> Uhlan Regiment . The lance had a red and yellow pennon . By 1815 , the Uhlans were wearing all @-@ black uniforms , but retained the yellow @-@ topped czapka . 
 <unk> wore similar clothing to the cavalry : mostly black in colour with a <unk> and black trousers . They were additionally equipped with a standard hussar sword should they have need to defend their guns . 
 There are a number of speculative theories on the origin of the Brunswickers ' dark and seemingly grim choice of garb . It has been suggested that black was chosen to mourn Duke Frederick William 's late father ; as a sign of respect for the Duke ; or in mourning for the Duke 's occupied homeland . Colonel Augustus Frazer , who had served alongside the Brunswickers , reported that black was adopted in mourning for the Duke 's wife , Princess Marie of Baden , who had died in 1808 , and that the black uniforms would not be put aside until Brunswick had been finally liberated . 
 = = Inspired art = = 
 The Black Brunswicker ( 1860 ) , by John Everett Millais was inspired in part by the exploits of the Brunswickers and in part by the contrasts of black broadcloth and pearl @-@ white satin in a moment of tender conflict . 
 The artwork took an estimated three months to paint , and it was greatly admired at the time . It was also bought for the highest price Millais had received from dealer and publisher Ernest <unk> - the lucrative sum of 100 guineas . Later , in 1898 , William Hesketh Lever purchased the work for his private collection . Charles Dickens ' daughter Kate was used as a model for the woman seen in the painting . 
 = = The Brunswick Corps in later years = = 
 A single infantry regiment and the hussars were maintained by the Duchy of Brunswick after the end of the Napoleonic War . In 1830 , the uniform colour was changed to blue , but reverted to black in 1850 . The Brunswick units were integrated into the Prussian Army in 1866 with the titles : Braunschweigisches Infanterie @-@ Regiment <unk> and Braunschweigisches <unk> Regiment <unk> following the Prussian regimental numbering sequence . Both units kept the skull with the crossed bones on their helmets and caps and carried the battle honours " Peninsula @-@ Sicily @-@ Waterloo " until the end of World War I in 1918 , when they were disbanded . At that time , a collection of artefacts and uniforms from the Napoleonic era were presented by the officers of the corps to the Braunschweigisches Landesmuseum , where they can be seen today . 
 The historic black of the Brunswick Corps was retained by the <unk> Regiment <unk> in full dress parade uniform until the outbreak of war in August 1914 . The Brunswick Infanterie @-@ Regiment <unk> however adopted the dark blue tunic of the Prussian line infantry . 
 = Jordan Slew = 
 Jordan Michael Slew ( born 7 September 1992 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for League Two side Plymouth Argyle . 
 Born in Sheffield , Slew began his footballing career at Sheffield United 's academy in 2006 , joining the club at the age of 11 . After making his first @-@ team debut in 2010 , he attracted the interest of a number of clubs including Blackburn Rovers , for whom he signed in September 2011 for a £ 1 @.@ 1 million fee . He subsequently spent time on loan at Stevenage , Oldham Athletic , Rotherham United , Ross County , and Port Vale . He joined Cambridge United in February 2015 and stayed with the club for 12 months . He signed with Chesterfield in February 2016 , and then joined Plymouth Argyle four months later . Slew also made two appearances for the England U19s in 2011 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Sheffield United = = = 
 Having started his career as a youngster with the Sheffield United academy , Slew made his first @-@ team debut at the start of October 2010 , coming on as an 86th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Watford . He then signed his first senior professional contract with Sheffield United at the start of November , a deal designed to tie him to the club until the summer of 2012 . After two further late @-@ substitute appearances , he made his first start for Sheffield United in April 2011 , playing the whole game and scoring in a 3 – 1 defeat to Preston North End at Deepdale . He made eight appearances in total for the club during the 2010 – 11 campaign , scoring twice . As well as his breakthrough into the first @-@ team , Slew also played an instrumental part in Sheffield United 's run in the 2010 – 11 FA Youth Cup , where they reached the final before losing to Manchester United 's Academy side over two legs . Slew scored three goals during the cup run , including a goal in the first leg of the final . 
 By May 2011 , a number of Premier League and Championship teams had enquired about acquiring Slew 's services , with United turning down a £ 500 @,@ 000 offer from Fulham . Shortly after , Slew agreed an improved two @-@ year deal to keep him at Bramall Lane until 2014 . He began the 2011 – 12 season as a first team regular , playing in all of United 's games during that August , scoring once . 
 = = = Blackburn Rovers = = = 
 Despite having only recently signed an extended deal with Sheffield United , Slew signed for Premier League side Blackburn Rovers on August transfer deadline day 2011 . Blackburn paid a fee of £ 1 @.@ 1 million for the player , with Slew signing a four @-@ year contract . Arriving as a squad player , Slew had to wait until December 2011 to make his debut for Blackburn , coming on as an 89th @-@ minute substitute against Manchester United at Old Trafford . Unable to achieve a regular place in the Blackburn first team , Slew joined League One side Stevenage on loan in March 2012 , agreeing a deal to run until the end of the 2011 – 12 season . He made his debut for Stevenage a day after joining the club , playing in a 1 – 1 away draw against Exeter City . During his fifth appearance for Stevenage , Slew received a straight red card for " inexplicably raising his arms " to Colchester United midfielder Anthony Wordsworth . Slew returned to Ewood Park having played nine games for Stevenage , but failed to score a goal . 
 With Blackburn now in the Championship , Slew was still unable to make the break into the first team and was instead loaned to League One side Oldham Athletic for six months in August 2012 . Slew scored on his Oldham debut , netting in a 2 – 4 League Cup loss to Sheffield Wednesday a week after signing . After only four appearances for his temporary club , Slew suffered a stress fracture to his back and was sidelined for over three months , returning to Blackburn Rovers for treatment , and effectively ending his loan spell . Having recovered from his injury , Slew signed a six @-@ week loan deal with League Two side Rotherham United at the end of January 2013 . Slew 's first appearance for Rotherham came just two days later , in a 3 – 1 win against promotion rivals Northampton Town , and he played regularly for the duration of his loan spell , making seven appearances in total . Despite Rotherham hoping to retain Slew 's services until the end of the season , they were unable to agree a deal with Blackburn Rovers , and Slew returned to Ewood Park once more . 
 The following season , Slew failed to make a first team appearance for Blackburn and on 1 January 2014 he joined Scottish Premiership side Ross County on loan until the end of the season . He made his debut that same day in the Highland derby with Inverness Caledonian Thistle at Caledonian Stadium , helping Derek Adams 's " <unk> " to a 2 – 1 win . He went on to make 20 appearances during his time at Victoria Park , and scored one goal in his final appearance , a 3 – 2 win over Partick Thistle on 10 May . 
 After being transfer @-@ listed at Blackburn , Slew agreed a loan move to Port Vale in summer 2014 , though manager Micky Adams stated it was " a frustrating chase " as Rovers manager Gary Bowyer refused to sanction the loan agreement until he was sure that a permanent offer would not be made for the player . A loan deal lasting until January 2015 was eventually agreed on 29 August , and Slew scored his first goal for the Valiants on 6 September , netting a late consolation goal in a 3 – 1 defeat at Peterborough United . On 4 October he was sent off in a 1 – 0 defeat at Fleetwood Town after striking an opposition player . He failed to win back his first team spot after returning from suspension , and his loan deal was not extended by manager Rob Page . He had his contract with Blackburn terminated by mutual consent in January 2015 . 
 = = = Cambridge United = = = 
 In February 2015 , Slew signed an 18 @-@ month contract with League Two side Cambridge United . He scored one goal in 13 games in the second half of the 2014 – 15 season , and was transfer listed in May by manager Richard Money after Slew admitted he was playing " nowhere near his best " . He failed to score in 12 appearances during the 2015 – 16 season and his contract with the club was cancelled by mutual consent on 1 February . 
 = = = Chesterfield = = = 
 Slew joined League One side Chesterfield on a short @-@ term deal in February 2016 , after manager Danny Wilson needed cover for injured strikers Sylvan Ebanks @-@ Blake and Lee Novak . He was released at the end of the 2015 – 16 season having made just seven substitute appearances for the club . 
 = = = Plymouth Argyle = = = 
 In July 2016 , Slew signed a contract with League Two club Plymouth Argyle . 
 = = International career = = 
 Slew made his international debut for the England U19 side in a 1 – 0 defeat to Germany on 8 February 2011 , replacing Connor Wickham after 60 minutes . He earned his second cap against the Netherlands on 29 March 2011 , coming on as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 0 defeat . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in Sheffield Slew is a lifelong supporter of his first club , Sheffield United . He enjoys classical music and when interviewed by radio station Classic FM , Slew described himself as " ... like an old man in a young man 's body ! " , after admitting to listening to the station while driving his car . 
 In March 2015 he was caught by police speeding at 156 mph in his BMW M4 on the Cambridgeshire section of the A1 , in what was the fastest recorded speed on a public road in the UK for more than three years ; he was banned from driving for six months and handed a £ 1 @,@ 400 fine . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 12 May 2016 . 
 = Wild Eagle = 
 Wild Eagle is a steel Wing Coaster built by Bolliger & Mabillard at the Dollywood amusement park in Pigeon Forge , Tennessee . It is the first of its kind in the United States and opened to the media on March 23 , 2012 before opening to the public on March 24 , 2012 . The roller coaster reaches a height of 210 feet ( 64 m ) and reaches speeds of 61 miles per hour ( 98 km / h ) . In September 2012 , the ride was voted as the best new ride of 2012 in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards . 
 = = History = = 
 Speculation of Wild Eagle began in March 2011 when plans to discuss Dollywood 's 2012 attraction were submitted to the Pigeon Forge Planning Commission . On March 24 , 2011 , those plans were approved and though city officials could not tell exactly what the plans were , some believed it looked to be a roller coaster . On September 4 , 2011 , Wild Eagle was officially announced to the public as the first wing coaster to open in the United States . On October 7 , 2011 , the lift hill was completed , and by the end of October 2011 , the track layout was complete . On February 28 , 2012 , Dollywood unveiled a steel sculpture of an eagle with a wing span of 42 feet ( 13 m ) and a total weight of 8 @,@ 000 pounds ( 3 @,@ 600 kg ) that would be placed near the entrance of the ride . The ride soft opened to the media on March 23 , 2012 , before officially opening to the public on March 24 , 2012 . 
 = = Experience = = 
 After departing from the station , the train makes a left turn leading into the 210 @-@ foot ( 64 m ) chain lift hill . Once at the top , the train drops 135 @-@ foot ( 41 m ) , reaching a top speed of 61 miles per hour ( 98 km / h ) . The train enters a 110 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) vertical loop followed by a slight left then a zero @-@ gravity roll where riders experience the feeling of weightlessness . Upon exiting the roll , the train immediately enters an immelmann loop . The train then goes through a trim brake , before entering a corkscrew , then a camelback hill which is a common way of achieving air @-@ time on roller coasters . The train then makes a sharp left turn before making a sharp right turn which leads into the brake run . The train then makes a left turn into another set of brakes before entering the station where the next riders board the train . One cycle of the ride lasts about 2 minutes and 22 seconds . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Wild Eagle operates with two open @-@ air steel and fiberglass trains , each with seven cars which have four seats each , with two on each side of the track for a total of 28 riders per train . Riders are restrained by flexible over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints and interlocking seat belts . Also , because the seats are on the side of the track , a cantilevered steel arm is used to support the wings . The front of each of the seven train cars is shaped to resemble an eagle with outstretched wings adding to the theme of the ride . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is 3 @,@ 127 feet ( 953 m ) in length and the height of the lift is approximately 210 feet ( 64 m ) . The track is painted blue and the supports are painted tan . Both friction and magnetic brakes are used on the roller coaster to control the trains speed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Joel Bullock from The Coaster Critic gave Wild Eagle a nine out of ten for its unique experience . He also stated that , " It ’ s smooth , has some fun inversions , and is meant to be a wide @-@ reaching crowd pleaser and it fully delivered " but mentions that the restraints can become uncomfortable from time to time . 
 In Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards , the roller coaster was voted as the best new attraction for 2012 and 15th best roller steel roller coaster in the world . In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , the ride placed 87th . 
 = Antibody = 
 An antibody ( Ab ) , also known as an immunoglobulin ( Ig ) , is a large , Y @-@ shaped protein produced mainly by plasma cells that is used by the immune system to identify and neutralize pathogens such as bacteria and viruses . The antibody recognizes a unique molecule of the harmful agent , called an antigen , via the variable region . Each tip of the " Y " of an antibody contains a paratope ( analogous to a lock ) that is specific for one particular epitope ( similarly analogous to a key ) on an antigen , allowing these two structures to bind together with precision . Using this binding mechanism , an antibody can tag a microbe or an infected cell for attack by other parts of the immune system , or can neutralize its target directly ( for example , by blocking a part of a microbe that is essential for its invasion and survival ) . Depending on the antigen , the binding may impede the biological process causing the disease or may recruit macrophages to destroy the foreign substance . The ability of an antibody to communicate with the other components of the immune system is mediated via its Fc region ( located at the base of the " Y " ) , which contains a conserved glycosylation site involved in these interactions . The production of antibodies is the main function of the humoral immune system . 
 Antibodies are secreted by B cells of the adaptive immune system , mostly by differentiated B cells called plasma cells . Antibodies can occur in two physical forms , a soluble form that is secreted from the cell to be free in the blood plasma , and a membrane @-@ bound form that is attached to the surface of a B cell and is referred to as the B @-@ cell receptor ( BCR ) . The BCR is found only on the surface of B cells and facilitates the activation of these cells and their subsequent differentiation into either antibody factories called plasma cells or memory B cells that will survive in the body and remember that same antigen so the B cells can respond faster upon future exposure . In most cases , interaction of the B cell with a T helper cell is necessary to produce full activation of the B cell and , therefore , antibody generation following antigen binding . Soluble antibodies are released into the blood and tissue fluids , as well as many secretions to continue to survey for invading microorganisms . 
 Antibodies are glycoproteins belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily . They constitute most of the gamma globulin fraction of the blood proteins . They are typically made of basic structural units — each with two large heavy chains and two small light chains . There are several different types of antibody heavy chains that define the five different types of <unk> fragments ( Fc ) that may be attached to the antigen @-@ binding fragments . The five different types of Fc regions allow antibodies to be grouped into five isotypes . Each Fc region of a particular antibody isotype is able to bind to its specific Fc Receptor ( except for IgD , which is essentially the BCR ) , thus allowing the antigen @-@ antibody complex to mediate different roles depending on which FcR it binds . The ability of an antibody to bind to its corresponding FcR is further modulated by the structure of the <unk> ( s ) present at conserved sites within its Fc region . The ability of antibodies to bind to <unk> helps to direct the appropriate immune response for each different type of foreign object they encounter . For example , IgE is responsible for an allergic response consisting of mast cell degranulation and histamine release . IgE 's Fab paratope binds to allergic antigen , for example house dust mite particles , while its Fc region binds to Fc receptor ε . The allergen @-@ IgE @-@ <unk> interaction mediates allergic signal transduction to induce conditions such as asthma . 
 Though the general structure of all antibodies is very similar , a small region at the tip of the protein is extremely variable , allowing millions of antibodies with slightly different tip structures , or antigen @-@ binding sites , to exist . This region is known as the hypervariable region . Each of these variants can bind to a different antigen . This enormous diversity of antibody paratopes on the antigen @-@ binding fragments allows the immune system to recognize an equally wide variety of antigens . The large and diverse population of antibody paratope is generated by random recombination events of a set of gene segments that encode different antigen @-@ binding sites ( or paratopes ) , followed by random mutations in this area of the antibody gene , which create further diversity . This recombinational process that produces clonal antibody paratope diversity is called V ( D ) J or VJ recombination . Basically , the antibody paratope is polygenic , made up of three genes , V , D , and J. Each paratope locus is also polymorphic , such that during antibody production , one allele of V , one of D , and one of J is chosen . These gene segments are then joined together using random genetic recombination to produce the paratope . The regions where the genes are randomly recombined together is the hyper variable region used to recognise different antigens on a clonal basis . 
 Antibody genes also re @-@ organize in a process called class switching that changes the one type of heavy chain Fc fragment to another , creating a different isotype of the antibody that retains the antigen @-@ specific variable region . This allows a single antibody to be used by different types of Fc receptors , expressed on different parts of the immune system . 
 = = Forms = = 
 The membrane @-@ bound form of an antibody may be called a surface immunoglobulin ( <unk> ) or a membrane immunoglobulin ( <unk> ) . It is part of the B cell receptor ( BCR ) , which allows a B cell to detect when a specific antigen is present in the body and triggers B cell activation . The BCR is composed of surface @-@ bound IgD or IgM antibodies and associated Ig @-@ α and Ig @-@ β heterodimers , which are capable of signal transduction . A typical human B cell will have 50 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 antibodies bound to its surface . Upon antigen binding , they cluster in large patches , which can exceed 1 micrometer in diameter , on lipid rafts that isolate the BCRs from most other cell signaling receptors . These patches may improve the efficiency of the cellular immune response . In humans , the cell surface is bare around the B cell receptors for several hundred nanometers , which further isolates the BCRs from competing influences . 
 = = Antibody – antigen interactions = = 
 The antibody 's paratope interacts with the antigen 's epitope . An antigen usually contains different epitopes along its surface arranged discontinuously , and dominant epitopes on a given antigen are called determinants . 
 Antibody and antigen interact by spatial complementarity ( lock and key ) . The molecular forces involved in the Fab @-@ epitope interaction are weak and non @-@ specific – for example electrostatic forces , hydrogen bonds , hydrophobic interactions , and van der Waals forces . This means binding between antibody and antigen is reversible , and the antibody 's affinity towards an antigen is relative rather than absolute . Relatively weak binding also means it is possible for an antibody to cross @-@ react with different antigens of different relative affinities . 
 Often , once an antibody and antigen bind , they become an immune complex , which functions as a unitary object and can act as an antigen in its own right , being countered by other antibodies . Similarly , <unk> are small molecules that provoke no immune response by themselves , but once they bind to proteins , the resulting complex or hapten @-@ carrier adduct is antigenic . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Antibodies can come in different varieties known as isotypes or classes . In placental mammals there are five antibody isotypes known as IgA , IgD , IgE , IgG , and IgM . They are each named with an " Ig " prefix that stands for immunoglobulin , a name sometimes used interchangeably with antibody , and differ in their biological properties , functional locations and ability to deal with different antigens , as depicted in the table . The different suffixes of the antibody isotypes denote the different types of heavy chains the antibody contains , with each heavy chain class named alphabetically : α , γ , δ , ε , and μ . This gives rise to IgA , IgG , IgD , IgE , and IgM , respectively . 
 The antibody isotype of a B cell changes during cell development and activation . Immature B cells , which have never been exposed to an antigen , express only the IgM + isotype in a cell surface bound form . The B lymphocyte , in this ready @-@ to @-@ respond form , is known as a " naive B lymphocyte . " The naive B lymphocyte expresses both surface IgM + and IgD + . The co @-@ expression of both of these immunoglobulin isotypes renders the B cell ready to respond to antigen . B cell activation follows engagement of the cell @-@ bound antibody molecule with an antigen , causing the cell to divide and differentiate into an antibody @-@ producing cell called a plasma cell . In this activated form , the B cell starts to produce antibody in a secreted form rather than a membrane @-@ bound form . Some daughter cells of the activated B cells undergo isotype switching , a mechanism that causes the production of antibodies to change from IgM or IgD to the other antibody isotypes , IgE , IgA , or IgG , that have defined roles in the immune system . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Antibodies are heavy ( ~ 150 kDa ) globular plasma proteins . They have sugar chains ( glycans ) added to conserved amino acid residues . In other words , antibodies are glycoproteins . The attached glycans are critically important to the structure and function of the antibody . Among other things the expressed glycans can modulate an antibody 's affinity for its corresponding FcR ( s ) . 
 The basic functional unit of each antibody is an immunoglobulin ( Ig ) monomer ( containing only one Ig unit ) ; secreted antibodies can also be dimeric with two Ig units as with IgA , tetrameric with four Ig units like teleost fish IgM , or pentameric with five Ig units , like mammalian IgM . 
 The variable parts of an antibody are its V regions , and the constant part is its C region . 
 = = = Immunoglobulin domains = = = 
 The Ig monomer is a " Y " -shaped molecule that consists of four polypeptide chains ; two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains connected by disulfide bonds . Each chain is composed of structural domains called immunoglobulin domains . These domains contain about 70 – 110 amino acids and are classified into different categories ( for example , variable or <unk> , and constant or <unk> ) according to their size and function . They have a characteristic immunoglobulin fold in which two beta sheets create a " sandwich " shape , held together by interactions between conserved cysteines and other charged amino acids . 
 = = = Heavy chain = = = 
 There are five types of mammalian Ig heavy chain denoted by the Greek letters : α , δ , ε , γ , and μ . The type of heavy chain present defines the class of antibody ; these chains are found in IgA , IgD , IgE , IgG , and IgM antibodies , respectively . Distinct heavy chains differ in size and composition ; α and γ contain approximately 450 amino acids , whereas μ and ε have approximately 550 amino acids . 
 Each heavy chain has two regions , the constant region and the variable region . The constant region is identical in all antibodies of the same isotype , but differs in antibodies of different isotypes . Heavy chains γ , α and δ have a constant region composed of three tandem ( in a line ) Ig domains , and a hinge region for added flexibility ; heavy chains μ and ε have a constant region composed of four immunoglobulin domains . The variable region of the heavy chain differs in antibodies produced by different B cells , but is the same for all antibodies produced by a single B cell or B cell clone . The variable region of each heavy chain is approximately 110 amino acids long and is composed of a single Ig domain . 
 = = = Light chain = = = 
 In mammals there are two types of immunoglobulin light chain , which are called lambda ( λ ) and kappa ( κ ) . A light chain has two successive domains : one constant domain and one variable domain . The approximate length of a light chain is 211 to 217 amino acids . Each antibody contains two light chains that are always identical ; only one type of light chain , κ or λ , is present per antibody in mammals . Other types of light chains , such as the iota ( ι ) chain , are found in other vertebrates like sharks ( Chondrichthyes ) and bony fishes ( Teleostei ) . 
 = = = CDRs , Fv , Fab and Fc regions = = = 
 Some parts of an antibody have the same functions . The arms of the Y , for example , contain the sites that can bind to antigens ( in general , identical ) and , therefore , recognize specific foreign objects . This region of the antibody is called the Fab ( fragment , antigen @-@ binding ) region . It is composed of one constant and one variable domain from each heavy and light chain of the antibody . The paratope is shaped at the amino terminal end of the antibody monomer by the variable domains from the heavy and light chains . The variable domain is also referred to as the FV region and is the most important region for binding to antigens . To be specific , variable loops of β @-@ strands , three each on the light ( VL ) and heavy ( VH ) chains are responsible for binding to the antigen . These loops are referred to as the complementarity determining regions ( CDRs ) . The structures of these CDRs have been clustered and classified by <unk> et al. and more recently by North et al. and <unk> et al . In the framework of the immune network theory , CDRs are also called idiotypes . According to immune network theory , the adaptive immune system is regulated by interactions between idiotypes . 
 The base of the Y plays a role in modulating immune cell activity . This region is called the Fc ( Fragment , <unk> ) region , and is composed of two heavy chains that contribute two or three constant domains depending on the class of the antibody . Thus , the Fc region ensures that each antibody generates an appropriate immune response for a given antigen , by binding to a specific class of Fc receptors , and other immune molecules , such as complement proteins . By doing this , it mediates different physiological effects including recognition of <unk> particles ( binding to FcγR ) , lysis of cells ( binding to complement ) , and degranulation of mast cells , basophils , and eosinophils ( binding to <unk> ) . 
 In summary , the Fab region of the antibody determines antigen specificity while the Fc region of the antibody determines the antibody 's class effect . Since only the constant domains of the heavy chains make up the Fc region of an antibody , the classes of heavy chain in antibodies determine their class effects . Possible classes of heavy chains in antibodies include alpha , gamma , delta , epsilon , and mu , and they define the antibody 's isotypes IgA , G , D , E , and M , respectively . This infers different isotypes of antibodies have different class effects due to their different Fc regions binding and activating different types of receptors . Possible class effects of antibodies include : <unk> , agglutination , haemolysis , complement activation , mast cell degranulation , and neutralisation ( though this class effect may be mediated by the Fab region rather than the Fc region ) . It also implies that Fab @-@ mediated effects are directed at microbes or toxins , whilst Fc mediated effects are directed at effector cells or effector molecules ( see below ) . 
 = = Function = = 
 The main categories of antibody action include the following : 
 <unk> , in which neutralizing antibodies block parts of the surface of a bacterial cell or virion to render its attack ineffective 
 Agglutination , in which antibodies " glue together " foreign cells into clumps that are attractive targets for phagocytosis 
 Precipitation , in which antibodies " glue together " serum @-@ soluble antigens , forcing them to precipitate out of solution in clumps that are attractive targets for phagocytosis 
 Complement activation ( fixation ) , in which antibodies that are latched onto a foreign cell encourage complement to attack it with a membrane attack complex , which leads to the following : 
 Lysis of the foreign cell 
 Encouragement of inflammation by <unk> attracting inflammatory cells 
 Activated B cells differentiate into either antibody @-@ producing cells called plasma cells that secrete soluble antibody or memory cells that survive in the body for years afterward in order to allow the immune system to remember an antigen and respond faster upon future exposures . 
 At the prenatal and neonatal stages of life , the presence of antibodies is provided by passive immunization from the mother . Early endogenous antibody production varies for different kinds of antibodies , and usually appear within the first years of life . Since antibodies exist freely in the bloodstream , they are said to be part of the humoral immune system . Circulating antibodies are produced by clonal B cells that specifically respond to only one antigen ( an example is a virus capsid protein fragment ) . Antibodies contribute to immunity in three ways : They prevent pathogens from entering or damaging cells by binding to them ; they stimulate removal of pathogens by macrophages and other cells by coating the pathogen ; and they trigger destruction of pathogens by stimulating other immune responses such as the complement pathway . Antibodies will also trigger vasoactive amine degranulation to contribute to immunity against certain types of antigens ( helminths , allergens ) . 
 = = = Activation of complement = = = 
 Antibodies that bind to surface antigens ( for example , on bacteria ) will attract the first component of the complement cascade with their Fc region and initiate activation of the " classical " complement system . This results in the killing of bacteria in two ways . First , the binding of the antibody and complement molecules marks the microbe for ingestion by phagocytes in a process called opsonization ; these phagocytes are attracted by certain complement molecules generated in the complement cascade . Second , some complement system components form a membrane attack complex to assist antibodies to kill the bacterium directly ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Activation of effector cells = = = 
 To combat pathogens that replicate outside cells , antibodies bind to pathogens to link them together , causing them to agglutinate . Since an antibody has at least two paratopes , it can bind more than one antigen by binding identical epitopes carried on the surfaces of these antigens . By coating the pathogen , antibodies stimulate effector functions against the pathogen in cells that recognize their Fc region . 
 Those cells that recognize coated pathogens have Fc receptors , which , as the name suggests , interact with the Fc region of IgA , IgG , and IgE antibodies . The engagement of a particular antibody with the Fc receptor on a particular cell triggers an effector function of that cell ; phagocytes will phagocytose , mast cells and neutrophils will <unk> , natural killer cells will release cytokines and cytotoxic molecules ; that will ultimately result in destruction of the invading microbe . The activation of natural killer cells by antibodies initiates a cytotoxic mechanism known as antibody @-@ dependent cell @-@ mediated cytotoxicity ( ADCC ) – this process may explain the efficacy of monoclonal antibodies used in biological therapies against cancer . The Fc receptors are isotype @-@ specific , which gives greater flexibility to the immune system , invoking only the appropriate immune mechanisms for distinct pathogens . 
 = = = Natural antibodies = = = 
 Humans and higher primates also produce " natural antibodies " that are present in serum before viral infection . Natural antibodies have been defined as antibodies that are produced without any previous infection , vaccination , other foreign antigen exposure or passive immunization . These antibodies can activate the classical complement pathway leading to lysis of enveloped virus particles long before the adaptive immune response is activated . Many natural antibodies are directed against the disaccharide galactose α ( 1 @,@ 3 ) <unk> ( α @-@ Gal ) , which is found as a terminal sugar on glycosylated cell surface proteins , and generated in response to production of this sugar by bacteria contained in the human gut . Rejection of <unk> organs is thought to be , in part , the result of natural antibodies circulating in the serum of the recipient binding to α @-@ Gal antigens expressed on the donor tissue . 
 = = Immunoglobulin diversity = = 
 Virtually all microbes can trigger an antibody response . Successful recognition and eradication of many different types of microbes requires diversity among antibodies ; their amino acid composition varies allowing them to interact with many different antigens . It has been estimated that humans generate about 10 billion different antibodies , each capable of binding a distinct epitope of an antigen . Although a huge repertoire of different antibodies is generated in a single individual , the number of genes available to make these proteins is limited by the size of the human genome . Several complex genetic mechanisms have evolved that allow vertebrate B cells to generate a diverse pool of antibodies from a relatively small number of antibody genes . 
 = = = Domain variability = = = 
 The chromosomal region that encodes an antibody is large and contains several distinct gene loci for each domain of the antibody — the chromosome region containing heavy chain genes ( IGH @ ) is found on chromosome 14 , and the loci containing lambda and kappa light chain genes ( IGL @ and <unk> @ ) are found on chromosomes 22 and 2 in humans . One of these domains is called the variable domain , which is present in each heavy and light chain of every antibody , but can differ in different antibodies generated from distinct B cells . Differences , between the variable domains , are located on three loops known as hypervariable regions ( HV @-@ 1 , HV @-@ 2 and HV @-@ 3 ) or complementarity determining regions ( <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) . CDRs are supported within the variable domains by conserved framework regions . The heavy chain locus contains about 65 different variable domain genes that all differ in their CDRs . Combining these genes with an array of genes for other domains of the antibody generates a large cavalry of antibodies with a high degree of variability . This combination is called V ( D ) J recombination discussed below . 
 = = = V ( D ) J recombination = = = 
 Somatic recombination of immunoglobulins , also known as V ( D ) J recombination , involves the generation of a unique immunoglobulin variable region . The variable region of each immunoglobulin heavy or light chain is encoded in several pieces — known as gene segments ( subgenes ) . These segments are called variable ( V ) , diversity ( D ) and joining ( J ) segments . V , D and J segments are found in Ig heavy chains , but only V and J segments are found in Ig light chains . Multiple copies of the V , D and J gene segments exist , and are <unk> arranged in the genomes of mammals . In the bone marrow , each developing B cell will assemble an immunoglobulin variable region by randomly selecting and combining one V , one D and one J gene segment ( or one V and one J segment in the light chain ) . As there are multiple copies of each type of gene segment , and different combinations of gene segments can be used to generate each immunoglobulin variable region , this process generates a huge number of antibodies , each with different paratopes , and thus different antigen specificities . Interestingly , the rearrangement of several subgenes ( i.e. V2 family ) for lambda light chain immunoglobulin is coupled with the activation of microRNA miR @-@ 650 , which further influences biology of B @-@ cells . 
 RAG proteins play an important role with V ( D ) J recombination in cutting DNA at a particular region . Without the presence of these proteins , V ( D ) J recombination would not occur . 
 After a B cell produces a functional immunoglobulin gene during V ( D ) J recombination , it cannot express any other variable region ( a process known as allelic exclusion ) thus each B cell can produce antibodies containing only one kind of variable chain . 
 = = = Somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation = = = 
 Following activation with antigen , B cells begin to proliferate rapidly . In these rapidly dividing cells , the genes encoding the variable domains of the heavy and light chains undergo a high rate of point mutation , by a process called somatic hypermutation ( SHM ) . SHM results in approximately one nucleotide change per variable gene , per cell division . As a consequence , any daughter B cells will acquire slight amino acid differences in the variable domains of their antibody chains . 
 This serves to increase the diversity of the antibody pool and impacts the antibody 's antigen @-@ binding affinity . Some point mutations will result in the production of antibodies that have a weaker interaction ( low affinity ) with their antigen than the original antibody , and some mutations will generate antibodies with a stronger interaction ( high affinity ) . B cells that express high affinity antibodies on their surface will receive a strong survival signal during interactions with other cells , whereas those with low affinity antibodies will not , and will die by apoptosis . Thus , B cells expressing antibodies with a higher affinity for the antigen will outcompete those with weaker affinities for function and survival . The process of generating antibodies with increased binding affinities is called affinity maturation . Affinity maturation occurs in mature B cells after V ( D ) J recombination , and is dependent on help from helper T cells . 
 = = = Class switching = = = 
 <unk> or class switching is a biological process occurring after activation of the B cell , which allows the cell to produce different classes of antibody ( IgA , IgE , or IgG ) . The different classes of antibody , and thus effector functions , are defined by the constant ( C ) regions of the immunoglobulin heavy chain . Initially , naive B cells express only cell @-@ surface IgM and IgD with identical antigen binding regions . Each isotype is adapted for a distinct function ; therefore , after activation , an antibody with an IgG , IgA , or IgE effector function might be required to effectively eliminate an antigen . Class switching allows different daughter cells from the same activated B cell to produce antibodies of different isotypes . Only the constant region of the antibody heavy chain changes during class switching ; the variable regions , and therefore antigen specificity , remain unchanged . Thus the progeny of a single B cell can produce antibodies , all specific for the same antigen , but with the ability to produce the effector function appropriate for each antigenic challenge . Class switching is triggered by cytokines ; the isotype generated depends on which cytokines are present in the B cell environment . 
