 Class switching occurs in the heavy chain gene locus by a mechanism called class switch recombination ( CSR ) . This mechanism relies on conserved nucleotide motifs , called switch ( S ) regions , found in DNA upstream of each constant region gene ( except in the δ @-@ chain ) . The DNA strand is broken by the activity of a series of enzymes at two selected S @-@ regions . The variable domain exon is rejoined through a process called non @-@ homologous end joining ( NHEJ ) to the desired constant region ( γ , α or ε ) . This process results in an immunoglobulin gene that encodes an antibody of a different isotype . 
 = = = Affinity designations = = = 
 A group of antibodies can be called monovalent ( or specific ) if they have affinity for the same epitope , or for the same antigen ( but potentially different epitopes on the molecule ) , or for the same strain of microorganism ( but potentially different antigens on or in it ) . In contrast , a group of antibodies can be called polyvalent ( or unspecific ) if they have affinity for various antigens or microorganisms . Intravenous immunoglobulin , if not otherwise noted , consists of polyvalent IgG . In contrast , monoclonal antibodies are monovalent for the same epitope . 
 = = = Asymmetrical antibodies = = = 
 Heterodimeric antibodies , which are also asymmetrical and antibodies , allow for greater flexibility and new formats for attaching a variety of drugs to the antibody arms . One of the general formats for a heterodimeric antibody is the “ knobs @-@ into @-@ holes ” format . This format is specific to the heavy chain part of the constant region in antibodies . The “ knobs ” part is engineered by replacing a small amino acid with a larger one . It fits into the “ hole ” , which is engineered by replacing a large amino acid with a smaller one . What connects the “ knobs ” to the “ holes ” are the disulfide bonds between each chain . The “ knobs @-@ into @-@ holes ” shape facilitates antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity . Single chain variable fragments ( scFv ) are connected to the variable domain of the heavy and light chain via a short linker peptide . The linker is rich in glycine , which gives it more flexibility , and serine / threonine , which gives it specificity . Two different scFv fragments can be connected together , via a hinge region , to the constant domain of the heavy chain or the constant domain of the light chain . This gives the antibody <unk> , allowing for the binding specificities of two different antigens . The “ knobs @-@ into @-@ holes ” format enhances heterodimer formation but doesn ’ t suppress homodimer formation . 
 To further improve the function of heterodimeric antibodies , many scientists are looking towards artificial constructs . Artificial antibodies are largely diverse protein motifs that use the functional strategy of the antibody molecule , but aren ’ t limited by the loop and framework structural constraints of the natural antibody . Being able to control the combinational design of the sequence and three @-@ dimensional space could transcend the natural design and allow for the attachment of different combinations of drugs to the arms . 
 Heterodimeric antibodies have a greater range in shapes they can take and the drugs that are attached to the arms don ’ t have to be the same on each arm , allowing for different combinations of drugs to be used in cancer treatment . Pharmaceuticals are able to produce highly functional <unk> , and even <unk> , antibodies . The degree to which they can function is impressive given that such a change shape from the natural form should lead to decreased functionality . 
 = = Medical applications = = 
 = = = Disease diagnosis = = = 
 Detection of particular antibodies is a very common form of medical diagnostics , and applications such as serology depend on these methods . For example , in biochemical assays for disease diagnosis , a titer of antibodies directed against Epstein @-@ Barr virus or Lyme disease is estimated from the blood . If those antibodies are not present , either the person is not infected or the infection occurred a very long time ago , and the B cells generating these specific antibodies have naturally decayed . 
 In clinical immunology , levels of individual classes of immunoglobulins are measured by <unk> ( or <unk> ) to characterize the antibody profile of patient . Elevations in different classes of immunoglobulins are sometimes useful in determining the cause of liver damage in patients for whom the diagnosis is unclear . For example , elevated IgA indicates alcoholic cirrhosis , elevated IgM indicates viral hepatitis and primary biliary cirrhosis , while IgG is elevated in viral hepatitis , autoimmune hepatitis and cirrhosis . 
 Autoimmune disorders can often be traced to antibodies that bind the body 's own epitopes ; many can be detected through blood tests . Antibodies directed against red blood cell surface antigens in immune mediated hemolytic anemia are detected with the Coombs test . The Coombs test is also used for antibody screening in blood transfusion preparation and also for antibody screening in antenatal women . 
 Practically , several <unk> methods based on detection of complex antigen @-@ antibody are used to diagnose infectious diseases , for example ELISA , immunofluorescence , Western blot , immunodiffusion , <unk> , and magnetic immunoassay . Antibodies raised against human chorionic gonadotropin are used in over the counter pregnancy tests . 
 = = = Disease therapy = = = 
 Targeted monoclonal antibody therapy is employed to treat diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclerosis , psoriasis , and many forms of cancer including non @-@ Hodgkin 's lymphoma , colorectal cancer , head and neck cancer and breast cancer . 
 Some immune deficiencies , such as X @-@ linked <unk> and hypogammaglobulinemia , result in partial or complete lack of antibodies . These diseases are often treated by inducing a short term form of immunity called passive immunity . Passive immunity is achieved through the transfer of ready @-@ made antibodies in the form of human or animal serum , pooled immunoglobulin or monoclonal antibodies , into the affected individual . 
 = = = Prenatal therapy = = = 
 Rhesus factor , also known as Rhesus D ( RhD ) antigen , is an antigen found on red blood cells ; individuals that are Rhesus @-@ positive ( Rh + ) have this antigen on their red blood cells and individuals that are Rhesus @-@ negative ( Rh – ) do not . During normal childbirth , delivery trauma or complications during pregnancy , blood from a fetus can enter the mother 's system . In the case of an Rh @-@ incompatible mother and child , consequential blood mixing may <unk> an <unk> mother to the Rh antigen on the blood cells of the Rh + child , putting the remainder of the pregnancy , and any subsequent pregnancies , at risk for hemolytic disease of the newborn . 
 Rho ( D ) immune globulin antibodies are specific for human Rhesus D ( RhD ) antigen . Anti @-@ RhD antibodies are administered as part of a prenatal treatment regimen to prevent sensitization that may occur when a Rhesus @-@ negative mother has a Rhesus @-@ positive fetus . Treatment of a mother with Anti @-@ RhD antibodies prior to and immediately after trauma and delivery destroys Rh antigen in the mother 's system from the fetus . It is important to note that this occurs before the antigen can stimulate maternal B cells to " remember " Rh antigen by generating memory B cells . Therefore , her humoral immune system will not make anti @-@ Rh antibodies , and will not attack the Rhesus antigens of the current or subsequent babies . Rho ( D ) Immune <unk> treatment prevents sensitization that can lead to Rh disease , but does not prevent or treat the underlying disease itself . 
 = = Research applications = = 
 Specific antibodies are produced by injecting an antigen into a mammal , such as a mouse , rat , rabbit , goat , sheep , or horse for large quantities of antibody . Blood isolated from these animals contains polyclonal antibodies — multiple antibodies that bind to the same antigen — in the serum , which can now be called antiserum . Antigens are also injected into chickens for generation of polyclonal antibodies in egg yolk . To obtain antibody that is specific for a single epitope of an antigen , antibody @-@ secreting lymphocytes are isolated from the animal and immortalized by fusing them with a cancer cell line . The fused cells are called <unk> , and will continually grow and secrete antibody in culture . Single hybridoma cells are isolated by dilution cloning to generate cell clones that all produce the same antibody ; these antibodies are called monoclonal antibodies . Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies are often purified using Protein A / G or antigen @-@ affinity chromatography . 
 In research , purified antibodies are used in many applications . Antibodies for research applications can be found directly from antibody suppliers , or through use of a specialist search engine . Research antibodies are most commonly used to identify and locate intracellular and extracellular proteins . Antibodies are used in flow cytometry to differentiate cell types by the proteins they express ; different types of cell express different combinations of cluster of differentiation molecules on their surface , and produce different intracellular and <unk> proteins . They are also used in immunoprecipitation to separate proteins and anything bound to them ( co @-@ immunoprecipitation ) from other molecules in a cell lysate , in Western blot analyses to identify proteins separated by electrophoresis , and in immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence to examine protein expression in tissue sections or to locate proteins within cells with the assistance of a microscope . Proteins can also be detected and quantified with antibodies , using ELISA and <unk> techniques . 
 Researchers using antibodies in their work need to record them correctly in order to allow their research to be reproducible ( and therefore tested , and qualified by other researchers ) . Less than half of research antibodies referenced in academic papers can be easily identified . A paper published in <unk> in 2014 provided researchers with a guide for reporting research antibody use . 
 = = Regulatory validation of monoclonal antibody products for human use = = 
 Production and testing : 
 Traditionally , most antibodies are produced by hybridoma cell lines through immortalization of antibody @-@ producing cells by chemically @-@ induced fusion with myeloma cells . In some cases , additional fusions with other lines have created " <unk> " and " <unk> " . The manufacturing process should be appropriately described and validated . Validation studies should at least include : 
 The demonstration that the process is able to produce in good quality ( the process should be validated ) 
 The efficiency of the antibody purification ( all impurities and virus must be eliminated ) 
 The characterization of purified antibody ( physicochemical characterization , immunological properties , biological activities , contaminants , ... ) 
 Determination of the virus clearance studies 
 Before clinical trials , studies of product safety and feasibility have to be performed : 
 Product safety testing : Sterility ( bacteria and fungi ) , In vitro and in vivo testing for adventitious viruses , Murine retrovirus testing ... Product safety data needed before the initiation of feasibility trials in serious or immediately life @-@ threatening conditions , it serves to evaluate dangerous potential of the product . 
 Feasibility testing : These are pilot studies whose objectives include , among others , early characterization of safety and initial proof of concept in a small specific patient population ( in <unk> or in vivo testing ) . 
 Preclinical studies : 
 Testing cross @-@ reactivity of antibody : to highlight unwanted interactions ( toxicity ) of antibodies with previously characterized tissues . This study can be performed in vitro ( Reactivity of the antibody or immunoconjugate should be determined with a quick @-@ frozen adult tissues ) or in vivo ( with appropriates animal models ) . More informations about in vitro cross @-@ reactivity testing . 
 Preclinical pharmacology and toxicity testing : Preclinical safety testing of antibody is designed to identify possible toxicities in humans , to estimate the likelihood and severity of potential adverse events in humans , and to identify a safe starting dose and dose escalation , when possible . 
 Animal toxicity studies : Acute toxicity testing , Repeat @-@ dose toxicity testing , Long @-@ term toxicity testing http : / / <unk> / en / drug @-@ development / safety @-@ testing / 
 Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics testing : Use for determinate clinical dosages , antibody activities ( AUC , pharmacodynamics , <unk> , ... ) , evaluation of the potential clinical effects 
 = = Structure prediction = = 
 The importance of antibodies in health care and the biotechnology industry demands knowledge of their structures at high resolution . This information is used for protein engineering , modifying the antigen binding affinity , and identifying an epitope , of a given antibody . X @-@ ray crystallography is one commonly used method for determining antibody structures . However , crystallizing an antibody is often laborious and time @-@ consuming . Computational approaches provide a cheaper and faster alternative to crystallography , but their results are more equivocal , since they do not produce empirical structures . Online web servers such as Web Antibody Modeling ( WAM ) and Prediction of Immunoglobulin Structure ( PIGS ) enables computational modeling of antibody variable regions . Rosetta Antibody is a novel antibody FV region structure prediction server , which incorporates sophisticated techniques to minimize CDR loops and optimize the relative orientation of the light and heavy chains , as well as homology models that predict successful docking of antibodies with their unique antigen . 
 The ability to describe the antibody through binding affinity to the antigen is supplemented by information on antibody structure and amino acid sequences for the purpose of patent claims . 
 = = History = = 
 The first use of the term " antibody " occurred in a text by Paul Ehrlich . The term Antikörper ( the German word for antibody ) appears in the conclusion of his article " Experimental Studies on Immunity " , published in October 1891 , which states that , " if two substances give rise to two different <unk> , then they themselves must be different " . However , the term was not accepted immediately and several other terms for antibody were proposed ; these included Immunkörper , <unk> , <unk> , substance <unk> , copula , Desmon , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The word antibody has formal analogy to the word antitoxin and a similar concept to Immunkörper ( immune body in English ) . As such , the original construction of the word contains a logical flaw ; the antitoxin is something directed against a toxin , while the antibody is a body directed against something . 
 The study of antibodies began in 1890 when Kitasato Shibasaburō described antibody activity against diphtheria and tetanus toxins . Kitasato put forward the theory of humoral immunity , proposing that a mediator in serum could react with a foreign antigen . His idea prompted Paul Ehrlich to propose the side @-@ chain theory for antibody and antigen interaction in 1897 , when he hypothesized that receptors ( described as " side @-@ chains " ) on the surface of cells could bind specifically to toxins – in a " lock @-@ and @-@ key " interaction – and that this binding reaction is the trigger for the production of antibodies . Other researchers believed that antibodies existed freely in the blood and , in 1904 , Almroth Wright suggested that soluble antibodies coated bacteria to label them for phagocytosis and killing ; a process that he named <unk> . 
 In the 1920s , Michael Heidelberger and Oswald Avery observed that antigens could be precipitated by antibodies and went on to show that antibodies are made of protein . The biochemical properties of antigen @-@ antibody @-@ binding interactions were examined in more detail in the late 1930s by John Marrack . The next major advance was in the 1940s , when Linus Pauling confirmed the lock @-@ and @-@ key theory proposed by Ehrlich by showing that the interactions between antibodies and antigens depend more on their shape than their chemical composition . In 1948 , Astrid <unk> discovered that B cells , in the form of plasma cells , were responsible for generating antibodies . 
 Further work concentrated on characterizing the structures of the antibody proteins . A major advance in these structural studies was the discovery in the early 1960s by Gerald Edelman and Joseph Gally of the antibody light chain , and their realization that this protein is the same as the Bence @-@ Jones protein described in 1845 by Henry Bence Jones . Edelman went on to discover that antibodies are composed of disulfide bond @-@ linked heavy and light chains . Around the same time , antibody @-@ binding ( Fab ) and antibody tail ( Fc ) regions of IgG were characterized by Rodney Porter . Together , these scientists deduced the structure and complete amino acid sequence of IgG , a feat for which they were jointly awarded the 1972 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . The Fv fragment was prepared and characterized by David <unk> . While most of these early studies focused on IgM and IgG , other immunoglobulin isotypes were identified in the 1960s : Thomas Tomasi discovered secretory antibody ( IgA ) ; David S. Rowe and John L. Fahey discovered IgD ; and <unk> Ishizaka and <unk> Ishizaka discovered IgE and showed it was a class of antibodies involved in allergic reactions . In a landmark series of experiments beginning in 1976 , Susumu Tonegawa showed that genetic material can rearrange itself to form the vast array of available antibodies . 
 = = Antibody mimetic = = 
 Antibody mimetics are organic compounds that , like antibodies , can specifically bind antigens . They are usually artificial peptides or proteins with a molar mass of about 3 to 20 kDa . Nucleic acids and small molecules are sometimes considered antibody mimetics , but not artificial antibodies , antibody fragments and fusion proteins are composed from these . Common advantages over antibodies are better solubility , tissue penetration , stability towards heat and enzymes , and comparatively low production costs . Antibody mimetics such as the <unk> and the <unk> have being developed and commercialised as research , diagnostic and therapeutic agents . 
 = Man on the Moon : The End of Day = 
 Man on the Moon : The End of Day is the debut studio album by American hip hop recording artist Kid Cudi , released on September 14 , 2009 , by Dream On , GOOD Music and Universal Motown . A concept album , narrated by fellow American rapper Common , it follows the release of his first mixtape A Kid Named Cudi ( 2008 ) . Production for the album took place during 2007 to 2009 and was handled by several record producers , including Cudi , Kanye West , Emile Haynie , Plain Pat , No I.D. , Dot da Genius and Jeff Bhasker , among others . 
 Man on the Moon : The End of Day spawned three singles – " Day ' n ' Nite " , " Make Her Say " and " Pursuit of Happiness " – that attained chart success , the former of which became a US platinum @-@ certified hit single . To further promote the album , he toured with Asher Roth and Lady Gaga . Man on the Moon : The End of Day received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised it for its music composition and different approach to being a hip @-@ hop record . Aside from being included on music critics list of the best albums of the year , Man on the Moon : The End of Day received three Grammy Awards nominations . 
 The album debuted at number four on both the US Billboard 200 and Billboard Top Rap Albums chart , selling 104 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release in the United States . It later became certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments exceeding 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US . Outside of the US , the album was less commercially successful , generally peaking outside of the top fifty positions of album charts . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 According to AllMusic , soon after it was announced that Cudi would release this album it became " deep in the category of ' much anticipated ' " . Prior to the album being picked up by the likes of Universal Motown and GOOD Music , he had previously worked with mentor and fellow rapper Kanye West on his 2008 record 808s & Heartbreak , co @-@ writing four hits for it . He said that without those song successes Man on the Moon : The End of Day would not have been picked up by any major labels . Cudi , who became West 's protege and collaborator , hoped Man on the Moon : The End of Day would show people that he had his own voice and set him apart . The record was originally titled Man on the Moon : The Guardians , but its subtitle was later changed to The End of Day . Performance artist Andy Kaufman partly inspired the new title . He planned for this record to be the first in a trilogy , with the next edition being entitled The Ghost and the Machine . 
 Before the success of " Day ' n ' Nite " , the rapper had said that he would never try to mix politics or jocular things in with his lyrical content . After realizing the power of his voice he then decided to make important and unique songs , focusing on the message , rather than just creating inane music . He said his mode of operation at that time " was just , ' Hey , I ’ m making these cool sounding songs and I have little messages in them ' " , but still had himself in it . Although Cudi had a message in every track , he chose to avoid using dense lyrics , explaining that he did not want to write material that he would not actually say or use in real life , adding that being true to yourself entirely was meaningful to him . " I don ’ t speak like a fucking nerdy guy ; I speak like a regular dude " , he remarked . 
 He wrote " Day ' n ' Nite " after the death of his uncle . The two were not on speaking terms after his uncle forced him out of his home before Cudi could find another living situation . A bitter Cudi never apologized to him before his death , which he now regrets . Other songs on the album expand upon themes discussed in that single . Back in 2007 , Drake , who was one of Cudi 's first supporters , had shown interest in doing an official remix of the song with him . However , Cudi chose against it since he was not interested in working with people who are in the " same creative realm " as him and because he was in the midst of creating his own works . Beginning in the fourth grade , and getting more tense after his father 's death when he was 11 , Cudi began dreaming of his own death ( which usually was an automobile accident ) . He channeled these things into his material . Speaking to BlackBook in May 2009 , Cudi said of the album and its content , 
 " Each song is a message . All the hooks are stadium @-@ worthy , crowd sing @-@ along , powerful joints that I can ’ t wait for people to hear in stadium magnitude . My album definitely needs to be heard loudly , but it ’ s also a great album if you ’ re smoking and you need to go to sleep . So far I have the lineup of how I want the first seven tracks on my album and if I play the first seven from the beginning to the end , I ’ m zoned out and it ’ s the best trip ever . You need to be high to appreciate the instrumentation and how everything is put together on the album — but you don ’ t have to be high just to enjoy it in general . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 A concept album , Man on the Moon : The End of Day is an autobiographical track series of moody dark material that is separated into five acts that all surround " Day ' n ' Nite " with an arcane account . One reviewer summed up the story to be : " [ a ] lonely guy sits in his room and dreams of success . He uses drugs to calm his fears and fend off night terrors . He eventually gets recognized as the star he always knew he was , and lives the superstar life … or maybe he ’ s still dreaming about that stage of his life , and we ’ re just witnessing what his dreams sound like . " According to Cudi , more lively songs had to be added so that listeners did not feel like they were listening to a " slit @-@ your @-@ wrists album " . It was observed by a reviewer that on Man on the Moon : The End of Day , Cudi neither raps nor sings , instead he goes " puzzling through some third way : a sort of loose , <unk> melodic talking . " Musical collaborators included Kanye West , Ratatat and MGMT , among others , and the record is narrated by Common . Lyrically , he raps about anxiety and his frequent nightmares . 
 The album 's first two songs are a one @-@ two introduction to the rapper and what he is up to . There is a gloomy interior monologue about success , the lack of it , and Cudi 's inner conflicts , where he welcomes listeners by saying they are in his dreams . " Soundtrack 2 My Life " is a more courageous theme song where he proclaims , " This is the soundtrack to my life " . In it he states that his family did not see the sadness in him and that he has not been right since his father 's death . The third track , which is part of the second half of the introduction , has an outer @-@ space style , which is due in part to the Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark group sample , and showcases the rapper 's readiness to experiment . 
 Following the opening three @-@ track introduction , there is another three @-@ song section of Man on the Moon : The End of Day where Cudi is confined in his solitary world . Like his current state , the music is appropriately obscure . This chapter of the album is the marijuana section , while in next part the rapper is on psychedelics . References to both drugs are abundant throughout the record , but the latter 's part carry " the blind @-@ to @-@ the @-@ world quality of the former . " They are internal tracks , where Cudi 's mind 's state of being is the subject at hand . 
 " Day ' n ' Nite " is the album 's turning point , where it transitions from the drab theme of loneliness to vitality . Among the brighter songs are " Enter Galactic ( <unk> Part 1 ) " , a " trippy disco anthem " that is inspired by when he and a female friend ate <unk> and listened to music by The Postal Service together . " Make Her Say " includes a sample of pop singers Lady Gaga 's 2009 smash hit " Poker Face " and features verses from West and Common . It takes Gaga 's naughty , mischievous central hook and turns it around to be an unrefined oral sex reference that makes it a " hyper @-@ catchy , forward @-@ looking single . " He channels André 3000 in " Cudi Zone " . Man on the Moon : The End of Day 's closer is " Up Up and Away " , an escapist drug anthem single . Unlike other music 's common theme of drugs being used as an escape from the unpleasant realities , this however , is about breaking free from the rough reality of someone 's own mind and heart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The first track from the album to be released as a single was " Day ' n ' Nite " which was a commercial success , when it debuted at number 88 and peaked at number 5 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Cudi 's highest charting song on that chart . Reaching its highest peak at number 2 on both the United Kingdom and Belgium charts , " Day ' n ' Nite " also found its peak positions within the top ten on the French singles charts , as well as charting in the top twenty positions on Irish , German and Australian charts . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for paid digital downloads of more than one million copies in the United States in July 2009 . Although Cudi was grateful for the opportunity to make a video for " Day ' n ' Nite " and enjoyed the overall concept for it , he was disappointed that a majority of his ideas were ignored and cut out of the video . When he saw the video for the first time , he claims he provided feedback for it , but was ignored . The rapper than decided to make another video for the track , which was directed by French artist and director So Me . 
 Despite Cudi announcing plans to release " Sky Might Fall " as Man on the Moon : The End of Day 's second single , " Make Her Say " was instead chosen . Compared to its previous single , " Make Her Say " was less successful on the music charts , with its highest peak position being at number 18 on the Belgium Singles Chart . The music video for the track was directed by Nez <unk> and utilizes a split screen effect to create the illusion that the three artists ( Cudi , Kanye West and Common ) were all filmed in the same location . In reality , they had shot their individual scenes on opposite coasts of the United States ; Common and Cudi were filmed in New York City while West was filmed in Los Angeles . The third and last single to be released from Man on the Moon : The End of Day was " Pursuit of Happiness " on January 25 , 2010 . " Pursuit of Happiness " managed to chart at number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100 , with its highest peak position being at number 41 on the Australian Singles Chart . 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 Initially Cudi stated that he would " lay low until his album drops to avoid unnecessary hype . " Despite this statement , he went on a tour with rapper Asher Roth between July and August 2009 . He performed all of the albums singles at Maryland 's The Ulalume Music Festival in October 2009 . In 2009 , the rapper also toured with singer Lady Gaga as an opening act during the first leg of her The Monster Ball Tour in North America , where he performed the track " Make Her Say " . Less than a month later , and after an altercation with an audience member in Vancouver , it was announced that due to time conflicts , Cudi chose to leave the tour . An official statement from him read , " Kid Cudi has decided to take an early leave of absence from Lady Gaga 's Monster Ball tour , in order to balance his schedule surrounding the recording of his next album and acting commitments . Cudi does not want to disappoint his fans and will move forward with his individual show dates in December and throughout the month of January . " However , in Complex 's October / November issue the rapper claimed that he was kicked off of the tour , commenting " she 's going to kick me off the tour because she didn 't want that type of negative energy at her shows ? Word ? I never did nothing to that girl " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the week ending on September 23 , 2009 , the album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 104 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , charting behind Jay Z 's The Blueprint 3 , Whitney Houston 's I Look to You and Muse 's The Resistance . On the 2009 year @-@ end chart for Billboard 200 , Man on the Moon : The End of Day was listed at number 157 . The album also charted and peaked at the same position on Billboard 's Top Rap Albums chart . It failed to rise above its positions on those charts and would later be outperformed by his next studio album , Man on the Moon II : The Legend of Mr. Rager ( 2010 ) . Man on the Moon : The End of Day also peaked within Billboard 's Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums top ten positions . 
 In November 2010 , Man on the Moon : The End of Day was certified gold for shipping over 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , which is its only certification . As of April 22 , 2016 , the album has sold 860 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In the UK Albums Chart , it charted at number 119 , and again did not rise above this position and had a better chart performance on its R & B Albums Charts , where it peaked at number 8 . In the French Album Charts , it debuted at number 56 , and again did not rise above this position . After charting on the chart for five consecutive weeks , it fell out of the top two @-@ hundred positions by October 2009 . Man on the Moon : The End of Day also found its peak at number fifty @-@ six again on the Swiss Album Charts . In Australia , on the week commencing September 28 , 2009 , the album reached its peak of 85 on the ARIA Chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Man on the Moon : The End of Day received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 71 , based on 15 reviews . The Boston Globe praised the experimental quality of the album : " It 's spacey , adventurous , and ridiculously intriguing if only because it 's so different " . <unk> Cudi 's " introspective persona , ear for melody , and eclectic taste in beats , " Entertainment Weekly music reviewer Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson called him " a hyped upstart who really does represent a promising new phase in the genre 's evolution . " David Jeffries of AllMusic called it " a soul searcher [ that ] may require more patience than your everyday debut " , but " perfects the futuristic bleak @-@ beat hip @-@ hop Kanye purposed a year earlier , and rewards the listener with every tripped @-@ out return . " Greg Kot , writing in the Chicago Tribune , believed that the album had the potential to turn heads as well as " bum @-@ rush the charts . " Slant Magazine 's Paul Schrodt wrote that the album attempts to be " both a bigger pop platform and indie credibility " , and felt that Cudi 's verses " are too good to ignore " so long as you do not take them too seriously . Ann Power of the Los Angeles Times called Man on the Moon a " standout release " in spite of " Cudi 's voice " . Billboard magazine 's Michael Menachem said that the album is " anything but a traditional hip @-@ hop recording " and that Cudi 's " delivery is confident in a poetic and artful way " . David Bevan of The A.V. Club said that , despite its filler , Cudi 's " thick layer of open , intense self @-@ loathing is a clever way of unifying Man On The Moon as pure mood piece , a stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness pop voyage that ’ s more Phil Collins than rap . " 
 In a mixed review , Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone was impressed by its music , but found Cudi 's raps " pedestrian " . Ian Cohen of Pitchfork Media gave the album a negative review , finding it frustrating that the album felt like a failed opportunity rather than a " non @-@ starter " . He further wrote that Cudi largely smears his verses with a " flat warble " that is salvaged by auto @-@ tune , which he remarked would be " numbing enough on its own " had it not been for the frequent " terrifyingly underwritten lyric to jolt you into sharp pangs of embarrassment . " In a largely mixed review , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times expressed his astonishment at the emotional honesty embedded into Cudi 's songwriting but felt his restrained vocal performance diminished his presence on the album , writing , that the album " is a colossal , and mystifying , missed opportunity , misguided if it is in fact guided at all . " Citing the tracks " Solo Dolo " and on " Cudi Zone " as Cudi 's most " appealingly creepy " and intricate vocal performance , on his general view of the album , Caramanica wrote that the rest of the album lacks that liveliness and drive , reducing Cudi to a " gaseous nonentity " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Man on the Moon : The End of Day was named Entertainment Weekly 's Best Hip Hop Album of 2009 and called one of the year 's best debut albums . Due to his " key track " , " Day ' n ' Nite " , Cudi was also one of their five breakout stars of the year . Calling it a " wonderfully weird album " , MTV 's James Montgomery listed Man on the Moon : The End of Day as being the nineteenth of twenty best albums of 2009 . Montgomery wrote that the albums collaborations , Commons narration of it and its detailed storytelling as some of the reasons for its inclusion on his list . The album was also Complex 's Best Album of 2009 . Prior to its official release as a single , " Pursuit of Happiness " was listed as being number fifteen on Montgomery 's list of " Best Song 's of 2009 " , and " Day ' n ' Nite " was ranked in at number fifteen on the list of " Best 25 Songs of 2009 " by Rolling Stone . Two singles from Man on the Moon : The End of Day were nominated for awards at the 52nd Grammy Awards . " Day ' n ' Nite " was nominated for Best Rap Song and Best Rap Solo Performance , while " Make Her Say " was also nominated for Best Rap Performance By A Duo or Group category . The lead single was also nominated for two BET Hip Hop Awards and one Urban Music Award . The " <unk> Remix " of " Day ' n ' Night " earned Cudi his first and only Beatport Music Award . In October 2013 , Complex named it the fifth best hip hop album of the last five years . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sample credits 
 " Simple As ... " contains a sample of " ABC ( Auto @-@ Industry ) " performed by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark . 
 " In My Dreams ( <unk> Anthem ) " contains a sample of " <unk> " performed by <unk> and <unk> 
 " Solo Dolo " contains a sample of " The Traitor " performed by the <unk> Street Band . 
 " Make Her Say " contains an interpolation of " Poker Face " ( Piano & Voice Version ) performed by Lady Gaga . 
 " Make Her Say " contains a sample of " Let 's Ride " performed by Q @-@ Tip . 
 " <unk> " contains a sample of " Early Morning Love " performed by Lou Rawls . 
 " Man on the Moon ( The Anthem ) " contains a sample of " Aquarium " performed by <unk> Thing . 
 " My World " contains a sample of " All What I Have " performed by Le Système <unk> . 
 " Heart of a Lion " contains an interpolation of " You Make Me Feel Brand New " performed by The Stylistics . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Man on the Moon : The End of Day adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Royal Canadian Air Cadets = 
 Royal Canadian Air Cadets ( French : Cadets de l 'aviation royale du Canada ) is a Canadian national youth program for persons aged 12 to 18 . Under the authority of the National Defence Act the program is administered by the Canadian Forces ( CF ) and funded through the Department of National Defence ( DND ) . Additional support is provided by the civilian Air Cadet League of Canada ( ACL ) . Together with the Royal Canadian Sea Cadets and Royal Canadian Army Cadets , it forms the " largest federally funded youth program in the country " . Cadets are not members of the military and are not obliged to join the Canadian Forces . 
 The first squadrons were established in 1941 to train young men for duties during World War II . The purpose has since changed to focus on citizenship , leadership , physical fitness , general aviation and stimulating an interest in the activities of the Canadian Forces . 
 The majority of cadet training takes place at the local squadron during the regular school year with a percentage of cadets selected for summer training courses at various cadet summer training centres located across Canada . Central to the air cadet program are the gliding and flying scholarships offered to air cadets who qualify . One in five private pilots in Canada is an ex @-@ air cadet and 67 % of commercial and airline pilots began as air cadets . There are 456 squadrons located across the country with an approximate enrolment of 23 @,@ 000 Air Cadets . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The aim of the Cadet Program is to develop in youth the attributes of good citizenship and leadership ; promote physical fitness ; and stimulate the interest of youth in the sea , land , and air activities of the Canadian Forces ; however , each focuses on its own parent element . The Air Cadet motto is " To learn . To serve . To advance . " , and was created by Robert Myles Colwell in 1966 when he was a cadet with 625 Squadron in Perth @-@ Andover , NB . 
 Persons aged 12 to 18 may join the Air Cadet Program . The organization and rank system of the pre @-@ unification Royal Canadian Air Force is used with one additional rank - Flight Corporal - equating to an Army Cadet Master Corporal or a Sea Cadet Master Seaman . Cadets are not members of the Canadian Forces and cadets have no power of command over any CF member . Adult leadership is provided by members of the Canadian Forces Reserve <unk> Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service composed mostly of officers of the Cadet Instructors Cadre ( CIC ) Branch , supplemented , if necessary , by contracted Civilian Instructors , authorized adult volunteers , and , on occasion , officers and non @-@ commissioned members of other CF branches . The CIC Branch is specifically trained to deliver the Royal Canadian Sea , Army , and Air Cadet training program , and like all reservists come from all walks of life and all parts of the community . Some are former cadets , many have former regular or reserve force service . 
 Along with the Royal Canadian Sea Cadets and Royal Canadian Army Cadets , they form the Canadian Cadet Organizations . Though the cadet programs have a close relationship with the CF , cadets are not members of the Forces , and are not expected or required to join the Canadian Forces . In keeping with Commonwealth custom , the Royal Canadian Air Cadets stand last in the order of precedence , after the Royal Canadian Sea and Army Cadets . 
 The Canadian Cadet Movement is sponsored by the CF / DND and the civilian Air Cadet League , along with the Navy League and Army Cadet League . Each cadet unit is supported by a local Squadron Sponsoring Committee responsible to the National League through each of the Provincial Committees . The basic Air Cadet program is provided at no cost , including uniforms and activities . Most Air Cadet squadrons are sponsored by a local service organization or club such as a Royal Canadian Legion Branch , Royal Canadian Air Force Association Wing , Rotary Club , Lions Club , or a locally established committee . The local civilian sponsors must raise money to provide for accommodation , utilities , liability insurance , local awards , and additional training resources or special activities , such as mess dinners , band instruments or squadron excursions and trips , not funded by the CF / DND . Cadets and their parents are encouraged to participate in fund @-@ raising activities . 
 = = History = = 
 The Air Cadet Organization originated in the early days of World War II when the war effort required young men to meet Canada 's military obligations . By 1938 there existed a couple of groups that would help promote such an effort . In Winnipeg , Manitoba this was the Winnipeg Air Cadets launched by Albert Bennett . Other such group existed in St. Catharines , <unk> and in <unk> , AB . 
 Prior to 1940 , official Air Cadet squadrons did not exist . One corps was opened up under the Royal Canadian Army Cadets in 1939 under the corps designation of 1601 AIR FORCE <unk> WING . With the formation of the Royal Canadian Air Cadet movement the corps transferred over and was given the designation 111 <unk> . This was to coincide with the local Royal Canadian Air Force unit stationed in Vancouver No. 111 Squadron . 111 Air Cadet Squadron still exists under the name 111 <unk> . 
 In 1940 , Air Minister Power directed that a nationwide voluntary organization be formed to sponsor and develop a select group of young men who would be trained to meet the increasing need for operational pilots in the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) during World War II . 
 On November 11 , 1940 , an Order @-@ in @-@ Council was passed to establish the Air Cadet League of Canada to work in partnership with the RCAF . The first squadrons were organized in 1941 and by 1942 there were 135 squadrons and 10 @,@ 000 cadets , mostly recruited from the Army Cadets . By 1943 , there were 315 squadrons with a membership of 23 @,@ 000 . In 1944 , the program reached its peak membership with 29 @,@ 000 cadets in 374 squadrons . 
 The first uniform the Air Cadets used were hand me down uniforms from the Pre War era RCAF . It consisted of a blue / gray wool uniform ; cap ( wedge ) , pants and a full collar tunic . This was phased out in 1943 with an open collar variation similar to the war time RCAF enlisted man ’ s tunic . After the war the air cadet organization received more hand me down uniforms from the RCAF before adopting the battle dress style uniform . 
 After the war , membership dropped to a low of 11 @,@ 000 in 155 squadrons and the Air Cadet program underwent a transformation to reflect the changing needs of Canada and the cadets . The Air Cadet League introduced awards for proficiency and loyalty to the squadrons , summer courses were offered at RCAF stations , and a flying scholarship course was developed . To date , more than 15 @,@ 000 cadets have received their private pilot licence through the scholarship course . Training shifted to be focused on the development of citizenship and an interest in aviation . Interest was renewed ; by 1961 , 332 squadrons were in existence and in 1972 , authority was given for membership of up to 28 @,@ 000 cadets . 
 In areas where there was a high interest in air cadets , additional squadrons were established with different parade nights to accommodate the numbers . These squadrons were often placed into air cadet wings ( a formation of two or more squadrons ) with a separate wing HQ staff of both officers and senior cadets overseeing the operation . The system was discontinued in the late 1960s and all squadrons became independent once again . 
 From the early days senior air cadets were given opportunities to work in staff positions beside officers , certain contracted civilians and RCAF / CF members at summer camps across Canada . A system was developed where senior cadets aged 16 or older were temporarily enrolled in the RCAF / CF on short term contracts and given the rank of Acting Corporal . They were referred to as Call @-@ out Corporals . The Senior Leaders Course at Cold Lake later even used the CF rank of Acting Master Corporal among its staff of Call @-@ out Corporals . Later the system was abolished and the " staff cadet " program selected senior cadets for advanced training who were appointed as staff cadets to assist the adult leadership . 
 With the unification of the Royal Canadian Navy , the Canadian Army and the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1968 , the Canadian Forces became the Air Cadet League 's military partner in the delivery of air cadet training . In 1975 , legislation was changed to officially allow the enrolment of female cadets into the Royal Canadian Sea , Army , and Air Cadets . The " battle dress " style woolen air force blue uniform was changed to a CF rifle green safari style uniform . The style and weight were more suited to the indoor and summer training reality of the program . The first of these was issued to cadet squadrons commencing in 1978 . A new embellished brass cap badge was issued and air cadet wings were worn on the left <unk> rather than the right . When the CF went back to separate uniform colours in the mid @-@ 1980s , cadets followed again with a new air force blue cadet uniform being issued but following the same style as the outgoing green uniform . Squadrons received these new uniforms commencing in the fall of 1992 . 
 Today , the Royal Canadian Air Cadets has a membership of approximately 23 @,@ 000 in 456 squadrons ; and together with the Royal Canadian Sea Cadets and Royal Canadian Army Cadets , forms the " largest federally funded youth program in the country " . The membership has also diversified , becoming gender balanced and attracting and retaining visible minorities . 
 = = Local training = = 
 Each squadron trains one night per week — a " parade night " — to undertake the local training program . The course of instruction is prescribed by the Director of Cadets and outlined in course training plans distributed to each squadron . The four @-@ year program provides cadets instruction in citizenship , leadership , survival training , instructional techniques , drill and ceremonial and the basics of aviation and aeronautics . In the fifth and subsequent years , cadets may be assigned to instruct these classes to the younger cadets . The local training begins in September and continues until June . 
 In addition to the mandatory weekly training <unk> , there are additional regularly scheduled activities that cadets can participate in optional training that includes band , firearms safety and marksmanship using the 10 metre air rifle for both training and competition , biathlon , military drill practice , first aid training and competitions , and ground school instruction in preparation for gliding and flying scholarship courses . Many of these activities also involve regional , provincial , or national competitions between teams and individual cadets . 
 Throughout the year there are weekend exercises organized by the local squadrons . Survival exercises , participation in Remembrance Day ceremonies , and familiarization flights are all common activities . Cadet squadrons participate in community events such as parades and band concerts . 
 = = = Cadet Program Update – Squadron program = = = 
 Beginning with the 2008 / 2009 training year , a new training system was introduced replacing the program that was in use since 1992 . The Cadet Program Update ( CPU ) brings new teaching materials and incorporates more contemporary educational and youth development methods . Similar updates to the Sea and Army Cadet programs rationalize the connectivity between the three programs and more efficiently provides the training that is common to all three elements . 
 The cornerstone of the CPU is the recognition that people between the ages of 12 @-@ 18 pass through three basic " Developmental Periods " ( DPs ) . These DPs mark the development of their cognitive abilities from a purely experienced @-@ based ( i.e. " hands @-@ on " ) method of learning to abstract problem @-@ solving and competency . The training methods used at each training level reflect the target age group of the cadets in that training level . 
 The delivery of the various performance objectives ( <unk> ) will be through a mixture of mandatory and complementary enabling objectives ( EOs ) . The mandatory EOs will be the same for all air cadet squadrons . Individual squadrons may chose from a number of complementary EOs to support the mandatory training . The selection of complementary training activities at a local squadron is based on the local resources and the interests of the cadets involved . 
 The program will be phased in one year at a time with the new proficiency level 5 being introduced for the 2012 / 2013 training year . Cadets already undergoing training in the current system will complete their training under the outgoing system . 
 = = = Squadron training levels = = = 
 Air Cadets are challenged to qualify to five training levels . Each level is normally completed in the ten @-@ month training period from September to June . With the approval of the commanding officer , cadets 14 years of age and older may complete levels 1 and 2 in a single training year . Success in meeting the required standard is rewarded with the appropriate level qualification badge . In Level Four cadets learn to instruct so that when they reach Level Five , they are ready to teach other cadets . The chart below displays the training level structure of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets . 
 = = Summer training = = 
 Courses offered at Air Cadet summer camps include training in leadership , flying , fitness and sports , survival , military band , pipe band , aerospace , aviation technology , and marksmanship . The courses offered include familiarization , basic , advanced , and national summer training courses . 
 <unk> courses 
 The only familiarization course is the two @-@ week @-@ long General Training course . It provides cadets with an introduction to camp life and outlines the various fields of interest in the Air Cadet Program . 
 Basic courses 
 The basic courses deliver training directed more specifically towards certain specialities . All of these courses are three weeks long , and are available to cadets who are level two or above . The Basic Drill & Ceremonial course prepares cadets to fill the role of a peer leader while building on their knowledge and skills in leadership , drill and ceremonial . The Basic Survival course introduces cadets to elementary survival skills and encourages them to pursue specialist training in this area of interest . Basic Aviation introduces cadets to the fundamentals of aviation and provides incentive to pursue specialist training in this area . Basic Fitness and Sports course prepares cadets to serve as an assistant sports instructor while developing personal habits to maintain a good fitness and healthy living . The Basic Aviation Technology and Aerospace course introduces cadets to the fundamentals of the aerospace industry , of airfield operations and the construction and maintenance of aircraft . The Basic Musician course develops cadets ' competence in music and prepare them to support their local military or pipe band . 
 Advanced courses 
 The advanced courses provides cadets with the knowledge required to become instructors of their speciality . Advanced Aviation Course increases cadets ' knowledge and skills of the field of aviation and provides incentive to pursue specialist training in this area . Drill And Ceremonial Instructor Course develops cadets to become a specialist with the skills and subject matter knowledge required to be an instructor and team leader for drill and ceremonial activities . Survival Instructor Course develops cadets to become a specialist with the skills and subject matter knowledge required to be an instructor and team leader for aircrew survival activities within the Air Cadet Program . Fitness Sports Instructor Course develops cadets to become a specialist with the skills and subject matter knowledge required to perform the role of a fitness and sports instructor and team leader for fitness and sports activities conducted at the squadron , during regionally directed activities and / or as a Staff Cadet at a <unk> . Air Rifle Marksmanship Instructor Course provides cadets with the opportunity to develop coaching and marksmanship skills necessary to support the squadron marksmanship program and biathlon programs . It also introduces cadets to advanced marksmanship skills . Intermediate and advanced musician courses increases cadets ' musical skills and advances them to the next level of musical qualification , with some instructional techniques relating to music . 
 National courses 
 There are seven national courses in the air cadet summer training program . Oshkosh Trip is a two @-@ week trip to Oshkosh , Wisconsin , home to EAA AirVenture Oshkosh . The International Air Cadet Exchange is a three @-@ week exchange that allow cadets to visit air bases , centres of industry , world landmarks , universities , cultural centres and museums , and experience private hospitality with families in their own homes . It is intended for outstanding senior cadets who will represent Canada with distinction . Other national courses include Advanced Aerospace , Advanced Aviation Technology Courses – Airport Operations and Advanced Aviation Technology Courses – Aircraft Maintenance . 
 Aviation national courses 
 Glider Pilot Scholarship Program 
 The Glider Pilot Scholarship ( GPS ) program is a six @-@ week course with an intensive programme of ground school and in @-@ flight glider pilot training . Cadets who successfully complete their flight test and Transport Canada written exam will qualify for a glider pilot licence and be awarded Air Cadet Glider Pilot <unk> program is also responsible for producing the largest number of glider pilots within Canada . On average , the program produces 320 glider pilots annually . Upon attaining their licences , these pilots join their local headquarters to provide other cadets with glider familiarization flying during the spring and fall seasons . 
 Private Pilot Scholarship Program 
 The Power Pilot Scholarship ( PPS ) program is a seven @-@ week course that allows cadets to get their private pilot licence and their Air Cadet Power Pilot Wings . A goal for many cadets within the program is to secure a private pilot licence prior to the age of 19 . Cadets who are aged 17 – 18 apply and are selected to write an exam and interview for the prestigious scholarship . The course provides cadets with both ground school training and in @-@ flight instruction at the various flight centres across Canada . Cadets who have been successful within the program have integrated themselves with commercial airlines , the Canadian Forces , various courier and charter companies , and have also gone on to become instructors at various flight schools . Overall , this opportunity to attain a private pilots ’ licence remains as one of the most prestigious and attractive opportunities available within the Air Cadet program . 
 After successfully completing a summer course , cadets are presented with a qualification badge to display on their uniform . The badges may be seen on the <unk> website . 
 = = = Cadet Training Centres ( CTCs ) = = = 
 The cadet training centres ( CTC ) of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets are distributed across Canada , often co @-@ located with a Canadian Forces base . Here are the following CTCs used for air cadets : 
 = = = Summer training courses ( 2012 ) = = = 
 As of the transition to the new program in the 2012 / 2013 training year , the summer training courses varies from year to year . 
 * A prerequisite for the Power Pilot Scholarship is that cadets must be 17 years old before 1 September of the year of the course . * * A prerequisite for the Glider Pilot Scholarship is that cadets must be 16 years old before 1 September of the year of the course . * * * The Oshkosh trip has been suspended until further notice . 
 * * * * A prerequisite for being a part of the International Air Cadet Exchange is that cadets must be 17 years old before 1 August of the year of the course . * * * * * A prerequisite for being a Staff Cadet is that cadets must be 16 years old before 1 January of the year of the course . * * * * * * BLC Basic Leadership has been changed to <unk> Basic Drill and Ceremonial Course , <unk> Leadership Ceremonial Instructor Course has been changed to , <unk> Drill and Ceremonial Instructor Course . 
 = = Flying = = 
 Throughout the spring and fall approximately 22 @,@ 000 air cadets participate in familiarization gliding at regional gliding centres located across the country . Each summer , 320 cadets earn a Transport Canada Glider Pilot Licence through the Air Cadet Gliding Scholarship and 250 more earn a Private Pilot licence . The Air Cadet Gliding Program conducts approximately 60 @,@ 000 glider flights annually in Schweizer SGS 2 @-@ 33 gliders . The aircraft fleet used in the gliding program is owned by the Air Cadet League of Canada . The fleet , consisting of more than 100 gliders and tow planes is maintained by the Canadian Forces under a memorandum of understanding . Canadian Forces pilots and Civilian Instructors operate the fleet to train cadets . The aircraft that are used during the Power Pilot Scholarship are various , and they depend on the flight school the cadet is posted at during their course . The Power Pilot Scholarship is operated by private flight schools , and the instructors are not affiliated with the cadet program . The aircraft can be a Cessna 152 , Cessna 172 , or <unk> Katana . 
 Aircraft 
 = = Uniform = = 
 Uniforms are provided at no charge . Cadets are responsible for care , cleaning and custody of the issued kit and also to return it when ceasing to be a cadet . The uniform includes : wedge , wide @-@ brimmed tan summer hat , toque , rank slip @-@ ons , short @-@ sleeved shirt , necktie , T @-@ shirt , turtleneck sweater , jacket ( tunic ) , jacket belt , trousers , trousers belt , all @-@ season jacket , boots , grey wool socks , running shoes , grey sports shorts , and blue sports T @-@ shirt . 
 Cadets in uniform shall be well groomed with footwear cleaned and shone . Their uniform shall be clean and properly pressed at all times . In particular , buttons , fasteners and zippers shall be kept closed . Hair must be of natural colour . 
 For male cadets , hair should not touch the ears or have excessive length or bulk on the head . At the top of the back of the neck , hair will either be evenly tapered or be clean cut . <unk> are authorized but must conform to dress regulations . Beards are not authorized except for religious or medical reasons and , when authorized , must conform to dress standards . Otherwise , male cadets must be clean shaven . 
 For females , short hair must be neat and may not extend past the bottom of the collar , while long hair must be pulled back into a tight bun , and may be contained by a hairnet . Very long hair may be braided or worn as a bun . Hair <unk> , bobby pins and <unk> should be the same colour as the cadet 's hair . When braided the cadets hair may be worn in either double or single French braids and in both cases the braids must fall behind the shoulders and not extend past the bottom of the armpit . 
 Different numbered orders of dress are worn on different occasions . Here are the numbered orders of dress : 
 C @-@ 1 ( Ceremonial ) : Worn during formal ceremonies or parades ; when parading as part of a guard of Honour ; for church services and parades ; for funerals ; or , other occasions as ordered . Medals are worn with this order of dress . 
 C @-@ 2 , C @-@ 3 , and C @-@ 4 ( Routine Training ) : C @-@ 2 dress is worn for day to day training ; routine parades ; or other occasions as ordered . It must be worn while travelling to and from a CTC . The dress is the same as C @-@ 1 , except that the medal ribbons replaces the medals . C @-@ 3 and C @-@ 4 is the same as C @-@ 2 , except that the turtleneck and blue T @-@ shirt replaces the shirt and tie respectively ; C @-@ 3 may be worn in cold weather . 
 C @-@ 5 ( Summer Training ) : Worn during summer training at a CTC . No medals , medal ribbons , pilot wings , or pins are worn with this order of dress . 
 C @-@ 6 ( Sports ) : Worn as directed by the squadron or CTC CO . CTC staff cadets wearing this order of dress while on duty shall wear their rank brassard . 
 C @-@ 7 ( CTC Staff Cadet ) : Worn by CTC staff cadets . Rank slip @-@ ons and name tag shall be worn . The wear of medal ribbons and the Certificate of Commendation Pin is authorized on the dress . Metal wings may be worn . 
 C @-@ 8 ( Mess dress ) Worn during mess or formal dinners , and other occasions as ordered . Same as C @-@ 2 , except that the white collar dress shirt with black bow tie replaces the shirt and tie . 
 = = Ranks = = 
 Upon enrollment a new cadet in the Air Cadet Program is known as a " cadet " ( <unk> ) . Appointment ( or promotion ) to higher ranks occurs after the cadet has met certain nationally prescribed standards . The specific criteria for all ranks is established to ensure that all cadets who receive a rank promotion possess the same basic qualifications or similar experience , the successful completion of squadron training serves as the common standard on which all cadets are evaluated , and that every cadet is given the same opportunity to advance . 
 Because there is a maximum number of established positions for ranks warrant officer first class ( one per squadron ) , promotions are based on the results of a merit review board . The composition of the merit review board includes a minimum of three to a maximum of five members . As appointed by the squadron commanding officer , members include : Commanding officer ( or delegate ) acting as board chairperson ; Air Cadet League or local sponsor representative ; and a minimum of one and maximum of three additional members from the following : representative ( s ) of the <unk> CO ( area Cadet Instructor Cadre officer , regional cadet advisor , area cadet officer , etc . ) , squadron CIC officer ( s ) ( from within own or members of neighbouring squadrons ) , and member ( s ) of the community ( to include : school principal , Legion member , etc . ) . Prior to 1976 the size of the squadron dictated the top rank available and many squadrons were ineligible to carry a <unk> on their establishment effectively capping promotion at WO2 for the squadron 's ranking cadet . 
 Responsibilities are given to cadets upon reaching corporal ( <unk> ) , the first NCO rank . In September 2007 , the rank of " flight corporal " ( <unk> ) was introduced . The badge is similar to the insignia of a flight sergeant incorporating a crown above two chevrons . The new rank brought the rank progression for the sea , army , and air cadet programs into line . Flight corporals and corporals generally assist a more senior cadet , such as a flight sergeant who leads a flight ( a small , organizational group of air cadets ) . Sergeants are responsible for most of the day @-@ to @-@ day activities of the squadron and assist the flight sergeants as second in command of a flight . Warrant officers work closely with the officer staff of the squadron , assisting with administration , logistical , leadership , and training . In smaller squadrons , these roles may be filled by more junior cadets . 
 The official phrasing for the ranks uses the word cadet as a preface — as an example , cadet corporal . However , custom omits cadet in casual reference . Thus , corporal is the usual wording . Generally , where there is a need to distinguish between cadets and Canadian Forces members , ranks will be written or spoken as cadet corporal and abbreviated as C / Cpl. 
 While it is customary within the organization to refer to a cadet receiving a rank as being " promoted , " the official documentation ( Queens Rules and Regulations ( Cadets ) and <unk> ) vary : the senior document describing progression as an " appointment " , the other describing progression as " promotion " . 
 The chart displays the rank structure of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets . 
 = = Music appointments = = 
 When a squadron wishes to create a cadet band , the decision to do so must be made in consultation with the sponsoring committee responsible for provision and maintenance of musical instruments . The cadet music program recognizes two types of bands : military bands and pipe bands . Military bands ' instrumentation includes woodwinds , brass , and / or percussion , while pipe bands ' instrumentation includes pipes and drums . The Regional Support Cadet Unit should provide instruments on loan to their squadrons to maximize the use of the instruments held by the region and <unk> and to better support squadron training . The music proficiency levels are recognized on the cadet uniform using a system of badges based on the music training programs ; the military band badge represents a lyre , while the pipe band badge represents either a pipe or a drum , depending on the instrument played . 
 The appointment of a Drum Major or Pipe Major is at the discretion of the corps / squadron CO . Requirements considered include : demonstration of skills and knowledge in band drill , commands and formations , qualification of Music Proficiency Level 2 , and holds the minimum rank of Flight Corporal . Only one cadet may be appointed as the squadron Drum Major or Pipe Major at any time . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 The Canadian Cadet Movement maintains its own Honours and Awards system . Cadets may be awarded these based on criteria including bravery , citizenship , service , outstanding performance on a summer training course , and more . In addition , cadets may also wear , on their uniform , any orders , decorations , and medals of Canada they have been awarded . 
 Within the system , there are several honours and awards common to all three cadet elements and some that are unique to each . A cadet who transfers from one element to another may continue to wear any medals awarded from their previous service , but in general , air cadets may be eligible for the following eight honours and awards , and are in the order of precedence : 
 = = Symbols = = 
 = = = Flags = = = 
 In some squadrons , the ensign and squadron banner are carried by a flag party with the Flag of Canada ( see image in the Local training section above ) , despite CF custom being for one- or two @-@ flag parties only . Subject to regional regulations , flag party escorts may carry deactivated drill purpose rifles . 
 The Royal Canadian Air Cadets Banner is flown only on important ceremonial occasions to indicate the presence of a formed body of cadets , and , at the end of useful life , is deposited , after the manner of colours , in some suitable location . The banner was presented in 1991 at the Senior Leaders Course at CFB Cold Lake , and was paraded at the Senior Leaders Course graduation parades each summer until the course was replaced with the Leadership and Ceremonial Instructor Course . Though not consecrated , the flag parallels Air Force Command Colours and is carried in the same manner . Cadets pay compliments to the banner in a similar manner to a consecrated colour . Members of the CF are not required to pay compliments to the banner but may do so as a courtesy . 
 Originally approved in 1941 , the Royal Canadian Air Cadets Ensign was modified in 1971 to incorporate the National Flag in the canton . The flag parallels a Canadian Forces command flag ( as distinct from a Command Colour ) . The ensign is normally flown at the squadron and often carried as part of a flag party . It is always flown from a mast or pole at air cadet summer training centres . 
 The squadron banner parallels an Air Force Squadron Standard and is carried by squadrons as their specific unit identifier . Unlike a squadron standard , however , an air cadet squadron banner may not be consecrated nor can they emblazoned with battle honours . Though squadron banners may not be consecrated they may , be dedicated and may be laid up in a manner paralleling similar ceremonies for squadron standards . Compliments are paid to the squadron banner in the same manner as the Air Cadet Banner . The squadron 's name and number are embroidered on the banner . It should be noted , however , that the Air Cadet League did for a brief period allow the acquisition of squadron banners featuring the individual squadron 's badge in place of standard design . It is unclear , should any of these banners require replacement , if anything other than the standard design will be authorized . 
 = = = Badge = = = 
 The emblem of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets consists of a circle surrounded by a wreath of maple leaves , superimposed with a flying falcon , the head to the sinister ( left ) . The whole is crowned by the Royal crown — fashioned as a St Edward 's Crown — to symbolise the monarchy of Canada as the Cadets ' source of authority . This all rests on a scroll displaying the words " Royal Canadian Air Cadets / Cadets de l 'aviation royale du Canada " . It is worn as a brass or embroidered badge on the left side of the wedge cap and other formal headdress , and as an embroidered patch on the all @-@ weather jacket . The original hat badge featured an eagle surmounted by single maple leaf with two underlying scrolls reading " Air Cadets Canada " . 
 = = Cadet Fitness Assessment and Incentive Program = = 
 The Cadet Fitness Assessment and Incentive Program replaced the old fitness testing program in the 2010 @-@ 2011 training year . It is based on the <unk> testing protocol produced by the Cooper Institute . 
 = = = Fitness assessment = = = 
 = = = Incentive program = = = 
 There are four incentive levels cadets can achieve upon doing the fitness assessment : bronze , silver , gold , and excellence . Scoring of the cadet depends on the age and gender of the cadet . Each test in the fitness assessment is scored as follows : 
 Using incentive level standards , each of the 5 or 6 tests is awarded an achievement level . The minimum achievement level reached of all 5 components is awarded ; only the highest two of the three flexibility tests is used in determining the achievement levels for the <unk> component . 
 = = Notable former air cadets = = 
 = Rashid Johnson = 
 Rashid Johnson ( born 1977 ) is an African @-@ American socio @-@ political photographer who produces conceptual post @-@ black art . Johnson first received critical attention when examples of his work were included in the exhibition " Freestyle , " curated by Thelma Golden at the Studio Museum in Harlem in 2001 — when he was 24 . He has studied at Columbia College Chicago and the School of the Art Institute of Chicago . His work has been exhibited around the world and he is held in collections of many of the world 's leading art museums . 
 In addition to photography , which is where Johnson began , he presents audio ( mostly music ) , video and sculpture art . Johnson is known for both his unusual artistic productions and for his process . He is also known for combining various science with black history so that his materials , which are formally independent , are augmented by their relation to black history . He was a 2012 Hugo Boss Prize finalist . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Johnson was born in Illinois to an academic and scholar mother , Dr. Cheryl Johnson @-@ <unk> , and a former Vietnam @-@ war veteran father , Jimmy Johnson , who was an artist but worked in electronics . His parents divorced when he was 2 years old . His mother remarried a man of Nigerian descent . Johnson said that growing up his family was based in <unk> and that his family celebrated Kwanzaa . 
 Johnson was raised in the Wicker Park neighborhood of Chicago , Illinois , as well as Evanston , Illinois . A photography major , he earned a 2000 Bachelor of Fine Arts from Columbia College Chicago and a 2005 Master of Fine Arts from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago . While at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago , one of his mentors was Gregg <unk> . 
 After obtaining his Master 's degree , he moved to the Lower East Side in New York City , where he taught at the Pratt Institute . Although he is generally referred to as a photographer and sometimes referred to as a sculptor , in certain contexts , he has been referred to as an artist @-@ magician . 
 Johnson followed a generation of black artists who focused on the " black experience " and he grew up in a generation that was influenced by hip hop and Black Entertainment Television . Because of his generation 's high exposure to black culture within pop culture , his contemporary audiences have a greater learned understanding of the " black experience . " The basic exposure of many to the black experience has enabled him to achieve a deeper race and identity interaction . 
 His work has been exhibited at the Art Institute of Chicago ; the Whitney Museum of American Art , New York ; the Detroit Institute of Arts ; the Walker Art Center , Minneapolis ; the Corcoran Museum of Art , Washington , DC ; the Institute of Contemporary Photography , New York ; the Brooklyn Museum of Art , New York ; and the Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago . His art is in the collections of most of these museums , and he is represented by art dealers in Milan , Naples , New York City and Chicago . By 2000 , his work was held by the Studio Museum in Harlem , and by 2001 he had two photographs in the collection at the Art Institute of Chicago . 
 In 2009 , Johnson collaborated with the local Chicago apparel company Flux Collection . Works utilized in Flux products include " Space " ( 2008 , Spray Enamel on Mirror ) , which was turned into a tee @-@ shirt design . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 As a college junior , he opened his first show at the Schneider Gallery . By 2000 , he had earned a reputation for his unique photo @-@ printing process and his medium and large scale works were priced at up to US $ 3 @,@ 000 . In 2000 , some of his early black @-@ and @-@ white photography work was described as " spectacularly rich " by The New York Times ; the Chicago Sun @-@ Times referred to his 2000 collection of portraits of homeless men " stunning " , and he was noted for a series of large @-@ scale photos of feet that serve as his interpretation of human migration in 2001 . Then , he exhibited in the notable 2001 Freestyle show , a show that is credited with having launched Johnson 's career . The curator of the show , Thelma Golden , is credited with coining the term post @-@ black art in relation to that exhibit , although some suggest the term is attributable to the 1995 book The End of Blackness by Debra Dickerson , who is a favorite of Johnson . The term post @-@ black now refers to art where race and racism are prominent , but where the importance of the interaction of the two is diminished . 
 Johnson 's most controversial exhibition was entitled <unk> and Watermelon Seeds : The African American Experience as Abstract Art . The subject matter was a series of stereotypical African @-@ American food culture items such as watermelon seeds , black @-@ eyed peas , chicken bones , and cotton seeds placed directly onto photographic paper and exposed to light using an iron @-@ reactive process . 
 In 2002 , he exhibited at the Sunrise Museum in Charleston , West Virginia . The exhibit , entitled Manumission Papers , was named for the papers that freed slaves were required to keep to prove their freedom . The exhibition was described as being as much a cultural commentary as an imagery display , and it related to the previous " <unk> " exhibit . He geometrically arranged abstractions of feet , hands , and elbows in shapes such as cubes , church windows and ships . This was a considered as study in racial identity because the body parts were not identifiable . Also in 2002 , presenting his photographic work using chicken bones , Johnson exhibited at the Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago , as part of the UBS 12 x 12 : New Artists , New Work series . 
 In 2002 he exhibited his homeless men in the Diggs Gallery of Winston @-@ Salem State University . The exhibit was entitled Seeing in the Dark and used partially illuminated subjects against deep black backgrounds . He also exhibited his homeless men work , including George ( 1999 ) , in Atlanta , Georgia as part of the National Black Arts Festival at City Gallery East in July and August 2002 . George was part of the Corcoran Gallery of Art November 2004 – January 2005 Common Ground : Discovering Community in 150 Years of Art , Selections From the Collection of Julia J. Norrell exhibition . George and the Common Ground exhibition appeared in several other places including the North Carolina Museum of Art in 2006 . 
 He took part in the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs artist Open Studio Program rotation in the Chicago Landmark / National Register of Historic Places Page Brothers Building during the summer of 2003 with a three @-@ week exhibition . He explored the " historical and contemporary nature of photography " . At that time , he was represented by George N <unk> , who owned G.R. N <unk> , the oldest African @-@ American @-@ owned , exhibiting commercial gallery in the country . 
 In conjunction with the Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago , Rashid Johnson exhibited The Evolution of the Negro Political Costume in December 2004 . He presented replicas of three outfits worn by African @-@ American politicians . He included a late 1960s <unk> worn by Jesse Jackson , a 1980s running suit worn by Al Sharpton in the ' 80s and a business suit worn by then United States Senator @-@ elect Barack Obama . The presentation , which invited inspection , was as likely to evoke humorous response to the Jackson <unk> as well as critical commentary about the presentation of political attire . 
 Johnson explored the theme of escapism at the Indianapolis Museum of Contemporary Art in a show entitled The Production of Escapism : A Solo Project by Rashid Johnson . He addressed distraction and relief from reality through art and fantasy . Johnson used photos , video and site @-@ specific installation to study escapist tendencies through often with a sense of humor that bordered on the absurd . 
 = = = Post @-@ graduate career = = = 
 During the summer of 2005 , he took part in a Chicago Cultural Center artist exchange program exhibition featuring five emerging Chicago contemporary artists and five from Kaohsiung , Taiwan . Half of the ten were women ( four from Taiwan ) . As part of the Crossings exhibition almost all artists had their first chance to exhibit in the country of the others . In this forum , Chicago Tribune art critic Alan G. Artner said Johnson 's audio selection imposed his artistry on all the other exhibits since he chose a rap song combined with a blunt video . Artner became a Johnson detractor in 2005 when Johnson had this and another simultaneous exhibit appearing in Chicago . He described Johnson 's exploration of the politics of race as " sloganeering or cute self @-@ advertising " in his two @-@ dimensional works , and his <unk> three @-@ dimensional installations as " glib and superficial " representations . He classified Johnson 's work as more suitable for the audience seeking nothing more than American pop culture . The following year , in 2006 , Artner derided Johnson 's short video contribution to the Art Institute of Chicago 's Fool 's Paradise exhibition as a " conflation of gospel singing with beat boxing ... that says nothing worth saying about race . " Other Chicago critics describe Johnson 's subsequent work as relatively hip . 
 In an ensemble 2006 showing entitled Scarecrow , Johnson exhibited a life @-@ sized photographic nude self @-@ portrait that was supposed to be menacing and abrasive , but that was perceived as interesting and amusing . His Summer 2007 " Stay Black and Die " work in the The Color Line exhibition at the Jack <unk> Gallery left one art critic from The New York Times wondering whether he was viewing a warning or exhortation . However , at the same time he participated in the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art 's For Love of the Game : Race and Sport in America exhibition that seemed to clearly address manners in which questions about race have been asked and answered on American sports fields of play . 
 In Dark Matters , a 2007 exhibition at the James Harris Gallery in Seattle , Washington , Johnson is said to mimic Édouard Manet 's Olympia in a work called White Girls and Sam Gilliam and Richard Tuttle in his <unk> backdrops that are perceived as sweeping perfection . 
 As a post @-@ black artist , his mixed @-@ media work , such as his Spring 2008 exhibition The Dead Lecturer , plays on race while diminishing its significance by playing with contradictions , coded references and allusions ( E.g. , The New Negro Escapist Social and Athletic Club ( Emmett ) , right ) . The exhibit was described as " a fictional secret society of African @-@ American intellectuals , a cross between Mensa and the Masons " that that was a challenge to either condemn or endorse . 
 Despite Artner 's generally negative reviews of Johnson in earlier years , Johnson was near the top of Artner 's list of exhibitions that he wanted to see in late 2008 . Artner promptly reviewed Johnson 's simultaneous September 2008 showings in Chicago . He claimed that The New Escapist Promised Land Garden and Recreation Center did not come across as either a land garden or recreation center due to the in part because of Johnson 's overwhelming presence and in part because of the long , narrow , cramped venue . He saw too much of the artist in his own work such as Bruce Conner @-@ like paintings and Johnson 's photographic impersonation of tennis champion Jimmy Connors . He perceives the nostalgia as somewhat autobiographical and possibly fictionalized . He perceived part of the work as graffiti and felt the work was unchallenging . Artner described Cosmic <unk> , which featured 11 paintings of black soap and wax , plus one simulacrum of a Constructivist canvas made of an animal pelt with glittery ribbons , as descendants of century of history of monochromatic abstractions that discards by titling his work as representations of the heavens . Artner feels these sculptural waxes are inferior to encaustic paintings in terms of artistic quality despite their three @-@ dimensionality . In 2008 he continued to view Johnson less seriously as an artist but felt his work had attitude . However , some experts spoke highly of Johnson 's work in the same newspaper during its run . Reviewers in Time Out Chicago spoke of how he transformed a " space associated with white privilege into a sanctuary for black traditions , " although they note the exhibition seems uncoordinated . 
 Johnson 's work stood out from the 200 @-@ piece 30 Americans at the Rubell Family Collection to be singularly mentioned in The Miami Herald . His work was described as a fusion of " portraits , sculptures and photography bathed in the color black ... [ that ] represent a fictional secret society of African @-@ American intellectuals " . Johnson described his work as a demonstration of the complexity of the black experience . 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 In November 2011 , he was named as one of six finalists for the Hugo Boss Prize . 
 In January 2012 , Hauser & Wirth presents ' <unk> ' , an exhibition of new works by Johnson . Including painting , sculpture , installation and film , ' <unk> ’ will be the artist ’ s first show with the gallery and will take place at their New York City location . 
 In April 2012 , the Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago , presents Johnson 's first major museum solo exhibition . MCA Pamela Alper Associate Curator Julie Rodrigues <unk> curated the exhibition in close collaboration with the artist . The exhibition is a survey of the past 10 years of the artist 's work . Additionally , a new MCA commission will be shown for the first time . 
 Johnson is currently represented by Galerie Guido W. <unk> , Berlin ; David <unk> Gallery , Los Angeles ; and Hauser & Wirth . 
 = = Techniques and processes = = 
 Johnson uses " alchemy , divination , astronomy , and other sciences [ sic ] that combine the natural and spiritual worlds " to augment black history . According to a Columbia College Chicago publication , Johnson works in a variety of media with physical and visual materials that have independent artistic significance and symbolism but that are augmented by their connections to black history . According to the culture publication <unk> , he challenges his viewers with photography and sculpture that present the creation and dissemination of norms and expectations . However , the Chicago Tribune describes the productions resulting from his processes as lacking complexity or depth . Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer writer Regina Hackett described Johnson as an artist who avoids the struggles of black people and explores their strengths , while inserting himself as subject in his " aesthetic aspirations " through a variety of forums . 
 Johnson has garnered national attention for both his unusual subject matter and for his process . In addition to portrait photography , Johnson is known for his use of a 19th @-@ century process that uses Van Dyke brown , a transparent organic pigment , and exposure to sunlight . He achieves a painterly feel with his prints with the application of pigment using broad brush strokes . He uses a 8 @-@ by @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 20 by 25 cm ) Deardorff , which forces him to interact with his subjects . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnson is married to artist Sheree <unk> . They live in New York City and have one child . 
 = = Selected exhibitions = = 
 = = = Solo = = = 
 2002 : " 12x12 : New Artist / New Work , " Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago , IL 
 2005 : " The Production of Escapism , " Indianapolis Museum of Contemporary Art , Indianapolis , IN 
 2008 : " <unk> My Oyster Knife , " Kunstmuseum <unk> , Germany 
 2009 : " The Dead Lecturer : Laboratory , Dojo , and Performance Space , " Power House Memphis , Memphis , TN 
 2009 : " Smoke and Mirrors , " Sculpture Centre , Long Island City , NY 
 2012 : " A Message to Our Folks , " Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago , IL 
 2012 : " Rumble , " Hauser & Wirth , New York , NY 
 2013 : " New Growth , " Ballroom Marfa , TX 
 2015 : " Smile , " Hauser & Wirth ( South Gallery ) , London ( 28 January – 7 March 2015 ) 
 = = = Group = = = 
 2000 : " A Decade of Acquisitions , " Detroit MI 
 2001 : " Freestyle , " Studio Museum in Harlem , New York NY 
 2004 : " Inside Out : Portrait Photographs from the Permanent Collection , " New York NY 
 2005 : " International Biennale of Contemporary Art 2005 , " Prague , Czech Republic 
 2006 : " A noir , E blanc , I rouge , U vert , O bleu : colors , " Magdeburg , Germany 
 2008 : " 30 Americans , " Rubell Family Collection , Miami FL 
 2009 : " Beg , Borrow and Steal " Rubell Family Collection , Miami FL 
 2010 : " Selected Works from the MCA Foundation ; Focus on UBS 12x12 , " Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago IL 
 2010 : " From Then to Now : Masterworks of African American Art , " MOCA , Cleveland OH 
 2011 : " <unk> " 54th Venice Biennale , Venice , Italy 
 2011 : " American <unk> , " Rubell Family Collection , Miami FL 
 = = Awards = = 
 2012 : David C. Driskell Prize 
 = Sauropelta = 
 Sauropelta ( / <unk> / SAWR @-@ o @-@ PEL @-@ tə ; meaning ' lizard shield ' ) is a genus of nodosaurid dinosaur that existed in the Early Cretaceous Period of North America . One species ( S. edwardsorum ) has been named although others may have existed . Anatomically , Sauropelta is one of the most well @-@ understood nodosaurids , with fossilized remains recovered in the U.S. states of Wyoming , Montana , and possibly Utah . It is also the earliest known genus of nodosaurid ; most of its remains are found in a section of the Cloverly Formation dated to 108 @.@ 5 million years ago . 
 It was a medium @-@ sized nodosaurid , measuring about 5 @.@ 2 metres ( 17 @.@ 1 ft ) long . Sauropelta had a distinctively long tail which made up about half of its body length . Although its body was smaller than a modern black rhinoceros , Sauropelta was about the same mass , weighing in at about 1 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) . The extra weight was largely due to its extensive covering of bony armor , including the characteristically large spines projecting from its neck . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sauropelta was a heavily built quadrupedal herbivore with a body length of approximately 5 @.@ 2 m ( 17 @.@ 1 ft ) . The skull was triangular when viewed from above , with the rear end wider than the tapering snout . One skull measured 35 centimeters ( 13 @.@ 75 in ) in width at its widest point , behind the eyes . Unlike some other nodosaurids , the roof of the skull was characteristically flat , not domed . The roof of the skull was very thick and covered in flat , bony plates that are so tightly fused that there appear to be no sutures ( boundaries ) like the ones seen in Panoplosaurus , <unk> , <unk> , and many other ankylosaurs . This could also be an artifact of preservation or preparation . As in other ankylosaurs , thick triangular scutes projected from the postorbital bone , above and behind the eyes , as well as the jugal bone , below and behind the eyes . More typically for nodosaurids , leaf @-@ shaped teeth lined both upper and lower jaws , used for cutting plant material . The front end of the skull is unknown , but there would have been a sharp bony ridge ( <unk> ) at the end of both upper and lower jaws , as seen in other ankylosaurs . This ridge probably would have supported a keratinous beak . 
 The tail of Sauropelta was characteristically long and made up nearly half of the body length . One skeleton preserved forty caudal ( tail ) vertebrae , although some were missing , suggesting that the true number of caudal vertebrae may have exceeded fifty . Ossified tendons stiffened the tail along its length . Like other ankylosaurs , Sauropelta had a wide body , with a very broad pelvis and ribcage . The forelimbs were shorter than the hindlimbs , which resulted in an arched back , with the highest point over the hips . Its feet , limbs , shoulders , and pelvis were all very stoutly constructed and reinforced to support a great deal of weight . American paleontologist Ken Carpenter estimated the mass of S. edwardsorum at 1 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) . 
 Like other nodosaurids , Sauropelta was covered in armor formed from bony masses embedded in the skin ( osteoderms ) . The discovery of a skeleton with the body armor preserved in situ allowed Carpenter and other scientists to accurately describe this protection . Two parallel rows of domed scutes ran down the top of the neck , along the <unk> axis ( front to back ) . On the upper surface of the back and tail , the skin was covered in small , bony nodules ( ossicles ) , which separated larger conical scutes arranged in parallel rows along the mediolateral axis ( side to side ) . Over the hips , the ossicles and larger domed plates were interlocked very tightly to form a structure called a sacral shield . This shield is also found in ankylosaurs like Polacanthus and Antarctopelta . Large , pointed spines lined the sides of the neck , increasing in size towards the shoulders , and then decreasing in size again along the side of the body until they stopped just before the hips . Behind the hips , flat triangular plates lined the tail on both sides , pointing laterally ( outwards ) and decreasing in size towards the end of the tail . Carpenter originally described the cervical ( neck ) spines and caudal plates as belonging to a single row on each side , although more recently he and Jim Kirkland reconstructed them in two parallel rows on each side , one above the other . The upper row of cervical spines pointed backwards and upwards ( <unk> ) , while the lower row pointed backwards and outwards ( <unk> ) . The bases of each pair of cervical spines and each pair of caudal plates were fused together , greatly restricting mobility in both the neck and upper tail . 
 = = Classification and systematics = = 
 Since John Ostrom first described Sauropelta in 1970 , it has been recognized as a member of the family Nodosauridae . The nodosaurids , along with the family Ankylosauridae , belong within the infraorder Ankylosauria . Nodosaurids are characterized by certain features of the skull , including the mandible ( lower jaw ) , which curves downwards at the end . Overall , nodosaurids had narrower snouts than the ankylosaurids , and also lacked the heavy ankylosaurid tail clubs . Nodosaurids , like ankylosaurids , are found in North America , Asia , and Europe . 
 While the systematics ( evolutionary relationships ) of nodosaurids have not been firmly established , the genera Sauropelta , <unk> and <unk> are sometimes considered to be basal to geologically younger nodosaurids like Panoplosaurus , Edmontonia , and <unk> . In a 2001 analysis , Carpenter included the former three genera in a sister clade to a group containing the latter three , although he found that Panoplosaurus could belong to either clade , depending which taxa and characters were chosen . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 In the early 1930s , famed dinosaur hunter and paleontologist Barnum Brown collected the holotype specimen of Sauropelta ( AMNH <unk> , a partial skeleton ) from the Cloverly Formation in Big Horn County , Montana . The locality is inside the Crow Indian Reservation . Brown also discovered two other specimens ( AMNH 3035 and 3036 ) . The latter is one of the best @-@ preserved nodosaurid skeletons known to science , includes a large amount of in situ armor , and is on display in the American Museum of Natural History in New York City . AMNH 3035 preserves the cervical armor and most of a skull , missing only the end of the snout . Expeditions in the 1960s led by the equally renowned John Ostrom of Yale University 's Peabody Museum of Natural History recovered additional incomplete specimens from the Cloverly . In 1970 , Ostrom coined the genus Sauropelta to include remains discovered by both expeditions . Derived from the Greek σαυρος / sauros ( ' lizard ' ) and <unk> / <unk> ( ' shield ' ) , this name is a reference to its bony armor . Although Ostrom originally named the species S. edwardsi , <unk> George Olshevsky corrected the spelling to S. edwardsorum in 1991 to conform to Latin grammar rules . 
 Despite the naming of Sauropelta two years earlier , confusion arose in 1972 when the name " Peltosaurus " was inadvertently published as the caption of a photograph of AMNH 3036 . Although Brown never published a name or description for the remains which are now known as Sauropelta edwardsorum , " Peltosaurus " was the name he informally used in lectures and museum exhibits . However , the name Peltosaurus was preoccupied by a genus of North American lizard from an extinct branch of the modern family <unk> ( the alligator lizards and the legless glass lizards ) and is no longer used to refer to the dinosaur . 
 In 1999 , Carpenter and colleagues described material of a large nodosaurid from Utah , discovered in a member of the Cedar Mountain Formation called the Poison Strip Sandstone , which is contemporaneous with the Cloverly Formation . He originally referred it to Sauropelta as a possible new species , but it was never named . In more recent publications , Carpenter no longer refers the Poison Strip animal to Sauropelta , only to the family Nodosauridae . 
 Other recent , but undescribed , discoveries include a complete skull from the Cloverly of Montana and a huge fragmentary skeleton from the Cedar Mountain Formation of Utah . These discoveries have been published only as abstracts for the annual Society of Vertebrate Paleontology conference , and may or may not prove to belong to S. edwardsorum or even Sauropelta when formally published . 
 = = = Footprint discoveries = = = 
 In 1932 , Charles Mortram Sternberg reported the presence of the footprints of a large , four @-@ footed dinosaur from Lower Cretaceous rocks in British Columbia , Canada . He described a new ichnogenus and species for these tracks , Tetrapodosaurus borealis , and attributed them to ceratopsians . However , in 1984 paleontologist Kenneth Carpenter re @-@ examined the British Columbian Tetrapodosaurus prints and argued that they were made by ankylosaurs rather than ceratopsians . Specifically , Carpenter concluded that these were probably the footprints of Sauropelta . Five years later , large numbers of Tetrapodosaurus tracks were discovered at the Smoky River Coal Mine near Grande Cache , Alberta . This site is considered the most important ankylosaur track site in the world . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Sauropelta was one of the earliest known nodosaurids . All specimens of S. edwardsorum were recovered from the Little Sheep Mudstone section of the Cloverly Formation in Wyoming and Montana , which has been dated to 108 @.@ 5 million years ago , during the Early Cretaceous . Sauropelta lived in wide floodplains around rivers that drained into the shallow inland sea to the north and east , carrying sediment eroded from the low mountains to the west . Periodic flooding of these rivers covered the surrounding plains with new muddy sediments , creating the Cloverly Formation and burying the remains of many animals , some of which would be fossilized . At the end of Cloverly times , the shallow sea would expand to cover the entire region and would eventually split North America completely in half , forming the Western Interior Seaway . Abundant fossil remains of coniferous trees suggest that these plains were covered in forests . Grasses would not evolve until later in the Cretaceous , so Sauropelta and other Early Cretaceous dinosaurian herbivores browsed from a variety of conifers and cycads . Nodosaurids like Sauropelta had narrow snouts , an adaptation seen today in animals that are selective browsers as opposed to the wide muzzles of grazers . 
 While Sauropelta was an important part of the Cloverly herbivore guild , the most abundant herbivorous dinosaur of the time was the large ornithopod Tenontosaurus . The smaller ornithopod Zephyrosaurus , rare titanosaur sauropods , and an unknown type of ornithomimosaur also lived alongside Sauropelta . The dromaeosaurid theropod Deinonychus fed upon some of these herbivores , and the sheer number of Deinonychus teeth scattered throughout the formation are a testament to its abundance . Microvenator , a small basal <unk> , hunted smaller prey , while the apex predators of the Cloverly was the large allosauroid theropod Acrocanthosaurus . Lungfish , <unk> mammals , and several species of turtles lived in the Cloverly , while crocodilians prowled the rivers , lakes , and swamps , providing evidence of a year @-@ round warm climate . The Late Jurassic fauna dominated by allosauroids , stegosaurs , and many varieties of huge sauropods gave way by Cloverly times to an Early Cretaceous fauna in which dromaeosaurs , ornithopods , and <unk> like Sauropelta were predominant . After the Cloverly ended , a large wave of Asian animals , including tyrannosaurids , ceratopsians , and ankylosaurids would disperse into western North America , forming the mixed fauna seen throughout the Late Cretaceous . 
 = Miguel Cotto = 
 Miguel Ángel Cotto Vázquez ( born October 29 , 1980 ) , best known as Miguel Cotto , is a Puerto Rican professional boxer . He is the first and only Puerto Rican to win world titles in four different weight classes . The Transnational Boxing Rankings Board ( <unk> ) currently ranks him as the world 's fourth best middleweight . 
 As an amateur , Cotto represented Puerto Rico in the lightweight and light welterweight divisions at various international events including the 1999 Pan American Games , the 2000 Olympics and the 1998 Junior World Championships , where he won a silver medal . Having begun his professional career in 2001 , Cotto defeated Kelson Pinto for the WBO light welterweight title in 2004 . He made six successful defenses before vacating the title when he ascended to welterweight . 
 In his first welterweight fight , in 2006 , he defeated Carlos Quintana for the vacant WBA welterweight title . Cotto successfully defended this title four times before losing it to Antonio Margarito in 2008 . The following year , Cotto won the vacant WBO welterweight title , defending it once before losing it to Manny Pacquiao . In 2010 , Cotto moved up another division to light middleweight and won the WBA title . Two successful defenses were made in 2011 , one of them including a rematch against Antonio Margarito . Cotto lost the WBA title to Floyd Mayweather Jr. in 2012 , which was one of the most anticipated fights in modern boxing history . The year would end on a sour note for Cotto , as he lost to Austin Trout . 
 Two years later , Cotto defeated Sergio Martínez to win capture the WBC , Ring magazine and lineal middleweight titles . In doing so , he became the first Puerto Rican fighter in history to win a world title in four different weight classes . In 2015 , he defended his titles once before losing to Canelo Álvarez . 
 Cotto started out his career as a hard @-@ hitting pressure fighter , but has evolved over the years into a more refined boxer @-@ puncher . Many former opponents name Cotto as their hardest punching opponent , with Paulie Malignaggi ( whom Cotto fought at light welterweight ) going as far as to call Cotto 's power " near superhuman " . Cotto is considered to be one of the greatest fighters of his generation and also to be one of the best Puerto Rican boxers ever , among the likes of Félix Trinidad , Wilfred Benitez , Hector Camacho , Wilfredo Gomez , and Carlos Ortiz . 
 = = Early years and amateur career = = 
 Cotto was born in Rhode Island , to Puerto Rican parents , and relocated to Caguas , Puerto Rico with his family before he was two . There are several figures linked to boxing in his family , including his late father Miguel Cotto Sr. , his brother José Miguel Cotto , his second cousin Abner Cotto , and his uncle and former boxing trainer Evangelista Cotto . Cotto began boxing as a child to help lose weight , not anticipating it to end up being his career path . He was taken to the <unk> Gym in Caguas . There , he was able to develop into a top amateur fighter . The young Cotto participated in several international tournaments , these include : The 1998 Junior World Championships that took place in Buenos Aires , Argentina , where he finished in second place while competing in the Lightweight division . His three victories here were by points , the results were : Andrey <unk> of Ukraine by points 15 @-@ 3 ; Dana Laframboise of Canada by points 6 @-@ 1 , and Darius <unk> representing Lithuania 9 @-@ 5 . His only loss was to Anton <unk> of Russia by points with a score of 8 @-@ 9 . In 1999 , Cotto competed in the Pan American Games that took place in Winnipeg , Canada . He only fought once in a loss to Dana Laframboise of Canada by points with a final score of 2 @-@ 5 . Following his participation in the Pan American tournament , Cotto was part of the Boxing World Championships in Houston , Texas . He lost his only fight by points to <unk> <unk> . In his final amateur tournament , Cotto represented Puerto Rico as a Light Welterweight at 2000 Sydney Olympic Games where he lost to <unk> Abdullayev of Uzbekistan by points . Cotto decided to turn professional after the loss to Abdulaev , ending his amateur career with a record of 125 @-@ 23 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Early in his career Cotto defeated former world title contender John Brown by decision in the tenth round . He led the score through the entire fight and scored a knockdown in the second round . The judges gave Cotto scores of 100 @-@ 89 twice and 100 @-@ 88 . 
 In 2001 , Cotto suffered a dangerous injury that threatened his boxing career . As he was driving to the gymnasium at 5 a.m. , he apparently fell asleep and crashed , breaking his arm and requiring hospitalization . 
 On September 13 , 2003 , Cotto defeated Demetrio Ceballos by knockout in the seventh round at Las Vegas . In a fight where Cotto injured Ceballos with numerous combinations in the sixth round , switching between the orthodox and southpaw stances . In the seventh round Cotto displayed an aggressive style that led to the referee stopping the fight with 0 : 32 remaining in the round . With this , he was ranked number one in his division by the World Boxing Association . 
 Cotto 's first fight of 2004 , was a fourth round knockout victory over the former world title contender Victoriano Sosa . This was after an eventful week prior to the fight , which included Cotto having to wait four hours for his luggage to arrive ( after a 2 a.m. local time arrival ) at McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas , and almost being removed from the Mandalay Bay Hotel , where the fight was held , by a security guard who thought he was an unaccompanied minor . 
 On April 8 , 2004 , he defeated the former world title challenger , <unk> N 'dou , by unanimous decision in Las Vegas . The first three rounds of the fight had a slow pace with neither of the boxers establishing control of the fight . Cotto dominated the fourth and fifth rounds managing to land combinations on N 'dou 's head . N 'dou won the seventh and eighth rounds after landing more accurate hits than Cotto . The last three rounds were even with both fighters establishing short periods of control in the fight . The judges gave Cotto scores of 117 @-@ 111 , 116 @-@ 112 and 115 @-@ 113 . 
 = = = Junior Welterweight = = = 
 On September 11 , 2004 , Cotto faced Kelson Pinto from Brazil , for the vacant World Boxing Organization junior welterweight title . This represented the third fight between them , with Pinto being victorious in their two previous encounters , both of which took place while they were still amateurs . The fight was televised by HBO from San Juan , Puerto Rico . During this card Cotto utilized a defensive stance with his hands in a high position instead of his usual aggressive orthodox stance . Over the course of the fight Cotto scored three knockdowns and won the World Boxing Organization Junior Welterweight Championship by knockout in the sixth round . 
 On December 11 , 2004 , he successfully defended his title , beating former world champion Randall Bailey by knockout in the sixth round , as part of the Vitali Klitschko @-@ Danny Williams undercard in Las Vegas . Cotto 's performance was described as a result of hand speed and accuracy . During the fight Bailey received punches in his face that opened cuts over and under both of his eyes . As a result of the cuts Bailey was examined by the ringside physician . Following this Bailey expressed that he didn 't want to continue and the referee stopped the fight at 1 : 39 of the sixth round . Eleven days later , on December 22 , 2004 the Puerto Rican boxing commission named Cotto as Puerto Rico 's fighter of the year for 2004 . Cotto 's second title defense took place on February 26 , 2005 in the Rubén Rodríguez in Bayamón , Puerto Rico against Demarcus Corley . During the fight Cotto practiced a boxing style that was more aggressive than usual , trading hits with Corley over the course of the first round . During the fight both boxers were deducted one point following illegal low blows . Cotto scored three knockdowns before the fight was stopped by the referee at 2 : 45 of the fifth round following a combination by Miguel . Corley claimed that the referee stopped the fight prematurely stating that " the ref just stopped the fight premature . If he wanted to stop the fight , he could have stopped it when I had [ Cotto ] hurt . " Just a few days after retaining the crown versus Corley , Cotto received a personal blow , when his stablemate and friend , former 2004 Olympian Joseph Serrano , was shot in the head upon leaving the <unk> gym . Serrano survived the shot , but was in critical but stable condition at a local hospital . 
 On June 11 , 2005 , Cotto faced the last man to beat him as an amateur , former Olympic gold medalist Mohamed Abdulaev from Uzbekistan . As amateurs , Abdulaev eliminated Cotto from the first round of the 2000 Sydney Olympics . This time they met as professionals in New York City 's Madison Square Garden . Before the beginning of the fight Cotto received a positive ovation from the public . During the first round Miguel went on the offensive scoring hits on Abdullaev 's head and body while he was in a defensive stance . In the fourth round a left hook by Miguel hurt Abdullaev , who proceeded to focus his hits on Cotto 's body . Abdullaev 's offense was effective in the sixth and seventh rounds and as a result of this Cotto assumed a defensive stance . Following the eighth round Abdullaev 's eye was swollen to the point of being almost entirely closed . In the ninth round following accurate punches by Cotto the fight 's referee paused the fight and asked the ringside doctor to examine Abdullaev 's eye . After being examined by the doctor Abdullaev indicated to the referee that he could not continue , this way Cotto retained the Welterweight division championship . 
 Miguel 's third championship defense took place on September 24 , 2005 at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City , New Jersey , against Ricardo Torres of Colombia . In the first round Cotto had an offensive advantage and scored a knockdown on Torres . In the second round after trading hits Torres scored a knockdown on Miguel . The last seconds of the round were evenly matched with both boxers finishing the round injured . Cotto was apparently in better condition when the third round began and was dominating the fight at that point . With two minutes remaining in the round one of Cotto 's punches landed in Torres ' beltline . Following this Torres was granted thirty seconds to recover by the referee . Cotto dominated the fourth round and Torres won the fifth . Cotto won and scored a knockdown in the sixth round . At 1 : 24 of the seventh round a left hook by Cotto knocked Torres out . 
 On March 4 , 2006 , Cotto defended his WBO Junior Welterweight title by knocking out Gianluca Branco , who had to give up during the eighth round of their bout due to a shoulder injury . Cotto dominated the fight as a result of jab combinations in a card that took place in Bayamón , Puerto Rico . Cotto 's next scheduled match was against the then @-@ undefeated Paul Malignaggi in a fight that took place on June 10 , 2006 in Madison Square Garden . Cotto opened a cut over Malignaggi 's right eye in the first round , which , according to Malignaggi , affected his performance over the course of the fight , by stating " this was the first time in which I was cut , and the blood kept going into my eye . And it bothered me the entire fight . I was not able to see very well . Cotto 's a great fighter , but I 'm disappointed , as I wanted to be the champion " . Cotto won the fight by unanimous decision with scores of 116 @-@ 111 and 115 @-@ 112 . Malignaggi suffered a fractured right orbital bone and his jaw was injured , he was taken to Roosevelt Hospital after the fight 's outcome was announced . 
 = = = Welterweight = = = 
 Cotto relinquished his title in late 2006 and announced his intention to move to the welterweight division to challenge Carlos Quintana for the WBA 's championship . The fight took place on December 2 , 2006 . Cotto defeated Quintana by technical knockout in the fifth round . Following a punch to the body , Quintana surrendered prior to the start of the sixth round and Cotto won the vacant World Boxing Association Welterweight Championship . Cotto 's Welterweight reign began successfully on March 3 , 2007 when he retained his belt with a technical knock out victory in the eleventh round over <unk> Urkal . Urkal 's corner threw in the towel because he was apparently down in the fight , and had just had a second point deducted for a head butt , leading to his corner 's belief that the referee was unfair . On June 9 , 2007 , Cotto defended the WBA Welterweight Title against Zab Judah in New York City , performing before a sellout crowd at Madison Square Garden . The bout included a knockdown and a point deduction registered for Cotto , who established dominance on the offensive following a close start . At the moment of the stoppage , the judges had Cotto leading 97 @-@ 91 . Cotto won by technical knockout in the eleventh round when the referee stopped the fight . 
 Miguel Cotto and Shane Mosley fought on November 10 , 2007 at Madison Square Garden in a card made possible by a legal settlement between Top Rank Boxing , Cotto 's promoter , and Mosley 's promoter , Golden Boy Promotions . The fight was broadcast on HBO Pay @-@ Per @-@ View and was won by Cotto via unanimous decision . During the course of the fight Cotto pursued Mosley who was reacting in a slow fashion . Late in the fight Mosley displayed more aggression at one point becoming the aggressor . Cotto 's performance was described as " a rare moment in sports when a sudden star rises from what is categorically termed as goodness , to the cusp of greatness . " On April 12 , 2008 , Cotto successfully defended the championship against Alfonso Gómez . Throughout the fight Cotto scored three knockdowns before the fight was stopped following the fifth round , when the doctor indicated to the referee that Gómez couldn 't continue . Cotto was selected the World Boxing Association 's " Boxer of the Year " , during the organization 's annual award celebration , which took place in Buenos Aires . 
 On July 26 , 2008 , at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas , Cotto suffered his first loss as a professional to Antonio Margarito in an unsuccessful title defense . Cotto had taken the early initiative , frequently landing a series of punches on Margarito during the early rounds while using his footwork to avoid danger . However , Margarito presented constant offensive pressure of Cotto and eventually began to wear down Cotto 's resistance by trapping him against the ropes . Cotto was hurt in the seventh round after a pair of Margarito uppercuts caused his nose to bleed . Margarito continued to chase his opponent down and inflicted further damage towards the end of the tenth round . Margarito then threw a series of punches at the start of the eleventh round , with Cotto against the ropes and bleeding profusely . A combination from Margarito finally forced Cotto to his knee . He got up , but Margarito continued landing combinations . Evangelista Cotto threw in the towel after Cotto again fell to the canvas in the corner of the ring . Two judges had Margarito ahead by a score of 96 – 94 at the time of the stoppage , while the third scored the fight even . HBO analyst Harold Lederman had also scored the fight even . Cotto 's loss to Margarito has since come under suspicion due to Margarito 's subsequent attempted use of illegal hand @-@ wraps in a fight against Shane Mosley . 
 = = = Corner changes = = = 
 Cotto returned to action on February 21 , 2009 , in a card held at the Madison Square Garden , sporting the first of his trademark tattoos which he has expanded on ever since . This time competing against Michael Jennings for the vacant WBO welterweight title . After both pugilists used the first round to study their opponent 's style , the tempo accelerated during the second . In the third , Cotto pursued the offensive more fluidly , connecting with jabs and hooks . One round later , Cotto scored two knockdowns on Jennings , who was able to continue until the recess . In the fifth , Jennings was trapped against the ropes , which Cotto utilized to connect a right hook to score a third knockdown . Jennings incorporated , but the referee decided to stop the fight . With this action , Cotto was awarded a technical knockout victory , in the process winning his second championship in the welterweight division . On April 8 , 2009 , Cotto fired his uncle from the team 's staff , following a violent discussion where his property was damaged . However , neither side expressed interest in pursuing any sort of legal action . Consequently , Cotto named Joe Santiago , who had served as the team 's nutritionist as his new trainer . 
 On June 13 , 2009 , Cotto defended this championship against Joshua Clottey , in a fight that was originally intended to be an unification that also included the International Boxing Federation 's title . In the first round he scored a knockdown after connecting a jab . In the third round an accidental head clash opened a severe laceration over Cotto 's left eye . The injury bled profusely during the fourth round , but he was able to control the pace . In the fifth round , Clottey was pushed to the floor during an exchange and was injured in his left knee , receiving time to recover before the contest resumed . In the sixth , Cotto trapped Clottey in a corner and gained offensive advantage . During the next two rounds , Clottey controlled the offensive , noticing that Cotto was unable to see right punches . During the last rounds , Cotto decided to employ his technique from outside , while the fight 's tempo remained close . The judges decided the fight 's outcome by split decision , awarding scores of 115 @-@ 112 and 116 @-@ 111 for Cotto and 114 @-@ 113 for Clottey . 
 Immediately after this fight , negotiations began to pursue a contest against Manny Pacquiao . Even before Pacquiao defeated Ricky Hatton , Bob Arum , who represents both Cotto and Pacquiao , stated that he was interested in this matchup . Subsequently , Pacquiao expressed interest in fighting Cotto . The fight was sanctioned as a world title fight in the welterweight division , where the weight limit is 147 pounds , however Cotto 's camp agreed to fight at a <unk> of 145 pounds to accommodate Pacquiao 's smaller physique . Cotto 's camp also conceded the larger share of the purse to Pacquiao , who received a 65 % share of pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , compared to Cotto 's 35 % share . 
 On November 14 , 2009 , Pacquiao defeated Cotto by TKO 55 seconds into the 12th round , dethroning Cotto as a WBO welterweight champion . The fight generated 1 @.@ 25 million buys and 70 million dollars in domestic pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue , making it the most watched boxing event of 2009 . Pacquiao earned around 22 million dollars for his part in the fight , whilst Cotto earned around 12 million dollars . Pacquiao @-@ Cotto also generated a live gate of $ 8 @,@ 847 @,@ 550 from an official crowd of 15 @,@ 930 . 
 = = = Light Middleweight = = = 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Foreman = = = = 
 After the Pacquiao fight , Cotto moved to the light middleweight division . On June 5 , 2010 , he fought against undefeated Israeli WBA Light Middleweight Champion Yuri Foreman at Yankee Stadium in New York . Bob Arum had said that if Cotto were to win , he would become a frontrunner to defend the WBA belt against Manny Pacquiao in November . Cotto stated that he would consider a return to the welterweight division , in case of an interesting fight . 
 Cotto ended up knocking Foreman down with a signature left hook to the body in the ninth round , after Foreman tore his knee , Cotto , claiming the WBA Light Middleweight title , his fourth overall in three different weight divisions . 
 On March 12 , 2011 , Cotto defeated Ricardo Mayorga in a 12th round TKO , retaining his WBA Light Middleweight title on the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Margarito II = = = = 
 On December 3 , 2011 , Cotto defeated Antonio Margarito via TKO in the 10th round . The fight was stopped at the start of the 10th round because of the condition of Margarito 's right eye , which was swollen shut . This was the same eye that was badly damaged in his fight with Manny Pacquiao and the one that almost kept the New York State Athletic Commission from granting him his boxing license because of the special procedure that was performed on it in 2010 . 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Mayweather = = = = 
 On May 5 , 2012 , Floyd Mayweather , Jr. faced Miguel Cotto for the WBA ( Super ) Light Middleweight / Super Welterweight belt . Mayweather came in at 151 , while Cotto came in at 154 pounds . The fight started off with Cotto establishing himself as the fight 's aggressor , but with Mayweather winning the first two rounds using effective counter @-@ punching and body movement to block most of Cotto 's punches . However , in the third round Cotto seemed to successfully swarm Mayweather and land decent flurries to steal himself the round . Then from rounds 4 @-@ 9 the action was closely contested , with both fighters using their partially contrasting styles in attempts to one @-@ up the other . Ultimately though , Mayweather managed to adjust to Cotto 's new rhythm of attacking in flurries and used his now @-@ newly tweaked counter @-@ punching style to win a lot of the final rounds , in what people thought had secured Mayweather the decision victory . Cotto had Mayweather against the ropes many times , resulting in some damage and a lot of bleeding from Mayweather 's nose . Cotto 's eyes had some partial swelling . Mayweather won via unanimous decision . When they hugged at the end , Mayweather told Cotto , " You are a hell of a champion — the toughest guy I fought . " 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Trout , Rodríguez = = = = 
 Cotto 's next fight was on December 1 , 2012 , at Madison Square Garden in New York City . His opponent was the undefeated WBA Super Welterweight Champion Austin Trout . Cotto lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Cotto faced <unk> Rodríguez on October 5 , 2013 , at the Amway Center in Orlando , Florida . Cotto looked like the Cotto of old , by displaying an aggressive style early on in the fight and landing powerful body shots . One punch in his arsenal that was brought back to life , was the vicious left hook which he was known for in his days of dominance in the junior welterweight and welterweight divisions . The second round saw Cotto landing body shots at will and with less than 10 seconds left in the round he staggered Rodriguez with a sharp left hook . In the beginning of the third round , with Rodriguez still feeling the effects of the left hook at the end of round two , Cotto forced Rodriguez in to the ropes landed a left hook to the temple , followed by flurry of punches which knocked Rodriguez onto the canvas . The referee then stopped the fight and gave Cotto a third @-@ round TKO victory . 
 = = = Middleweight = = = 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Martinez = = = = 
 Cotto faced WBC and The Ring Middleweight champion Sergio Martinez for the titles on June 7 , 2014 in his first fight in the middleweight division at Madison Square Garden . It should be noted that Martinez was inactive for a year before this bout and had two separate surgeries performed on his right knee . Throughout the fight , journalists and fans alike , noticed Martinez was unable to bend , flex and support his own weight while moving in the ring . Martinez himself proclaimed that his knee had nothing to do with the outcome of the fight and his struggles were a result of a body shot . Cotto knocked Martinez down 3 times in the first round and once in the ninth round before Martinez retired on his stool before the tenth round , giving Cotto the win by ninth @-@ round corner retirement . With the win , Cotto became the first Puerto Rican boxer to win world titles in four different weight classes . 
 = = = = Cotto vs. Alvarez = = = = 
 Cotto lost to Saul " Canelo " Alvarez on November 21 , 2015 via unanimous decision . The fight was close throughout as both boxers were cautious in their attacks , neither fighter was seriously hurt . As Cotto attacked with a jab the whole fight , and didn 't sit down on his punches , instead deciding to employ movement . Álvarez responded with power punches , landing especially to the body . Both fighters showed iron chins , with Cotto repeatedly coming back after hard shots to the head . The scorecards at the end of the night were highly controversial as they did not show the competitiveness of the fight , with many boxing pundits having Álvarez winning by a round or two , others called it a draw . There was a fraction of the boxing world that felt Cotto won by both a small margin , while others felt he won decisively . Cotto left immediately after hearing the scorecards , with his team and family . 
 Cotto did not attend the post @-@ fight press conference , but Freddie Roach in his place stated that he believed his fighter won , by outscoring Canelo and blocking many of his shots . Cotto later told reporters in Puerto Rico that he felt he won . 
 = = = = WBC withdraws recognition of Cotto = = = = 
 On November 17 , 2015 in the week leading up to his fight with Alvarez , the WBC announced that they were withdrawing recognition of Cotto as their Middleweight World Champion . The WBC 's reasoning was " After several weeks of communications , countless attempts and good faith time extensions trying to preserve the fight as a WBC World Championship , Miguel Cotto and his promotion did not agree to comply with the WBC Rules & Regulations , while Saúl Alvarez has agreed to do so . " This meant that , though Cotto was stripped of his title , Alvarez still had the opportunity to win the championship . Cotto then stated publicly that the reason the WBC stripped him of his title was because he refused to pay their sanctioning fees , which he believed to be excessive . 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cotto is married to Melissa Guzmán with whom he has two children , Alondra and Miguel Cotto III . Cotto has another daughter from a previous relationship , who was born in November 2006 . 
 Still an active boxer , Cotto also owns and presides a boxing promotion named " <unk> Miguel Cotto " , which organizes fight cards in Puerto Rico . Similarly he founded " El Ángel " , a non @-@ profit organization that promotes physical activity and measures against infant obesity . Marc Ecko , fashion designer and owner of Eckō , selected Cotto when promoting the brand within the sport , citing the boxer 's " fearless " demeanor as one of the main reasons behind this agreement . As a product of this partnership , Eckō produced boxing gear for him as well as mainstream clothing accessories for the general public . 
 = = Titles in boxing = = 
 Major World Titles : 
 WBO Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBA Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 WBO Welterweight Champion ( 147 lbs ) 
 WBA Light Middleweight Champion ( 154 lbs ) 
 WBA ( Super ) Light Middleweight Champion ( 154 lbs ) 
 WBC Middleweight Champion ( 160 lbs ) 
 Minor World Titles : 
 <unk> Light Middleweight Champion ( 154 lbs ) 
 The Ring / Lineal Championship Titles : 
 The Ring Middleweight Champion ( 160 lbs ) 
 Lineal Middleweight Champion ( 160 lbs ) 
 Regional / International Titles : 
 WBC International Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBA <unk> Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 WBO NABO Light Welterweight Champion ( 140 lbs ) 
 = = Pay @-@ per @-@ view bouts = = 
 = Follow Me Home ( song ) = 
 " Follow Me Home " is a song by English girl group Sugababes from their fourth studio album , Taller in More Ways ( 2005 ) . The electropop and R & B ballad was written by band members Keisha Buchanan , Mutya Buena and Heidi Range , with Jony Rockstar , Karen Poole and Jeremy Shaw . The producer , Rockstar , developed the idea of a close person as its inspiration . Buena wrote a verse about her daughter , while Buchanan wrote a verse based on her close friend . The song was released as the album 's fourth single on 5 June 2006 and contains vocals from Amelle Berrabah in replacement of Buena 's , who left the band in December 2005 . 
 " Follow Me Home " received mixed reviews from critics . Although its instrumentation and the group 's vocals were praised , the song was criticised as tedious and uninspiring . The single reached the top forty in Ireland and the United Kingdom , and also charted in Romania , Slovakia , and on the European Hot 100 singles chart . The music video for " Follow Me Home " was directed by Tony Tremlett and filmed in Prague , the Czech Republic . It features the Sugababes in a winter environment and contains various scenes of the group in a large house . The Sugababes performed " Follow Me Home " at the O2 ABC Glasgow , the <unk> Academy and on Top of the Pops . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 " Follow Me Home " was written by the Sugababes — Keisha Buchanan , Mutya Buena , and Heidi Range — in collaboration with Jonathan Lipsey , Karen Poole , and Jeremy Shaw , for the group 's fourth studio album , Taller in More Ways ( 2005 ) . Lipsey developed the idea of a close person as the song 's inspiration . Buena wrote the first verse based upon her daughter <unk> , who was born in March 2005 . While writing the verse , she pondered questions such as ' What would you say to her if she was ever in trouble ? ' , and ' How would you say , I ’ ll always be there for you ? ' . Buena wanted people to interpret the verse in different ways , and stated that the lyrics came naturally . Buchanan drew inspiration from her close friend when she wrote the other verse . Lipsey produced the song under his production name Jony Rockstar . " Follow Me Home " was mixed and engineered at Metropolis Studios by Tom Elmhirst and Richard Wilkinson , respectively . 
 " Follow Me Home " is a electropop and R & B ballad . Stuart Heritage of the website <unk> described it as an " R & B @-@ tinged ballad " . Instrumentation consists of keyboards , a guitar , beats and bass , which were provided by Shaw , Rockstar and Cameron McVey . According to Alex <unk> of Sydney Morning Herald , the song is " fleshed out with the string grandeur " of Welsh producers Hybrid , and channels European electropop music . The main concept of " Follow Me Home " is romance , and the song 's lyrical content is about protecting your loved one . During the chorus , the Sugababes sing : " I won 't walk away / I 'll stand by your side / I 'm here for you / For the rest of our lives " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In December 2005 , Buena left the Sugababes due to " personal reasons " , and was replaced by Amelle Berrabah in the same month . Some tracks on Taller in More Ways were subsequently re @-@ recorded to feature Berrabah 's vocals in replacement of Buena 's ; these included " Gotta Be You " , " Follow Me Home " and " Red Dress " . Buena expressed her disappointment with the re @-@ recording of " Follow Me Home " , saying : " My verse was talking about my daughter , it was personal . " The song was announced as the fourth and final single from Taller in More Ways , and was released as a CD single and digital download on 5 June 2006 . The CD single contains the radio edit of the song in addition to two remixes . The digital release features a cover of English band Hard @-@ Fi 's single " Living for the Weekend " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Follow Me Home " received mixed reviews from critics . K. Ross Hoffman of AllMusic described it as an " aptly pitched inspirational mini @-@ epic " , while Stylus Magazine 's Nick Southall complimented the song 's " luscious , romantic strings . " Talia Kraines of BBC noted the song as having a near @-@ level standard of the group 's 2003 single , " Too Lost in You " . <unk> gave the song seven out of ten stars , writing : " With this film themed track they ’ re staying true to their roots and retain their position as leaders amidst the all @-@ girl band rankings " . Stuart Heritage of Hecklerspray wrote that the song " benefits from some lovely strings and gorgeous , sultry vocals " , although admitted that the single is not as exciting as the album 's previous ones . Daily Record 's Rick Fulton described the song as one of the group 's more thoughtful tracks , but admitted that it lacks " bite " . He applauded the Soul Seekerz Vocal Mix version as " breathing life " into it . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian criticised the song as tedious and stated that it " is every bit as gripping as new parents <unk> their baby photos on you " . Linda McGee of RTÉ.ie considered it " nothing special " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Follow Me Home " debuted and peaked at number 32 on the UK Singles Chart in the issue dated 17 June 2006 . The following week , the song dropped ten places to number 42 , and in its third and last week on the chart , it fell to number 72 . It is the group 's lowest @-@ charting single in the UK , and one of their lowest @-@ selling singles . The song achieved more success on the Irish Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 25 and spent four weeks on the chart . The song debuted at number 88 on the Romanian Top 100 singles chart , and peaked at number 64 the following week . " Follow Me Home " achieved minor success on the Slovakian Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 93 . The single 's performance throughout Europe allowed it to chart on the European Hot 100 singles chart , peaking at number 91 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Follow Me Home " was directed by Toby Tremlett , who collaborated with the group on the video for their single " Ugly " . Filming of the video took place in Prague , the Czech Republic , and most scenes take place in a large house . It is set in winter time and features the Sugababes wearing winter clothing such as thick coats and scarves . The video was released onto the iTunes Store on 23 May 2006 and is featured on the song 's CD release . The video opens with a scene of an alcohol bottle and a glass next to it . It then cuts to a scene of Berrabah on a couch , while follow @-@ up scenes show Buchanan against a wall and Range on a bed . 
 An elderly man is shown by a pool located in the house , while a young girl in a swimsuit is on the other side of it . Another elderly man enters a room in the house where there is another girl . Throughout the video , various scenes of older men and younger women appear . Towards the end of the video , Berrabah , Buchanan and Range are shown standing outside in the dark . A car stops next to the trio and they enter it . In the last scene , an elderly man watches by as the car drives off . Avril <unk> from the Sunday Mail praised the video as " great " . Former group member Buena expressed her dissatisfaction with it , saying : " I just saw a bunch of perverted men and paedophile guys " . The video reached number eight on the UK TV airplay chart . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 The Sugababes performed " Follow Me Home " in October 2005 at the O2 ABC Glasgow , where they played to a crowd of 300 competition winners to promote the release of Taller in More Ways . The song was included in the set list for the group 's Taller in More Ways tour . <unk> <unk> from the Birmingham Mail described their performance at Birmingham 's <unk> Academy as " polished " . In June 2006 , following its release as a single , the group performed " Follow Me Home " on Top of the Pops . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded and mixed at Metropolis Studios , London 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Keisha Buchanan , Mutya Buena , Heidi Range , Jonathan Lipsey , Karen Poole , Jeremy Shaw 
 Production – Jony Rockstar 
 Mixing – Tom Elmhirst 
 Engineering – Richard Wilkinson 
 Keyboards and guitar – Jeremy Shaw 
 Beats – Jony Rockstar 
 Bass – Cameron McVey 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Taller in More Ways . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Battle of Setauket = 
 The Battle of Setauket ( August 22 , 1777 ) was a failed attack during the American Revolutionary War on a fortified Loyalist outpost in Setauket , Long Island , New York , by a force of Continental Army troops from Connecticut under the command of Brigadier General Samuel Holden Parsons . 
 In an attempt to repeat the success of the earlier Meigs Raid against Sag Harbor , Parsons ' force crossed Long Island Sound to attack the Loyalist position . Alerted by spies to the planned assault , Lieutenant Colonel Richard Hewlett strongly fortified the local Presbyterian church , surrounding it with a stockade and earthworks . After Hewlett rejected Parsons ' demand to surrender , a brief firefight ensued that did no significant damage . Parsons then withdrew and returned to Connecticut . 
 = = Background = = 
 The American Revolutionary War was a qualified success for the British in 1776 . After being forced to abandon Boston , they captured New York City , but were unable to hold New Jersey when General George Washington surprised them at Trenton and Princeton . The British consolidated their hold on New York City and Long Island during the winter months of early 1777 , while the Continental Army established a land blockade around the city in New Jersey , southern New York , and southwestern Connecticut . 
 In the spring of 1777 Lieutenant General William Howe launched raiding expeditions against Continental Army and local militia storage depots near the city . A successful raid against Peekskill , New York in March prompted him to organize a more ambitious expedition to raid a depot in Danbury , Connecticut . This expedition , led by the former royal governor of New York , William Tryon , successfully reached Danbury from a landing point in Westport , Connecticut , on April 26 , and destroyed provisions and supplies . The Connecticut militia had mobilized , and over the next two days skirmished with the British as they marched back to their ships , most notably on April 27 at Ridgefield . General Samuel Holden Parsons , leading Connecticut 's defenses , decided to organize an act of reprisal . The raid executed with great success by Colonel Return Jonathan Meigs against Sag Harbor on eastern Long Island prompted Parsons to consider further such actions against other Loyalist positions on the island . On August 16 , Parsons , whose brigade was stationed at Peekskill , New York , received orders from Major General Israel Putnam authorizing an expedition against Loyalist targets on Long Island . Parsons immediately ordered Colonel Samuel <unk> Webb to muster his regiment , numbering about 500 men , and march to Fairfield , Connecticut . Parsons followed , reaching Fairfield on August 21 . 
 Loyalists recruited from Queens County , New York by Lieutenant Colonel Richard Hewlett for the 3rd battalion DeLancey 's Brigade had established a fortified position in early August on the central north shore of Long Island at Setauket , just across Long Island Sound from Fairfield . Hewlett 's force took over the town 's Presbyterian meeting house , which they fortified . When spies informed Hewlett that Parsons was mustering troops at Fairfield , he set his force to improving the defenses , building a breastwork six feet ( about 2 meters ) high at a distance of 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) all around the meeting house . Upon these works he mounted four small swivel guns . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the night of August 21 , Parsons and Webb set out across Long Island Sound in whaleboats , taking with them a few small brass cannons . Early the next morning they landed at Crane 's Neck ( in present @-@ day Old Field , just west of Setauket ) , and marched to Setauket . Finding the Loyalists strongly entrenched , Parsons first sent a truce flag to demand their surrender . Hewlett refused the demand , and the two forces began a three @-@ hour exchange of gunfire . Neither side incurred significant casualties ( Colonel Webb reported one man wounded ) , and the small American cannons failed to make an impression on the fortifications . Concerned that armed British ships in the Sound would hear the battle and come to investigate , Parsons called off the assault and retreated , taking with him a dozen captured horses and some blankets . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The attackers successfully recrossed the Sound , and Parsons assigned Webb 's regiment to patrol the Connecticut shore . In December 1777 Parsons , Webb , and Meigs were involved in a more elaborate attempt at taking British military stores at Setauket . This one failed , because rough seas prevented Meigs from crossing , and Webb 's boat was captured by a British ship . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Hewlett was favorably mentioned in general orders for his defense of the post , although it was abandoned several months later . Although Setauket was never again the target of a major expedition , it was frequently the target of small @-@ scale raids . It was also a significant waypoint for intelligence that made its way from American spies in New York to Washington 's spy chief , Setauket native Benjamin Tallmadge . Tallmadge operated what has since been called the <unk> Ring , in which a number of Setauket residents figured prominently . 
 A Patriot refugee from Long Island , Zachariah Greene , was a member of Parsons ' expedition , and later served as minister to the Setauket Presbyterian congregation . A new building was erected on the site in 1812 . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 A fictionalized portrayal of the battle appears in the season 1 finale of the series Turn : Washington 's Spies . In this portrayal , Major Benjamin Tallmadge led the Continental forces against the British garrison led by a Major Edmund Hewlett . 
 = Transfusion ( EP ) = 
 Transfusion is the second EP by the Australian rock group Powderfinger . It was released on 27 September 1993 by Polydor . The album was the group 's first recording with Polydor , as the group had signed with the label due to the success of the previous EP by the band , Powderfinger . 
 The song " Reap What You Sow " is the first song by Powderfinger to have a music video . The EP received minor chart success , though not achieving a mainstream ARIA Singles Chart position . It reached the # 1 position on the ARIA Alternative Chart , taking the place of Nirvana 's single " Heart Shaped Box " . 
 = = History = = 
 Transfusion was recorded and produced by Powderfinger in 1993 under the Polydor label , at Red <unk> studios in Brisbane . Despite working with Polydor , the group did not sign any contract prior to work on the EP . Says lead singer Bernard Fanning , " We haven ’ t signed anything ... we certainly haven ’ t signed with them ( Polydor ) " . This statement also refuted rumours that the band had signed with various labels including " Red Eye , Emily , Polydor , and Imago " , according to Fanning . 
 In producing Transfusion , the band aimed to move away from the " sixties " tag that had been placed on them by the musical community . According to Fanning , it is human nature that " you really can ’ t help but categorise " , and this instinct was something the EP attempted to move away from . He went on to say that " it ’ d be nice , in a perfect world , just to be judged on your own merits " , whilst hitting back at those who gave Powderfinger the " sixties " tag by saying that " people that say that aren ’ t really listening , I think " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Publicity = = = 
 In order to publicise the release , Powderfinger decided to film a music video its first track , " Reap What You Sow " . The music video was directed by the advertisement director David Barker of Film Headquarters . This work with Barker proved amicable , and lead to the band 's following seven music videos also being directed by him . The " Reap What You Sow " video used black @-@ and @-@ white footage of Fanning lying in a creek floating and leaning on rocks . These scenes are intercut with more black @-@ and @-@ white scenes of the band performing the song , in one setting on the side of a mountain overlooking their home city of Brisbane . In another setting , the band is <unk> full colour playing live to an audience . Later in the video , the whole band are recreating in the creek seen earlier in the video . The video uses a range of filters and effects , including reversed scenes and visual filters . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 Transfusion replaced " Heart Shaped Box " by Nirvana at the top of the ARIA alternative music chart in 1993 . Despite appearing a notable achievement , Fanning overlooked its significance , telling Rolling Stone magazine , " All it did was make us aware of how few people buy records . " He estimated that it had taken 1 @,@ 000 sales for the EP to top the alternative music chart . However , Fanning said he hoped that the EP ’ s chart success would open doors for Powderfinger to play at renowned concerts such as the Big Day Out . 
 " Reap What You Sow " , the opening track on Transfusion , received some air time on Triple M in Brisbane , and on Triple J nationwide in Australia , but its airplay was incomparable to future singles by the band . The song did , however , win the band much local popularity , topping local community radio station and indie record store charts . It was recognisable and appreciated for " ( establishing ) the band 's tone and moral stance from the outset " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music and lyrics written by Bernard Fanning , John Collins , Ian Haug , Darren Middleton , Jon Coghill . 
 " Reap What You Sow " – 5 : 29 
 " Change the Tide " – 4 : 40 
 " Blind to Reason " – 6 : 11 
 " Mama Harry " – 3 : 11 
 " Rise Up " – 5 : 00 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Muslim conquest of Sicily = 
 The Muslim conquest of Sicily began in June 827 and lasted until 902 , when the last major Byzantine stronghold on the island , Taormina , fell . Isolated fortresses remained in Byzantine hands thereafter , but the island was henceforth under Muslim rule until conquered in turn by the Normans in the 11th century . 
 Although Sicily had been raided by the Muslims since the mid @-@ 7th century , these raids did not threaten Byzantine control over the island , which remained a largely peaceful backwater . The opportunity for the Aghlabid emirs of Ifriqiya came in 827 , when the commander of the island 's fleet , Euphemius , rose in revolt . Defeated by loyalist forces and driven from the island , Euphemius sought the aid of the Aghlabids . The latter regarded this as an opportunity for expansion and for diverting the energies of their own fractious military establishment and alleviate the criticism of the Islamic scholars by championing jihad , and dispatched an army to aid him . Following the Arab landing on the island , Euphemius was quickly sidelined . An initial assault on the island 's capital , Syracuse , failed , but the Muslims were able to weather the subsequent Byzantine counter @-@ attack and hold on to a few fortresses . With the aid of reinforcements from Ifriqiya and al @-@ Andalus , in 831 they took Palermo , which became the capital of the new Muslim province . 
 The Byzantine government sent a few expeditions to aid the locals against the Muslims , but preoccupied with the struggle against the Abbasids on their eastern frontier and with the Cretan Saracens in the Aegean Sea , it was unable to mount a sustained effort to drive back the Muslims , who over the next three decades raided Byzantine possessions almost unopposed . The strong fortress of Enna in the centre of the island was the main Byzantine bulwark against Muslim expansion , until its capture in 859 . Following its fall , the Muslims increased their pressure against the eastern parts of the island , and after a long siege captured Syracuse in 878 . The Byzantines retained control of some fortresses in the north @-@ eastern corner of the island for some decades thereafter , and launched a number of efforts to recover the island until well into the 11th century , but were unable to seriously challenge Muslim control over Sicily . The fall of the last major Byzantine fortress , Taormina , in 902 , is held to mark the completion of the Muslim conquest of Sicily . 
 Under Muslim rule , Sicily prospered and eventually detached itself from Ifriqiya to form a semi @-@ independent emirate . The island 's Muslim community survived the Norman conquest in the 1060s and even prospered under the Norman kings , giving birth to a unique cultural mix , until it was deported to Lucera in the 1220s after a failed uprising . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout the imperial Roman period , Sicily was a quiet , prosperous backwater . Only in the 5th century did it suffer from raids by the Vandals operating from the coasts of North Africa . In 535 , the island came under Byzantine control and was raided by the Ostrogoths in the Gothic War , but calm returned thereafter . Protected by the sea , the island was spared the ravages inflicted on Byzantine Italy through the Lombard invasions of the late 6th and early 7th centuries , and retained a still flourishing urban life and a civilian administration . It was only the increasing threat of the Muslim expansion that thrust it into the limelight . As John <unk> Bury writes , " A fruitful land and a desirable possession in itself , Sicily 's central position between the two basins of the Mediterranean rendered it an object of supreme importance to any Eastern sea @-@ power which was commercially or politically aggressive ; while for an ambitious ruler in Africa it was the <unk> to Italy and the gates of the Adriatic . " 
 Consequently , the island was early on targeted by the Muslims , the first raid occurring in 652 , only a few years after the establishment of the first Muslim navy . Following the onset of Muslim attacks against North Africa , it became a crucial strategic base , and for a while , in 661 – 668 , it was the residence of the imperial court under Constans II . Constituted as a theme around 690 , its governing strategos also came to assume control over the scattered imperial possessions in the southern Italian mainland . The island was raided thereafter , especially in the first half of the 8th century , but did not come under serious threat until the Muslims completed their conquest of North Africa and moved into Hispania as well . It was Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ <unk> , the Abbasid governor of Ifriqiya , who first made plans to invade the island in force and attempt to capture it and Sardinia in 752 – 753 , but he was thwarted by a Berber rebellion . 
 In 799 , the founder of the Aghlabid dynasty , Ibrahim ibn al @-@ Aghlab , secured recognition of his position as autonomous emir of Ifriqiya by the Abbasid caliph , Harun al @-@ Rashid , thereby marking the establishment of a practically independent state centred on modern Tunisia . In 805 , Ibrahim concluded a ten @-@ year truce with the Byzantine governor of Sicily , which was renewed by Ibrahim 's son and successor Abdallah I in 813 . During this time , the Aghlabids were too preoccupied with their rivalry with the <unk> to the west to plan any serious assault on Sicily . Instead , there are testimonies of commercial traffic between Sicily and Ifriqiya , and of the presence of Arab traders on the island . 
 = = Euphemius ' rebellion = = 
 The occasion for the invasion of Sicily was provided by the rebellion of the tourmarches Euphemius , commander of the island 's fleet . According to later and possibly fictional accounts , driven by lust for a nun , he had forced her to marry him . Her brothers protested to Emperor Michael II , and the Byzantine ruler ordered the island 's strategos , Constantine <unk> , to investigate the matter and if the charges were found true , to cut off Euphemius ' nose as punishment . Thus it came that Euphemius , returning from a naval raid against the African coast , learned that he was to be arrested . Instead , he sailed for Syracuse , occupying the city , while the governor sought refuge in Catana . Euphemius soon managed to gain the support of a large part of the island 's military leadership . Euphemius not only repulsed an attempt by Constantine to recover Syracuse , but pursued him and drove him out of Catana , and eventually captured and executed him . Euphemius was then proclaimed emperor . The historian Alexander Vasiliev doubts the " romantic " story of the origin of Euphemius ' revolt , and believes that the ambitious general simply used an opportune moment , when the central Byzantine government was weakened by the recent Revolt of Thomas the Slav , and by its preoccupation with the contemporary Muslim conquest of Crete , to seize power for himself . 
 At this point , however , Euphemius was deserted by one of his closest and most powerful allies , a man known through Arab sources as " Balata " ( according to Vasiliev probably a corruption of his title , while Treadgold holds that he was named Plato ) , and his cousin Michael , commander of Palermo . The two men denounced Euphemius ' usurpation of the imperial title and marched against Syracuse , defeated Euphemius and took the city . 
 Like one of his predecessors , <unk> , who had rebelled under Irene of Athens , Euphemius resolved to seek refuge among the Empire 's enemies and with a few supporters sailed to Ifriqiya . There he sent a delegation to the Aghlabid court , which pleaded with the Aghlabid emir Ziyadat Allah for an army to help Euphemius conquer Sicily , after which he would pay the Aghlabids an annual tribute . This offer came as a great opportunity for the Aghlabids , who faced long @-@ simmering ethnic tensions between Arab settlers and Berbers , dissension and rebellions within the Arab ruling elite ( the jund ) , and criticism for their preoccupation with worldly concerns , their " un @-@ Islamic " system of taxation and their luxurious lifestyle from the jurists of the <unk> school . Indeed , at the time of Euphemius ' arrival , Ziyadat Allah had just suppressed a dangerous three @-@ year revolt of the jund under Mansur al @-@ <unk> . As Alex Metcalfe writes , " by undertaking a jihad to expand the frontiers of Islam at the expense of the infidels by conquest – the first major undertaking since the invasion of the Iberian Peninsula from 711 – they could silence the criticism of the jurists . At the same time , they could redirect the destructive energies of a restless jund across the Ifriqiyan – Sicilian channel to secure new sources of manpower and wealth " . 
 Ziyadat Allah 's council was divided over the issue , but in the end the exhortations of the respected qadi of Kairouan , Asad ibn al @-@ Furat , who used quotations from the Quran to support his case , swayed them . Asad was placed at the head of the expedition even while retaining his office of qadi , normally incompatible with a military post . The Muslim expeditionary forces is said to have consisted of ten thousand foot soldiers and seven hundred cavalry , mostly Ifriqiyan Arabs and Berbers , but possibly also some Khurasanis . The fleet comprised seventy or a hundred ships , to which were added Euphemius ' own vessels . 
 = = Initial operations and conquest of Palermo = = 
 = = = Muslim landing and siege of Syracuse , 827 – 828 = = = 
 On 14 June 827 , the allied fleets sailed from the Bay of Sousse , and after three days they reached Mazara in southwestern Sicily , where they landed . There they were met with soldiers loyal to Euphemius , but the alliance soon began to show rifts : a Muslim detachment mistook some of Euphemius ' partisans for loyalist troops , and a skirmish ensued . Although Euphemius ' troops were ordered to place a twig on their helmets as a distinctive mark , Asad announced his intention to wage the campaign without them . Soon after that , Balata , who seems to have taken over the functions , if not the title , of the imperial strategos on the island , appeared nearby with a Byzantine force . The two armies clashed on a plain south @-@ east of Mazara , where Asad 's men , after exhortations by their leader , gained a victory . Balata retreated first to Enna and from there to Calabria on the Italian mainland , where he may have hoped to gather more troops . Instead , he died there shortly after his arrival . 
 Asad then left Mazara under Abu Zaki al @-@ <unk> , and turned to Syracuse : the Muslim army advanced along the southern shore towards the island 's capital , but at Qalat al @-@ <unk> ( possibly ancient <unk> ) , it was met by an embassy from the city which offered tribute if the Muslims halted their advance . The proposal was probably designed to buy time for the city to better prepare itself for a siege , but Asad , either persuaded by the emissaries ' assurances or needing to rest his army , halted his advance for a few days . At the same time , Euphemius began to regret his alliance with the Aghlabids , and opened secret contacts with the <unk> , urging them to resist the Arabs . The Muslims recommenced their advance soon after , and laid siege to the city . Byzantium , which at the same time was forced to face a threat much closer to home at Crete , was unable to send much aid to the beleaguered island , while the Muslims received reinforcements from Africa . <unk> <unk> , the dux of the imperial protectorate of Venice , came to the city 's aid , but was not able to raise the siege . The besiegers however suffered from lack of supplies as well as the outbreak of a disease in spring 828 , which cost Asad his life . He was replaced by Muhammad ibn Abu 'l @-@ <unk> . When a Byzantine fleet arrived , the Arabs raised the siege and tried to sail back to Africa , but were hindered by the Byzantine ships . Thwarted , the Muslim army burned its ships and retreated over land to the castle of Mineo , which surrendered to them after three days . 
 = = = First siege of Enna and the Byzantine counterattack , 828 – 829 = = = 
 Despite his contacts with the <unk> , Euphemius was now willing to serve as their guide , evidently hoping that the Muslims , humbled by their failure and without the strong will of Asad to guide them , could now be made to serve his purposes . After Mineo surrendered , the Muslim army divided in two : one part took Agrigento in the west , while the other , along with Euphemius , attacked Enna . The garrison of Enna began negotiations , offering to acknowledge Euphemius ' authority , but when Euphemius with a small escort met with their emissaries , he was murdered . It is unknown what happened to Euphemius ' supporters after his death , whether they dispersed or continued fighting alongside the Muslims . 
 In spring 829 , Michael II sent a new fleet to Sicily under Theodotus , who was well acquainted with the island , having already served as its strategos in the past . After landing , Theodotus marched his army to Enna , where the Arabs were continuing the siege . He was defeated in the subsequent battle , but was able to find refuge in the fortress with most of his men . The Muslims now became so confident of victory that they struck their first coins on the island , in the name of Ziyadat Allah and Muhammad ibn Abu 'l @-@ <unk> , who however died a short while after and was replaced by Zubayr ibn <unk> . Shortly after that , Theodotus managed to reverse the situation : he led a sally that routed a Muslim raiding party and then defeated the main Muslim army on the next day , killing 1 @,@ 000 men and pursuing the rest up to the Muslims ' fortified encampment , which he placed under siege . The Muslims tried to break out in a night sortie , but Theodotus was expecting such a move and routed them in an ambush . 
 The remains of the Muslim army once again sought refuge in Mineo , where Theodotus blockaded them and soon reduced them to the point of eating their horses and even dogs . When they heard of this reversal , the Arab garrison of Agrigento abandoned the city and retreated to Mazara . Thus , by the autumn of 829 , Sicily had almost been cleared of the Muslim invaders . 
 = = = Umayyad assistance and death of Theodotus 830 = = = 
 Theodotus ' success was not to be completed , however as in early summer 830 , a fleet from the Umayyad Emirate of Córdoba in al @-@ Andalus , under Asbagh ibn Wakil , arrived in Sicily despite the political difference and rivalry between Abbasid Caliphate and the Umayyad Emirate of Cordoba , the latter sent military assistance for Aghlabids to conquer Sicily although the Aghlabids was clearly serving under Abbasid interest . Ibn Kathir recorded that 300 ships of Umayyad and Aghlabids joint forces were present . Theodotus did not confront them , hoping that they would depart after raiding , but the beleaguered garrison at Mineo managed to get into contact with the raiders and proposed joint action . The Andalusians agreed , provided that Asbagh was recognized as the overall commander , and together with fresh troops from Ifriqiya marched on Mineo . Unable to confront them , Theodotus retreated to Enna and the siege of Mineo was broken ( July or August 830 ) . The combined Ifriqiyan and Andalusian army then torched Mineo and laid siege to another town , possibly <unk> ( modern <unk> ) . However , once again a plague broke out in their camp , killing Asbagh and many others . The town fell later , in autumn , but the Arabs ' numbers were so depleted that they had to abandon it and retreat west . Theodotus launched a pursuit and inflicted heavy casualties , so that most of the Andalusians departed the island . However , Theodotus too was killed at this time , possibly in one of these skirmishes . 
 = = = Fall of Palermo 831 = = = 
 Meanwhile , the Ifriqiyans of Mazara , together with some of the Andalusians , had advanced across the island and laid siege to Palermo . The city held out for a year until September 831 , when its commander , the spatharios Symeon , surrendered it in exchange for safe departure for the city 's senior officials and possibly the garrison as well . The city suffered greatly during the siege ; the Arab historian Ibn al @-@ Athir , records with exaggeration that the city 's population fell from 70 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 , who were taken as slaves . The city 's bishop , Luke , managed to escape and reach Constantinople , where he informed Emperor Theophilos of the disaster . The fall of Palermo marks a decisive step in the Muslim conquest of Sicily : the Muslims gained not only an important military base , but possession of the city — henceforth known simply as al @-@ Madina ( " the City " ) — allowed them to consolidate their control over the western portion of the island , which was established as a regular Aghlabid province . Thus , in March 832 , the first Aghlabid governor ( wali ) , Abu Fihr Muhammad ibn Abdallah , arrived in Palermo . Abu Fihr was a capable man , and was able to assuage the often violent dissensions between Ifriqiyans and Andalusians . 
 = = Expansion of the Muslim province = = 
 The western third of Sicily fell relatively quickly into Muslim hands , but conquest of the eastern portion of the island was a protracted and haphazard affair . There is little evidence of large @-@ scale campaigns or pitched battles , and warfare was dominated by repeated Arab attacks on Byzantine citadels , coupled with raids ( sa <unk> ) in the surrounding countryside , aimed at looting or the extraction of tribute and prisoners from the threatened localities . In this type of warfare , the south @-@ eastern third of the island ( Val di Noto ) suffered comparatively more than the more mountainous and inaccessible north @-@ eastern portion . 
 = = = Expeditions of 832 – 836 = = = 
 No operations are reported in Sicily for the first two years after the fall of Palermo . The Muslims were probably preoccupied with organizing their new province , while the Byzantines were too weak to react , and could not expect any reinforcements : the Empire faced mounting pressure in the East , where the Abbasid Caliph al @-@ Ma 'mun launched repeated invasions of the Byzantine borderlands and threatened to march on Constantinople itself until his sudden death in August 833 . 
 The struggle during the next few years focused on Enna , which became the main Byzantine stronghold in central Sicily . In early 834 , Abu Fihr campaigned against Enna , defeated its garrison in the field and forced it to withdraw within the town 's fortifications . In spring , the garrison sallied forth , but was again defeated and driven back . In 835 , Abu Fihr again raided central Sicily , and defeated the army under a Byzantine patrikios ( probably the island 's strategos ) that opposed him , taking the Byzantine commander 's wife and son captive in the process . After his success , Abu Fihr sent Muhammad ibn Salim in a raid against the eastern parts of the island , which reached as far as Taormina . However , dissensions broke out once again among the Muslims : Abu Fihr was murdered , and his killers found refuge among the Byzantines . 
 The Aghlabids replaced Abu Fihr with al @-@ Fadl ibn Yaqub , who displayed great energy : immediately after his arrival he led a raid against the environs of Syracuse , and then another into central Sicily , around Enna . The Byzantine strategos marched out to meet them , but the Muslims withdrew to a mountainous and thickly forested area where the Byzantines could not pursue . After waiting in vain for the Muslims to accept battle , the strategos turned his army back , but was ambushed by the Muslims who put his men to flight . The Muslims seized most of the Byzantines ' arms , equipment and animals , and almost managed to capture the severely wounded strategos himself . Despite his success , Ibn Yaqub was replaced in September by a new governor , the Aghlabid prince Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab Ibrahim ibn Abdallah ibn al @-@ Aghlab , a first cousin of the emir Ziyadat Allah . At the same time , the long @-@ awaited Byzantine reinforcements arrived . The Byzantine fleet contested the passage of Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab 's small fleet , which lost ships both to the Byzantine attack and to storms ; the Byzantines however could not prevent it from reaching Palermo , and were driven off by a squadron from the city under Muhammad ibn al @-@ Sindi . Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab avenged himself by launching naval raids against Pantelleria and other localities , beheading the Christians taken prisoner . At the same time , a Muslim cavalry raid reached the eastern parts of the island around Mount Etna , burning the villages and crops and taking captives . 
 In 836 , Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab launched fresh attacks . A Muslim force seized the fortress known in Arabic as <unk> ( probably <unk> on the island 's northern coast ) , but were driven away by a Byzantine counter @-@ attack . The Muslim fleet , under al @-@ Fadl ibn Yaqub , raided the Aeolian Islands and seized a number of forts on the northern coast of Sicily , most notably <unk> . In the meantime , another cavalry raid was dispatched against the region of Etna and was so successful that the price for Byzantine captives plummeted . 
 = = = Expeditions of 837 – 841 = = = 
 In 837 , a Muslim army under Abd al @-@ Salam ibn Abd al @-@ Wahhab attacked Enna , but was defeated by the Byzantines , and Abd al @-@ Salam himself was taken prisoner . The Muslims responded by reinforcing their position around Enna , which they placed under siege . During the following winter , one of the besiegers discovered an unguarded path leading to the town , allowing the Muslims to take the entire lower town . The Byzantines however managed to maintain control of the citadel , and after negotiations secured a Muslim withdrawal in exchange for a large ransom . 
 Theophilos now undertook a serious effort to relieve Sicily : he assembled a large army and placed it under the command of his son @-@ in @-@ law , the Caesar Alexios Mousele . Mousele arrived in Sicily in spring 838 , in time to relieve the fortress of Cefalù from a Muslim attack . Mousele scored a number of successes against Muslim raiding parties but , back in Constantinople , his enemies launched accusations of contacts with the Arabs and designs on the throne . Furthermore , the death of his infant wife , Maria , cut his link to Theophilos , and the Emperor sent the archbishop of Syracuse , Theodore <unk> , to recall the Caesar to Constantinople in 839 . 
 On 11 June 838 the emir Ziyadat Allah had died , and was succeeded by his brother , Abu <unk> ibn al @-@ Aghlab . The new emir sent fresh troops to Sicily , where the Muslims regained the upper hand after Mousele 's departure : in 839 – 840 , the Muslims captured the fortresses of Corleone , <unk> , <unk> , and possibly also <unk> , Geraci and other forts , and in 841 , they raided from Enna as far as Grotte . 
 In the same period , the Sicilian Muslims also established footholds in the Italian mainland . The Muslims were asked to assist the beleaguered Duchy of Naples against Sicard of Benevento in 839 , but then they sacked Brindisi and , following Sicard 's murder and the outbreak of civil war in the Principality of Benevento , seized Tarentum in 840 and Bari in 847 , which they made their bases . Until well into the 880s , the Muslims would launch destructive raids along the coasts of Italy and into the Adriatic Sea from their bases on the Italian mainland — most notably from the Emirate of Bari , until its destruction in 871 . 
 = = = Muslim advances and the fall of Enna , 842 – 859 = = = 
 In late 842 or 843 , with Neapolitan support , the Muslims conquered Messina . In 845 , the fortress of Modica also fell , while the Byzantines , now at peace with the Abbasid Caliphate , received reinforcements from the eastern theme of Charsianon . The two armies met near Butera , where the Byzantines suffered a crushing defeat , losing about 10 @,@ 000 men . In the wake of this disaster , the Byzantine position deteriorated rapidly : al @-@ Fadl ibn Ja 'far took <unk> by a ruse in 846 , and the fortress of Ragusa followed in 848 , when its garrison was forced by severe famine to surrender it to the Muslims , who razed it to the ground . At about the same time ( late 847 or 848 ) , an attempt by the Byzantine fleet to land troops near Palermo failed , and subsequently the Byzantines lost seven out of their ten ships in a storm . 
 In 851 , the capable Muslim governor and general Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab Ibrahim died , and the local Muslims elected Abu 'l @-@ Aghlab al @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Fadl , the victor of Butera , as his successor . Without waiting for confirmation of his appointment from Ifriqiya , the new governor attacked and captured the northern fortress of Caltavuturo , and then turned south towards Enna , whose Byzantine commander refused to meet him in the field . Abbas continued his raid , and in 852 – 853 he devastated the Val di Noto . Butera was besieged for five or six months , until its inhabitants came to terms and secured his withdrawal by delivering 5 @,@ 000 – 6 @,@ 000 prisoners . Little details are known about the events of the next four years , but the picture painted by the sources is one of unopposed Muslim raids across the remaining Byzantine territories . Abbas captured several fortresses , including Cefalù in 857 , whose population was allowed safe departure and which was then razed . Gagliano was also besieged , but not taken . In summer 858 , the two sides were engaged in naval combat , probably off Apulia ; Abbas ' brother Ali managed to defeat the Byzantine fleet of 40 ships in the first engagement , but was in turn defeated and forced to flee in the second . 
 Then , in January 859 , the Muslims scored a major success through the capture , with the aid of a Byzantine prisoner , of hitherto impregnable Enna . As Metcalfe remarks , the capture of the fortress was of major importance , for Enna was the key to Muslim expansion in eastern Sicily : " without bringing it under their control , the Muslims were not able to capture and consolidate towns further to the <unk> the risk of losing their gains in counteroffensives . ... Its fall , followed by its comprehensive sacking and the slaughter of its defenders on 24 January 859 was thus , in military terms , the crowning achievement of the early Aghlabids in Sicily since the fall of Palermo " . 
 The fall of Enna reduced the Byzantines to the eastern coastal strip between Syracuse and Taormina , and forced the emperor to send a large army and a fleet of reportedly 300 ships , under Constantine Kontomytes , which arrived at Syracuse in autumn 859 . Soon after , the Byzantine navy was defeated a major battle with the Muslims , in which the Byzantines lost a third of their fleet . Nevertheless , the arrival of a large Byzantine army induced several settlements , which had previously submitted to the Muslims , to rise in revolt . Abbas soon suppressed these uprisings , and marched against Kontomytes . The two armies met near Cefalù , and in the ensuing battle , the Byzantines were heavily defeated and retired to Syracuse , while Abbas strengthened his position by refortifying and colonizing Enna . 
 = = Fall of Malta and Syracuse = = 
 = = = Governorship of Khafaja ibn Sufyan , 861 – 869 = = = 
 Abbas died in autumn 861 , after another raid into Byzantine territory , and was buried at <unk> ; the Byzantines later exhumed and burned his corpse . As his replacement , the Sicilian Muslims chose his uncle Ahmad ibn Ya 'qub . His tenure was short , as in February 862 he was deposed in favour of Abdallah , son of Abbas . Abdallah 's general Rabah was able to capture a few Byzantine fortresses , despite suffering a defeat in battle at first . Abdallah 's elevation , however , was not acknowledged by the Aghlabids , and he was replaced , after only five months in office , by Khafaja ibn Sufyan . 
 In 863 , Khafaja sent his son Muhammad to raid the environs of Syracuse , but he was defeated by the Byzantines and forced to retire . In February / March 864 , however , with the aid of a Byzantine renegade , the Muslims captured Noto and Scicli . In 865 , Khafaja led in person an expedition against the environs of Enna — which may signify that the Byzantines had retaken it , or that they still held forts in its vicinity — before moving onto Syracuse , but again his son Muhammad was defeated in an ambush , losing 1 @,@ 000 men . 
 In 866 , Khafaja marched once more against Syracuse . From there he marched along the coast towards the north . There he met a delegation of the citizens of Taormina , who concluded a treaty with him , but soon broke it . In the same year , the Muslims retook Noto and Ragusa , which the Byzantines had apparently recaptured , or which had simply failed to renew their tribute payments after previous capitulations . Khafaja also captured the fortress called " al @-@ <unk> " and a few other towns , before an illness forced him to return to Palermo . In the summer of 867 , after the illness had passed , Khafaja led his army towards Syracuse and Catania again , raiding their environs . 
 In September 867 , the Byzantine emperor Michael III was killed and succeeded by Basil I the Macedonian . The new emperor was more energetic than his predecessor , and the relative peace on his eastern frontier allowed him to soon turn his full attention to the west : in 868 – 869 admiral Niketas Ooryphas was sent to relieve an Arab siege of Ragusa and re @-@ establish imperial authority in Dalmatia , after which he sailed to Italy in an abortive attempt to conclude a marriage alliance and co @-@ ordinate a joint siege of Bari with the western emperor , Louis II . Another fleet was dispatched to Sicily in spring 868 , but the Byzantines were heavily defeated by Khafaja in battle , after which the Muslims freely raided the environs of Syracuse . After <unk> 's return to Palermo , his son Muhammad launched a raid against mainland Italy , possibly besieging Gaeta . 
 On his return to Sicily , in January – February 869 , Muhammad led an attempt to capture Taormina through treason , but although a small Muslim detachment gained control of the gates , Muhammad tarried to arrive with the main army and the detachment , fearing capture , abandoned the city . A month later , Khafaja launched an attack on the region of Mount Etna , probably against the town of <unk> ( modern Randazzo ) , while Muhammad raided around Syracuse . The Byzantines , however , sortied from the city and defeated Muhammad 's men , inflicting heavy casualties , forcing Khafaja to turn on Syracuse himself . He reportedly laid siege to the city for a few weeks , before turning back towards Palermo in June . On his march home , however , he was assassinated by a dissatisfied Berber soldier , who then fled to Syracuse . It was a heavy loss for the Sicilian Muslims . The motives for the murder remain unclear : Metcalfe suggests a dispute over the division of spoils between the various sections of the Muslim army , but Alexander Vasiliev suggested the possibility that the Berber soldier was in the Byzantines ' pay . 
 = = = Muslim capture of Malta and Syracuse , 870 – 878 = = = 
 Khafaja was succeeded by his son Muhammad , elected by the Sicilian army and confirmed by the Aghlabid emir . In contrast to his previous energy , Muhammad was a sedentary governor , preferring to remain in his capital rather than campaign in person . His tenure was furthermore cut short when he was assassinated by his court eunuchs on 27 May 871 . 
 Nevertheless , his tenure is associated with a major success of long @-@ term significance , the capture of Malta . Of all the islands around Sicily , this was the last to remain in Byzantine hands , and in 869 a fleet under Ahmad ibn Umar ibn <unk> ibn al @-@ Aghlab al @-@ Habashi attacked it . The Byzantines , having received timely reinforcements , resisted successfully at first , but in 870 Muhammad sent a fleet from Sicily to the island , whose fortress fell on 29 August 870 . The local governor fell , and the town was plundered — Ahmad al @-@ Habashi reportedly took along the local cathedral 's marble columns to decorate his palace — and its fortifications razed . The fall of Malta had important ramifications for the defence of what remained of Byzantine Sicily : with Reggio in Calabria and now Malta in their hands , the Muslims completed their encirclement of the island , and could easily interdict any aid sent from the east . 
 From 872 to 877 there was apparently a period of calm , since the sources are silent on any military operations in Sicily . This was probably chiefly due to internal turmoil in Muslim Sicily , with six governors reported as having taken office during this period , as well as the weakness of the Aghlabid government on the Ifriqiyan metropolis . In Italy , Muslim raids continued , but the Byzantines had a major success in 875 or 876 , after the death of Louis II , when they took possession of Bari . 
 In 875 , the unwarlike and pleasure @-@ loving Aghlabid emir Muhammad II ibn Ahmad ( r . 864 – 875 ) died , and was succeeded by his more energetic brother , Ibrahim II ( r . 875 – 902 ) . The new Emir of Ifriqiya was determined to finally capture Syracuse . He appointed a new governor for the island , Ja 'far ibn Muhammad , and sent a fleet from Ifriqiya to his assistance . Ja 'far began his campaign in 877 , raiding the Byzantine territories and occupying some outlying forts around Syracuse , before settling down to besiege the city . The Muslims , well supplied with siege weapons , launched incessant attacks on the city 's defenders , but Syracuse received scant reinforcements from Constantinople , where the bulk of the imperial fleet was apparently occupied with carrying building materials for a sumptuous new church built by Emperor Basil . During nine months of siege , the Arabs gradually occupied the outer defences , and finally , on 21 May 878 , stormed the city . The population was massacred or enslaved , and the city thoroughly looted over two months . 
 = = Completion of the Muslim conquest = = 
 = = = Dissension among the Sicilian Muslims , 878 – 900 = = = 
 Despite the major success of capturing Syracuse , the Muslim province in Sicily now degenerated into internal strife . Soon after the city 's fall , Ja 'far ibn Muhammad was murdered by his own slaves , at the instigation of his uncle and his brother , who then usurped the governorship . They were in turn overthrown in September 878 , and sent to Ifriqiya where they were executed . 
 Ibrahim II then briefly named his own son as governor , before the appointment of the Sicilian Husayn ibn Rabah . Husayn renewed the campaigns against the remaining Byzantine strongholds in the northeast , especially Taormina , in 879 – 880 , but without success . Indeed , the Byzantines were able to launch a limited counteroffensive in 880 , when the admiral Nasar defeated an Aghlabid fleet in a daring night attack in the Ionian Sea , and then proceeded to raid the environs of Palermo , before defeating another Aghlabid fleet at the Battle of <unk> . In 881 – 882 , Taormina was again the target of a determined Muslim attack , but held out , and a Muslim army under Abu 'l @-@ Thawr was annihilated by the Byzantines , causing a large @-@ scale mobilization of the Sicilian Muslims . Over the next years , the Muslims launched several raids , against Catania , Taormina and " the king 's city " ( possibly Polizzi ) in 883 , against Rometta and Catania in 884 , and again against Catania and Taormina in 885 . These expeditions were successful in so far as they yielded sufficient booty or tribute to pay the army , but failed to capture any Byzantine strongholds . The same period , 885 – 886 , also saw a resurgence of Byzantine strength in the Italian mainland , where Nikephoros Phokas the Elder won a string of victories against the Muslims . 
 It was in this climate of military failure that the discontent among broad sections of the Sicilian Muslim population , hitherto kept in check by successful raiding , erupted into open rebellion . In the later narrative sources , this conflict between the ruling elite and the lower classes is often simplified to an " ethnic " struggle between the ( ruling ) " Arabs " and the ( rebel ) " Berbers " . In December 886 , the people of Palermo deposed the governor , Sawada ibn Khafaja , and sent him to Ifriqiya . Emir Ibrahim II appointed a new governor , who was able to calm the situation temporarily through successful raids and the victory over a Byzantine fleet off Milazzo in 888 , which enabled the Sicilian Muslims to launch destructive raids into Calabria . 
 In the next year , Sawada returned , with fresh Ifriqiyan troops , and launched yet another failed attack on Taormina . However , in March 890 , another rebellion broke out in Palermo , this time apparently among the Sicilian Arabs , and directed against Sawada 's Ifriqiyans . Coupled with a major rebellion in Ifriqiya itself in 894 – 895 , this put an end to Muslim raids against the Byzantines , and resulted in the conclusion of a truce in 895 – 896 . According to its terms , in exchange for peace , over 40 months the Byzantines would gradually release their Muslim prisoners , by turns a group of " Arabs " and a group of " Berbers " , in total some 1 @,@ 000 men . As Metcalfe remarks , " not only does this show the extent of Christian military success against the Aghlabids in eastern Sicily , but it may also have been deliberately aimed at exacerbating tensions within the Muslim army by playing off one faction against another in negotiating their staggered release " . 
 In the event , a full @-@ scale civil war between " Arabs " and " Berbers " erupted in 898 , prompting the dispatch of Ibrahim II 's son Abu 'l @-@ Abbas Abdallah , who had previously suppressed the rebellion in <unk> , to the island at the head of an army in summer 900 . By then , the Muslims ' infighting had acquired a regional dimension , with the <unk> pitted against the <unk> . After negotiations between the Ifriqiyans and the rival Sicilian parties failed , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas Abdallah marched on Palermo , which he captured on 18 September 900 . A great number of the rebels fled the city to the Byzantines in Taormina , with some reaching even Constantinople itself . 
 = = = Ibrahim II 's arrival and the fall of Taormina , 901 – 902 = = = 
 The Byzantines tried to take advantage of the revolt , and began assembling forces at Messina and Reggio , while a fleet was dispatched from Constantinople . Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , however , did not tarry and as soon as he had suppressed the rebellion , marched against the Byzantines , ravaging the environs of Taormina and launching an unsuccessful siege of Catania before returning to winter in Palermo . In the next spring , he resumed his attack and assaulted Demona . To disrupt the Byzantine preparations , his forces then crossed over to the mainland . Reggio was captured on 10 July , and was subjected to a savage sack ; a vast booty was collected , over 15 @,@ 000 of its inhabitants were carted off as slaves , and the jizya imposed on the remainder . On his return to Sicily , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas came across a Byzantine fleet that had just arrived from Constantinople and thoroughly defeated it , capturing thirty of its vessels . 
 In early 902 , Emir Ibrahim II was forced into abdication by his subjects , through the intervention of the Abbasid caliph . Ibrahim exchanged places with Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , who was named as his successor : Abu 'l @-@ Abbas left Sicily for Ifriqiya , while Ibrahim now resolved to take up the mantle of the Holy War , and accompanied a group of volunteers to Sicily in the summer . In an act that broke the long @-@ standing stalemate on the island , Ibrahim and his followers advanced on Taormina , defeated the Byzantine garrison before its walls and laid siege to it . Left unsupported by the imperial government , the town fell on 1 August 902 . Ibrahim then capitalized on his success by sending raiding parties against various strongholds in the vicinity , forcing either their capitulation and destruction or the payment of tribute . 
 Indefatigable , Ibrahim now crossed over into the mainland , where cities as far as Naples began to prepare to resist his attack . In the end , his advance was stopped at the siege of Cosenza , where Ibrahim died of dysentery on October 24 . His grandson stopped the military campaign and returned to Sicily . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although few strongholds in the northeast remained unconquered and in Christian hands , the fall of Taormina marked the effective end of Byzantine Sicily , and the consolidation of Muslim control over the island . However , it did not signal the end of Arab – Byzantine warfare on and around the island . 
 In 909 , Sicily , like Ifriqiya itself , passed under the control of the Fatimids . The Fatimids ( and after the 950s the <unk> hereditary governors ) continued the tradition of jihad , both against the Christian strongholds in the northeast ( the Val Demone ) and , more prominently , against the Byzantine possessions in southern Italy , punctuated by truces . Taormina itself threw off Muslim control soon after 902 , and it was not until 962 , possibly in response to the Byzantine reconquest of Crete the previous year , that the Fatimids retook the town , following a 30 @-@ week siege . In the next year , the Muslims attacked the last remaining Christian stronghold on the island , Rometta , which prompted an expedition sent by the Byzantine emperor , Nikephoros II Phokas , to recover Sicily . The Byzantines were at first successful , recapturing Messina and other fortresses in the northeast , but were repulsed before Rometta itself , and retreated back to Calabria . In the next year , they tried to resume their offensive , but were annihilated in the " Battle of the Straits " ( <unk> 'at al @-@ <unk> ) off Messina . As a result , a lasting truce was concluded by the two powers in 967 . 
 Sicilian raids on Italy continued , and prompted the intervention of the Western Emperor , Otto II in the peninsula in 982 , where he was defeated at the Battle of Stilo . It was not until the 1020s that the Byzantines turned their attention to Sicily again , after a period of consolidation of their position in southern Italy under the capable Catepan Basil Boioannes . A large force landed in Messina in 1025 , but the expedition was called off when news came of the death of Emperor Basil II . A final effort was made in 1038 , when the talented young general George Maniakes was dispatched to Sicily , taking advantage of internal conflicts between the <unk> and the <unk> . Maniakes quickly recaptured the entire eastern coast , but the conquest was left incomplete when he was recalled to Constantinople by jealous rivals . The <unk> soon recovered their losses , and Messina , the last Byzantine outpost , fell in 1042 . 
 The Arabs remained in control of Sicily until the Norman conquest of the island , which was also a prolonged affair , lasting from the first invasion in 1061 to the surrender of Noto in 1091 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The long Arab – Byzantine struggle left abiding traces on the island 's subsequent history : although under Muslim rule , Sicilian culture quickly became Arabicized , the Christian communities in the central and eastern parts largely resisted <unk> . The level of Arab influence , as attested through surviving toponyms , also varied across the island depending on the length of resistance and the extent of Arab settlement : there are many Arab @-@ derived names in the western third ( the medieval Val di Mazara ) , are more mixed in the southeastern third ( Val di Noto ) , while Christian identities survived strongest in the northeastern third of the island ( Val Demone ) , which was the last to fall , where Christian refugees from other parts of Sicily had assembled , and which furthermore remained in contact with Byzantine southern Italy . 
 = Greater scaup = 
 The greater scaup ( Aythya marila ) , just scaup in Europe or , colloquially , " <unk> " in North America , is a mid @-@ sized diving duck , larger than the closely related lesser scaup . It spends the summer months breeding in Alaska , northern Canada , Siberia , and the northernmost reaches of Europe . During the winter , it migrates south to the coasts of North America , Europe , and Japan . 
 Drake greater scaup are larger and have more rounded heads than the females ; they have a bright blue bill and yellow eyes . Their heads are dark , with a green gloss ; the breast is black , the belly white and the wing shows a white stripe . The females are mostly brown , again with white on the wing . They have dull blue bills and white on the face . 
 Greater scaup nest near water , typically on islands in northern lakes or on floating mats of vegetation . They begin breeding at age two , but start building nests in the first year . The drakes have a complex courtship , which takes place on the return migration to the summer breeding grounds and concludes with the formation of monogamous pairs . Females lay a clutch of six to nine olive @-@ buff colored eggs . The eggs hatch in 24 to 28 days . The down @-@ covered ducklings are able to follow their mother in her search for food immediately after hatching . 
 Greater scaup eat aquatic molluscs , plants , and insects , which they obtain by diving underwater . They form large groups , called " rafts " , that can number in the thousands . Their main threat is human development , although they are preyed upon by owls , skunks , raccoons , foxes , coyotes , and humans . Greater scaup populations have been declining since the 1980s ; however , they are still listed as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The genus name Aythya is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> which refers to a seabird mentioned by Aristotle and others and is thought to refer to a duck , auklet or other seabird . The species name marila is from the Greek word for charcoal embers or coal dust . The greater scaup was first studied by Linnaeus in 1761 . Male greater scaup from America are distinguishable from those in Europe and Asia by the stronger vermiculations , worm @-@ like carvings or marks on the mantle and scapulars , and are considered a separate subspecies , A. m. <unk> . Females of the two subspecies are indistinguishable . Based on size differences , a Pleistocene paleosubspecies , Aythya marila <unk> , has also been described by <unk> in 1941 from fossils recovered at <unk> , Azerbaijan . The greater scaup 's name may come from " scalp " , a Scottish and Northern English word for a shellfish bed , or from the duck 's mating call : " scaup scaup " . 
 A phylogenetic analysis of the diving ducks , examining the skeletal anatomy and skin , found that the greater and lesser scaups are each other 's closest relatives , with the tufted duck as the next closest relative of the pair . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult greater scaup is 39 – 56 cm ( 15 – 22 in ) long with a 71 – 84 cm ( 28 – 33 in ) wingspan and a body mass of 726 – 1 @,@ 360 g ( 1 @.@ 601 – 2 @.@ 998 lb ) . It has a blue bill and yellow eyes and is 20 % heavier and 10 % longer than the closely related lesser scaup . The male has a dark head with a green sheen , a black breast , a light back , a black tail , and a white underside . The drake or male greater scaup is larger and has a more rounded head than the female . The drake 's belly and flanks are a bright white . Its neck , breast , and tail feathers are a glossy black , while its lower flanks are vermiculated gray . The upper wing has a white stripe starting as the speculum and extending along the flight feathers to the wingtip . Legs and feet of both sexes are gray . The adult female has a brown body and head , with white wing markings similar to those of the male but slightly duller . It has a white band and brown oval shaped patches at the base of the bill , which is a slightly duller shade of blue than the drake 's . Juvenile greater scaup look similar to adult females . The greater scaup drake 's eclipse plumage looks similar to its breeding plumage , except the pale parts of the plumage are a buffy gray . Distinguishing greater from lesser scaups can be difficult in the field . The head of the greater tends to be more rounded , and the white wing stripe is more extensive . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The greater scaup has a circumpolar distribution , breeding within the Arctic Circle both in the Old World ( the Palearctic ) and in North America ( the Nearctic ) . It spends the summer months in Alaska , Siberia , and the northern parts of Europe . It is also found in Asia and is present in the Aleutian Islands year round . The summer habitat is marshy lowland tundra and islands in fresh water lakes . In the fall , greater scaup populations start their migration south for the winter . They winter along the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of North America , the coasts of northwest Europe , the Caspian Sea , the Black Sea , the coast of Japan , Yellow Sea and East China Sea . During the winter months , they are found in coastal bays , estuaries , and sometimes inland lakes , such as the lakes of Central Europe and the Great Lakes . 
 In Europe , the greater scaup breeds in Iceland , the northern coasts of the Scandinavian peninsula , including much of the northern parts of the Baltic Sea , the higher mountains of Scandinavia and the areas close to the Arctic Sea in Russia . These birds spend the winters in the British Isles , western Norway , the southern tip of Sweden , the coast from Brittany to Poland , including all of Denmark , the Alps , the eastern Adriatic Sea , the northern and western Black sea and the southwestern Caspian Sea . 
 In North America , the greater scaup summers in Newfoundland and Labrador , <unk> Bay , Hudson Bay , Lake Winnipeg , northern Yukon , northern Manitoba , and northern Saskatchewan . It winters along the coasts of North America from northern British Columbia south to the Baja Peninsula and from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick south to Florida , as well as the shores of the Great Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Greater scaup breed in the tundra and the boreal forest ; it is estimated that 75 % of the North American population breed in Alaska . They typically nest on islands in large northern lakes . Greater scaup begin breeding when they are two years old , although they may start nesting at age one . Drake greater scaup have a soft , quick whistle they use to attract the attention of hens during courtship , which takes place from late winter to early spring , on the way back to their northern breeding grounds . Female greater scaup have a single pitch , a raspy “ arrr @-@ arrr @-@ arrr @-@ arrr @-@ arrr ” vocalization . The courtship is complex and results in the formation of monogamous pairs . Pairs nest in close proximity to each other in large colonies , usually near water , on an island or shoreline , or on a raft of floating vegetation . The nest consists of a shallow depression made by the female and lined with her down . After the female lays the eggs , the drake abandons the female and goes with other drakes to a large , isolated lake to molt . These lakes can be close to the breeding grounds or miles away . The lakes chosen are used yearly by the same ducks . The optimal molting lake is fairly shallow and has an abundance of food sources and cover . The female lays six to nine olive @-@ buff @-@ colored eggs , which she incubates for 24 – 28 days . A larger clutch could indicate brood parasitism by other greater scaups or even ducks of other species . Newly hatched chicks are covered with down and are soon able to walk , swim , and feed themselves ; however , they are not able to fly until 40 – 45 days after hatching . The vulnerable small chicks follow their mother , who protects them from predators . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The greater scaup dive to obtain food , which they eat on the surface . They mainly eat molluscs , aquatic plants , and aquatic insects . During the summer months , the greater scaup will eat small aquatic crustaceans . There is a report of four greater scaups swallowing leopard frogs ( with body length about 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) ) , which they dredged out of a roadside freshwater pond . In freshwater ecosystems , the greater scaup will eat seeds , leaves , stems and roots , along with sedges , <unk> , <unk> , and wild celery . Owing to the greater scaup 's webbed feet and weight , it can dive up to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) and stay submerged for up to a minute , allowing it to reach food sources that are unobtainable to other diving ducks . The greater scaup forms large flocks , some of which can contain thousands of birds . When flocks are in water , they will face the current , and as the ducks float backwards , some fly to the front of the flock to maintain position . 
 = = Threats = = 
 Common predators of the greater scaup are owls , skunks , raccoons , foxes , coyotes , and humans . Greater scaup often find themselves entangled in fishing nets , thus large numbers of them drown in nets each year . Greater scaup can catch avian influenza , so future outbreaks have the potential to threaten greater scaup populations . 
 Although the greater scaup faces numerous threats , the most significant challenge to their survival is habitat degradation caused by a mix of human development and runoff . Greater scaup , when moulting and during the winter , are threatened by escalated levels of organochloride contaminants . Oil and sewage pollution also threaten this duck . Since 80 % of the greater scaup population winters in the urbanized part of the Atlantic Flyway , these ducks are subject to high levels of organic contaminates , along with increased levels of heavy metals in foods and habitat . 
 A joint group of American and Canadian scientists researching scaup migration across the Great Lakes found that 100 % of female greater scaup , and 77 % of female lesser scaup , had escalated levels of selenium in their bodies . Selenium is an occurring semimetallic trace element that occurs naturally in some soils and minute amounts are necessary for animal life . However excessive selenium can cause reproductive harm and is highly toxic . On their migration across the Great Lakes , greater scaups are at risk of ingesting selenium by eating the invasive zebra mussels , which can render a hen infertile . This sterilization of hens is causing the population to decrease . 
 In a study of 107 scaup , they all had traces of iron , zinc , manganese , copper , lead , cadmium , cobalt and nickel in their tissue samples with varying concentrations of metals in different types of tissues . Further analysis revealed that the kidneys had the highest levels of cadmium , the liver had the highest levels of copper and manganese , the liver and the stomach had the highest levels of zinc , and the lungs and liver had the highest levels of iron . There was no difference in concentration when comparing genders . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Greater scaup are rated as a species of least concern by the IUCN <unk> . During aerial population surveys greater and lesser scaup are counted together , because they look almost identical from the air . It was estimated that the greater scaup made up about 11 % of the continental scaup population . Since the 1980s , scaup populations have been steadily decreasing . Some of the primary factors contributing to this decline are habitat loss , contaminants , changes in breeding habitat , and a lower female survival rate . The 2010 American scaup population survey was 4 @.@ 2 million scaup , however , the worldwide greater scaup population survey estimated 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 mature greater scaup . Along with the aerial population surveys , there is a banding program for the greater scaup . Metal leg bands are placed on them , so that if the scaup is killed by a hunter or if it is captured by another banding group , the number on the band can be reported to biologists and wildlife organizations . These banding programs yield valuable data about migration patterns , harvest rates , and survival rates . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Greater scaup are a popular game bird in North America and Europe . They are hunted in Denmark , Germany , Greece , France , the United Kingdom , and Ireland , and in Iran for both sport and commercial reasons . Greater scaup are hunted with shotguns because they must be shot on the fly , a challenging task , as they can fly at up to 121 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Greater scaup are hunted from shorelines and in open water hunting blinds or layout boats , low @-@ profile kayak @-@ like boats that hunters lie inside . Hunters frequently use decoys to attract the birds , often arranged to simulate a raft of greater scaup and featuring an open area to attract the birds to land . In most countries where greater scaup are hunted , a duck stamp is required along with the normal hunting licences that are required to pursue other game . In America and Canada , waterfowl must be hunted with non @-@ toxic shot . 
 = Metroid Prime : Trilogy = 
 Metroid Prime : Trilogy is a compilation of action @-@ adventure games developed by Retro Studios and published by Nintendo for the Wii video game console . It features three games from the Metroid series : Metroid Prime , Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , and Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption . Prime and Echoes , which were originally released for the GameCube , were updated with many of the features that were first implemented in Corruption , such as a new control scheme based on the Wii Remote and a credits system that was supported by WiiConnect24 . 
 The compilation was first announced by Nintendo in May 2009 , and was released in North America on August 24 , 2009 ; in Europe on September 4 , 2009 ; and in Australia on October 15 , 2009 . It was not released in Japan , because the Prime and Echoes ports were released as standalone games in the New Play Control ! collection for that region . In January 2010 , Nintendo discontinued the title in both North America and Australia . Metroid Prime : Trilogy was well received by critics , with much praise to the new controls . In January 2015 , the compilation was made available for download from the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The updated Wii versions of Prime and Echoes , which were released separately in Japan as part of the New Play Control ! series , utilize the same Wii Remote control scheme introduced in Corruption . Other updates include shorter load times , upgraded textures , bloom lighting , altered visual effects , and 16 : 9 widescreen capabilities ; however , the heads @-@ up display is always displayed at the original aspect ratio , causing it to be stretched horizontally when in widescreen mode . 
 Additionally , the award system from Corruption was incorporated into the first two games . Players earn credits by accomplishing certain tasks , allowing them to unlock in @-@ game items such as artwork , music , a screenshot feature , decorative items for Samus ' ship in Corruption and the Fusion Suit in Prime , in which the latter was previously unlocked by connecting the Game Boy Advance title Metroid Fusion to the game . Credits could also be shared with registered Wii friends , who also have a copy of Trilogy , via WiiConnect24 which used the Wii 's own 16 @-@ digit number as opposed to a separate Friend Code . Save files from the original version of Corruption cannot be transferred to the Trilogy version due to changes made to the source code . 
 The game also featured the multiplayer mode from Echoes , but was limited to local four @-@ player games and did not feature online play , which is faithful to the original . In response to complaints from players and critics about Echoes 's high difficulty during some of the boss battles , the difficulty of the encounters was lowered . All three games were printed on a single disc , and accessible via a new , unified start menu designed differently from any of the previous editions of the included games . The menu also allows independent access to the Echoes multiplayer mode , the extras menu , and other settings . 
 = = = Metroid Prime = = = 
 Originally released in 2002 for the GameCube , Metroid Prime was the first 3D title in the series , changing the perspective from sidescrolling third person to first @-@ person view , with third @-@ person being used on the Morph Ball gameplay . The game starts with protagonist Samus Aran receiving a distress signal from Space Pirate Frigate Orpheon . After an accident causes the ship to be destroyed , Samus lands on the nearby planet , Tallon IV , where the Space Pirates discovered a powerful radioactive substance known as Phazon . Samus fights off the Pirates and their biological experiments , eventually leading to a battle with Metroid Prime , a highly mutated Metroid that had been feeding off the core of a Phazon meteorite . The game received universal acclaim by critics , winning several Game of the Year awards , and sold over two million units worldwide . 
 = = = Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes = = = 
 Released in 2004 , Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes continues from the events of the first Prime , and featured a multiplayer mode . Samus is sent to rescue Galactic Federation Marines from a ship near Aether , a planet inhabited by a race known as the Luminoth . There , she discovers that the troops were slaughtered by the Ing , an evil race that came from an alternate dimension of Aether created by a Phazon meteor . Samus travels to three temples to ensure the destruction of the Ing , while battling Space Pirates and her mysterious doppelgänger called Dark Samus . Although it was positively received , criticism of the game was driven on the steep difficulty and multiplayer components . Sales for Echoes were lower than the first , with a total of 800 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = = Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption = = = 
 Released in 2007 , Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption was the first title in the series to be released on the Wii . While fending off a Space Pirate assault , Samus and her fellow bounty hunters are attacked by Dark Samus . After Samus loses contact with the other hunters , the Galactic Federation sends Samus on a mission to determine what happened to them . During the course of the game , Samus works to prevent the Phazon from spreading from planet to planet while being slowly corrupted by the Phazon herself . The game received high critical acclaim , and as of March 2008 , 1 @.@ 31 million copies of the game were sold worldwide . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2004 , while Retro Studios was finishing Echoes , senior producer Bryan Walker suggested to studio president Michael Kelbaugh to " do something for the fans by putting all the games together on a single disc in a collector [ ' ] s ' trilogy ' edition " . Kelbaugh sent the proposal to Nintendo , which the company accepted . Development on the compilation started shortly before the release of Corruption , and used only a few of Retro Studios ' staff , as most of the crew was busy with Donkey Kong Country Returns . Prime series producer Kensuke Tanabe asked the staff to resolve most of the glitches for the Trilogy release to prevent sequence breaking . 
 Walker considered the compilation to be " an almost unheard of opportunity to take something you had already released and make it better " . Senior designer Mike Wikan said most of the content additions were subtle changes , such as streamlining the engines for steady framerates and shorter loading times , and higher resolution textures . Prime had the addition of light bloom , and Echoes had difficulty tweaks to make it " more accessible to those who were really intimidated early on " . For Corruption , the code was examined to find ways to make it run faster and better than in the original Wii release . Besides the changes , the particle and water ripple effects found in the original versions of Prime were reduced . The word " damn " uttered by the character Admiral Dane in Corruption 's original release was also replaced with " no " . Corruption voice actor Timothy Patrick Miller recalled on a minor dialogue alteration for his voice work : " I realize that video games even more than film is a Director [ ' ] s medium . The Director will take any actor [ ' ] s performance , edit it , cut it and in general mold it to fit his vision of the overall project . Not only do I not have a problem with that , I don ’ t see how it can be any other way . Should they find it not to work I expect the voice will be dropped . " 
 On October 2 , 2008 , Nintendo presented the New Play Control ! series of GameCube ports , with Prime and Echoes among the initial Japan titles . In May 2009 , Nintendo announced that all three games would be packaged in a single @-@ disk compilation internationally . In April 2011 , a copy of Trilogy — signed by Retro Studios staff and the Prime series producer — was auctioned on Amazon , with 100 percent of proceeds to be donated to the relief efforts for the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . Initially at the 2011 Game Developers Conference , Kelbaugh stated that the studio had no plans for the Trilogy to be re @-@ released . However it was later announced in a Nintendo Direct on January 14 , 2015 , that the Trilogy would see a re @-@ release alongside Super Mario Galaxy 2 on the Wii U eShop . 
 = = Release = = 
 Metroid Prime : Trilogy was released in North America on August 24 , 2009 , packaged in a steel @-@ book case , along with an art booklet . The European release in the following month maintained the booklet , while the Australian release in October only had a metallic cardboard slip cover . On January 8 , 2010 , it was reported that Nintendo of America was no longer producing or shipping Metroid Prime : Trilogy , and stated that players may still be able to find second @-@ hand copies of Trilogy via video game stores . On January 11 , 2010 , it was reported that Nintendo Australia had also discontinued the game . Following Nintendo of America 's announcement , Nintendo of Europe assured that the game was not discontinued in their region . Although , the game had since been out of stock at most retailers . 
 In August 2013 , U.S.-based retailer GameStop announced they acquired a significant stock of pre @-@ owned copies of Metroid Prime : Trilogy , along with Xenoblade Chronicles , another game that Nintendo published with a limited print cycle . GameStop stated that the game is available for purchase exclusively via their website as a " vintage " title ( despite being released merely four years prior ) for $ 84 @.@ 99 , and " with no shrink wrap " , suggesting their pre @-@ owned copies are slightly or never used , including intact Club Nintendo redeeming codes . Whilst the price is high for a pre @-@ owned game , it relatively much cheaper than other copies of the game being offered by other resellers via trade sites such as eBay , as demand remains high for Metroid Prime : Trilogy against the low supply . 
 In the January 2015 Nintendo Direct , it was announced that Metroid Prime : Trilogy would be released for download through the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop . It was made available in North America and Europe on January 29 , 2015 , and in Australia and New Zealand on January 30 , 2015 . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 Metroid Prime : Trilogy uses a dual @-@ layer disc to allow all three games to fit on a single disc due to the size of the game data . Nintendo of America has stated that some Wii consoles may have difficulty reading the high @-@ density software due to a contaminated laser lens . Nintendo offered a free repair for owners who experienced this issue . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid Prime : Trilogy was released to critical acclaim . GameSpy 's Phil Theobald praised it for being the compilation of three great games for the price of one . Matt Casamassina of IGN awarded Trilogy a score of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , citing the " fantastic gameplay " and " brilliant presentation values " , while Martin Kitts of NGamer UK complimented the addition of achievements system , and said the package had a good money value , calling it a " massive amount of gameplay per pound " . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed thought the new implementations made it attractive to newcomers and old @-@ time fans , and declared that " not since Super Mario All Stars in the SNES era has Nintendo taken an opportunity to unite one of its great series in such an irresistible way " . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish liked the implementation of the new control scheme , stating that " the smooth precision of the Wii Remote makes the older games well worth revisiting " . 
 Metroid Prime : Trilogy has also been subject to criticism . GamePro 's Ashley Schoeller said that graphically , " the games do look a bit dated " and complained that the HUD was " out of aspect " to fit the widescreen . Official Nintendo Magazine 's Fred Dutton said that some aspects of Prime and Echoes had aged , saying the backtracking " feels like more of a chore than it did seven years ago , " and that it is " not until [ Echoes ] enters its final third that things really start to pick up " . GamesRadar considered the achievements too expensive , and that the similarity between the three games gives " an inescapable sense of déjà vu " . Edge noted that the control scheme was not very innovative , and that Echoes and Corruption " favoured graphical flourishes over design innovation " . While Ben Reeves of Game Informer praised the game , the " second opinion " reviewer , Adam Biessener , considered the collection " subpar " , saying it lacked innovation , and that the Wii control scheme , particularly aiming and panning , " is inferior in every way to the traditional scheme from the GameCube titles " . 
 In IGN 's Top 25 Wii Games list , Metroid Prime : Trilogy ranked third ( 2011 ) , and fourth ( 2012 ) . In a feature article regarding games collections , Bob Mackey of 1UP.com listed Trilogy as the " Hardest @-@ to @-@ find Work of Greatness " , noting that it " had a conspicuously low print run ; finding a copy in the wild proves difficult , and eBay prices often reach 100 dollars . " 
 = Siege of St. John 's = 
 The Siege of St. John 's was a failed attempt by French forces led by Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase to take the fort at St. John 's , Newfoundland during the winter months of 1705 , in Queen Anne 's War . Leading a mixed force of regulars , militia , and Indians , Subercase burned much of the town and laid an ineffectual siege against the fort for five weeks between late January and early March 1705 . Subercase lifted the siege after running out of provisions and gunpowder . 
 The siege was part of a larger @-@ scale expedition that was an attempt to repeat the highly destructive expedition led by Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville in 1696 . Many outlying English communities were destroyed by Subercase 's men , leading to reprisal raids by the English . Fishing activities on both sides suffered for the duration of the war , which ended with the French cession of its claims to Newfoundland . 
 = = Background = = 
 The island of Newfoundland had been contested territory between France and England for some time before Queen Anne 's War broke out in 1702 . French raids during King William 's War in the 1690s had completely destroyed almost all of the English settlements , including the principal port of St. John 's , located on the east side of the Avalon Peninsula of southeastern Newfoundland . However , an English squadron led by Sir John Gibson and Sir John Morris persuaded the displaced fishermen to return and rebuild along their side of the peninsula . The Treaty of Ryswick signed in September 1697 led to the English receiving Newfoundland and the French retaining Acadia . However , the terms of the treaty became void when the French re @-@ established their capital in Plaisance , on the Avalon Peninsula 's west side . 
 In 1702 , English Captain John Leake raided a number of French settlements in Newfoundland , but avoided Plaisance due to the presence of French warships in the harbour . In 1703 , Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase arrived in Plaisance as the new governor and took command of a 150 @-@ man garrison and facilities that were in poor condition . After raiding Ferryland , he learned of a planned English attack on Plaisance , and prepared for the assault . It never came , as Admiral John Graydon , in what was widely seen in England as a cowardly move , called off the attack despite of having significant advantages . Graydon was subsequently court martialed and dismissed from the service over his conduct in the entire campaign , which also included the failed Siege of Guadeloupe . 
 = = = French preparations = = = 
 In late 1704 , Subercase began planning an attack against the English settlements . In addition to his garrison , he recruited Canadiens and Abenakis from the mainland and as many settlers as possible to participate in the effort . In all , his force numbered about 450 when it set out across the peninsula on 8 January 1705 . His corps included a company of over 100 men led by Josué Dubois Berthelot de <unk> that included Jacques <unk> de Montigny and the Abenaki war leader <unk> , both of whom had participated in Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville 's 1696 raid against English settlements . While most of the company went overland , a brigantine was sent around the peninsula with some heavy guns . 
 = = = English defences = = = 
 St. John 's was under the command of Lieutenant John Moody , with Lieutenant Robert Latham , a military engineer and mason , as his second in command . The principal defences of St. John 's were Fort William , a stone fortification on the north side of the harbour built after the French expedition of 1696 , and the South Castle , a stone fort on the south side of The Narrows which commanded the harbour entrance . Moody had put Latham in command of South Castle , while he commanded at Fort William . The combined defense force numbered between 50 and 60 men , with about a dozen under Latham 's command . 
 = = Siege = = 
 The progress of the French was quite slow , due to the extreme winter cold and snow . They first captured Bay Bulls and Ferryland ( small coastal communities south of St. John 's ) without opposition , and then moved on to St. John 's , where they arrived near the town on 31 January . Subercase had wanted to surprise the English , but the opportunity was lost when his advance guard approached within sight of the English defences ( the remaining force having been delayed by poor conditions ) , and was driven off by cannon fire . Most of the community then fled to the protection of Fort William , and Subercase had to content himself with occupying the town while waiting for the brigantine to arrive . While he did take prisoners , he released the women and children to the fort in order to increase the burden on the English supplies . The women ended performing valuable assistance in helping with the fort 's defence . 
 After about two weeks ' siege , Subercase attempted to use the divisions between Moody and Latham to diminish English morale and possibly achieve a negotiated surrender or gain control of Latham 's post . He sent letters to both men , one from himself to Moody , and a second from one of the prisoners , addressed to Latham . The letter to Latham implied that a deal was in the works with Moody , and Subercase 's agents tried to convince Latham to leave his works to meet with Moody . Latham refused , and Subercase 's effort was ineffective . 
 After 33 days of waiting , in which the brigantine with the heavy guns never appeared , Subercase , running low on munitions and provisions , lifted the siege . He destroyed the town 's houses and fishing stages , and returned to Plaisance , taking with him 200 civilian captives . Subercase detached Montigny and 70 men , who continued to raid English settlements through the rest of the winter . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French expedition took 1 @,@ 200 prisoners in all , most of which were released due to a lack of provisions , and destroyed forty cannon , 2 @,@ 000 fishing <unk> , and 200 wagons , but failed to eliminate the stronghold . John Moody returned to England in late 1705 , and was rewarded with a lieutenant 's commission in the Coldstream Guards . He feuded with Latham , charging him with irregularities in his administration of the fortification works and poor command of South Castle , and his complaints led to Latham 's recall . 
 Subercase continued to develop the French colony in 1705 , which flourished despite the war . He was rewarded for his efforts with the Order of Saint Louis and the governorship of Acadia . There he presided over Port Royal 's defences , successfully fending off British sieges in 1707 , but was then forced to capitulate to overwhelming force in 1710 . 
 Subercase 's replacement at Plaisance , Philippe Pastour de Costebelle , negotiated an exchange of prisoners from the siege , and successfully captured St. John 's in January 1709 . France gave up claims of sovereignty over Newfoundland in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht and , under Costebelle 's supervision , moved the French settlers from Newfoundland to Louisbourg . 
 The site of Fort William is a National Historic Site of Canada ( marked by a plaque ) , and the South Castle location is part of the Signal Hill National Historic Site . 
 = Joseph Schwantner : New Morning for the World ; Nicolas Flagello : The Passion of Martin Luther King = 
 Joseph Schwantner : New Morning for the World ; Nicolas Flagello : The Passion of Martin Luther King is a classical music album by the Oregon Symphony under the artistic direction of James DePreist , released by Koch International Classics in 1995 . Recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon , in September 1994 , the album is a tribute to Martin Luther King , Jr. and was released in his honor on the following holiday in his name . 
 The album features two works by American composers , each with text from speeches by King : Joseph Schwantner 's New Morning for the World ( " Daybreak of Freedom " ) and Nicolas Flagello 's cantata The Passion of Martin Luther King . Both works include performances by Raymond Bazemore , who serves as narrator on the former and provides bass vocals on the latter . On the album 's release date , more than 30 United States radio stations broadcast the album version of Schwantner 's composition to commemorate the civil rights leader . Proceeds from the album 's sale benefited the King Center for Nonviolent Social Change . Produced by Michael Fine and engineered by Fred Vogler , the recording reached a peak position of number three on Billboard 's Classical Albums chart and remains the Oregon Symphony 's best @-@ selling album as of 2013 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album , 58 minutes and 54 seconds in length , contains two compositions : Joseph Schwantner 's New Morning for the World ( " Daybreak of Freedom " ) and Nicolas Flagello 's cantata The Passion of Martin Luther King . Both compositions contain text from speeches by King delivered during the civil rights movement . The first track , 23 minutes and 27 seconds in length , features Schwantner 's work . The Passion of Martin Luther King , 35 minutes and 17 seconds in length , is separated into nine tracks . The album was produced by Michael Fine and engineered by Fred Vogler . Coretta Scott King wrote the introduction for the album 's liner notes . 
 New Morning for the World , composed in 1982 on commission from AT & T , premiered on January 15 , 1983 ( King 's birthday ) at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts ; David Effron conducted the Eastman Philharmonia , and Willie Stargell , then first baseman and team captain of the Pittsburgh Pirates , served as narrator . Schwantner selected words from public speeches by King that spanned more than a decade of his life . In the album 's liner notes , program <unk> and classical music radio host Jim <unk> described the work as having " equal parts " for the orchestra and the speaker , with King 's words " supported and illuminated by an orchestra fabric of unusual variety and flexibility " . Music critics compared Schwantner 's composition to Aaron Copland 's Lincoln Portrait because of its prominent narrative passages and its " broad and lyrical scoring that sounds unmistakably American " . In describing the work , Melinda Bargreen of The Seattle Times wrote that percussion and " soaring " strings helped to emphasize King 's orations . New Morning for the World contains text from the following speeches and writings by King : " Stride Toward Freedom " ( 1958 ) , " Behind the Selma March " ( 1965 ) , and " Letter from Birmingham Jail " ( 1963 ) ; the composition ends with King 's " I Have a Dream " speech . 
 The Passion of Martin Luther King was composed in 1968 following King 's assassination . The Passion was first recorded in London in 1969 , with Ezio Flagello , the composer 's brother , as the bass baritone soloist . This performance was eventually released by Naxos American Classics in 2012 . DePreist conducted the National Symphony Orchestra 's first performance of the work at the Kennedy Center on February 19 , 1974 . Music critics drew comparisons to Johann Sebastian Bach 's Passions , which recounts Jesus ' death . The Oregon Symphony album was the first published recording of the work . Bazemore provided bass vocals , with additional vocals by the Portland Symphonic Choir , directed by Bruce Browne . The nine sections of the work are performed with a brief pause in between . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On the album 's release date , more than 30 United States radio stations broadcast the album 's version of New Morning for the World to commemorate King . Martin Luther King III and <unk> celebrated the album 's release at Phipps Plaza in Atlanta . Proceeds from sales benefited the King Center for Nonviolent Social Change . 
 The album received positive commercial and critical reception . It reached a peak position of number three on Billboard 's Classical Albums chart and remains the Oregon Symphony 's best @-@ selling album as of 2013 . In his review for Deseret News , music critic William S. Goodfellow wrote that each work contained " sophistication and substance " . Goodfellow said of <unk> 's composition : " The more exotic scoring ... as well as Schwantner 's minimalistic treatment of the music 's more militant episodes , gives it a drive and dramatic punch of its own . " The album features Raymond Bazemore as narrator ; Goodfellow described Bazemore 's " occasionally sing @-@ song narration " in New Morning for the World as " <unk> " . He wrote that Flagello 's work contained " writing of remarkable clarity and Italianate warmth " , but thought Bazemore 's voice sounded hoarse towards the end and preferred the solo sections in New Morning for the World . The Seattle Times 's Melinda Bargreen called the album " strong and emotionally convincing " , and praised " excellent performances with strong soloists " . She wrote that both works were composed in " styles that are distinctively modern , but tonal and accessible " . Bargreen described Bazemore 's voice as " deeply affecting " and complimented DePreist for conducting " with an obvious passion for the music , drawing remarkably detailed and virtuosic performances from his orchestra . " Tim Smith of the Sun @-@ Sentinel said both works were " well worth hearing " and encouraged orchestras to explore the pieces , along with works by other African @-@ American composers , to provide the public with broader programming . Smith described New Morning for the World as " remarkably lyrical " and " quite dramatic " ; he found Bazemore 's sing @-@ song narration to be " too affected " but found the conclusion " touching " and complimented the orchestra for its overall " sturdy , communicative " performance . Smith called Flagello 's score " unabashedly romantic " and described as effective the work of Bazemore , DePreist and the orchestra . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " New Morning for the World ( " Daybreak of Freedom " ) " ( Joseph Schwantner ) – 23 : 27 
 The Passion of Martin Luther King ( Nicolas Flagello ) 
 " Hosanna filio David " – 3 : 27 
 " At the Center of Nonviolence " – 4 : 04 
 " Cor Jesu " – 3 : 53 
 " In the Struggle " – 5 : 25 
 " Et <unk> <unk> " – 3 : 08 
 " Death is inevitable " – 3 : 48 
 " Stabat Mater " – 5 : 22 
 " We 've Got Some Difficult Days Ahead " – 2 : 13 
 " Finale " – 3 : 48 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic and the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = = Orchestra roster = = = 
 Orchestra roster adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 " * " designates acting orchestra members ; " * * " designates musicians on a leave of absence . 
 = Flixton , Greater Manchester = 
 Flixton is a village and electoral ward in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford , Greater Manchester , England . The population of the ward at the 2011 census was 10 @,@ 786 . It lies about six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the southwest of Manchester city centre , within the historic county boundaries of Lancashire . 
 Neolithic and Bronze Age artefacts have been found locally and the area may have been inhabited in those periods . Medieval Flixton was a parish within the Hundred of Salford and encompassed the manor of Flixton , along with its church , first mentioned in the 12th century . The parish comprised isolated farmsteads and a manor house . Toward the end of the 17th century its population began to rise , continuing through the 19th century , although at a much slower pace than its neighbours . Flixton was a remote rural area with few transport links and did not witness the level of industrialisation other parts of Manchester saw , but its connection to the railway network in 1873 helped transform the area into a middle @-@ class suburb . 
 Flixton is represented in Parliament by Labour MP Kate Green . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Flixton has been recorded as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Fleece @-@ town , <unk> and <unk> . It is not mentioned in the Domesday Survey , and first appears in historical records in 1176 or 1177 . The name may be Scandinavian in origin , the Anglo @-@ Saxon ton meaning a farmstead , although along with nearby Urmston , it may be an anglicised personal name from the 10th or 11th centuries and not a primary settlement name from earlier times . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The area may have been inhabited during the Neolithic and Bronze Ages . Stone axes have been found on the banks of the River Mersey in Flixton , as well as on the banks of the River Irwell in Old Trafford . Further afield , two Neolithic arrowheads have been found in Altrincham and Dunham Massey , and a Bronze Age arrowhead in Warburton . 
 Medieval Flixton was one of several parishes which existed in the Hundred of Salford . The parish encompassed the manors of Urmston and Flixton ; the latter is first mentioned between 1189 and 1181 and was granted by the Mascy family of Dunham . The manor of Flixton 's boundaries are unclear , although they were perhaps formed by a mixture of natural and man @-@ made features including Carr Ditch , which divided Flixton and Urmston . St Michael 's Church is also first recorded at about the same time , although the building may date from an earlier period . In keeping with a pattern found in northern and eastern Cheshire and south @-@ eastern Lancashire , the parish comprised isolated farmsteads and a medieval manor house , rather than a village centre . Notable place names in medieval Flixton include Shaw Hall , located near the present @-@ day Roebuck Hotel , east of the modern Flixton village . The location of Berne is unknown , while Booths was possibly somewhere near Hulme Bridge Farm , close to the Irwell . An area named Wood may have existed in the north @-@ western part of Flixton , near a Woods @-@ end Farm noted in an 1818 survey . A Shaw Hall , whose name first appears in 1508 and was derived from a small wood , was described by historian Michael <unk> as " the most significant medieval estate within the township " . Reputed to be a Jacobean era mansion , it was referred to as a manor in 1594 , although whether this was also the case during the medieval period is unknown . It was the home of the Valentines , the <unk> and the Egertons , and during the English Civil War was defended against a potential attack by Royalist forces . The Egertons remained at Shaw Hall until 1757 ; thereafter it was occupied by various families , until it was demolished in the 20th century . 
 An early mention of Flixton appears in the Testa de Nevil , which includes the entry : " Albert <unk> , sen . , gave to Henry , son of Siward , one carucate of land in Flixton by 10s. yearly . The heirs hold that land . " The manor of Flixton was , for a time , controlled by the Grelleys , Barons of Manchester . Robert of <unk> , who inherited the manor , granted the parish of Flixton to the newly created Burscough Priory , located near Ormskirk , in 1190 . The Grelleys may not have been Flixton manor 's only masters , as in 1250 – 1251 part of the area came into the possession of David de Hulton . The <unk> united what in the 12th century was a fragmented manor . In 1330 they sub @-@ let one half of it to the Valentine family and the other to two branches of the Radcliffe family . The Valentines are included in the Exchequer Lay Subsidy Rolls of 1332 , which show five tax payers in Flixton : Richard le Valentine , Henry de l <unk> , William de l <unk> , Richard son of Robert and John de Booth . The name Valentine also appears in Flixton 's parish registers , which begin in 1570 . Written on vellum and mostly in Latin , the first records 11 baptisms , 2 marriages and 7 burials . Christian names include Hamlet , Randle and Ralph . The registers show that surnames such as <unk> , Valentine , <unk> and Low remained prevalent in the area well into the 19th century . 
 = = = Industrial Revolution = = = 
 Flixton 's population remained fairly stable until the end of the 17th century , when , along with other nearby parishes , it began to rise steadily . It was by that time a small hamlet , with several buildings around the parish church and its parsonage . The 1664 hearth tax returns show that Flixton had 70 heads of household , who were likely engaged mainly in agricultural activities . Evidence exists to suggest that some areas in the parish were used for textile production , with " yarn croft " in Flixton , Stretford and Warburton indicating the production of flax . Almost 20 per cent of wills and other documents gathered from nearby areas contain references to textiles , hemp and flax . 
 During the Industrial Revolution many of the townships in the region experienced fairly rapid population growth , although Flixton remained an exception , its population growing by only 22 per cent between 1801 and 1851 . This was in stark contrast to Altrincham ( 165 % ) , Bowdon ( 242 % ) and Stretford ( 238 % ) , and is attributed to the emigration of villagers to more industrialised areas like Manchester , and the agricultural depression of the 1830s and 1840s . The domestic production of textiles , popular during the 17th and early 18th centuries in Flixton and other nearby townships , and the newer factory @-@ based system which replaced it , had disappeared in Altrincham by the middle of the 19th century . Weaving continued in Flixton , although within ten years of the construction of Flixton Cotton Mills in 1851 , domestic textile production had ended . In nearby Urmston , 28 per cent of the township 's population was in 1851 engaged in textile work , but the area did not experience the level of industrialisation seen in towns like Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , east of Manchester , where 16 mills were built between 1815 and 1829 , doubling the population . The reasons for this reliance on land rather than industry are unclear . 
 Flixton was a remote rural area with few transport links to nearby towns , the rivers Irwell and Mersey for the most part cutting off access to other areas . To the southwest , Carrington Old Bridge , removed in about 1840 , was an old wooden structure too narrow to accommodate carts , which were forced to use a nearby ford . Another ford existed near Flixton Church and yet another near Shaw Hall . An omnibus service carried passengers to and from Stretford , where the nearest railway station was located , but it was the town 's connection on 2 September 1873 to the UK 's railway network , through the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway ( later the Cheshire Lines Committee ) line from Manchester to Liverpool , which helped transform the area . A new bridge across the Mersey was built around 1906 – 1907 , replacing the earlier structure nearer to Carrington . Flixton gradually became a middle @-@ class railway suburb of Manchester . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Civic history = = = 
 In 1841 Davyhulme , Flixton and Urmston became part of the Chorlton Poor Law Union , until 1849 when , with Stretford , it was transferred to Barton upon Irwell Poor Law Union . An 1894 Act of Parliament created urban and rural district councils , and along with Carrington , Davyhulme , Dunham Massey , Hale , Partington , Timperley and Warburton , Flixton became part of Barton upon Irwell Rural District ( Urmston gained an urban district council ) . Land was exchanged between Flixton and Irlam Urban District and Barton Moss civil parish . A further exchange of land occurred in 1920 , with Carrington civil parish . In 1933 the civil parish became a part of Urmston Urban District . 
 = = = Political representation = = = 
 From 1918 to 1950 Flixton was a part of the Stretford Division of Lancashire and from 1950 to 1983 a part of the borough constituency of Stretford . From 1983 to 1997 it was included in the new constituency of Davyhulme and represented by the Conservative Party MP Winston Spencer @-@ Churchill , grandson of Winston Churchill . The Davyhulme constituency was replaced in 1997 by Stretford and Urmston , whose first MP was Labour 's Beverley Hughes . She won the 1997 General Election with 58 @.@ 5 per cent of the vote , against the Conservatives ' John Gregory with 30 @.@ 5 per cent . She was replaced in 2010 by Kate Green , who won 48 @.@ 6 per cent of the vote , compared to the Conservatives ' Alex Williams with 28 @.@ 7 per cent . The Liberal Democrats gained 16 @.@ 9 per cent of the vote . 
 Flixton elects three councillors to Trafford Council ; as of the 2012 local election , all three seats are held by Jonathan Coupe , Paul Lally and Vivienne Ward , for the Conservative Party . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 44 ′ 27 ″ N 2 ° 38 ′ 44 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> ° , <unk> ° ) and 170 miles ( 274 km ) northwest of central London , Flixton is located between Urmston and Irlam , which lie to the east and west . For the purposes of the Office for National Statistics , Flixton forms a south westerly part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , with Manchester city centre 6 @.@ 4 miles ( 10 @.@ 3 km ) to the north @-@ <unk> . 
 Flixton ward 's southern boundary is formed by the River Mersey , opposite the neighbouring ward of Bucklow St Martins . With the creation of the Manchester Ship Canal , which roughly followed the former path of the River Irwell , the township 's western boundary with Irlam was adopted in 1896 . Today , the ward 's western boundary lies further east , running south through farmland near Woodsend Circle . Flixton 's north and eastern boundaries are formed by Moorside Road and the area slightly east of Chassen Road railway station . Most of the town 's population lives to the north , the south being mainly open land . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , Flixton ward 's population was 9 @,@ 473 , 9 @,@ 164 of whom were white , the remainder being either of mixed race , Asian , Black or Chinese . 3 @,@ 789 people are listed as single and 3 @,@ 543 as married for the first time ; the remainder were either remarried , separated , divorced or widowed . 7 @,@ 771 people considered themselves Christian , 952 stated they had no religion and 606 did not state their religion . 86 people are listed as Muslims , 22 as Hindus , 10 as Buddhist and 8 as Jewish . 
 Of Flixton 's 4 @,@ 530 households 83 @.@ 1 per cent are listed as owner occupied . Most houses in the area are semi @-@ detached ; the rest are detached , terraced or flats . Average household income for 2010 was £ 39 @,@ 231 . According to the 2001 census , of the 6 @,@ 812 people aged 16 – 74 , 46 @.@ 1 per cent were employed on a full @-@ time basis , 11 @.@ 2 per cent part @-@ time , and 7 @.@ 3 per cent self @-@ employed . 1 @.@ 8 per cent were unemployed and seeking work , while 16 @.@ 5 per cent were retired . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Flixton Band , formed in 1877 , played at the official opening of the Manchester Ship Canal in 1894 , attended by Queen Victoria . It was disbanded in 1933 but reformed in 1967 , since when it has performed on television and radio . 
 Local artist Frances Lennon , born in nearby Stretford , moved with her husband to Flixton in the late 1970s . Following his death she became a full @-@ time painter , releasing several books including A Trafford Childhood ( 1986 ) and A Manchester Childhood ( 2001 ) . Dubbed " the people 's artist " , she was the official artist for the 2002 Commonwealth Games and produced a special book of paintings relating to games and sports . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Flixton is in the Church of England Diocese of Manchester and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Salford . Historically church life has centred around the Grade II * listed 12th @-@ century St Michaels Church , built on raised land close to the centre of Flixton village . For about 500 years the church was attached to Lichfield Cathedral . Another Church of England place of worship , St John 's Church , can be found on Irlam Road . Flixton 's Catholic Community worships at St Monica 's Church on Woodsend Road South . The parish was founded in 1950 and the church built from 1968 to 1969 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Flixton House , a late 18th @-@ century Grade II listed building set in Flixton Park and Gardens , was the focus of one of the first footpath battles in England after its owner , Ralph Wright , in 1824 closed several footpaths crossing his estate . Local residents accepted the closures , but Wright also attempted to change the route of footpaths not on his land , ploughing the entrance to one and sowing it with oats . A local farmer , Samuel Wood , objected to Wright 's tactics and removed each obstruction , restoring the footpath . Wright successfully gained an order supporting his changes at his third attempt , but by then the case had attracted considerable interest and in 1826 the Manchester Society for the Preservation of Ancient Footpaths was formed . After several years of expensive legal wrangling , Wright 's order was quashed and in June 1827 the footpaths affected were reopened . Wright obtained further orders and again closed the footpaths , before the matter was finally resolved at the Quarter Session on 29 October that year , to Wright 's cost . His loss proved to be an important event in the movement for footpath preservation in England . 
 Abbotsfield Park was the venue for a 1963 Beatles concert , booked before they became famous . The Urmston and District Model Engineering Society operates a miniature railway around the park and ran a yearly May Day Steam rally in conjunction with the Lancashire Traction Engine Club until 2010 . Stocks , once located in Flixton village and seldom used , were removed in 1823 . A tree planted in 1887 to celebrate Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee , and known locally as ' The Jubilee Tree ' , now stands in the same area . 
 To the southwest lies Green Hill , from which the disused Flixton Sewage Works may be viewed . Formed from pulverised fuel ash , the soil provides ideal conditions for flora like gorse and is a habitat for moles . The former sewage works is an important undisturbed wintering site for wildfowl , such as marsh harriers and linnets . Nearby , Duttons Pond is a privately run but publicly accessible location for anglers . West of Dutton 's Pond is Jack Lane nature reserve , a small marshland habitat for wetland birds , surrounded by farmland . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Public transport in Flixton is coordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester . Bus services in Flixton run to destinations such as Davyhulme , Urmston , Stretford , Partington , Hulme and Manchester . The two local railway stations , Flixton and Chassen Road , are managed by Northern Rail . 
 = = Education = = 
 Flixton has several primary and secondary schools . Its first was founded by Peter Egerton , in 1643 , and built close to the parish church . The building was later replaced by the Dog and Partridge Inn , but another school was opened near the present @-@ day Roebuck pub in 1662 , of thatched wood and plaster . <unk> school , which was slightly closer to Urmston than the building it replaced , was still extant in 1826 , but was later used as cottages . A school built in 1861 opposite the parish church and expanded in 1893 has since been demolished . 
 Flixton Girls ' School is a non @-@ selective sports specialist academy school , for girls aged 11 – 16 . Its 2011 Ofsted report describes it as a good school , with " a number of outstanding features including the way in which the school promotes community cohesion " . Another local school , <unk> Academy , was described by Ofsted as " an outstanding and happy school which knows itself very well " . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Flixton was witness to bull and bear baiting , performed in several places throughout the village . One of these was in <unk> , on " <unk> ' Green " , and another was at " Th ' <unk> " , at the top of Woodsend Road , opposite where the Red Lion pub once stood . The practice was ended in 1816 . Badger baiting was also practised , at certain inns . Anecdotal evidence exists to suggest that hunting , cockfighting and horse racing took place in Flixton , the latter in the fields around the parish church . 
 Formed in 1990 , Trafford Football Club plays in the Northern Premier League . Local golf courses include the municipally owned William Wroe Golf Course and the privately owned Flixton Golf Club . The William Wroe course , named after Councillor William Wroe , was opened in 1973 as a fourteen @-@ hole course , six holes occupying land on the Flixton road side of the railway , and eight on the Church road side . The land it occupies was originally purchased by Urmston District Council in 1935 , but from 1947 to 1970 , aware that it was gradually becoming occupied , Wroe campaigned for the establishment of a municipal golf course . It was expanded to fifteen holes , then eventually to eighteen holes in 1984 , after the nearby Acre Gate Farm became vacant . 
 = Skull Tower = 
 The Skull Tower ( Serbian : <unk> kula , <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ̩ e kula ] ) is a tower composed largely of human skulls located in the city of Niš , Serbia . During the 1809 Battle of Čegar , fought during the First Serbian Uprising ( part of the Serbian Revolution , 1804 – 1817 ) , Serbian revolutionaries under Stevan Sinđelić were attacked by Turkish forces on Čegar Hill , near Niš . Rather than be captured by the Turks and impaled , Sinđelić fired his pistol into a powder magazine , killing himself and all Serbian rebels and Turkish soldiers in the vicinity . Afterward , <unk> Pasha , the Turkish vizier of Niš , ordered that a tower be made from the skulls of the killed Serbian revolutionaries . The tower is 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high , and originally contained 952 skulls embedded on four sides in fourteen rows . 
 Following the Turkish withdrawal from Niš in 1878 , the tower was roofed over , and in 1892 a chapel was built around it . In 1937 , the chapel was renovated . A bust of Sinđelić was added the following year . In 1948 , Skull Tower and the chapel enclosing it were declared Cultural Monuments of Exceptional Importance and came under the protection of the Socialist Republic of Serbia . Further renovation of the chapel occurred again in 1989 . As of 2013 , 54 skulls remain on the tower ; the one that is said to belong to Sinđelić is enclosed in a glass container . Seen as a symbol of independence by Serbs , the tower is mentioned in the writings of French Romantic poet Alphonse de Lamartine and English travel writer Alexander William Kinglake . In the two centuries following its construction it has become a popular tourist attraction , visited by between 30 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 people annually . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 During the time of the Ottoman Empire , Turkish forces were known to create tower structures from the skulls of their enemies in order to create terror amongst their opponents . The First Serbian Uprising ( part of the Serbian Revolution , 1804 – 1817 ) against Ottoman rule erupted in 1804 , with Karađorđe Petrović as its leader . On 19 May 1809 , 3 @,@ 000 Serbian revolutionaries led by commander ( Serbian : vojvoda , вoјвода ) Stevan Sinđelić were attacked by a large Turkish force on Čegar Hill , located close to the city of Niš . Owing to a lack of coordination between Serb commanders , the revolutionaries failed to receive any support from other Serbian rebel detachments . The numerically superior Turks lost thousands of troops in numerous attacks against the Serbs , but eventually overwhelmed the Serbian lines . Knowing that he and his men risked impalement if captured , Sinđelić took his flintlock and fired at his entrenchment 's gun powder magazine . The resulting explosion killed him , and all the surviving Serb revolutionaries and Turkish soldiers in the vicinity . 
