 " The Frying Game " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Michael Polcino . The screamapillar was conceived by the episode 's writer , who pitched it to the other staff writers . It has since been described as a satire on the Endangered Species Act , a United States environmental law passed during the 1970s . The idea that Homer 's execution was in fact part of a reality game show was conceived by former staff writer George Meyer . The episode features Frances <unk> as Mrs. Bellamy and Carmen Electra as herself . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 6 @.@ 5 million viewers , finishing in 46th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer decides to give Marge a koi pond for their anniversary , but an endangered " Screamapillar " takes refuge in the pond . Bound by law not to disturb it , Homer accidentally injures the loud , unsettling insect larva and is sentenced to community service . 
 Homer begins delivering Meals on Wheels to an elderly woman , Mrs. Bellamy , who takes a liking to him . She subtly guilts Homer and later , Marge , into becoming her personal servants . When Mrs. Bellamy turns up dead , having been stabbed with a pair of scissors , Homer and Marge are the prime suspects in the murder , even though they witnessed a man with braces leaving the murder scene , with Mrs. Bellamy 's necklace . The people of Springfield are very suspicious of Homer and Marge , and Chief Wiggum does not believe their story . Finally , during an inspection of the house , Maggie is found with Mrs. Bellamy 's stolen necklace . Bart , Lisa and Maggie are adopted by Cletus Spuckler , who decides to change their " city names " to " Dingus <unk> Junior , and Pamela E. Lee " ( with Lisa apparently becoming Dingus ) . 
 Despite no lie detector or DNA test given , the two are sentenced to death in the electric chair . In a successful bid to spare Marge , Homer says that he acted alone . As he is sitting in the electric chair , it is suddenly revealed to Homer that he is on a new reality TV show , Frame Up that airs on Fox TV . The whole thing was just part of an elaborate hidden camera scheme , the " man with the braces " was the show 's host , and Mrs. Bellamy is guest host Carmen Electra in disguise . Homer and Marge are reunited with the kids , and Homer is furious that he had to suffer so the show could get higher ratings . Carmen Electra tries to explain , but Homer is too busy looking at her breasts . Chief Wiggum , on the other hand , initially seems furious that the police department used was wasted on what turned out to not even be a real case , but he drops his anger when he learns he will be in the show and Eddie and Lou will be given producer credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Frying Game " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Michael Polcino . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on May 19 , 2002 . The screamapillar , the larva that the Simpsons find in their garden , was , according to current showrunner Al Jean , Swartzwelder 's " total conception . " He pitched the idea to the Simpsons writing staff , and because they found it " hilarious , " they decided to include it in the episode . Jean said that when people ask what sense of humor Swartzwelder has , the screamapillar is " one of the best examples . " It was voiced by main cast member Dan Castellaneta , who portrays Homer among other characters in the series . Because the screamapillar only communicates by screaming , its lines were recorded last during recording sessions , as the screaming would " burn out " Castellaneta 's voice . 
 In a scene in the episode , Homer is on death row and eats his last meal . The meal consists solely of junk food like hamburgers and fried chicken . The scene came from an article that the writers had read , in which it said that death sentenced prisoners often requested junk food as their last meal . On the way to the electric chair , Homer meets a man resembling Michael Clarke Duncan 's character John Coffey in The Green Mile . While recording lines for the episode , the staff were told that Duncan was visiting the Fox studios . Having not recorded the lines for the character yet , the staff asked Duncan if he wanted to voice the character , but he declined . The music that plays during the scene is also from The Green Mile . The idea that Homer 's execution was in fact a reality show on Fox was conceived by former staff writer George Meyer . According to fellow writer Matt Selman , the writing staff liked the idea since reality shows were " really big " at the time . The episode features American actress Frances <unk> as Mrs Bellamy , and glamour model Carmen Electra as herself . According to Jean , Electra 's character is " one of the most voluptuous figures " they have ever had on The Simpsons . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Jean has himself admitted in an interview that The Simpsons is of " liberal bent " . In the DVD commentaries , creator Matt Groening and the majority of people who work on the show state several times that they are very liberal , but some , such as John Swartzwelder ( the writer of this and many other The Simpsons episodes ) , are conservative . In his book The Really Inconvenient Truths : Seven Environmental <unk> Liberals Don 't Want You to Know <unk> Because They Helped Cause Them , Iain Murray described " The Frying Game " as " subversively conservative " , and wrote that it shows " The best popular explanation of the liberal environmentalist model for endangered species . " In the episode , Homer buys a koi pond for Marge , only to find a screamapillar has taken residence in their garden . When Homer tries to squash it , an EPA official tells him that allowing an endangered species to die is a federal offense , under the " Reversal of Freedoms Act of 1994 . " Homer is forced to coddle the screamapillar , and when he accidentally squashes it , Homer is found guilty of " attempted insecticide and aggravated buggery . " The " Reversal of Freedoms Act " is a reference to the Endangered Species Act , an environmental law that Murray opined had " indeed become the Reversal of Freedoms Act . " He continued , " Landowners who happened to have threatened or endangered species on their lands or who simply have habitat that might be used by endangered species are routinely prevented from using their lands or property . They are stopped from undertaking such activities as harvesting their trees , grazing their cattle , irrigating their fields , clearing brush along fence lines , <unk> firebreaks around their homes and barns , or building new homes . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 19 , 2002 , " The Frying Game " received a 6 @.@ 2 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 6 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode finished in 46th place in the ratings for the week of May 13 – 19 , 2002 . On August 24 , 2010 , " The Frying Game " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Matt Groening , Al Jean , Matt Selman , John Frink , Don Payne , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Michael Polcino and Deb Lacusta participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " The Frying Game " received mixed reviews from critics . Giving the episode a positive review , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide described the episode as " pretty good " , writing " I like the obnoxious Screamapillar , and the way the Simpsons become seen as murderers also amuses . This allows S13 to move toward a satisfying conclusion . " 
 DVD Verdict 's Jennifer Malkowski gave the episode a B + , declaring the episode 's " highlight " " one of the reasons the Screamapillar is endangered , that it 's ' sexually attracted to fire . ' " 
 On the other hand , giving the episode a negative review , Andre Dellamorte of Collider described it as " terrible . " DVD Talk 's Ryan Keefer wrote a negative review as well , calling it " definitely forgettable " and criticizing it for " fall [ ing ] apart quickly . " Ron Martin of 411Mania criticized the Screamapillar character , describing it as " just as annoying as Homer 's constant screaming earlier in the season . " Writing for IGN , R.L. Shaffer described it as one of the worst episodes of the entire series , writing " Episodes like ' Homer the Moe , ' ' The Frying Game , ' ' The Old Man and the Key , ' and ' Sweets and Sour Marge ' represent some of the worst of The Simpsons . " James Greene of Nerve.com put the episode ninth on his list " Ten Times The Simpsons Jumped the Shark , " criticizing that the episode " eighty @-@ <unk> the chance to nail a great murder mystery akin to ' Who Shot Mr. Burns ? ' in favor of topical humor " and calling the ending a " truly stupid cop @-@ out . " 
 = Ten Dollar Bill ( Roy Lichtenstein ) = 
 Ten Dollar Bill ( also referred to as The Dollar Bill ) is a 1956 proto @-@ pop art lithographic drawing by Roy Lichtenstein . Considered to be a combination of Americana art and cubism , the work is referred to as the beginning to Lichtenstein 's work on pop art . Twenty @-@ five editions of the lithograph were made by Lichtenstein , which were exhibited at several galleries . The piece is based on the design for the ten @-@ dollar bill and has influenced several of Lichtenstein 's later works . The picture has received generally favorable reception from critics , and is considered to be one of the best artistic portrayals of currency . 
 = = Background and history = = 
 Roy Lichtenstein began experimentation with printmaking in the late 1940s , well before its rise in popularity in the early 1960s . Lichtenstein created his first lithograph and woodcut artwork in 1948 while he was working on receiving his graduate degree in fine arts from Ohio State University . During the late 1940s , he created abstract paintings influenced by several artists , especially Pablo Picasso . From 1951 through early 1956 , Lichtenstein painted what were considered by Gianni Mercurio to be " jagged , post @-@ cubist " designs of famous American artworks . Many of his pieces reflected portraits of the American west , especially Native Americans and cowboys , as well as other themes , such as images of president George Washington . Lichtenstein referred to the period as his " American " series , and it was generally negatively received by critics . Lichtenstein also began experimenting in abstract expressionism , using the technique on several of his western painting designs . These were poorly received , however , being compared by one critic to " the doodling of a five @-@ year old " . 
 In 1956 , Lichtenstein created twenty @-@ five editions of Ten Dollar Bill and gave them to several private collectors and museums . Starting in late October 1994 , Ten Dollar Bill went on display at the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , along with 89 of Lichtenstein 's print artworks . As a part of " The Prints of Roy Lichtenstein " , the piece was displayed in Washington until January 8 , 1995 , before it was moved to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and put on display as part of that city 's <unk> ' 95 , starting in mid @-@ February of that year . The tour moved in May to the Dallas Museum of Art , the final place it was displayed . In December 1996 , Lichtenstein and his wife donated 154 prints of his artwork to the National Gallery of Art for permanent keeping . This donation included several famous pieces , including Crying Girl , along with one of the editions of Ten Dollar Bill . 
 Another edition of Ten Dollar Bill was a part of the showcase opening exhibit " $ how Me the Money : The Dollar As Art " for the American Numismatic Association Money Museum in Colorado Springs , Colorado . This exhibit ran from October 4 , 2002 , until December 1 . The lithograph was shown alongside work from Andy Warhol , Robert Dowd , and others . Later , the work was made a part of the " Roy Lichtenstein Prints 1956 @-@ 1997 " collection , created entirely from the family gallery of Jordan Schnitzer . This tour began in June 2006 at the Jordan Schnitzer Museum of Art , and traveled across the country , exhibiting in Las Vegas and Austin , Texas , among other places . The collection tour ended in 2008 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Based on the design for the United States ten @-@ dollar bill , Ten Dollar Bill measures 14 by 28 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 by 11 @.@ 3 in ) , and is drawn on sheets of paper with dimensions of 42 @.@ 8 by 57 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 16 @.@ 9 by 22 @.@ 7 in ) . Classified as a proto @-@ pop art work , the lithograph is considered by Janis Hendrickson to be " a Picasso @-@ esque vision of what currency could look like " , as well as a " humorous " combination of " established art forms and Americana " . The drawing has the dimensions and shape of the ten @-@ dollar bill , and completely covers the space needed , which has led to Lichtenstein being considered by Hendrickson as " almost seeming to be forging money " . Hendrickson also describes the picture as being a " brand @-@ new bill of tender and not a picture of one " . Mary Lee Corlett and Hendrickson noted that the " schematic head " of the medallion portrait of Alexander Hamilton , the prominent feature of the print , " shows him as a planar , anteater @-@ like being " with a " hair @-@ do of the young Picasso " and eyes similar to a " figure by Francis Picabia " . According to Hendrickson , the exterior framing for The Dollar Bill was " simplified " from the original dollar design , appearing in " an imbalanced , drunken fashion " . The lithograph has full margins surrounding the main design , as well as the signature " rf Lichtenstein " and a number between one and 25 , followed by / 25 , reflecting the print number of the specific work , as well as the years 1956 / 79 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stephen Goode , a critic for Insight on the News , considered the piece to be the beginning of the Pop Art movement , labeling the work " a sign of things to come as other artists tackled common yet sacrosanct items , including the American flag " . Lichtenstein , reflecting on his work , told reporters , " The idea of counterfeiting money always occurs to you when you do lithography " . Despite the assessments of critics , Lichtenstein , in an interview with Joan Marter , considered the work to be " a kind of Cubist dollar bill , not a Pop one " . He continued , " The fact it was a ten @-@ dollar @-@ bill at all [ suggests that ] there was some kind of Pop influence on me that I wasn 't aware of so much . They 're really not Pop at all . They 're more funny , or humorous , or something " . 
 In the book Off Limits : Rutgers University and the Avant @-@ garde , 1957 @-@ 1963 , the piece was described as a " humorous , Cubist abstraction of the currency " . Discussing the piece after edition 10 was given to the National Gallery of Australia , critic <unk> Babington considered Lichtenstein 's early works , including Ten Dollar Bill , to be " intriguing precursors to the artist ’ s subsequent development " . She called it a " finely hand @-@ drawn lithograph " , and considered the work to be " the only hint of Lichtenstein ’ s imminent obsession with American popular culture " . Babington finished by noting , " we see Lichtenstein first taking an everyday object , symbolic of the growing American consumer culture , as his subject matter " . 
 = New Worlds ( magazine ) = 
 New Worlds was a British science fiction magazine that began in 1936 as a fanzine called Novae Terrae . It adopted its current title in 1939 , after John Carnell became editor . First published professionally in 1946 , it became the leading publication of its type ; the period to 1960 has been described by historian Mike Ashley as the magazine 's " Golden Age " . 
 Carnell joined the British Army in 1940 following the outbreak of the Second World War , and did not return to civilian life until 1946 . He negotiated a publishing agreement for the magazine with Pendulum Publications , but only three issues of New Worlds were subsequently produced before Pendulum 's bankruptcy in late 1947 . A group of science fiction fans formed a company called Nova Publications to revive the magazine ; the first issue under their management appeared in mid @-@ 1949 . New Worlds continued to appear on a regular basis until issue 20 , published in early 1953 , following which a change of printers led to a hiatus in publication . It was not until early 1954 , when Maclaren & Sons acquired control of Nova Publications , that the magazine returned to a stable monthly schedule . 
 New Worlds was acquired by Roberts & Vinter in 1964 , when Michael Moorcock became editor . By the end of 1966 financial problems led Roberts & Vinter to abandon New Worlds , but with the aid of an Arts Council grant obtained by Brian Aldiss , Moorcock was able to publish the magazine independently . He featured a good deal of experimental and avant @-@ garde material , and New Worlds became the focus of the " New Wave " of science fiction . Reaction among the science fiction community was mixed , with partisans and opponents of the New Wave debating the merits of New Worlds in the columns of critical journals such as Speculation . Several of the regular contributors during this period , including Brian Aldiss , J. G. Ballard and Thomas M. Disch , became major names in the field . By 1970 Moorcock was too deeply in debt to be able to continue with the magazine , and it ceased publication with issue 200 . The title has been revived multiple times , with Moorcock 's direct involvement or approval ; as of 2012 , 22 additional issues have appeared in various formats , including several anthologies . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In 1926 , Hugo Gernsback launched Amazing Stories , the first science fiction ( sf ) magazine . It was soon followed by other US titles also specializing in sf , such as Astounding Stories and Wonder Stories . These were distributed in the UK , and British fan organizations began to appear . In 1936 , Maurice K. Hanson , a science fiction fan living in Nuneaton , founded a fanzine called Novae Terrae ( Latin for " new worlds " ) for the local branch of the Science Fiction League . Hanson subsequently moved to London and his fanzine became the official publication of the Science Fiction Association , founded in 1937 . 
 Arthur C. Clarke , John Carnell and William F. Temple became involved in Novae Terrae 's production . In 1939 Hanson gave up the editorship to Carnell , who retitled the fanzine New Worlds and restarted the numbering at volume 1 number 1 ; the first issue under Carnell 's control was dated March 1939 . Carnell wanted to turn New Worlds into a professional magazine , and through W.J. Passingham , a writer , had begun discussions with a publisher named The Worlds Says Ltd . In January 1940 Carnell was asked to put together three issues , and Carnell and Passingham each put up £ 50 towards costs . Carnell solicited material from British authors including John F. Burke , C.S. <unk> , and David McIlwain , and acquired Robert A. Heinlein 's " Lost Legion " , but in March internal strife led to the collapse of The World Says . Alfred Greig , the director , returned to his native Canada without repaying Carnell and Passingham , and no issues were ever printed . 
 Carnell joined the army in 1940 , serving with the Royal Artillery , Combined Operations , and Naval Bombardment . After his return to civilian life in January 1946 he met writer Frank Edward Arnold , who had been working with Pendulum Publications on a new science fiction line . Arnold introduced Carnell to Stephen D. Frances , Pendulum 's director . Frances believed in the commercial possibilities of science fiction , and since Carnell still had the portfolio of stories he had put together in 1940 , Pendulum soon agreed to make New Worlds into a professional magazine . The first issue appeared in July 1946 , although there was no date on the magazine . The initial print run was 15 @,@ 000 , but only 3 @,@ 000 copies were sold — a very disappointing return . Carnell felt that the cover artwork , which he considered to be weak , was partly responsible for the poor sales . He put together a new design , based on covers from two US science fiction magazines , and gave it to artist Victor <unk> to complete . The resulting space scene was the cover for the second issue , which appeared in October 1946 ; in combination with Pendulum 's investment in promoting the magazine this led to much better sales , and the second issue sold out completely . Pendulum rebound the remaining copies of the first issue with the second cover design , and <unk> them at 1 / 6 ( <unk> ) ; the first two issues had been priced at 2 / - ( 10p ) . The new cover and price were much more popular and the repackaged first issue , like the second , soon sold out . 
 Pendulum Publications produced one more issue in October 1947 , shortly before going bankrupt and thus leaving New Worlds without a publisher . The magazine was saved by a group of sf fans who since 1946 had been meeting regularly on Thursday nights at the White Horse public house on New Fetter Lane , near Fleet Street . At one of those meetings it was suggested that they form a company to revive New Worlds ; one of those present , Frank Cooper , recently retired from the RAF , agreed to look into what would be necessary to start a new company . 
 = = = Nova Publications = = = 
 In May 1948 Carnell announced at a science fiction convention in London that plans were well underway to form a new company , to be called Nova Publications Ltd . Nova raised £ 600 in capital and was launched in early 1949 . There were initially six directors : the chairman was John Wyndham , and the remaining board members were G. Ken Chapman , Frank Cooper , Walter Gillings , Eric C. Williams , and John Carnell . A printer was found near Stoke Newington , where Frank Cooper was based , and the first issue ( numbered 4 , to follow on from the three Pendulum issues ) appeared in June . It was planned to move to regular quarterly publication , and subsequently to a bimonthly schedule . To keep costs down Nova decided to handle the distribution themselves ; this was not easy but Cooper and his assistant , Les Flood , were sufficiently successful that in July the decision was taken to go ahead with the planned quarterly schedule . A fifth issue duly appeared in September , and the sixth issue the following spring , dated Spring 1950 . 
 In 1950 , with New Worlds on a stable quarterly schedule , Nova Publications decided to launch a companion , Science Fantasy . They chose Walter Gillings as the editor ; but he was replaced by Carnell after two issues , partly because Nova could not afford to pay two editorial salaries , and partly because of " fundamental differences of opinion " . At the end of 1951 New Worlds went bimonthly , and by the middle of the year had reached a circulation of 18 @,@ 000 . The price had been reduced to 1 / 6 with the third issue , but with paper costs rising Nova looked for a cheaper printer . The new printer , The Carlton Press , was supposed to take over production with the May 1953 issue ( number 21 ) , but the issue was late , and had to be dated June 1953 instead . The issue was shoddily produced , which dismayed Nova 's board , and printers ' strikes caused further delays . Nova discovered that The Carlton Press was an agent with no printing facilities ; they farmed out work to other printers , but were only able to get their commissions executed when they paid off any prior debts to those printers . Issue 22 was repeatedly delayed ; proofs appeared in August , and the issue itself was promised for November . Even this late schedule was not adhered to , and Carnell finally received a copy of the print run in January 1954 . The copy was dated 1953 ( with no month ) , and since this made it useless for distribution in 1954 , Carnell refused to accept the print run . While the dispute with the printers was going on , Carnell and Maurice Goldsmith , a journalist acquaintance of Carnell 's , put together a small conference of well @-@ known science fiction authors , including Arthur C. Clarke and John Wyndham . Goldsmith covered the conference for Illustrated , a weekly magazine , and the article caught the attention of Maclaren & Sons Ltd , a technical trade publisher interested in launching a new sf magazine . Carnell turned down the offer because of his loyalty to Nova Publications , but subsequent discussions ultimately led to Maclaren taking control of Nova , with a commitment to produce New Worlds on a monthly basis and Science Fantasy on a bimonthly schedule . By January 1954 , when The Carlton Press delivered the incorrectly dated issue 22 , the acquisition by Maclaren was complete , and Maclaren 's legal department was helpful in resolving the dispute . The printing press who had actually printed the issue were not paid by The Carlton Press , so an injunction was obtained that sequestered the issues to avoid them being sold to recover the printing costs . Carnell retained the copy he had been sent in January , and it is thought that this is the only copy that exists of The Carlton Press 's version of this issue , as the remainder of the printing run was destroyed at the conclusion of the court case . The cover painting , by Gerard Quinn , was subsequently used on issue 13 of Science Fantasy , and all the stories and editorial material eventually appeared in later issues of New Worlds over the next year . 
 The financial support that Maclaren provided meant that once issue 22 finally appeared in April 1954 , it was the start of a regular monthly schedule that lasted until 1964 with just one hiccup : a printing dispute in 1959 delayed the August issue and it was combined with the September issue . Despite this stability , New Worlds 's circulation began to decline in the early 1960s . Nova Publications had launched a third magazine , Science Fiction Adventures , in 1958 , but both it and Science Fantasy were also losing readers , and in May 1963 Science Fiction Adventures was cancelled . In September of that year Nova 's board decided to close down both New Worlds and Science Fantasy , and in preparation for the change Carnell signed a contract in December 1963 to edit an original anthology series , New Writings in SF , for publisher Dennis Dobson . 
 = = = Roberts & Vinter = = = 
 The magazines were unexpectedly saved by David Warburton of Roberts & Vinter , a London publishing house . The printer who had been printing both New Worlds and Science Fantasy happened to meet Warburton in a pub , and mentioned that he was looking for additional work to fill the gaps in his schedule left by the demise of the magazines . Roberts & Vinter were having difficulty getting good distribution for their existing titles , which were violent thrillers , and were interested in acquiring more respectable titles that would help them penetrate the British distribution network , which was heavily dependent on W.H. Smith and John Menzies , the two main British newsagent chains . Warburton 's partner , Godfrey Gold , ran a company that was connected to Roberts & Vinter and published pin @-@ up magazines ; like Warburton , Gold needed to improve his ability to distribute his titles . 
 When Michael Moorcock , who by this time had begun selling stories to Carnell , heard of the plans to cease publication of New Worlds and Science Fantasy , he wrote a letter that appeared in issue 141 lamenting the loss to the British science fiction field of both the magazines and Carnell himself . Carnell did not want to continue to edit the magazines in addition to New Writings in SF , and recommended Moorcock to Warburton . Kyril Bonfiglioli , an Oxford art dealer who was a friend of Brian Aldiss , also expressed an interest . Warburton gave Moorcock the choice of which magazine to edit ; Moorcock chose New Worlds , and Bonfiglioli became the new editor of Science Fantasy . Moorcock wanted to switch to a large format , and showed Warburton a dummy issue he had made up , but Warburton insisted on a paperback format in order to fit in with the other titles they were producing , though he agreed to revisit the format in the future if sales improved . The first issue under Moorcock 's control was number 142 , dated May / June 1964 . The schedule was initially bimonthly , but at the start of 1965 it returned to a stable monthly schedule . 
 In July 1966 Roberts & Vinter 's distributor , Thorpe & Porter , went bankrupt , owing Roberts & Vinter a substantial sum . The resulting financial pressure led Roberts & Vinter to focus on their more profitable magazines , and they made plans to close down both Science Fantasy and New Worlds . After hearing of these plans , Moorcock and Warburton began to consider forming a separate company to continue publishing New Worlds , and Brian Aldiss contacted well @-@ known literary figures such as J.B. Priestley , Kingsley Amis , Marghanita Laski , and Angus Wilson to gain support for an application for a grant from the British Arts Council in late 1966 . In early January 1967 Aldiss discovered that the grant application would be successful , and that New Worlds would be awarded £ 150 per issue , though in the event the formal grant certification was delayed until at least May . The grant was enough to enable the magazine to continue , though it would not cover all costs . A publisher still needed to be found , and both Fontana and Panther Books expressed an interest , but the promise of the money and the prestige of an Arts Council grant convinced Warburton to stay involved personally . While these negotiations were going on , two more issues were assembled from backfile material and donated stories . Roberts & Vinter had ceased to exist by this time , so a sister company , Gold Star Publications , became the publisher for both these issues , with Warburton and Aldiss providing Gold Star with personal financial guarantees . These two issues appeared in March and April 1967 , but the latter was mistakenly also dated March in the indicia . Science Fantasy , which by this time had been retitled SF Impulse , was not continued but was merged with New Worlds as of the first Gold Star issue , though nothing of SF Impulse 's design or content was visible in New Worlds . 
 = = = Arts Council = = = 
 The partnership Warburton and Moorcock formed to continue New Worlds was named <unk> Publications . Moorcock and Warburton reviewed the dummy issue Moorcock had put together when he first became editor , and Warburton agreed to switch to the larger format . The first issue from <unk> appeared in July 1967 , beginning a regular monthly schedule . Moorcock remained as editor with Langdon Jones as his assistant , and Charles Platt became the layout designer . Poor sales led Warburton to cease his involvement after the November issue , but the magazine was again saved , this time by Sylvester Stein of Stonehart Publications . 
 Delays led to a skipped month , with the December 1967 and January 1968 issues being combined into one , but a monthly schedule returned thereafter . The March 1968 issue contained the third instalment of Norman <unk> 's novel Bug Jack Barron , which included some fairly explicit sex scenes . A member of parliament complained in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom that the Arts Council was " sponsoring filth " ; and soon W.H. Smith and John Menzies , the two main retail outlets for magazines in the UK , withdrew the magazine from sale . The complaints came at the time when the Arts Council was considering renewing the grant for another year , and it appeared for a while that New Worlds would have to cease publication , but eventually the grant was renewed . Some private donations also came in , and with money from advertising , and a substantial contribution from Moorcock himself , the magazine was able to survive . The loss of revenue caused by the withdrawal from sale of the March 1968 issue was exacerbated by a temporary ban on the magazine in South Africa , New Zealand and Australia , and by John Menzies ' subsequent decision not to stock New Worlds . W.H. Smith left it to their individual branch managers to decide whether or not to carry the magazine . Stonehart were unhappy with developments and refused to pay the printers , who in turn withheld the printed copies . The Arts Council money had been intended for the contributors , but a disagreement over the grant led to Stonehart 's refusal to pay them as well . Some negative coverage appeared in the press as a consequence of the distribution ban . The grant was eventually renewed , but by late that year Stein had had enough and Stonehart ceased their involvement with New Worlds after the July 1968 issue . 
 Without reliable distribution at the leading newsagents , New Worlds had to rely on subscriptions and donations . The magazine was not profitable , and since Moorcock had not formed a company to publish it , he was personally responsible for its costs . To bring in cash he had been writing fantasy novels at a very rapid rate since early 1968 , and from early 1969 the editorial work was given to various others , primarily Charles Platt and Langdon Jones . A regular monthly schedule was adhered to from January until July 1969 , at which point came another financial blow when it was discovered that half of the print run of 20 @,@ 000 was being held back by the distributors . Moorcock attempted to regroup by reducing the number of pages in each issue , and because he was again forced to write as much as he could to earn enough to pay New Worlds 's bills , he turned over almost all editorial duties to Charles Platt , though others involved with the magazine also took turns at the editorial work over the next few issues . Moorcock was £ 3 @,@ 000 in debt , and in combination with the Arts Council 's decision not to renew their grant he found himself with no option but to cease publication . The April 1970 issue , the 200th , was the last that went out to the distributors ; one more issue was prepared and mailed to subscribers in March of the following year . 
 = = = Later incarnations = = = 
 When Moorcock realized that the magazine would have to fold , he made arrangements with Sphere Books to continue New Worlds as a quarterly paperback anthology series . Sphere produced eight issues , although the quarterly schedule was not adhered to after the fourth issue ; the eighth issue appeared in 1975 . Six issues were reprinted in the US . The early issues did well financially , with about 25 @,@ 000 copies sold , not counting US sales . Moorcock turned over the editorship to Charles Platt with the sixth volume , and to Hilary Bailey thereafter , to give himself more time to devote to his own writing : he also commented that by this time " I no longer had my editorial touch ( I couldn 't read sf at all ) " . Sphere cancelled the series after two more issues ; it was briefly taken over by Corgi Books , but sales were weak and Corgi dropped the series with New Worlds 10 in 1976 , although according to Moorcock he and Bailey decided to end the series when they got into disagreements with Corgi . In the US Berkley Books published volumes 1 through 4 , and when they dropped the series Platt , who was a consulting editor at Avon Books , reprinted two further volumes , number 6 and 7 of the UK series . 
 In 1978 the magazine was revived by Moorcock again , this time in a fanzine format . Four more issues appeared , professionally printed and with various editors , between Spring 1978 and September 1979 . There followed a long gap until 1991 , when New Worlds again reappeared as a paperback anthology series , this time edited by David S. Garnett . Four volumes appeared between 1991 and 1994 , published by Victor Gollancz . Moorcock edited a fiftieth anniversary issue in 1996 , and Garnett subsequently edited one more issue of the anthology . Together with the earlier fanzine , magazine and anthology versions , these took the issue numbering from 212 through to 222 . In 2012 there was a relaunch in the form of a simultaneous print and online magazine , titled Michael Moorcock 's New Worlds - two issues were released before a long period of hiatus , followed by a formal statement in Facebook ( October 8 , 2014 ) that the magazine had ceased due to lack of subscriber income . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = Carnell = = = 
 The lead story of the first issue of New Worlds was Maurice <unk> 's " The Mill of the Gods " . John Russell Fearn contributed four stories , under his own name and three pseudonyms , and William Temple provided " The Three Pylons " , a fantasy which turned out to be the most popular story in the issue . Sf historian Mike Ashley regards the next two issues as an improvement on the first ; the second issue contained John Wyndham 's " The Living Lies " , under his " John Beynon " alias , and the third contained " Inheritance " , an early story by Arthur C. Clarke . Wyndham 's story , about hostility and bigotry shown by settlers on Venus to the Venusian natives , was reprinted in Other Worlds in 1950 , while " Inheritance " later appeared in Astounding Science Fiction . 
 The acquisition of Nova Publications by Maclaren in 1954 gave New Worlds the stability to establish itself as a leading magazine . Ashley describes the period from 1954 to 1960 as a " Golden Age " for New Worlds . Carnell bought J. G. Ballard 's first sale , " <unk> " , which appeared in the December 1956 New Worlds ; Ballard went on to become a significant figure in the genre in the 1960s . Ballard was grateful to Carnell for the support he provided Ballard in the late 1950s . Much of Ballard 's work appeared in New Worlds and Science Fantasy , and Ballard later recalled that Carnell " recognized what I was on about from a very early stage and he encouraged me to go on writing in my own way . " Carnell also published much of Brian Aldiss 's early work in Science Fantasy and New Worlds . John Brunner , later to become one of the most successful British science fiction writers , appeared regularly in the Nova magazines , starting with " Visitors ' Book " in the April 1955 New Worlds . James White began publishing with " Assisted Passage " in the January 1953 New Worlds , and in 1957 began his popular Sector General series , about a hospital for aliens , with " Sector General " in the November 1957 issue . John Wyndham , who was already well known outside the genre for works such as The Day of the Triffids , began a series about the <unk> , a space @-@ going family , with " For All the Night " in the April 1958 issue . Arthur C. Clarke , another very successful British sf writer of the period , wrote relatively few short stories for the British market , but did publish " Who 's There " in the November 1958 New Worlds . Colin Kapp began his popular " Unorthodox Engineers " series with " The Railways up on <unk> " , in October 1959 . Other less well @-@ known writers who were prolific during the late 1950s included J. T. McIntosh , Kenneth Bulmer , and E. C. Tubb . 
 New Worlds has been credited with " shap [ ing ] the way science fiction developed " as a genre . It " did the most " of any magazine for British science fiction , helping to revive a nationalist style of speculative fiction in the 1950s ; Roger Luckhurst called it " the most important British sf journal " . Particularly influential were Clarke 's " Guardian Angel " ( published in 1950 ) , and the work of Brian Aldiss , John Brunner and J. G. Ballard . Mike Ashley argued that New Worlds and Science @-@ Fantasy were " the bedrock of high @-@ quality science fiction in Britain " . Female readership for the magazine was between 5 and 15 percent , according to surveys conducted during the 1950s . The magazine became increasingly popular among a younger demographic : readers 19 and under made up 5 percent of total readership in 1954 , 18 percent in 1958 , and 31 percent in 1963 . The same polls also showed an increase in the number of science and technology workers reading the magazine during that period . Among the best artists of this period were Brian Lewis , Gordon Hutchings , and Gerard Quinn , whose art is regarded by Ashley as comparable in style to Virgil Finlay 's work . However , in 1957 Carnell stopped using interior art , saying that " art work in the digest @-@ size magazines is as out @-@ of @-@ date as a coal fire " . 
 In Ashley 's view , the quality of New Worlds began to drop somewhat in the early 1960s . It still ran popular series such as White 's Sector General stories , and printed some well @-@ received stories such as Harry Harrison 's " The Streets of Ashkelon " , about a clash between an atheist ( the protagonist ) and a priest , on another planet . Because of the subject matter , it took six years for Harrison to find an editor willing to accept the story ; when Aldiss bought it for an anthology , Carnell agreed to print it in New Worlds , where it appeared in September 1962 . J.G. Ballard continued to publish in New Worlds , but was now sending his more conventional stories to the US magazines , and submitting his more experimental pieces to Carnell . Examples from 1961 to 1964 include " The Overloaded Man " , " The Subliminal Man " , " End @-@ Game " , and " The Terminal Beach " , with themes of psychological stress , and changes to the nature of perception and of reality . 
 = = = Moorcock = = = 
 When Roberts & Vinter made the decision to close down New Worlds in 1963 , Moorcock and Ballard considered publishing a new magazine that would be willing , as Carnell had been , to publish experimental material . Moorcock assembled a dummy issue , and later described his intentions : " It would be on art paper , to take good quality illustrations ; it would be the size of , say , Playboy so that it would get good display space on the newsstands ; it would specialise in experimental work by writers like [ William ] Burroughs and [ Eduardo ] Paolozzi , but it would be ' popular ' , it would seek to publicise such experimenters ; it would publish all those writers who had become demoralised by a lack of sympathetic publishers and by baffled critics ; it would attempt a cross @-@ fertilization of popular sf , science and the work of the literary and artistic avant garde . " Moorcock also wrote a letter to Carnell setting out his thoughts on what science fiction needed : " Editors who are willing to take a risk on a story and run it even though this may bring criticism on their heads . " The letter was published in the final Nova Publications issue , which also carried the announcement that Moorcock would be taking over from Carnell as editor of New Worlds , though Moorcock had been unaware he would be considered for the post when he wrote his letter . 
 Moorcock 's first issue , dated May / June 1964 , bore a cover by James Cawthorn illustrating the first instalment of Ballard 's novella " Equinox " ; Ballard also contributed a book review of William Burroughs ' Dead Fingers Talk , and stories by Brian Aldiss , Barrington Bayley , and John Brunner completed the issue . Moorcock 's editorial included a quote from a radio interview with William Burroughs to the effect that " If writers are to describe the advanced techniques of the Space Age , they must invent writing techniques equally advanced in order properly to deal with them . " Within the first few issues , Moorcock printed stories intended to demonstrate his editorial goals . The most controversial of these was Langdon Jones ' " I Remember , Anita ... " , which appeared in the September / October 1964 issue ; the story contained sex scenes that led to arguments in the magazine 's letter column , and some regular subscribers abandoned the magazines , though overall circulation increased . 
 Moorcock contributed a substantial amount of material , under his own name and under pseudonyms such as James Colvin ; some of these stories were fairly traditional , but contributions such as the Jerry Cornelius stories , which began with " Preliminary Data " in the August 1965 issue , were much more experimental . He also printed his novella " Behold the Man " in the September 1966 issue ; the story , about a time traveler who returns to the time of Christ , won him a Nebula Award the following year . Ballard also began to write some of his most controversial stories , including " You : Coma : Marilyn Monroe " in the June 1966 issue , and " The Assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy Considered as a Downhill Motor Race " , in March 1967 ; both had been previously published in <unk> , a literary magazine , in 1966 . 
 Many writers now found New Worlds to be a market in which they could publish experimental material . Charles Platt , David I. Masson , and Barrington Bayley were among the British writers in this group , and Moorcock also attracted work from US writers such as John Sladek , Roger Zelazny and Thomas M. Disch . Zelazny 's contributions included " For a Breath I Tarry " in March 1966 , and Disch published several short stories and the novel Echo Round His Bones , which was serialized starting in the December 1966 and January 1967 issues . Disch commented that he had been unable to find a publisher for the novel in the US . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , the term " New Wave " began to be applied to the more experimental work that Moorcock was publishing , and New Worlds was soon regarded as the leading publication in the New Wave movement . In addition to the experimental material , Moorcock attempted to keep the existing readership happy by publishing more traditional science fiction ; in the words of sf historian Colin Greenland , he " changed the contents of the magazine much more slowly than he pretended to " . Traditional sf stories bought by Moorcock include Vernor Vinge 's first story , " <unk> " , which appeared in June 1965 ; he also printed material from Bob Shaw , early stories by Terry Pratchett , and , in March 1965 , Arthur C. Clarke 's " <unk> " . 
 = = = Arts Council and after = = = 
 When Moorcock took over publication of New Worlds from Roberts & Vinter he changed the format from digest to a larger size with good quality paper that allowed better use of artwork . The first issue in this format , July 1967 , contained part one of Disch 's Camp Concentration , a novel which Disch had been unable to sell in the U.S. because of the explicitness of the language used by the protagonist . Disch afterwards recalled that some of the experimental language in the book was written in the knowledge that New Worlds was available as a market for unconventional fiction . Other new writers who appeared in the magazine include M. John Harrison and Robert <unk> , both of whom appeared in the November 1968 issue . The December 1968 issue included Samuel R. Delany 's " Time Considered as a Helix of Semi @-@ Precious Stones " , and Harlan Ellison 's " A Boy and His Dog " appeared in April 1969 ; Ellison won a Nebula Award , and Delany both a Nebula and a Hugo , though it was not until the stories were reprinted in book form that they were widely noticed . 
 The July 1967 issue of New Worlds contained Pamela <unk> 's first story , " The Heat Death of the Universe " , which used entropy , a frequent theme in New Worlds , as a metaphor . The story is one of the best examples of the new approach Moorcock was taking with the magazine : in the words of critic Edward James , the goal was to " use science @-@ fictional and scientific language and imagery to describe perfectly ' ordinary ' scenes of life , and by doing so produce altered perceptions of reality in the reader " . " Inner space " , a term originally coined by J.B. Priestley , was also used to describe the focus of the stories Moorcock printed , in contrast to traditional science fiction 's focus on outer space , and James regards the term as " the watchword of the British New Wave , and the shibboleth by which one recognized those who had abandoned Gernsback and Campbell . " The methods and interests of these writers were quite different from those of traditional science fiction : the concern was with internal rather than external reality , and experimental techniques , unusual juxtapositions of material , and a focus on psychological concerns were the norm . 
 With the switch to anthology format , some of the more experimental material disappeared . In his editorials , Moorcock made it clear that he did not want to exclude traditional sf stories ; he wanted to eliminate the genre boundaries completely , and have science fiction treated as part of the mainstream of fiction . However , the <unk> were labelled as science fiction since Sphere knew that would increase sales . The stories printed in the anthologies were generally downbeat . Some of the material had been intended for Sword & Sorcery , a magazine planned as a companion to Vision of Tomorrow , but which folded before its first issue appeared . New writers who appeared for the first time in the quarterly anthology series included Marta Randall ( under the name Marta <unk> ) , Eleanor Arnason , Geoff Ryman , and Rachel Pollack ( as Richard A. Pollack ) . 
 Issue 212 reprinted a piece written by Moorcock and M. John Harrison that was a spoof issue of The Guardian ; it had been published in <unk> , an underground paper , in 1971 . The next two issues also contained mock newspaper stories , but issue 215 contained somewhat more conventional material , including a Jerry Cornelius story , written by Charles Partington . Issue 216 , the last of the late 1970s issues , reintroduced the mock news stories . The 1990s anthology series did not try to recapture the atmosphere or style of the 1960s or 1970s New Worlds . It contained some well @-@ received material , including stories by Moorcock , Paul Di Filippo , and Ian McDonald , though it was financially unsuccessful . 
 = = New Worlds and the " New Wave " = = 
 New Worlds ' greatest influence on science fiction came in the 1960s , with the " New Wave " that began with Moorcock 's polemical editorials . Moorcock asserted in 1965 that a writer of good sf " can learn from his predecessors , but he should not imitate them " ; and he was soon publishing stories that were quite different in technique and style from anything that had appeared before , not just in New Worlds itself , but in any of the sf magazines . Moorcock 's goal was to use the magazine to " define a new avant @-@ garde role " for the genre . New Worlds thus became the " ideological center of the [ New Wave ] movement to rejuvenate conjectural literature " . 
 The term " New Wave " did not meet with universal approval among those who were regarded as part of it . Brian Aldiss , for example , wrote to Judith Merril in 1966 that he suspected the term was " a journalistic invention of yours and Mike Moorcock 's " , and added " I feel I am no part of the New Wave ; I was here before ' em , and by God I mean to be here after they 've gone ( still writing bloody science fiction ) ! " Merril was a key advocate for the New Wave , and popularized it in her anthology England Swings SF , which appeared in 1968 ; she spent almost a year in London , living near Moorcock , when researching the anthology in 1966 – 1967 . Merril and writer Christopher Priest were among those who used the term " New Wave " to describe the work being done in New Worlds , but Aldiss was not the only writer to object to the term , and it never received a generally accepted definition . Critic Brian Attebery characterizes it as a " disruptive , existentially fraught and formally daring " style ; Peter Nicholls hesitates to define it but comments that " perhaps the fundamental element was the belief that sf could and should be taken seriously as literature " . In a 1967 interview , Ballard , one of the writers most closely associated with the New Wave , described modern U.S. sf as extrovert and optimistic , and contrasted it with " the new science fiction , that other people apart from myself are now beginning to write " , which he saw as " introverted , possibly pessimistic rather than optimistic , much less certain of its own territory . " 
 Whatever the exact definition of the term , between 1964 and 1966 , New Worlds was at the forefront of the New Wave movement . Two guest editorials in 1962 and 1963 ( " Which way to Inner Space ? " by Ballard and " Play with Feeling " by Moorcock ) were arguably the " first <unk> " of New Wave ideas in sf magazines . Latham suggests that these were " the first volleys in the polemical offensive they would launch once [ Moorcock ] gained control of the magazine and installed [ Ballard ] as his resident visionary " . The response to the New Wave from critics and sf fans was varied . Christopher Priest called New Worlds a " New Wave <unk> " , but lauded the talents of its writers and its experimental stories ( with the exception of Ballard 's The Crystal World , which he deemed " tedious and wearying " ) . Ian McAuley suggested the magazine 's editors were " plugging the ' inner @-@ space ' jazz for all its [ sic ] worth " . Mike Ashley argued that New Worlds was instrumental in promoting authors that would not otherwise have been published ( a suggestion with which Bould and Butler concur ) . Ballard was a particular focus of both praise and , more significantly , vehement criticism , and was vigorously defended by Moorcock . Peter Weston took an " even @-@ handed approach " by praising New Worlds in Speculation editorials , in contrast with his largely negative columnists . Beginning in 1966 , US fanzines began responding to New Worlds and its detractors , and the debate spread to the professional US magazines as well . Judith Merril praised Disch and Ballard 's contributions to New Worlds in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , but Algis Budrys in Galaxy rebutted her viewpoint and condemned both authors . Frederik Pohl called New Worlds " damned dull " , advocating a return to adventure stories . American science fiction authors " were finding it increasingly difficult to avoid partisan alignments in the developing New Wave war " because of the preponderance of columns and letters in American magazines both for and against New Worlds and New Wave in general . Latham suggests that " the New Worlds editorial conclave was actively working within fandom to counteract the Old Guard assaults " . 
 By the end of the 1960s , New Worlds and the New Wave 's connection to and influence on science fiction was becoming tenuous . In the August 1969 issue , Platt asserted that " New Worlds is not a science @-@ fiction magazine " , and Moorcock likened it to an avant @-@ garde and experimental literary review . The sf world had lost interest in New Worlds , and it had become , in Ashley 's words , " a revolution running out of energy " . In the longer term , however , it proved influential , despite the lack of wide acceptance at the time : in the words of sf historian Brian Stableford , " the paths beaten by the New Worlds writers are now much more generally in use " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The following table shows the editorial succession at New Worlds , indicates which issues appeared from which publisher , and gives the format , page count and price of each issue : Note that dates in [ square brackets ] indicate the approximate date that an issue was released in cases where a month did not appear on the magazine itself . 
 There were US reprints of six of the New Worlds Quarterly anthology series . The first four were published by Berkley Books ; Avon Books picked up two more of the series after Berkley dropped it , but since the fifth volume had been missed by that time , Avon retitled volumes 6 and 7 as New Worlds Quarterly 5 and New Worlds Quarterly 6 . 
 = = = US editions = = = 
 A US reprint edition of New Worlds ran briefly in 1960 , published by Great American Publications , who at the time were the publishers of Fantastic Universe , edited by Hans Stefan Santesson . The first issue appeared in March 1960 ; it omitted Carnell 's name , and credited Santesson as editor . Although the fiction consisted entirely of reprints , with all but one story coming from the British New Worlds , this was not declared to the reader . Carnell was unhappy with the results of this attempt to break into the US market , but in the event Great American collapsed later that year and only five issues appeared , on a monthly schedule from March to July . The contents of the issues did not correspond to specific British issues : the majority were taken from New Worlds but one story was reprinted from Nova 's edition of Science Fiction Adventures , and three were taken from Fantastic Universe , which had ceased publication with its March 1960 issue . 
 Subsequently the British edition was released in the US essentially unchanged , with a cover date delayed by one month , starting with issue 99 ( October 1960 ) . 
 = = = Anthologies = = = 
 Several anthologies of stories from New Worlds have been published , including : 
 = Washington Park Court District = 
 The Washington Park Court District is a Grand Boulevard community area neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago , Illinois . It was designated a Chicago Landmark on October 2 , 1991 . Despite its name , it is not located within either the Washington Park community area or the Washington Park park , but is one block north of both . The district was named for the Park . 
 The district includes row houses built between 1895 and 1905 , with addresses of 4900 – <unk> South Washington Park Court and 417 – 439 East 50th Street . Many of the houses share architectural features . The neighborhood was part of the early twentieth century segregationist racial covenant wave that swept Chicago following the Great Migration . The community area has continued to be almost exclusively African American since the 1930s . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Washington Park Court , which runs one @-@ way northbound from East 50th Street to East 49th Street , is a one @-@ city block @-@ long street located at 432 east in the Chicago street numbering system . Officially , it runs from 4900 south to 5060 south in the numbering system . The street and several adjacent homes at one end are recognized as a distinct district within the city , according to the City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development . In May 1990 , the district was one of ten that were under consideration for Chicago Landmark status , and it was designated a Chicago Landmark on October 2 , 1991 . The district was named for the Park , which was designed by landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted . 
 The T. G. Dickinson Real Estate Company , which created the subdivision in 1892 , mandated 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) setbacks for all properties and originally sold lots in small groups of two or three . Between 1895 and 1905 , the tone of the district became clear with the development of its row houses . In 1990 , the district contained forty @-@ nine row houses that span a wide variety of architectural styles including Classical Revival and Romanesque . As of 2004 , the district contained fifty @-@ one properties . The street hosts residential designs of architect Henry Newhouse and of developers Andrew and John <unk> . At least twenty @-@ five of the lots were developed by the <unk> and at least twelve of the properties were designed by Newhouse . Their architectural contributions set the tone for the block , which uses mostly brick and limestone houses that share porch and cornice lines . Most houses have <unk> or recessed roofs with bay fronts . 
 = = Demographic change = = 
 Between 1900 and 1934 the African American population in Chicago grew from 30 @,@ 000 to 236 @,@ 000 . The population was initially diluted in scattered places , but during this time , due to the change in the demographics of Chicago , it became concentrated in two large strips of land . The racial concentration was enforced by violence for few decades , until restrictive covenants became the preferred way to enforce segregation . Although they were previously rare , racially restrictive covenants among property owners that outlawed the purchase , lease , or occupation of their properties by African Americans became common in Chicago in the 1920s following the Great Migration , especially after the 1926 United States Supreme Court upheld racially restrictive covenants in Corrigan v. Buckley ( 271 U.S. 323 ( 1926 ) ) . 
 During the first half of the 20th Century , The Black Belt was the term for the African American neighborhood from 22nd Street to 31st Street along State Street on Chicago 's South Side . South Side local businessmen and the University of Chicago became alarmed at the prospect of poorer blacks moving from the Black Belt due to a combination of racial succession and economic decline . Because 85 % of Chicago was covenanted , most black neighborhoods were bounded by covenanted areas . The Washington Park Court Improvement Association changed its focus from neighborhood improvement projects , such as planting shrubs and cleaning streets , to upholding segregationist policies . When necessary , the organization resorted to violence to pursue its segregationist purpose , and between 1917 and 1921 , bombs were used to discourage encroachment into majority white neighborhoods . The bombs were used at the residences of African Americans as well as the properties of real estate agents and bankers . 
 Eventually the term Black Belt included the region from 39th Street to 95th Street between the Dan Ryan Expressway and Lake Michigan . Since the 1930 United States Census , the Grand Boulevard community area has been over 90 % African American . In both the 1960 and 1990 Census , the community area was over 99 % African American . As of the 2000 Census , the area was 98 @.@ 2 % African American and 0 @.@ 8 % Hispanic . 
 = A Retrospective ( Pink Martini album ) = 
 A Retrospective is the first compilation album by the American group Pink Martini , released in September 2011 in the United Kingdom and the following month in the United States , Australia and Canada . The album contains twenty @-@ one tracks from six studio albums . Guest artists include Michael Feinstein ( " How Long Will It Last ? " ) , French singer and songwriter Georges <unk> ( " Ma Solitude " ) and director Gus Van Sant ( " Moon River " ) ; the compilation also features remixes by New York City disc jockey Johnny Dynell ( " Una Notte a Napoli " ) and Hiroshi Wada ( " Kikuchiyo to Mohshimasu " ) . 
 Critical reception of the compilation album was positive overall ; many reviewers appreciated the album in its entirety but criticized select tracks . A Retrospective reached a peak position of number seven on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A Retrospective contains twenty @-@ one tracks totaling more than seventy minutes in length , some of which were previously unreleased . Tracks originally appearing on the group 's 1997 debut album Sympathique include Manuel Jiménez 's " ¿ Donde Estas Yolanda ? " , " La Soledad " , " Sympathique " , " Que Sera Sera " by Ray Evans and Jay Livingston , and " Amado Mio " . " Hang On Little Tomato " , " Una Notte a Napoli " , " Anna ( El Negro <unk> ) " , " Lilly " and " <unk> " first appeared on Hang On Little Tomato ( 2004 ) . The group 's 2007 album Hey Eugene ! included the song of the same name ; similarly , " Splendor in the Grass " was the title track of the 2009 album of the same name . The samba @-@ influenced version of " Auld Lang Syne " was the final track on Pink Martini 's 2010 holiday album Joy to the World . 1969 , the collaborative album with Saori Yuki first released in October 2011 , included Jorge Ben Jor 's " Mas que Nada " . 
 " Moon River " , originally by Henry Mancini and Johnny Mercer , and " The Man with the Big Sombrero " were previously unreleased . " Moon River " featured guest vocals by director Gus Van Sant , marking his singing debut . French singer @-@ songwriter Georges <unk> provided vocals on " Ma Solitude " , and pianist and singer Michael Feinstein contributed to Max Lief and Joseph Meyer 's " How Long Will It Last ? " The compilation also features two remixed recordings : " Una Notte a Napoli " by New York City disc jockey Johnny Dynell , and an instrumental version of " Kikuchiyo to Mohshimasu " by Hiroshi Wada . " Kikuchiyo to Mohshimasu " originally appeared on Hang On Little Tomato . 
 Included with the album is a 48 @-@ page booklet of previously unseen Polaroid pictures taken by Thomas Lauderdale , along with postcards and posters from Pink Martini 's history . A deluxe hardbound CD book version was also available for purchase . The group promoted the release of A Retrospective and 1969 by touring throughout the United States , including a holiday special in Portland , Oregon featuring Saori Yuki as part of their Holiday Tour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overall , critical reception of the album was positive , though some reviewers criticized select tracks . Michael Upchurch of The Seattle Times wrote that the " A " before " Retrospective " in the album 's title was appropriate and that the compilation included highlights of the group 's career . The New Zealand Herald 's Lydia Jenkin thought the collection represented a standard Pink Martini concert set list by including a variety of sounds , languages and vocalists , each delivered with " class , passion and subtlety " . Jenkin awarded the album 3 @.@ 5 of 5 stars , complimenting the album overall but noting that some tracks featured less " elegant sophistication " or " imaginative " arrangements . Marion <unk> wrote a positive review for The Cambridge Student , believing the compilation incorporated various styles of music and reflected the group 's " cosmopolitan nature " . <unk> concluded by asserting that the album was " perfect for avid admirers and newcomers alike " . 
 Rave magazine 's Chad Parkhill rated the album three of four stars . Parkhill described " Auld Lang Syne " as " weirdly off @-@ kilter " and found Dynell 's remix to be " profoundly derivative " , but also called some of the previously unreleased material " wonderful " . Tom D 'Antoni of Oregon Music News called Van Sant 's performance " truly awful in execution " , but considered the album to be " simply sensational " overall . The Sydney Star Observer 's Nick Bond complimented the album 's artwork and packaging . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 A Retrospective reached a peak positive of number seven on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Release history adapted from Pink Martini 's official website . 
 = University of Surrey = 
 The University of Surrey is a public research university located within the county town of Guildford , Surrey , in the South East of England , United Kingdom . The university specialises in science , engineering , medicine and business . It received its charter on 9 September 1966 , and was previously situated near Battersea Park in south @-@ west London . The institution was known as Battersea College of Technology before gaining university status . Its roots , however , go back to the Battersea Polytechnic Institute , founded in 1891 to provide further and higher education for London 's poorer inhabitants . 
 The university conducts research on small satellites and has a high number of staff who are members of learned societies . The university has recently expanded into China by launching the Surrey International Institute with Dongbei University of Finance and Economics . 
 The university 's main campus is located on Stag Hill close to the centre of Guildford and adjacent to Guildford Cathedral . A second campus , at Manor Park , is located a short distance away and has been developed to expand upon existing accommodation , academic buildings and sporting facilities . 
 The university is a major centre for satellite and mobile communications research . In March 2014 , the British Prime Minister David Cameron announced a partnership between the University of Surrey , King 's College London and the University of Dresden for the development of 5G technology . The university is a member of the Association of <unk> , the European University Association and Association of Commonwealth Universities . The university is one of only eight universities to be ranked within the top 10 of all three major national league tables for 2016 . According to the figures revealed by the Higher Education Statistics Agency 2013 / 14 , the University of Surrey has the fourth highest percentage of graduates entering employment and / or further study within six months of graduation at 96 @.@ 9 % ( behind Lancaster University , Robert Gordon University and Arts University Bournemouth ) — higher than the University of Oxford ( 92 @.@ 6 % ) and the University of Cambridge ( 95 @.@ 2 % ) . 
 The university has 10 Fellows of the Royal Society , 21 Fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering , one Fellow of the British Academy and 6 Fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Battersea Polytechnic Institute = = = 
 The University of Surrey was preceded by the Battersea Polytechnic Institute which was founded in 1891 and admitted its first students in 1894 . Its aims were to provide greater access to further and higher education for some of the " poorer inhabitants " of London . 
 In 1901 , Evening Classes consisted of some of the following ; Mechanical Engineering and Building , Electrical Engineering , Chemical and other Trades , Physics and Natural Science , Maths , Languages , and Commercial subjects , Music . Special classes for Women in Domestic Economy subjects . Day Classes in Art , Science , Women 's subjects and Gymnastics . Classes in preparation for University and Professional Examinations . Also . Science day School for Boys and Girls , Commercial School for Girls , Training School for Domestic Economy and Training for Teachers . 
 The Institute focused on science and technology subjects , and from about 1920 taught some classes for University of London students . The Institute awarded University of London external degrees . 
 = = = Battersea College of Technology = = = 
 In 1956 , the Institute was among the first to receive the designation " College of Advanced Technology " and was renamed Battersea College of Technology . By the beginning of the sixties , the College had virtually outgrown its building in Battersea and had decided to move to Guildford . In addition to this , the Robbins Report of 1963 proposed that the Colleges of Advanced Technology , including Battersea , should expand and become degree @-@ awarding universities . 
 In 1965 , the university @-@ designate acquired a greenfield site in Guildford from Guildford Cathedral , Guildford Borough Council and the Onslow Village Trust . 
 = = = University = = = 
 On 9 September 1966 the University of Surrey was established by Royal Charter and by 1970 the move from Battersea to Guildford was complete . 
 Early visitors to the new campus were Led Zeppelin , who performed their very first gig at the university on 25 October 1968 . 
 Between 1982 and 2008 , the university became the trustee of the building of the Guildford Institute , using parts of the building for its adult education programme ad providing a university presence in the heart of Guildford . The Assessment and Qualifications Alliance ( formerly Associated Examining Board ) moved from Aldershot to its own headquarters building on the Stag Hill campus in 1985 . 
 The university marked its Silver Jubilee in 1991 , an event celebrated by the publishing of Surrey – The Rise of a Modern University by Roy Douglas and by a Service of Thanksgiving in Guildford Cathedral attended by HM The Queen in March 1992 . 
 The university celebrated its 35th anniversary year in May 2002 with a major event in Guildford Cathedral . It was also marked by the unveiling of the Surrey Scholar sculpture ( by Allan Sly FBS ) to mark the Golden Jubilee of Her Majesty The Queen and as a gift to the people of Guildford . The Surrey Scholar is located at the bottom of Guildford High Street . Understanding the Real World , a visual history of the university , by Christopher Pick , was published to coincide with this anniversary . 
 In 2007 , the university saw a major increase in overall applications by 39 % compared with the previous year . This was followed by a further increase in applications of 12 % in 2008 . 
 In October 2008 , the university lost out to Royal Holloway in a bid to merge with London medical institute St George 's , University of London . 
 From September 2009 , the Guildford School of Acting became a subsidiary of the university and relocated from Guildford town centre to the university campus . 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 On 1 July 2005 , Sir Christopher Snowden became Surrey 's fourth Vice @-@ Chancellor and Chief Executive . Like his predecessors Dowling and Kelly , Snowden is a Fellow of the Royal Society . Sir Christopher stepped down in March 2015 to take up the Vice @-@ Chancellorship at the University of Southampton . 
 On 3 December 2015 it was announced that Professor <unk> Max Lu would become the University 's fifth President and Vice @-@ Chancellor , taking up his appointment in April 2016 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The university moved in 1968 to a new 30 ha ( 74 @-@ acre ) site on Stag Hill in Guildford , adjacent to Guildford Cathedral . A further 90 ha ( 222 acres ) allocated to the university remained undeveloped until 2005 . The new Manor Park campus , designed as a car @-@ free village , is 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 mi ) from the Stag Hill campus and on the other side of the A3 trunk road . It combines residences for students and staff , buildings for research and teaching , and sporting facilities . 
 The BBC 's local radio station for Surrey and North @-@ East Hampshire , BBC Surrey , has its studios on the campus . In addition the university has a student @-@ run medium wave radio station , Stag Radio . 
 In November 2007 , the university was given planning permission to build the Surrey <unk> Centre . This will be the first building in Britain to have a Synagogue , Muslim Prayer Hall , Gurdwara and Chapel built separately under one roof . 
 On 8 July 2009 , a temporary Amigo convenience store opened in the BB Building on the campus , replacing the previous One Stop store which was situated near the library . The new store is operated by the Compass Group , and will see the University enjoy ' guaranteed rental income and share of turnover ' . The project is part of wider work which saw a new building , housing a larger shop and library extension , which opened on the One Stop site in April 2011 . 
 In September 2009 , the Guildford School of Acting moved into a new purpose built facility on the main Stag Hill campus as part of a strategic merger between the two organisations . The old Sports Centre has been converted into the Ivy Arts Centre , a performing arts facility housing a 200 @-@ seat theatre and studio and workshop space . 
 A £ 35 million research centre for the development of the first worldwide 5G network was scheduled to open in February 2015 . 
 = = = Surrey Sports Park = = = 
 In April 2010 , a £ 35 million new sports centre named the Surrey Sports Park opened . 
 The Surrey Sports Park is situated close to the main university campus on its Manor Park site . It houses a 50 @-@ metre Olympic @-@ size swimming pool , three multi @-@ sports halls , a squash centre , 700 square metres of fitness facilities , two artificial floodlit pitches , outdoor and indoor tennis courts , four real tennis courts and a climbing centre . 
 The 1 @,@ 000 seat indoor arena is home to Guildford Heat basketball team , who have been using the venue since 2010 following a move from their previous home at the Guildford Spectrum . Heat are one of the leading teams and former winners of the British Basketball League , the country 's top division . 
 It played host to all but 4 matches of the 2010 Women 's Rugby World Cup ( the semi finals , 3rd place play off and final were held at the Twickenham Stoop ) . It is also the official training facility for Harlequins rugby club , with plans to add a private gym for the club in addition to the already available facilities . 
 It will also be the home ground of <unk> Old Boys F.C. , a football team for alumni of the university , which competes in the Surrey County Intermediate League ( Western ) , at the 12th level of the English football league system . 
 Surrey University participates in an annual sports festival called the Varsity Games . The university competes against other institutions such as Royal Holloway , University of London and Kingston University . Over the years , there has been stiff competition between Surrey and Kingston for the Varsity Cup , that has made both universities arch @-@ rivals at the Games . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The academic activities of the university are divided into the following three faculties : 
 = = Academic profile = = 
 = = = Research = = = 
 The university conducts extensive research on small satellites , with its Surrey Space Centre and spin @-@ off commercial company , Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd . In the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise , the University of Surrey received a 5 * rating in the categories of " Sociology " , " Other Studies and Professions Allied to Medicine " , and " Electrical and Electronic Engineering " and a 5 rating in the categories of " Psychology " , " Physics " , " Applied Mathematics " , " Statistics and Operational Research " , " European Studies " , and " Russian , Slavonic and East European Languages " . 
 The new 5G Innovation Centre ( <unk> ) at the University of Surrey has gained over £ 40m support from international telecommunications companies including <unk> , <unk> International , BBC , BT Group , EE ( telecommunications company ) , Fujitsu Laboratories of Europe , Huawei , Ofcom , Rohde & Schwarz , Samsung , <unk> and Vodafone – and a further £ <unk> from the Higher Education Funding Council for England ( <unk> ) . 
 The Centre will provide industry with a world @-@ leading real @-@ time experimental facility for testing and optimising advanced technologies , underpinning the development of the new mobile broadband internet products and services . This will give Surrey the opportunity to be a major influence in critical standardisation and radio regulatory bodies in the emerging 5G arena . 
 Professor Rahim <unk> , Director of the <unk> , said , “ By bringing together leading academics with heavyweight industry partners , I believe we can develop the technologies required for the future . 
 In addition , the Surrey Research Park is a 28 ha ( 69 @-@ acre ) low density development which is owned and developed by the university , providing large landscaped areas with water features and facilities for over 110 companies engaged in a broad spectrum of research , development and design activities . The university generates the third highest endowment income out of all UK universities " reflecting its commercially @-@ orientated heritage . " 
 = = = Centre for Communication Systems Research = = = 
 CCSR at the University of Surrey is the UK 's largest and most well @-@ known academic research centre in Mobile and Satellite Communication Systems . CCSR has a long @-@ standing track record of being a major academic research group in the field of wireless communications within Europe and historically it has a unique research approach on both satellite as well as terrestrial mobile communication systems . The research activities within the group encompass all levels of communication systems , from antennas & propagation , air interfaces , <unk> , MAC , networking layer up to the service support platforms and distributed applications and user interfaces . It is a major participant in European Union Information Science and Technology ( IST ) projects . It has major collaborations in India , China , Korea , Japan and USA as well as several links in the communications industry and UK Catapults . It holds a 100 % graduate employment record . CCSR was selected by industry as a core member of the UK Virtual Centre of Excellence in Mobile and Personal Communications . 
 Surrey ’ s research into the Web of Things has been highlighted as one of the top 10 technology trends for 2014 by the IEEE Computing Society . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 1991 the university was granted the Queen 's Award for Export Achievement , and in 1996 it was awarded the Queen 's Anniversary Prize for Higher & Further Education in recognition of the university 's outstanding achievement in satellite engineering and communications , teaching and research by the Centre for Satellite Engineering Research and its associated companies . In 1998 Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd ( <unk> ) was awarded the Queen 's Award for Technological Achievement . This was presented in person by the Queen on her second visit to the university , accompanied by HRH The Duke of Edinburgh and HRH The Duke of Kent , Chancellor of the University . 
 More recently the university was awarded the 2002 Queen 's Anniversary Prize for Higher & Further Education , this time for its internationally renowned research and development on optoelectronic devices and ion beam applications . The university has a high number of staff who are academicians of the learned societies : 10 Fellows of the Royal Society , 21 Fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering , one Fellow of the British Academy and 6 Fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences . 
 In July 2007 , the university was awarded Fairtrade University status by the Fairtrade Foundation . 
 In 2011 , the university won the 2011 Queen 's Anniversary Prize for Higher & Further Education , for its research into the fields of safe water and sanitation . 
 In 2013 , the Electronic Engineering Department of the university won the 2013 Elektra Award University Department of the Year , marking it the most innovative and successful in Europe . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 The University of Surrey is recognised as one of the leading universities in the United Kingdom and has climbed rapidly in national league tables as of recent years . In the The Sunday Times 10 @-@ year ( 1998 – 2007 ) average ranking of British universities based on consistent league table performance , Surrey was ranked 35th overall in the UK , as of 2016 it now places between 4th and 8th in the three main ranking compilations of universities in the United Kingdom . For the most recent domestic university league tables , the university is ranked 4th overall by The Guardian , 8th overall by the Complete University Guide , 8th overall by the Times and Sunday Times Good University Guide 2016 . 
 Subjects ranked in the top 10 include Hospitality & Tourism , Law , Electronic Engineering , Food Science , Sociology , Aerospace Engineering , Mechanical Engineering , Civil Engineering , Chemical Engineering , Economics and Psychology . In world rankings , Times Higher Education ranked the university 190th in 2007 . 
 = = = Educational links = = = 
 Since its foundation , the university has fostered links with other educational bodies in the local community and region . For example , in recent years it has validated courses at and subsequently accredited Saint Mary 's College ( now an independent institution called St Mary 's University College , Twickenham ) , Wimbledon School of Art , and Farnborough College of Technology . The university currently validates courses at North East Surrey College of Technology ( <unk> ) , Guildford School of Acting , Guildford College of Further & Higher Education , King Edward VII Hospital Department of Staff Development , The Nuclear Department at HMS Sultan , St John 's Seminary , Southern Theological Education & Training Scheme ( <unk> ) , the Pre @-@ Retirement Association and SHL ( UK ) Ltd . 
 In 1998 , as a result of the continuing development in the relationship between the university and the nearby Roehampton Institute , it was decided to form an academic federation . In November 1999 , the Privy Council approved the necessary changes to the university 's Charter and Statutes and the Roehampton Institute became The University of Surrey Roehampton at the beginning of 2000 . Between 2000 and 2004 , the university and Roehampton worked together as the Federal University of Surrey . In June 2004 , the Privy Council granted Roehampton an independent university title , and it became Roehampton University from 1 August 2004 . This move ended the federal partnership between the two institutions , although collaboration between the two is being maintained . 
 In 2007 , the university and Dongbei University of Finance and Economics in Dalian , China , launched the Surrey International Institute , DUFE . The SII at DUFE offers Surrey degrees and dual @-@ degree programmes in China . A placement year link with University of North Carolina is currently being initiated in 2009 , where each institution places students from the other with companies located nearby , in the South East of England and the Carolinas , respectively . 
 = = = International partners = = = 
 The university holds a number of formal links with institutions from around the world to share teaching and research and facilitate staff and student exchanges . 
 University of São Paulo , Brazil 
 Seoul National University , South Korea 
 University of Central Florida , USA 
 North Carolina State University , USA 
 The DUFE — Surrey International Institute ( <unk> ) is an academic partnership with the Dongbei University of Finance and Economics in Dalian , China 
 University of Hong Kong 
 Nanyang Technological University 
 National Autonomous University of Mexico Head Associate Diego Luiz 
 <unk> University Vienna , Austria 
 = = Notable academics and alumni = = 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 = = = Notable academics = = = 
 Academics to work at the university include Alf Adams , pioneer of the strained quantum @-@ well laser ; Jim Al @-@ Khalili , the nuclear physicist , author and broadcaster ; Aleks <unk> , the technology journalist and broadcaster ; Sir Martin Sweeting , founder of Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd ; and Nigel Gilbert , the sociologist pioneer in the use of agent @-@ based models in the social sciences . 
 On 20 May 2009 , Andreas <unk> , a researcher at the Surrey Space Centre , was announced as a new member of the European Astronaut Corps , part of the European Space Agency and in doing so , will become the first Danish astronaut . 
 In February 2011 , terrorism and Northern Ireland expert Marie Breen Smyth , joined the Politics department , as Chair in International Relations . In March 2005 , Breen @-@ Smyth , ( then Smyth ) gave evidence to the House of Commons Northern Ireland Affairs Committee Inquiry into Dealing with Northern Ireland 's past . Another notable academic was the late translation studies scholar Peter Newmark . 
 One notable academic , who is known for his work in Nanotechnology , is Ravi Silva . Ravi Silva is the current Director of the Advanced Technology Institute at the university . In 2003 , he was awarded the Albert Einstein Silver Medal and the Javed Husain Prize by UNESCO for contributions to electronic devices . The 2011 Clifford Paterson Lecture was given by Silva for his outstanding contributions to basic science and engineering in the field of carbon nanoscience and nanotechnology . The lecture is given annually on any aspect of engineering . The General Electric Company Limited endowed the lecture in 1975 in honour of Clifford Paterson who undertook the creation of the GEC Research Laboratories in 1919 . Other notable academics who have delivered the lecture include Frank Kelly and Richard Friend , both from the University of Cambridge . 
 Surrey 's Centre for Environmental Strategy ( established by Roland Clift in 1992 ) gained a lot of attention with the publication of Prosperity Without Growth by University of Surrey academic Tim Jackson , Professor of Sustainable Development and Director of the <unk> Research Group on Lifestyles , Values and Environment . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Students ' Union = = = 
 The University of Surrey Students ' Union is the sole representative body of Surrey students to the university . It consists of a membership department ( representing students on academic and welfare issues , as well as administering sports clubs and societies ) as well as a commercial department . The organisation is non @-@ profit , meaning any takings from the Union 's four commercial outlets are invested in supporting the membership side of the business . 
 The Union was incorporated as an independent charity in July 2011 . It has a trustee board consisting of four external trustees , a member of University staff , a student trustee , and five full @-@ time student sabbatical officers ( President , VP Education , VP Welfare , VP Sports , VP Societies ) . 
 The Union hosts many Balls throughout the academic year . The Union ball is a formal event , where students are smartly dressed . There is a Winter Ball at the end of the Autumn term . The Ball season begins in the Summer term with the Colours Ball . Colours Ball is an event organised for all sports activities done at the university . It is done at the end of the sports season , where members of various sports ' clubs are honoured for their contribution to Sports at Surrey . There is a break in the middle of the season for students to sit their final examinations . After the examinations , the season continues with events from several Union societies . The season ends with the Graduation Ball at the end of the year for the graduating class . 
 = Ronald M. George = 
 Ronald Marc George ( born March 11 , 1940 ) is the retired 27th Chief Justice of California , where he headed the Supreme Court of California and the Judicial Council of California . Governor Pete Wilson appointed George as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court in 1991 and elevated George to Chief Justice in 1996 . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 Ron George grew up in Beverly Hills , the son of a Hungarian immigrant mother and French immigrant father . A 1957 graduate of Beverly Hills High School , George earned his B.A. from Princeton University in 1961 and his J.D. from Stanford Law School in 1964 . 
 Upon graduating from Stanford , George was a Deputy California Attorney General from 1965 – 1972 . As a Deputy Attorney General , he argued unsuccessfully on behalf of the State of California before the United States Supreme Court in Chimel v. California in 1969 . The following year , he again represented California before the U.S. Supreme Court , this time successfully defending the death penalty in <unk> v. California . In 1971 , he represented California as an amicus curiae in support of the successful argument of the State of Illinois in Kirby v. Illinois . 
 In 1972 , his final year as a Deputy Attorney General , George unsuccessfully argued in favor of the death penalty before the California Supreme Court in California v. Anderson but was successful in defending the conviction of Sirhan Sirhan in the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy , a U.S. Senator and 1968 presidential candidate . The ruling in California v. Anderson resulted in the dismissal of Aikens v. California as moot ; George was to have represented the State of California in this case . 
 = = Early judicial career = = 
 Governor Ronald Reagan appointed George as a Judge of the Los Angeles Municipal Court on April 20 , 1972 . George was elected to a full six @-@ year term on November 2 , 1976 . Governor Jerry Brown appointed him to the Los Angeles County Superior Court on December 23 , 1977 ; George was elected to a full six @-@ year term on November 7 , 1978 , and re @-@ elected on November 6 , 1984 . 
 As a Superior Court judge , George presided over the trial of Hillside Strangler Angelo Buono in 1981 – 1983 . George also presided over the trial of Marvin Gay , Sr. for the slaying of Gay 's son , the singer Marvin Gaye . George was lauded for his extremely unusual decision to deny the motion by Los Angeles County District Attorney 's office to dismiss all 10 counts of murder against Buono . However , his unusual decision was speculated to be a result of his earlier decision to separate crucial counts of rape and sodomy , which in themselves would serve as evidence against the defendant , from the murder charges . The prosecutors felt the evidence against Buono was so weak that it did not justify even an attempt to win at trial . Judges rarely second @-@ guess the prosecutors ' judgment on such a matter ( and George stated that he was " loath " to do so ) . However , George 's review of the evidence in the case caused him to feel so strongly that the prosecutors were in error that he did exactly that . George reassigned the case to the California Attorney General 's office , and that office successfully convicted Buono on nine of the 10 counts . Thus , it was recognized that the judge , through his action to deny the earlier motion to dismiss , had ultimately prevented a serial killer from going free . Oddly , Los Angeles County District Attorney John Van de Kamp had been elected California Attorney General in the middle of the lengthy trial , so a Van de Kamp @-@ led District Attorney 's office attempted to dismiss the unwinnable case only to have a Van de Kamp @-@ led Attorney General 's office win nine convictions in the case . 
 Governor George Deukmejian appointed him to the California Second District Court of Appeal on July 23 , 1987 . George was confirmed and sworn in on August 27 , 1987 , and was elected to a full twelve @-@ year term on November 6 , 1990 . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 Governor Pete Wilson appointed Justice Ron George to the California Supreme Court on July 29 , 1991 . George was confirmed and sworn in as an Associate Justice on September 3 , 1991 . California voters elected him to a full twelve @-@ year term on November 8 , 1994 . Wilson appointed George as the 27th Chief Justice of California on March 28 , 1996 . George was confirmed and sworn into office on May 1 , 1996 . He was elected to a full twelve @-@ year term on November 3 , 1998 , with 75 @.@ 5 % percent of the vote . 
 George was occasionally floated as a candidate for justice of the United States Supreme Court as a conservative acceptable to Democrats , such as when Democratic United States Senator Barbara Boxer suggested George as a potential nominee for the seat on the Court vacated by Sandra Day O 'Connor 's retirement . Boxer described both George and his fellow California Supreme Court Justice Kathryn <unk> , as Republicans who " reflect the spirit of Sandra Day O 'Connor 's tenure — independent and <unk> . " 
 In 2008 , Justice George authored the opinion in the Supreme Court 's 4 @-@ 3 ruling in In re Marriage Cases legalizing same @-@ sex marriage in California . Citing the court 's 1948 decision legalizing interracial marriages , George 's opinion found that sexual orientation is a protected class like race and gender , meaning that attempts to ban same @-@ sex marriage would be subject to strict scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause of the California Constitution . It was the first state high court in the country to do so . Voters would overturn the decision less than six months later by passing Proposition 8 in the November 2008 elections . However , Proposition 8 would itself be later overturned by a Federal Court in Perry v. Schwarzenegger and In Re Marriage Cases reinstated as valid constitutional law in California . 
 On July 14 , 2010 , Justice George announced he would not seek to be re @-@ elected in 2010 and would therefore retire at the end of his term : January 2 , 2011 . He was succeeded by Tani <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = 34th Street – Hudson Yards ( IRT Flushing Line ) = 
 34th Street – Hudson Yards is a New York City Subway station in Manhattan 's West Side on the IRT Flushing Line , and is the western ( railroad south ) terminus for the 7 < 7 > trains . It has two tracks and one island platform , with two levels of mezzanines : one directly above the platform and the other directly below street level . 
 The station , originally part of the city 's bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics and the failed attempt to build the West Side Stadium , was first scheduled to open in summer 2012 . When London was chosen for the Olympics , the opening date was pushed to December 2013 . In 2011 , the opening was postponed to June 2014 , pending the completion of the escalators and elevators in the station . After a series of delays involving escalator , elevator , and fire and safety systems , the station finally opened on September 13 , 2015 . The 34th Street station is the first completely new station in the New York City Subway system since 1989 , as well as the first such station funded by the government of New York City since 1950 . 
 The new construction , part of the city 's and the MTA 's master plan for the Far West Side , extended the IRT Flushing Line west from Times Square to Eleventh Avenue , then south to 34th Street . Although the West Side Stadium plan was rejected by city and state planning agencies , the 7 Subway Extension plan received approval to move ahead , as New York political leaders wanted to see the warehouse district west of Eighth Avenue and north of 34th Street redeveloped as part of the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project , and subway service was to be an essential part of that effort . The extension also serves the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center , which was expanded in 2008 – 14 and is located just half a block away from the station entrances . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 In response to the City Planning Commission 's 1993 proposal to improve access to the Manhattan Central Business District , the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) began exploring the possibility of an extension of the IRT Flushing Line to New Jersey . In 2001 , a business and civic group convened by Senator Charles Schumer argued that a westward extension of the Midtown office district could not be accomplished without a subway extension , saying : 
 The long blocks along the avenues make the walk as long as 20 minutes to the westernmost parts of the area . In addition , there is no convenient link from Grand Central Station or elsewhere on the east side of Manhattan , making the Far West Side a difficult commute for workers from parts of Manhattan , Queens , Westchester and Connecticut . 
 It was again proposed as part of the New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics . The City wanted to get funding before July 2005 , at which time the International Olympic Committee would vote on funding . However , due to shortfalls in the MTA 's Capital Program , as well as preexisting funding for the Second Avenue Subway and East Side Access , the MTA could not pay to fund the extension . After a proposal for the West Side Stadium , an Olympic stadium to be located above the nearby West Side Yard , was rejected in 2005 , New York City quickly lost their Olympic bid . 
 For then @-@ Mayor Michael Bloomberg , the extension was still a priority . His December 12 , 2006 , address to the New York League of Conservation Voters noted that in November 2006 , the government began issuing bonds to fund the extension of the 7 subway to Eleventh Avenue and 34th Street . The extension was funded with New York City funds from municipal tax increment financing ( TIF ) bond sales that are expected to be repaid with property tax revenues from future developments in areas served by the extension . The one @-@ station extension to the burgeoning Hudson Yards was originally to cost US $ 2 @.@ 1 billion , but eventually grew to US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion , excluding a US $ 500 million intermediate station at 10th Avenue that was canceled due to costs . 
 In October 2007 , the MTA awarded a $ 1 @.@ 145 billion contract to build 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) of twin @-@ tube tunnel to S3 , a joint venture of J.F. Shea , Skanska USA Civil , and Schiavone . The contract was to build tunnel from the then @-@ current 7 train terminus at Times Square westward underneath 41st Street to Eleventh Avenue , then down to 26th Street . Richard Dattner and Partners , Architects , designed the 34th Street station . After excavating the new terminal 's shell and creating the first 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of tunnel using the drill @-@ and @-@ blast method , S3 placed two tunnel @-@ boring machines ( TBMs ) in the ground to dig the remaining 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) ; as it dug , each TBM placed precast concrete liner segments to create the tunnel interior . 
 On December 21 , 2009 , the MTA said that a tunnel @-@ boring machine broke through the 34th Street station cavern wall . Both tunnel @-@ boring machines were scheduled to finish the required tunneling in the spring of 2010 . 
 In April 2011 , the MTA announced that the contract covering the tunnels , the station mezzanine and passenger platform was 85 % complete , and that the systems contract , covering mechanical and electrical systems , electric power , lighting and train tracks would be awarded by July 2011 . The systems contract was awarded in September 2011 . In May 2012 , the MTA announced that the extension , now 65 % complete , had received the installation of the first set of rails . By August 2013 , the extension was 90 % complete . 
 On December 20 , 2013 , Bloomberg took a ceremonial ride on a train to the nearly @-@ complete station , celebrating a part of his legacy as mayor , during a press tour of the extension . Train testing did not commence until June 2015 . 
 = = = Delays = = = 
 In January 2012 , the station was touted as under @-@ budget and on schedule to open in 2013 , before a series of delays plagued the project . The station , originally part of the city 's bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics , was supposed to first open as part of a two @-@ station subway extension , including Tenth Avenue station , in summer 2012 . When London was chosen for the Olympics , the opening date was pushed to December 2013 ; the Tenth Avenue station was dropped from construction plans soon after . By June 2012 , trains were still expected to run " for test purposes " by the end of 2013 . That same month , the station 's opening was delayed to June 2014 for completion of the station 's fitting @-@ out . 
 Michael Horodniceanu , chief of MTA Construction Company , told the New York Times in January 2014 that complications in the installation of the inclined elevator would likely cause a further delay of about three months , bringing the opening date to very late summer or early fall of 2014 , or to November 2014 . By March 2014 , the station 's tentative opening date was still to be in November 2014 . 
 Then , in May 2014 , the opening was delayed again to install the inclined elevators , as they had originally failed a factory test in Como Province , Italy . Officials had insisted that the Italian @-@ manufactured elevators had software and parts made from a variety of different companies in America , rather than from a single foreign company . However , the station was not delayed solely because of the elevators . The station 's opening was also pushed to later dates due to " integrated testing for fire protection " , which required the completion of all station infrastructure , including escalators , stairs , and elevators . Escalators and tunnel ventilation systems also caused the station to be delayed . At this point , the station was expected to open for service in late 2014 , but due to further elevator delays as well as problems with the extension 's ventilation systems , it was delayed in October 2014 by a further few months , to February 2015 . The opening date was originally supposed to be before 10 Hudson Yards , the first Hudson Yards building , opened in July 2015 . 
 At this point , the project was so far delayed that the MTA was offered US $ 4 @.@ 75 million in " incentive " money if the station opened by February 24 , 2015 . Software changes were made to solve the elevators ' problems , and the elevators were installed . Testing would be complete by November . Three ventilation systems were already installed by October 1 , 2014 , with two more systems to be installed by the end of the month . On November 17 , it was confirmed that February 24 would be the opening date for the station ; new signs and the southern entrance 's canopy started to be erected . However , just a month later , the MTA stated that it was unable to open the subway extension for service until April to July 2015 , due to the failure to get the inclined elevators to work properly . The MTA also cited problems with the fire alarm and security systems as another reason for the delay . In addition , Hudson Yards ' developer , The Related Companies , also needed to dig caissons for the foundations of 55 Hudson Yards , just above the subway station , and the foundation work needed to be complete before the MTA could proceed with opening the station . 
 The MTA made another announcement , on March 24 , 2015 , saying that the station 's opening would be delayed again to summer 2015 , due to more problems with the fire and security systems . In addition , third rails , public service announcement systems , ventilation fans , escalators , and elevators would need to be tested . By April 2015 , the station was complete , but unopened . On June 15 , 2015 , though , the extension was pushed back again to " before the end of the third quarter " of 2015 . A month later , the MTA confirmed that the station would be opened on or before September 13 , 2015 . The opening date was confirmed on August 28 , 2015 . By this point , MTA chairman Thomas Prendergast had stated that the myriad delays in both the new station and in the other MTA Capital Construction projects were humiliating . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The station opened on September 13 , 2015 , in a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony attended by New York City mayor Bill de Blasio , U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer , and former deputy mayor Dan <unk> . The secondary station entrance at 35th Street , as well as finishing touches within the station itself , was not expected to be completed until 2016 . 
 Just a couple of days after the station opened , though , there were some problems in and around the station , which multiple news outlets criticized . An escalator broke down on September 14 , just a day after the station 's opening . In an unrelated September 16 incident , a <unk> got injured while walking up another escalator at the 34th Street station . Earlier that day , the New York Post reported on signal problems in the brand @-@ new tunnels around the station , while riders complained about the delays on Twitter and Reddit . A Wall Street Journal commentator remarked that " it 's only a matter of months ( make that weeks ) before the gleaming station ... is pockmarked with chewing @-@ gum spots , urban scrawl and litter . " Overall , however , the station received positive acclaim during its first few days of service . In an article in several newspapers distributed by NYC Community Media , Lenore <unk> writes that many riders have praised the station 's design , its cleanliness , and its climate @-@ controlled platforms , and noted herself that the station looked and felt " as uplifting as a cathedral " . 
 In March 2016 , news sources reported that despite the station 's high cost , the station had maintenance problems : there were leaks in the ceiling of the corridors holding the escalators , the station 's bathrooms were closed because of flooding from the street , and icicles had formed on the ceiling of the station . The MTA supposedly knew about the issues for several years , even during construction . The MTA board called these issues " unacceptable " and the contractor responsible for waterproofing the station spent $ 3 million to fix them . The leaky ceiling was reportedly fixed by May 2016 . 
 = = Station layout = = 
 The approximately 1 @,@ 200 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 370 m ) station , designed by Dattner Architects , has a single wide island platform serving two tracks , as well as eight staircases between the lower mezzanine and the platform . The platform itself is 35 feet ( 11 m ) wide , which makes it much wider than many other island platforms in the subway system ; by comparison , the Chambers Street station in Lower Manhattan has platforms that are 18 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 @.@ 6 m ) wide , and the Second Avenue Subway stations are 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) wide . The platform , at 585 feet ( 178 m ) long , is among the longest in the IRT system , as well as the longest " column @-@ free " platform of any station in the system . In addition , there is a large 3 @-@ block @-@ long mezzanine , stretching between 33rd and 36th Streets , overhead . 
 The station 's extreme depth necessitates an upper ( fare ) mezzanine and a lower ( passenger ) mezzanine . A 27 @.@ 6 @-@ foot @-@ deep ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) fare mezzanine is located under the basements of 55 Hudson Yards , and escalators and an incline elevator lead to a lower mezzanine , which is 109 feet ( 33 m ) deep . The Empire Connection and North River Tunnels are both above the station . Above the lower mezzanine is a curved , oval @-@ shaped ceiling indentation that helps to cover the ventilation tubes in the station ceiling , and also acts as a skylight . The curved , cavernous ceiling of the lower mezzanine helps the station be energy @-@ efficient via the use of indirect lighting . The station has a total of five escalators from the lower mezzanine to the upper mezzanine , and four escalators from the upper mezzanine to the main entrance . There are also four elevators ; of these , two are vertical elevators — one from street level to the upper mezzanine , and one from the lower mezzanine to platform level — while the other two are incline elevators . 
 There are four escalators and two stairs from the main entrance to the upper mezzanine . Past the main entrance 's fare control , which is split into two banks , there are two parallel shafts down to the lower mezzanine ; the northern shaft carries four escalators , while the southern shaft carries one escalator and the two incline elevators . The lowermost five escalators are the system 's longest and take about one minute and thirty seconds to traverse . 
 The walls adjacent to the tracks have white tiles arranged in sets of three 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) columns of 3 tiles each . There are two @-@ tile @-@ high gray squares containing white " 34 " s in the middle of each set of columns . They are pre @-@ fabricated porcelain panels , in three @-@ by @-@ five slabs , to allow easy replacement . On the lower mezzanine , the architects used high ceilings and convex railings to make the station seem bigger , thus improving passenger flow . A tiling pattern , similar to that used on platform level , is also used on the lower mezzanine , though electronic advertisement panels are mounted on the walls at certain areas along the lower mezzanine . The cavernous station 's design has been compared to that of Washington Metro stations , although early plans for narrow , Washington Metro @-@ like platforms were scrapped . The station has also been compared to stations along London 's Jubilee Line Extension , and in fact , the station 's architecture was inspired by that of the Canary Wharf tube station on that extension . 
 The station , which is paid for with tax increment financing property taxes , is the first to be funded by the city since the Jamaica – 179th Street station on the IND Queens Boulevard Line opened in 1950 , as well as the first new unique station in the New York City Subway since the three stations on the IND 63rd Street Line opened in October 1989 . 
 = = = Entrances and exits = = = 
 The station has two entrances and exits : 
 Main Station Entrance / Ventilation Building – escalators and elevator on the west side of Hudson Boulevard between 33rd and 34th Streets 
 Secondary Station Entrance – escalators on the SW corner of Hudson Boulevard and 35th Street ; under construction as of May 2016 
 The main entrance , located at the southeast corner of the intersection of 34th Street and Hudson Boulevard , has a turtle shell @-@ shaped glass canopy above it that allows light to shine on the upper mezzanine . The elevator is located south of 34th Street in Hudson Park , while the escalator entrance is located further east , closer to the boulevard . The ventilation building will be built over by developers at a future date . The second entrance , which will contain escalator entrances is at the southwest corner of 35th Street and Hudson Boulevard East . At both of the exits , the staircases and four escalators each go down 40 feet ( 12 m ) to a fare control area , then another 80 feet ( 24 m ) to the common lower mezzanine ; the main entrance was completed by summer 2014 , while the secondary entrance is still under construction and will be completed by 2016 . 
 Both entrances will feature the glass canopy design , the first of their kind in the subway system . They are intended to stand out aesthetically . The entrances are interweaved with the Hudson Yards developments , with the main entrance wedged between 50 Hudson Yards to the east and 55 Hudson Yards to the west . The rest of the Hudson Yards development is located very close to the south of the station . Both entrances are based on a design by architect Toshiko Mori , which itself is based on the design of smaller station entrances in the Paris Métro . 
 There was provisionally an entrance inside the 3 Hudson Boulevard building , near where the secondary station building will be . However , as both entrances will use a glass canopy cover independent of any Hudson Yards structures , the 3 Hudson Boulevard entrance was shelved in lieu of a subway entrance directly to the east of 3 Hudson Boulevard . 
 In the preliminary plans , there was also going to be an entrance at the southwest corner of Eleventh Avenue and 36th Street to serve the Javits Center directly . The secondary exit would have been relocated to the north side of 34th Street west of Hudson Boulevard . 
 = = = Features = = = 
 In September 2007 , it was announced that the new station would feature platform screen doors . However , plans for screen doors in New York City Subway stations were dropped in 2012 , because of their high cost of $ 1 million per platform edge . However , even without the inclusion of platform screen doors for ventilation and safety purposes , the station — along with the new South Ferry station on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line and the three Phase 1 Second Avenue Subway stations on the Upper East Side — includes special air @-@ cooling systems that keep the temperature at 72 to 78 ° F ( 22 to 26 ° C ) year @-@ round . These systems , which already existed at Grand Central – 42nd Street station , help reduce the temperature along platforms . The station also has ventilation towers that are the largest in the New York City Subway system . 
 Unlike most stations in the system , which do not have open public restrooms , there are public restrooms in the station . The station also has a stainless steel oval @-@ shaped station agent booth . 
 Materials used in the station are expected to last at least 100 years ; include granite tile , ceramic tile , stainless steel panels on the walls , painted steel panels on the ceilings , energy @-@ efficient fluorescent lamps and LEDs , and mesh ; and are supposed to conform to New York City Transit criteria , including slip @-@ resistance . The station also uses acoustic ceiling tiles to reduce noise , in addition to using indirect lighting . The station is also compliant with National Fire Protection Association standards , despite its extreme depth , as it can be evacuated in six minutes in case of fire , and the platform can be cleared within four minutes . 
 While the station was not equipped with Wi @-@ Fi or 3G at the time of opening , it was to be installed " in the near future " . However , the station does include " countdown clocks " indicating the time until the next train , as well as Help Point emergency <unk> and in @-@ station travel planners . 
 As part of the MTA 's " Arts for Transit " program , three mosaics by Xenobia Bailey , which total approximately 2 @,@ 788 square feet ( 259 @.@ 0 m2 ) , were installed in three locations within the station . The artworks , titled <unk> Vibrations , are based on some of Bailey 's crocheting patterns , and is located in an oval @-@ shaped recession in the ceiling at the 34th Street entrance . The other two mosaics are located in the station entrances . The Hudson Park and Boulevard project is also included with the construction of the station . However , there is no artwork in the rest of the station ; one Newsweek writer observed that while the station was " very clean but also a little antiseptic " , " cool " , and " efficient " , it was also " lacking all character " with its austere design . 
 = = = = Incline elevators = = = = 
 The station is more than 10 stories deep , placing it among the system 's deepest — so deep , in fact , that the North River Tunnels and the planned Gateway Project tunnels pass over it by approximately 35 feet ( 11 m ) . The station , which is 125 feet ( 38 m ) below street level , and 108 feet ( 33 m ) below sea level in total , is the third deepest subway station in the entire system , behind 190th Street and 191st Street stations ; as a result , nine escalators were installed at the station . In addition , passenger access to the station includes a pair of custom @-@ made incline elevators , which are installed in the southernmost of the two shafts between the upper and lower mezzanines , at the 34th Street end of the station . In April 2014 , the first of two 172 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 52 m ) incline elevators was installed in the station . The elevators are relatively slow in order to encourage non @-@ disabled riders to use the escalators . These incline elevators make the station the first to be built to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ( ADA ) . 
 The 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) high incline elevators , which move at 100 feet ( 30 m ) per minute ( making an entire trip between the mezzanine levels in less than two minutes ) and are sloped at a 27 @-@ degree angle , are the first of their kind in the system . Each elevator can hold up to 15 standing passengers or five wheelchair passengers . The inclined elevators were less expensive than vertically @-@ traveling elevators , and were installed within the large escalator shaft at 34th Street . However , as the incline elevators had originally failed a factory test by its manufacturer Maspero Elevatori , there were multiple delays in opening the station , and the opening date was eventually delayed from December 2013 to late 2014 , then to mid @-@ 2015 . 
 The use of inclined elevators was intended to provide wheelchair @-@ bound patrons with a shorter , easier path to the train platform as well as to reduce tunneling costs . The two elevators were manufactured by Maspero Elevatori , in <unk> Gentile , Italy , using a controller made on Long Island , speed governors made in Ohio , and buttons and other parts in Queens . The software for the elevator was written in the United States . Maspero Elevatori assembled the elevators in Italy , and they failed an operational test there , prior to being shipped to the United States . The MTA said the manufacturer chose to use American subcontractors in place of local Italian suppliers after reading the specifications the transit agency submitted . The MTA worked with the manufacturer to try to resolve the problems caused by a very high level of customization . 
 = = = Track layout = = = 
 The tracks of this station continue south of the station , down to 25th Street , to allow trains to be stored south of the station during off @-@ peak hours ; the tail tracks are seven blocks long , enough to store two 11 @-@ car trains each , since the delivery of the <unk> train cars was to add 66 more cars to the fleet of the 7 service . There are also two diamond crossovers , one north and one south of the station . The storage tracks at this location were constructed due to the Corona Yard in Queens lacking any space to hold any more trains , and expanding the yard is very difficult due to its location next to the Flushing River . A new storage yard elsewhere would be prohibitively expensive , as it would cost hundreds of millions of dollars . 
 = = Projected ridership = = 
 The station was originally expected to be very heavily used , due to its location as " the only subway line serving the area west of Ninth Avenue below 59th Street " , as well as its status as the main subway station for the Hudson Yards area and the closest station to the busy Javits Center . Originally , the station was projected to serve 27 @,@ 000 passengers per day , or about 9 @.@ 855 million passengers per year , when it first opened . After the Hudson Yards is complete , ridership was to grow very heavily , with an average of 35 @,@ 000 people per hour using the station at its peak by 2020 . By September 2015 , though , projections had increased to a proposed ridership of 32 @,@ 000 people per hour . The projected 2025 ridership of 200 @,@ 000 daily riders is more than at Times Square station , the station with the most ridership as of 2013 with 197 @,@ 696 riders a day . 
 Projections predict that during the morning rush hour alone , 26 @,@ 000 passengers will be leaving the station , while 15 @,@ 000 will be simultaneously entering the station . This will make it the busiest subway station in New York City that is not a transfer station . The station is built to handle an even higher capacity of 40 @,@ 000 passengers per hour during peak times and events at the Javits Center . The high projected ridership is despite the fact that it was once described as a station on an " extension to nowhere " , given the relative sparseness of the area in 2007 . As late as 2011 , it was thought that the city was wasting money on the station because , at the time , Hudson Yards had not yet been finalized . 
 It was reported that only 7 @,@ 000 daily riders entered the station between September 13 – 22 , 2015 , drastically below the MTA 's projected ridership of 32 @,@ 000 passengers upon the station 's opening . This was attributed to incompleteness of developments in the area , as well as an unopened entrance to the High Line Park , which is nearby . In late October 2015 , AM New York found that the average daily ridership was even lower , at only 5 @,@ 900 passengers per day , except for during the 2015 New York Comic Con on October 8 – 11 , when average daily ridership reached 18 @,@ 300 daily riders . The station 's official ridership for 2015 was 692 @,@ 165 , amounting to 2 @,@ 064 riders on an average weekday ; this made 34th Street – Hudson Yards the 392nd busiest station in the city out of 422 total stations . 
 = = Effects = = 
 The warehouse district west of Eighth Avenue and north of 34th Street was rezoned in 2005 into a commercial and residential area , and the station is part of an effort to accelerate development in the area . The reportedly " transformative " subway extension to 34th Street spurred development in the Hudson Yards area by providing transit access for future tenants of the Hudson Yards development , and by keeping up with the MTA 's goal to " ensure that all new residential and commercial growth in the MTA region between 2008 and 2030 is concentrated within a half @-@ mile of an MTA station " . In addition to providing transit access to residents and tenants of nearby neighborhoods , the construction of the station was expected to bolster the area 's commercial growth and , in turn , creating up to 50 @,@ 000 jobs in the area . 
 Mitchell Moss , director of New York University 's Rudin Center for Transportation Policy & Management , states that the development of Hudson Yards , and the related subway extension , were among the benefits of the 2012 Olympic bid , saying that " the # 7 Extension will be one of the largest expansions of the New York City transit system in decades and one of the most significant in terms of its potential impact . " Moss says that redevelopment of the west side was a direct result of the new subway station 's construction . Kenneth T. Jackson , editor of The Encyclopedia of New York City , describes the extension as a " very important " one . 
 Since the station started construction , land prices in the immediate area have nearly doubled . Interest in the surrounding area has also grown , as many development companies are going to Hudson Yards to buy air rights ; for instance Related Companies , already the developer of Hudson Yards , entered a contract to buy a $ 75 million @-@ plus parcel of land between 35th and 36th Streets and between Eleventh Avenue and Hudson Boulevard , as well as land over a McDonald 's to build 50 Hudson Yards . Also as a result of the subway extension , three tenants have already been found for 10 Hudson Yards , and Citigroup is considering moving to the area . Most importantly , however , the $ 750 million platform supporting much of Hudson Yards was built starting in January 2013 ; subway construction for a station that could potentially carry up to 27 @,@ 000 daily passengers necessitated the construction of more buildings , as 70 % of tenants are expected to come to Hudson Yards via the 7 subway extension . Additionally , new restaurants , luxury condominiums , and stores have appeared near the station and along the extension 's route , and residential prices along the extension have also increased . A construction boom has occurred in the greater Hudson Yards area as well . 
 The station is described by the MTA as the centerpiece of the Hudson Park and Boulevard , as well as of the entire Hudson Yards project , which developers say could not have been started without the 7 subway extension . Horodniceanu stated that " this new , modern station will be the lifeline of Manhattan 's newest neighborhood . It will make it possible for thousands of residents , employees and visitors to get to Hudson Yards easily and quickly . Without the extension , this new development would not have been possible . " The completion of the High Line and the Hudson Boulevard , as well as the Javits Center renovation , are boosting development in the area as well . Although Hudson Yards was not finished at the time of the station 's opening , the High Line and the Javits Center are popular destinations for station patrons . 
 = <unk> Shahin = 
 <unk> Shahin Saadeh al @-@ <unk> ( also spelled <unk> <unk> <unk> Al <unk> , given name also spelled <unk> or <unk> ) ( 1815 – 1895 ) was a Maronite <unk> and peasant leader from Mount Lebanon . He led a peasants ' revolt in the area of Keserwan in 1859 , during which he drove out the area 's Maronite nobility , the feudal Khazen lords , and declared a peasants ' republic . While he had a reputation as a ruffian and provocateur among members of the Maronite clergy and European consuls , Shahin became a popular figure among Christian commoners , many of whom considered him the guardian of their interests , a view which Shahin promoted . 
 Following his victory in Keserwan , Shahin and his fighters launched intermittent raids against villages in nearby regions , such as Jubail and Matn , often in the name of defending the rights of local Christians . The assaults and their repercussions served as catalysts of the 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war , particularly the battle of Beit <unk> between local Maronites and Druze , in which Shahin was a principal belligerent . Although he claimed he could raise an army of 50 @,@ 000 to combat the forces of the Druze feudal lords , he did not participate further in the war . Following the war 's end , he was defeated by Youssef Karam in a struggle over political influence in Maronite affairs . Shahin subsequently relinquished his republic and worked in the judiciary of his home village , Rayfoun . 
 = = Early life and character = = 
 According to historian Elizabeth Thompson , there are sparse biographical details available about Shahin . He was born to a Maronite Christian family in the village of Rayfoun in the Keserwan district of Mount Lebanon in 1815 . According to Thompson , Shahin may have been literate as indicated by his early career as an artisan and an entrepreneur , while Lebanese historian Kamal Salibi describes him as " half @-@ literate " . Prior to leading the 1859 peasant revolt in Keserwan , Shahin was a blacksmith and a <unk> who transported goods throughout Keserwan . 
 Shahin was tall and of muscular build . According to Thompson , Shahin " was more a man of spoken word than the pen , famous for powerful , sermon @-@ like speeches at village meetings " , and for his violent temper , according to Salibi . He acted as a local shaykh <unk> ( leader of young men ) , a title that carried honor and typically denoted a village strongman who derived power from his following of armed men . He was admired and respected by the peasants of Keserwan , some of whom considered him their " redeemer " . According to a local chronicler , residents " prepared grand receptions for him amid joy and celebrations " when he entered a local village . Various European diplomats described him as a " ruffian of despicable character " and as dishonest , while some clergymen also regarded him as deceitful . 
 = = Leadership of peasants ' revolt = = 
 = = = Uprising in Keserwan = = = 
 Peasant anger in Keserwan had been building since the mid @-@ 19th century , due to a number of factors , including the burdens of corvée ( unpaid labor for a landlord ) that had been imposed during the rule of Emir Bashir Shihab II , general economic hardship , and the decreasing availability of land . The Maronite Khazen family traditionally served as the sheikhs ( chiefs ) of Keserwan , although their power had been significantly diminished during Emir Bashir 's rule . The Khazens opposed the creation of the " Double <unk> " in Mount Lebanon in the 1840s , which divided Mount Lebanon into Druze and Christian @-@ run sectors , and were incensed at the appointment of a sheikh from the mixed Druze @-@ Christian Abu 'l Lama family as the qaimaqam ( deputy governor ) of the Maronite section of the <unk> . The Khazens feared that such an appointment would formally subordinate them to the Abu 'l Lama sheikhs . Following the Abu 'l Lama sheikh 's death in 1854 , his successor Bashir Ahmad Abu 'l Lama attempted to further reduce the Khazens ' influence , prompting the Khazens to stir the peasants to revolt against Bashir Ahmad . The revolt against Bashir Ahmad soon turned against the Khazen sheikhs and their feudal allies . The peasant subjects of the Khazen sheikhs had long been wary of their rule due to the excessive taxes they imposed as well as the additional gifts the peasants were virtually obligated to give the sheikhs , which many peasants considered humiliating . 
 In early 1858 , a group of peasants from Keserwan lodged a formal complaint against the Khazens to Khurshid Pasha , the Ottoman governor of Beirut . Later , in March 1858 , the Khazens held a summit for the people of Keserwan to garner support for their nomination of a new qaimaqam . Instead , the peasants participating in the summit voiced their dissent against the Khazens and in October , several villages in Keserwan entered into an alliance against the Khazen sheikhs . Shahin was chosen by this alliance of peasants as their leader in December , and was declared the <unk> <unk> ( first delegate ) . 
 In January 1859 , Shahin intensified the armed revolt against the Khazen sheikhs and with 800 of his peasant fighters , he besieged the Khazens during a summit they were holding in <unk> . The siege prompted the sheikhs to flee the village , and the peasants under Shahin subsequently plundered the Khazens ' estates . Shahin and his men proceeded to attack the Khazens in other villages with little blood spilled in the process , with the exception of the wife and daughter of a Khazen sheikh who were killed in <unk> in July during a raid on their home by the peasants . The Maronite patriarch , Paul Peter Massad , condemned their killing as a " horrific crime " . Silk and wheat warehouses belonging to the sheikhs were plundered and the goods were redistributed among the peasants of Keserwan . By July , the Khazens had been routed and between 500 and 600 family members had fled to Beirut in an impoverished state . Shahin broadened the peasants ' main demands of tax relief and refunds for the illegal payments they had previously paid to the Khazen sheikhs to also include political and legal reforms . Shahin cited the Edict of Gülhane , which mandated equality for all Ottoman citizens . 
 = = = Establishment of republic = = = 
 Following his victory over the Khazen sheikhs , Shahin and the peasants of Keserwan formed a government , with Shahin declaring a <unk> ( republic ) . He became known as the <unk> ' <unk> ( general delegate ) , and in the fall of 1859 moved the headquarters of the rebellion from the coastal village of Zouk Mikael to his hometown of Rayfoun in the mountains . Although revolts were relatively commonplace in Mount Lebanon , the ousting of a noble family by their peasant subjects was unprecedented . Shahin 's government consisted of a 100 @-@ member council made up of representatives from the villages of Keserwan . Over half of the representatives were peasants who did not own land , 32 were relatively well @-@ to @-@ do farmers , ten were clergymen and three were merchants or lenders . Shahin , who by this point oversaw a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong militia , exercised power by seizing arms , ensured the upholding of the law and established security on the roads . He disciplined dissidents suspected of betraying the government and issued decrees in the name of the public . He also entered into negotiations with the Khazen sheikhs , but they reached a stalemate . 
 The main villages that supported Shahin 's government were Rayfoun , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> . The representatives of these villages were able to gain the solidarity of other villages by persuading their inhabitants through both peaceful and coercive means that as Christians they were all a part of single community with a united purpose . The leaders of some villages , such as those of <unk> , <unk> , Ghazir and <unk> opposed Shahin and his revolt . Shahin 's popularity among the Christian peasants of Mount Lebanon grew as he came to be viewed as their savior from both the Druze nobles and the traditional Maronite elites . This reputation was further solidified after Shahin 's men backed Christian residents in a clash with Druze residents in the mixed village of Beit Meri in Matn in August 1859 . 
 The Khazens demanded the restoration of their rule in Keserwan and lodged complaints to the Ottoman government about property stolen or damaged by the peasantry . The Ottomans launched an investigation in Keserwan , but in their interviews with the peasants , all claimed that they were unaware of looting and other crimes , while representatives of Shahin denied that they were rebels , insisting that they only sought the implementation of the Tanzimat reforms and the restoration of law and order . In petitions to the Maronite Patriarchate , the peasants demanded compensation by the Khazens for taxes that were illegally extorted from them , an abolition to the traditional gift @-@ giving required of the peasants , the abolition of marriage taxes levied by the Khazens and an end to the practice of beating peasants , among other demands . Shahin nominally recognized the Maronite Patriarchate as the ultimate arbiter of disputes , but consistently urged them to honor their obligations to the " ahali " ( commoners ) . In one incident he or his men fired shots toward the patriarch 's headquarters in <unk> for hosting a number of Khazens who were seeking refuge there . In March 1859 , Shahin rebuffed the church 's request to make an agreement with the Khazen sheikhs , citing the need to first " consult with all the ahali and all the villages " . 
 Shahin 's rise generally confused the Ottoman government because Shahin used the Tanzimat to legitimize his revolt . The Ottomans did not consider the religious equality called for by the Tanzimat reforms to translate into class equality , which is how Shahin interpreted it . Moreover , the Ottomans did not countenance that a semi @-@ literate Arabic @-@ speaking peasant from a rural region such as Keserwan would serve as a representative of the Tanzimat . They reacted to Shahin 's revolt negatively , although the provincial Ottoman authorities of Beirut generally felt powerless to act against the peasant rebels due to a lack of funds and forces on the ground . Khurshid Pasha sympathized more with the Khazen sheikhs and in a letter to the Patriarchate accused Shahin of using " deceit to lead astray the minds of the people and to seduce them into following his evil ways " . The principal focus of the Ottoman authorities in Lebanon was containing Shahin 's revolt . However , later historians of Lebanon accused Khurshid Pasha of at least tacitly supporting Shahin in order to break communal solidarity . 
 Khurshid Pasha dispatched Emir Yusuf Ali Murad , a Maronite sheikh from the Abu 'l Lama family , to rein in peasant rebels in Jubail , but Shahin sent a letter warning Emir Yusuf not to " intervene in the affairs " of Jubail because the " Christians of Jubail were united with the ahali of Keserwan " and claimed that " all the Christians of Syria have made common cause " . He condemned Emir Yusuf for aligning himself with the ousted sheikhs and his " Druze relatives " and accused him of attempting to " subjugate the Christians after we achieved our [ freedom ] " . He threatened Emir Yusuf to " return without delay " and that if he " desires a fight , we are more eager than you , and we are not afraid " . Shahin 's confidence in the support he received from the Christian peasantry of Keserwan and other parts of Mount Lebanon and his challenge to Emir Yusuf through a populist sectarian approach alarmed the Maronite elites , the church and the Ottoman authorities . 
 In response to a Maronite priest 's complaints about harassment by Shia Muslims against Christians , Shahin 's men attacked and plundered Shia villages and travelers in Jubail and demanded that Shia villages convert to Christianity to avoid assault . The Shia residents of Jubail protested these assaults in June 1859 . While Shahin 's actions further frustrated the local elites , Christian , Muslim and Druze alike , his reputation as the defender of Christian rights was bolstered at the popular level . 
 = = Civil war in Mount Lebanon = = 
 The increased assertiveness of Maronite peasants as a result of Shahin 's revolt and confidence in their demographic majority in Mount Lebanon alarmed Druze feudal lords , who began arming their peasant fighters . Likewise , Maronite peasants , who despite their general confidence were still wary of growing Muslim hostility toward Christians in Ottoman Syria , were also being armed , in particular by Maronite bishop <unk> Aoun . Tensions spilled into violence , and between March and May 1860 , several retaliatory tit @-@ for @-@ tat killings and attacks of sectarian nature between Druzes and Christians had been occurring throughout Mount Lebanon and its immediate environs . In late May , Shahin and some 300 of his men entered the village of <unk> in the mixed Druze @-@ Maronite Matn district to seize silk owned by a noble family of Keserwan . However , instead of returning to Rayfoun , they proceeded to enter the nearby Maronite village of Antelias . Shahin 's incursion into Antelias was considered a provocation by the Druze who feared that the presence of Shahin 's fighters in that village threatened the Druze residents of Matn . Many Christians in turn viewed the deployment of Khurshid Pasha 's troops in <unk> on 26 May as a provocation because they suspected Khurshid Pasha of being allied with the Druze and that this was the signal for the beginning of the Druze counter @-@ attack . Shahin 's stated purpose for entering Antelias was to protect the Christian Shihab emirs based in the village of Baabda . 
 The Shihab emirs requested Shahin and his men withdraw from Baabda 's vicinity to avoid conflict . However , on 29 May , clashes occurred in the Matn village of Beit <unk> between its Druze and Christian residents , which led to the participation of their respective coreligionists from other villages in the vicinity . By 30 May , the Druze had defeated the Keserwan fighters in Beit Meri . Fighting subsequently spread throughout Matn , with 35 – 40 Christian villages being burned . According to Lebanese historian Leila <unk> <unk> , the Keserwan fighters proved to be undisciplined and ineffective against the more experienced , unified and better organized Druze forces . 
 The fighting in Matn spread throughout Mount Lebanon and its surrounding area , becoming a civil war mainly between the Druze and the Christians , which later spilled over into other parts of Syria . Shahin claimed that he could raise 50 @,@ 000 fighters to fight the Druze , and Christians from areas outside of Keserwan appealed for his intervention . However , when his men were halted by Ottoman forces in Matn , Shahin and other Maronite militia leaders largely restricted their operations to guarding their areas of origin . In mid @-@ June , when Zahle , the last Christian stronghold , was besieged by the Druze , Shahin did not send reinforcements and the town fell . This all but consolidated a Druze victory in Mount Lebanon . On 29 July , under pressure from Bishop Aoun , Shahin agreed to openly declare his obedience to the Ottoman sultan . Although the peasants ' revolt had not been directly against the Ottoman state , Shahin 's declaration served as a virtual repudiation of the revolt 's legitimacy . In his declaration , Shahin asserted that he was forced to revolt by the treacherous " men of corruption " . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 French @-@ led international intervention ended the civil war and order was restored by 1861 . Shahin 's movement was in a precarious state in the war 's aftermath ; Shahin could not financially support his impoverished peasant partisans , the Maronite clergy was disillusioned with him , and Ottoman officialdom and the local nobility were arrayed against him . The Ottomans , the clergy and the nobility resolved to bring an end to Shahin 's movement because it represented the last obstacle to their political reorganization of Mount Lebanon into the Mount Lebanon <unk> . Shahin threatened to convert to Protestantism together with his partisans if the Khazen sheikhs were restored to Keserwan , while Patriarch Massad of the Maronite Church was prepared to excommunicate Shahin and his supporters . 
 Meanwhile , Youssef Karam , a Maronite leader from <unk> who acquired a degree of popularity during the war and backing from the Maronite Patriarchate and the French government , was appointed acting qaimaqam of the Christian areas of Mount Lebanon by Fuad Pasha after the war 's end . Shahin opposed Karam , who in a bid to reconcile the Maronite community , issued orders directed to the peasants of Keserwan to restore properties seized from the Khazens and compensate the latter for their losses . Shahin was backed by Emir Majid Shihab , who sought to replace Karam as qaimaqam . Tensions between Shahin and Karam in Keserwan in late March 1861 culminated in a battle between their forces in an area between Rayfoun and ' <unk> , in which Shahin was defeated and fled . Karam subsequently raided Shahin 's home in Rayfoun , imprisoned some of Shahin 's supporters and posted a number of his own troops in villages that supported Shahin 's movement . 
 Fuad Pasha advised Karam to pursue and capture Shahin , while the British consul communicated his desire to see Karam restore the Khazens to their former position in Keserwan . Shahin ultimately reconciled with Karam on 12 April under the mediation of the French general Charles de Beaufort . Shahin agreed to submit to the <unk> 's authority without conditions . Later in 1861 , Shahin relinquished the republic that he established in Keserwan . Subsequent to his retirement from politics , Shahin served as a judicial official in Rayfoun . There , in 1895 , he died in relative obscurity . He left no memoirs about his role in the civil war . 
 = Treehouse of Horror IV = 
 " Treehouse of Horror IV " ( originally known as " The Simpsons Halloween Special IV " ) is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season and the fourth episode in the Treehouse of Horror series of Halloween specials . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 28 , 1993 , and features three short stories called " The Devil and Homer Simpson " , " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " , and " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " . The episode was directed by David Silverman and co @-@ written by Conan O 'Brien , Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein , Greg Daniels , Dan McGrath , and Bill Canterbury . 
 In " The Devil and Homer Simpson " , Homer Simpson announces he would sell his soul for a doughnut , and the Devil appears to make a deal with Homer . Homer tries to outsmart the Devil by not finishing the doughnut but eventually eats it and is sent to Hell . A trial is held between Homer and the Devil to determine the rightful owner of Homer 's soul . In " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " , while riding the bus to school , Bart Simpson believes he sees a gremlin taking apart the bus piece by piece . Nobody sees it except for Bart , so he tries to remove it on his own . In " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " , Mr. Burns is a vampire and Bart falls victim to his bite . Lisa and the rest of the family go to Burns ' castle to kill Burns so Bart can return to normal . 
 As with the rest of the Halloween specials , the episode is considered non @-@ canon and falls outside of the show 's regular continuity . The episode makes cultural references to television series such as The Twilight Zone , Night Gallery , and Peanuts . References are also made to films such as Bram Stoker 's Dracula and The Lost Boys . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 5 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart introduces each of the three segments by walking through a gallery of paintings and each time choosing one of them as the focus of his story . 
 = = = The Devil and Homer Simpson = = = 
 In a parody of The Devil and Daniel Webster , at work , Homer states that he would sell his soul for a doughnut after finding that Lenny and Carl took all the doughnuts and threw them at an old man ( Abe Simpson ) " for kicks " . The Devil , revealed to be Ned Flanders , appears and offers Homer a contract to seal the deal . However , before Homer finishes the doughnut , he realizes that Ned will not be able to have his soul if he does not eat all of the doughnut and keeps the final piece in the refrigerator . Unfortunately , while half @-@ asleep and looking for a midnight snack , he eats the final piece of the " forbidden donut " , and Ned instantly reappears to take possession of Homer 's soul . Marge and Lisa plead with Ned , finally getting him to agree to hold a trial the next day . Until then , Homer is sent to spend the rest of the day being punished in Hell . At the stroke of twelve midnight , Ned brings Homer back to the Simpson household for his trial . Then , when the Simpsons ' lawyer , Lionel Hutz , flees after ruining his case , Marge makes a final effort to save Homer by displaying a photo from their wedding day . On the back of the photo , Homer has written that , in return for Marge giving him her hand in marriage , he pledges his soul to her forever ; therefore , it was not his property to sell at the time of his deal with Ned . The jury rules in favor of the Simpsons and the presiding judge dismisses the case . Enraged , the Devil leaves , but not before he turns Homer 's head into a doughnut . 
 = = = Terror at 5 ½ Feet = = = 
 In a parody of the Twilight Zone episode , " Nightmare at 20 @,@ 000 Feet " , after having a nightmare in which he is killed in a bus crash , Bart rides the bus to school one rainy morning . He panics when he sees a gremlin on the side of the bus loosening the lug nuts on one of the wheels . Bart unsuccessfully tries to convince the other passengers of the danger . In desperation , Bart climbs halfway out the window to scare off the gremlin with an emergency flare . The gremlin catches fire and falls from the bus , but is found by Ned Flanders , who decides to adopt the creature . When the bus finally stops , everyone sees the obvious damage , but Bart is still sent away to an insane asylum for the rest of his life for his disruptive behavior . Bart is relieved as he is finally able to rest , but the gremlin appears in the back window of the ambulance , holding Flanders ' decapitated ( yet still living ) head , which makes Bart scream in terror . 
 = = = Bart Simpson 's Dracula = = = 
 In a parody of Bram Stoker 's Dracula , after a news story about several vampire attacks , Lisa begins to suspect that Mr. Burns is a vampire , but the rest of the family dismisses her concerns . The family is invited to Burns ' castle in Pennsylvania , where Bart and Lisa discover a secret staircase descending to an eerie basement filled with coffins . As they investigate , vampires emerge from the coffins and encircle them . Lisa escapes , but Bart activates the " Super Fun Happy Slide " , causing him to be captured and get bitten by Burns . Bart returns to the table with Burns , who tells him to take a seat . Bart is very pale and is behaving oddly , but these factors get little attention by the family . Later that night , Lisa is awakened by a now undead Bart and his vampire friends . When Bart is about to bite Lisa , Homer and Marge interrupt and discover that Bart is a vampire . Lisa claims that the only way to restore him is to kill the head vampire , Mr. Burns . The family returns to the Burns ' mansion , where Homer drives a stake through Burns ' heart . Unfortunately , despite Burns ' death , Bart still remains a vampire . To make things worse , Lisa discovers that everyone in the Simpson family except for herself is a vampire , and that the true head vampire is inexplicably Marge , not Mr. Burns . With this revelation , the whole entire family swoops in on Lisa , only to stop and wish everyone a happy Halloween . Then , they all harmonize " Hark the Herald Angels Sing " , parodying A Charlie Brown Christmas . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Treehouse of Horror IV " was directed by David Silverman and co @-@ written by Conan O 'Brien , Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein , Greg Daniels , Dan McGrath , and Bill Canterbury . It is the fourth episode of the annual Treehouse of Horror Halloween specials . As with the rest of the Halloween specials , the episode is considered non @-@ canon and falls outside of the show 's regular continuity . O 'Brien worked on the " wraparounds " of Bart introducing each segment to make sure that they " pulled " the episode together . The wraparounds are based on Rod Serling 's television series Night Gallery , in which Serling appears at an art gallery and introduces each episode by unveiling paintings depicting the stories . Executive producer James L. Brooks loved the show , so it was " great fun " for him to do the parody . Show runner David Mirkin thought the Treehouse of Horror episodes were the hardest episodes to do because the staff had to fit in all three stories in only 22 minutes . Mirkin said , " Things had to happen really fast . They 're really just crammed with jokes and story beats and everything . " 
 The first segment , " The Devil and Homer Simpson " , was written by Daniels and McGrath . The first time Devil Flanders appears , he looks the same as the devil Chernabog from the 1940 Walt Disney produced film Fantasia ; Silverman particularly admired the animation in that sequence . Oakley loved the idea of Flanders being the Devil because he is the one you would least expect . He also thought Harry Shearer did a good job of playing Flanders in a much darker way , while remaining very true to the character . Many scenes had to be cut to shorten the segment , including one that showed Homer 's severed head being used as a bowling ball by a demon in hell . This scene later appeared in the clip show episode " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " , which aired in the show 's seventh season . 
 The second segment , " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " , was written by Oakley and Weinstein . It was inspired by an episode of The Twilight Zone called " Nightmare at 20 @,@ 000 Feet " , in which William Shatner 's character is inside an airplane watching a gremlin tear apart the wing . Silverman watched the episode to get inspiration for Bart 's facial expressions . Oakley said there was a lot of work put into the design of the gremlin in " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " to make him scary " within The Simpsons universe " . Mirkin said he felt the gremlin was well @-@ done because he looked scary and " yet it looks like a completely organic Simpsons character " . Üter , a character from Germany , makes his first appearance on the show in this segment ; he was conceived as a one @-@ time joke , but reappeared in later episodes because Mirkin felt he was " such a perfect stereotype " . 
 The third segment , " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " , was written by Canterbury . It is based on Francis Ford Coppola 's film Bram Stoker 's Dracula . Mirkin was a big fan of the film and pushed for a segment about vampires inspired by the movie . He liked the final result and felt Mr. Burns was perfect in the role as Dracula . Dracula and his castle was designed by Silverman . Mirkin , a " big " Peanuts fan , came up with the idea for the ending of " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The wraparound segments are a reference to Rod Serling 's television series Night Gallery . " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " is a parody of The Twilight Zone episode " Nightmare at 20 @,@ 000 Feet " . The title and a majority of the plot of " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " is a parody of the Francis Ford Coppola film Bram Stoker 's Dracula . The ending of " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " is a reference to A Charlie Brown Christmas . The title " The Devil and Homer Simpson " is a reference to the short story " The Devil and Daniel Webster " in which a farmer sells his soul for prosperity but is then defended in court against the Devil with a jury of the Devil 's choosing . The demon who is feeding Homer donuts says : " I don 't understand it . James Coco went mad in fifteen minutes ! " James Coco was a character actor known in the 1970s ... He parodied the Belgian sleuth Hercule Poirot , penned by Agatha Christie . In the movie , James Coco ’ s character throws a volley of subtle food jokes . In his last years , Coco received attention for his culinary talents and best @-@ selling cookbooks . The James Coco Diet , an educational book which included chapters on menu planning and behavior modification as well as choice recipes ) , was just one that he promoted on the talk show circuit . It is probably not a coincidence that he often played characters with extreme food issues . The jury at Homer 's trial consists of John Wilkes Booth , Lizzie Borden , John Dillinger , Blackbeard , Benedict Arnold , the starting lineup of the 1976 Philadelphia Flyers , and Richard Nixon . The first time the Devil appears , he resembles the demon Chernabog from the Walt Disney film Fantasia , especially after Homer discovers a technicality and starts taunting the Devil that he 's " smarter than the devil " , until the Devil turns into the Chernabog @-@ esque demon and glares at him before disappearing . The scene in Hell where Homer is fed all the doughnuts in the world , and asks for more , is a direct parody of the cartoon Pigs is Pigs , in which a generic pig character ( a Porky Pig @-@ esque character ) known for being a glutton is taken in by a scientist and forced to eat all the food in the world . At Mr. Burns ' castle , Lisa notices a tome resting on a stand in the basement . She runs over and reads the title : " Yes , I Am a Vampire , by Monty Burns . Foreword by Steve Allen , " a reference to American actor Steve Allen . Shortly after she finds the tome , she makes allusions to <unk> and Curly Howard of the Three Stooges , mistaken Bart 's fearful attempts at getting her attention as impressions of the two . In " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " , Bart is seen floating outside Lisa 's bedroom window . This is a parody of The Lost Boys as well as Stephen King 's novel Salem 's Lot . The family 's plan to kill the head vampire is also a reference to both the film and novel . In particular , the twist revelation that Burns is not the head vampire is also a reference to the twist ending of The Lost Boys . The closing credits of the episode features a version of the Simpsons theme that is a combination of the instruments used in The Munsters theme song and the harpsichord and clicking from the Addams Family theme song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Treehouse of Horror IV " finished 17th in the ratings for the week of October 25 to October 31 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 5 , translating to 13 @.@ 6 million households . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said the episode included many notable sequences and was " probably the best " <unk> of Horror episode . They particularly liked the scenes in Hell where Homer is punished by the Devil , and Chief Wiggum 's attempts to deal with Dracula ( whom he thinks is a mummy ) in the " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " segment by ordering the Egyptian wing of the Springfield museum to be destroyed . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson thought " Terror at 5 ½ Feet " was the best segment of the episode . Jacobson praised " The Devil and Homer Simpson " as clever funny , and described " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " as " easily the least effective " , claiming it , " presents some good moments but never quite takes flight " . Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode an A grade and called it " one of the very best " Halloween specials , although said " Treehouse of Horror V " was better . Central Michigan Life 's John Thorpe named it the tenth best episode of the series , and wrote : " The best part comes when Homer decides not to eat the last part of the doughnut , thus saving him from hell . Hilarious . " DVD Talk 's Bill Gibron gave the episode a 4 out of 5 score . 
 Kim <unk> of Yakima Herald @-@ Republic named " Treehouse of Horror IV " her " all @-@ time favorite " episode . She praised the parodies of The Twilight Zone and A Charlie Brown Christmas . The episode 's reference to Bram Stoker 's Dracula was named the 32nd greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 = Liquid fly @-@ back booster = 
 Liquid Fly @-@ back Booster ( LFBB ) is a cancelled German Aerospace Center 's ( DLR 's ) project to develop a reusable liquid rocket booster for Ariane 5 in order to significantly reduce a high cost of space transportation and increase environmental friendliness . LFBB would replace existing solid rocket boosters , providing main thrust during the liftoff . Once separated , two winged boosters would perform an atmospheric entry , fly back autonomously to the French Guiana , and land horizontally on the airport like an airplane . 
 Additionally a family of derivative launch vehicles was proposed in order to take an advantage of economies of scale , further reducing launch costs . These derivatives include a Reusable First Stage in a class of small and medium size launch vehicles like Vega and Arianespace Soyuz , the Super @-@ Heavy Lift Launcher capable of lifting nearly 70 tonnes to the orbit , and a Two @-@ Stage @-@ To @-@ Orbit system operating a dedicated reusable orbiter . 
 German Aerospace Center studied Liquid Fly @-@ back Boosters as a part of future launcher research program from 1999 to 2004 . After the cancellation of the project , publications at DLR continued until 2009 . 
 = = Development = = 
 The German Aerospace Center ( DLR ) studied potential future launch vehicles of the European Union under the <unk> Systeme und <unk> für <unk> ( ASTRA ; English : Systems and Technologies for Space Transportation Applications ) programme from 1999 to 2005 , with additional studies continuing until 2009 . The LFBB design was one of two projects within the ASTRA program , the other being Phoenix RLV . During development , scale models were constructed for testing various configurations in DLR 's supersonic <unk> <unk> Köln ( <unk> ; English : <unk> measuring section at Cologne ) and in their <unk> 2 Köln ( <unk> ; English : Hypersonic wind canal at Cologne ) wind tunnels . The preliminary mechanical design of other major elements was done by the companies EADS Space Transportation and MAN . 
 The advantages of reusable boosters include simplicity from using only one type of fuel , environmental friendliness , and lower reoccurring costs . Studies concluded that reusable fly @-@ back boosters would be the most affordable and the least risky way for European space launch systems to start becoming reusable . These fly @-@ back boosters had the potential to reduce launch costs . However , when other projects , such as Space Shuttle or <unk> , undertook this objective , they failed to meet their goals . Supporting technologies needed for LFBB construction can be developed within 10 years , and additional launchers can be developed based on fly @-@ back boosters to minimise costs and provide maintenance synergy across multiple classes of launch vehicles . Eventually , the hardware grew too large and the LFBB project was scrapped , with one member of the French space agency ( <unk> ) remarking : 
 The thing that shocked me was that at the beginning , this reusable flyback booster was just a cylinder with engines and little wings , just a turbo fan in the back . And three years later these were complete <unk> in terms of size with four engines in each of them . 
 = = Description = = 
 The overall concept of the liquid boosters in the LFBB programme was to retain the Ariane 5 's core and upper stages , along with the payload fairings , and replace its solid rocket boosters ( EAP <unk> , from French <unk> d ’ <unk> à Poudre ) with reusable liquid rocket boosters . These boosters would provide the main thrust during take @-@ off . After separation , they would return to a spaceport in French Guiana for landing . This vertical take @-@ off , horizontal landing ( <unk> ) mode of operation would allow liquid fly @-@ back boosters to continue operating from the Guiana Space Centre , thus avoiding any major changes to the ascend profile of Ariane 5 . Launch vehicle payload performance of the Cryogenic Evolution type @-@ A ( ECA ) variant would increase from 10 @,@ 500 kg ( 23 @,@ 100 lb ) to 12 @,@ 300 kg ( 27 @,@ 100 lb ) . 
 In the reference design , each LFBB consists of three engines installed in a circular arrangement at the aft of the vehicle . Each engine is a Vulcain engine with reduced expansion ratio . An additional three turbofan air @-@ breathing engines , installed in the nose section , provide power for fly @-@ back . The fuselage is 41 m ( 135 ft ) long , with an outer tank diameter of 5 @.@ 45 m ( 17 @.@ 9 ft ) , specifically designed to match the existing Ariane 5 core stage and to reduce manufacturing costs . A low @-@ wing V @-@ tail canard configuration was selected , with a wingspan of approximately 21 m ( 69 ft ) and an area of 115 m2 ( 1 @,@ 240 sq ft ) . The aerofoil was based on a transonic profile from the Royal Aircraft Establishment ( RAE <unk> ) . The gross lift @-@ off mass ( <unk> ) of each booster is 222 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 245 @.@ 3 short tons ) , with 54 tonnes ( 60 short tons ) upon separation and 46 @.@ 2 tonnes ( 50 @.@ 9 short tons ) dry mass . In comparison , the <unk> for EAP <unk> is 273 tonnes ( 301 short tons ) . 
 The booster was designed to have four independent propulsion systems , the first of which – main rocket propulsion – would be based on three <unk> Vulcain engines fueled by 168 @,@ 500 kg ( 371 @,@ 500 lb ) of propellant . Second , <unk> <unk> fly @-@ back turbofan engines would be propelled with hydrogen to reduce fuel mass . Further , ten 2 kN ( 450 lbf ) thrusters placed on each side of the vehicle would be used by the reaction control system . Finally , the fourth propulsion system would be based on solid rocket motors that separate the boosters from the core stage . An up @-@ scaled version of the motors used in existing EAP boosters would be mounted in the attachment ring and inside the wing 's main structure . 
 A typical mission profile would begin with the ignition of a main stage and both boosters , followed by an acceleration to 2 km / s ( 1 @.@ 2 mi / s ) and then a separation at the altitude of 50 km ( 31 mi ) . As the main stage continues its flight into orbit , the boosters follow a ballistic trajectory , reaching an altitude of 90 – 100 km ( 56 – 62 mi ) . After low @-@ energy atmospheric entry , the boosters reach denser layers of the atmosphere where they perform a banking turn toward the target airfield . Gliding continues until they achieve an altitude that is optimal for engaging turbofan engines and entering cruise flight . At this point , about 550 km ( 340 mi ) from the launch point , the boosters would be flying over the Atlantic Ocean . The cruise back to the airport requires about 3 @,@ 650 kg ( 8 @,@ 050 lb ) of hydrogen fuel and takes over two hours to complete . An undercarriage is deployed and each booster lands autonomously . After separation , the boosters are not under threat of collision until they land due to small differences in their initial flight trajectories . 
 = = Derivatives = = 
 The development of liquid fly @-@ back boosters has the potential to enable three additional space transportation systems with an objective of increasing production and creating economies of scale . The aim of the LFBB project at DLR was to reduce Ariane 5 operational costs and to develop future derivatives , including a reusable first stage of a small @-@ to @-@ medium launch vehicle , a super @-@ heavy launch vehicle capable of lifting 67 tonnes ( 74 short tons ) to Low Earth orbit , and a reusable two @-@ stage @-@ to @-@ orbit launch vehicle . Initially , LFBBs would be used only on Ariane 5 . Over time , alternative configurations could phase out Arianespace Soyuz and Vega . 
 = = = Reusable first stage = = = 
 The LFBB was studied with the three upper stage composites , to attain a Reusable First Stage ( RFS ) configuration . The first was a Vega derivative , with a Zefiro 23 second stage , a Zefiro 9 third stage and an <unk> upper stage . With the LFBB replacing the <unk> stage , the payload to sun @-@ synchronous orbit ( SSO ) would increase to 1 @,@ 882 kg ( 4 @,@ 149 lb ) , compared to the 1 @,@ 450 kg ( 3 @,@ 200 lb ) of the Vega . The second was an Ariane 4 derivative called H @-@ 25 . It was based on an <unk> upper stage with a Vinci rocket engine and 25 tonnes ( 28 short tons ) of cryogenic fuel . Depending on the method of deceleration , the payload to SSO is between 1 @,@ 481 and 2 @,@ 788 kg ( 3 @,@ 265 and 6 @,@ 146 lb ) . The third was a large cryogenic upper stage , called H @-@ 185 , based on an alternative , yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ developed Ariane 5 main stage with 185 tonnes ( 204 short tons ) of cryogenic fuel . Its payload to SSO is 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) . 
 Two of the lighter configurations ( the Zefiro 23 and the H @-@ 25 ) use upper stages mounted on top of the booster . Due to the lower weight , it might have been necessary to lower the amount of fuel in a booster to ensure that the separation velocity , the flight path , and the reentry do not exceed design bounds . In the case of H @-@ 25 , it might be necessary to accelerate the fly @-@ back boosters to above 2 km / s ( 1 @.@ 2 mi / s ) to help the upper stage achieve its desired orbit . Consequently , two solutions were proposed to decelerate the boosters after separation . The first option was to actively decelerate them using 10 tonnes ( 11 short tons ) of fuel and reduce the velocity by 300 m / s ( 980 ft / s ) . However , launch performance would drop below that of the Vega derivative . Another option is to use aerodynamic forces to decelerate . However , a hypersonic parachute was deemed too expensive and too complex . As a result , an alternative <unk> was proposed . Flight dynamics simulation revealed that a <unk> with a cross @-@ section of 45 m2 ( 480 sq ft ) offered the best compromise between loads on the booster and deceleration by aerodynamic forces . In this configuration , a launch performance of up to 2 @,@ 788 kg ( 6 @,@ 146 lb ) could be achieved , partly thanks to a higher separation velocity . 
 The heaviest configuration uses a single booster with an asymmetrically mounted , large , expendable cryogenic stage designated H @-@ 185 . It was proposed as a future variant of the Ariane 5 core stage ( <unk> ) , eventually meant to phase out the main stage in a standard launch configuration with LFBB . H @-@ 185 would use a new Vulcain 3 main engine , with increased vacuum thrust . When launched with a single booster , both stages would be operated in parallel , and be delivered to a 180 by 800 km ( 110 by 500 mi ) orbit before separation . The remaining upper stage composite would weigh 7 @,@ 360 kg ( 16 @,@ 230 lb ) , with a 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) payload performance to SSO . When launching to Low Earth orbit , payload mass can be increased to over 10 @,@ 000 kg ( 22 @,@ 000 lb ) . 
 = = = Super @-@ heavy lift launcher = = = 
 The Super @-@ Heavy Lift Launcher ( <unk> ) would consist of a new cryogenic main stage , five liquid fly @-@ back boosters , and a re @-@ <unk> injection stage . This configuration was designed to provide increased capabilities for complex missions , including manned explorations to the Moon and to Mars , as well as the launch of large solar @-@ powered satellites . 
 The new core stage would stand 28 @.@ 65 m ( 94 @.@ 0 ft ) tall and have a diameter of 10 m ( 33 ft ) , feeding 600 tonnes ( 660 short tons ) of LOX / <unk> to three Vulcain 3 engines . The increased circumference of the main stage allows five LFBBs to be integrated with either retractable or variable @-@ geometry wings . The upper stage would be a derivative of the Ariane 5 ESC @-@ B , with the size upped to 5 @.@ 6 m × 8 @.@ 98 m ( 18 @.@ 4 ft × 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , and strengthened to bear higher loads . The Vinci engine was proofed to be sufficiently powerful for orbital insertion . Payload would be enclosed in an 8 m × 29 @.@ 5 m ( 26 ft × 97 ft ) fairing . The launch vehicle would have a total height of 69 m ( 226 ft ) and a mass of 1 @,@ 900 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 100 short tons ) . The payload to LEO would be 67 @,@ 280 kg ( 148 @,@ 330 lb ) . 
 When launched to a 200 km × 600 km ( 120 mi × 370 mi ) Low Earth transfer orbit , the LFBBs would separate at an altitude of 51 km ( 32 mi ) , at a speed of 1 @.@ 55 km / s ( 0 @.@ 96 mi / s ) . To avoid simultaneous separation of all boosters , either a cross @-@ feed to the main stage , or throttling could be used . The return flight of the boosters would require an estimated 3 @,@ 250 kg ( 7 @,@ 170 lb ) of fuel , including a 30 % reserve . 
 = = = Two @-@ stage @-@ to @-@ orbit = = = 
 A reusable Two @-@ Stage @-@ To @-@ Orbit ( <unk> ) launch vehicle was planned to be implemented about 15 years after the addition of LFBBs to Ariane 5 . However , only a preliminary analysis of <unk> was completed . The proposed configuration consisted of two boosters with retractable wings attached to the external fuel tank , and a reusable orbiter with fixed wings carrying payload on top of it . During geostationary transfer orbit ( GTO ) missions , an additional , expandable upper stage would be used . 
 The external tank , being a core of the system , would have a diameter of 5 @.@ 4 metres ( 18 ft ) and a height of 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) , carrying 167 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 184 @.@ 6 short tons ) of propellant . The attached orbiter would be 28 @.@ 8 metres ( 94 ft ) tall and 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) in diameter , carrying 50 tonnes ( 55 short tons ) of propellant . The payload fairing mount atop the orbiter would be 5 @.@ 4 by 20 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft × 67 ft ) . For LEO missions , the launch vehicle would be 57 @.@ 3 metres ( 188 ft ) tall , with a gross lift @-@ off mass of 739 @.@ 4 tonnes ( 815 @.@ 0 short tons ) . The payload to LEO would be 12 @,@ 800 kilograms ( 28 @,@ 200 lb ) , with an increase to 8 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 18 @,@ 700 lb ) to GTO when using an expandable upper stage . 
 = Vimala Temple = 
 The Vimala Temple or Bimala Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to goddess Vimala ( Bimala ) , located within the Jagannath Temple complex in Puri in the Indian state of Orissa . It is generally regarded as a Shakti Pitha , among the holiest temples dedicated to the Hindu Goddess . 
 The temple is located in the south @-@ west corner of the inner enclosure of the Jagannath temple complex and on the western corner of the tower of Jagannath , next to the sacred pond Rohini kunda . The temple faces east and is built of sandstone and laterite . It is built in the Deula style with four components ; vimana ( structure containing the sanctum ) , jagamohana ( assembly hall ) , nata @-@ mandapa ( festival hall ) and bhoga @-@ mandapa ( hall of offerings ) . The temple was renovated around 2005 and is maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India , Bhubaneswar Circle . 
 Though a small shrine in the temple complex , the Vimala temple is important to the Goddess @-@ oriented Shakta and Tantric worshippers , who revere it even more than the main Jagannath shrine . Vimala is considered to be the Tantric consort of Jagannath and a guardian of the temple complex . Devotees pay respect to Vimala before worshipping Jagannath in the main temple . Food offered to Jagannath does not get sanctified as Mahaprasad until it is also offered to Vimala . The Goddess @-@ oriented festival of Durga Puja in the Hindu month of Ashvin ( October ) is celebrated for sixteen days at Vimala , culminating with Vijayadashami . 
 = = History = = 
 The central icon of Vimala is of sixth century CE . The present structure , based on its architecture , seems to have been built in the ninth century under the Eastern Ganga dynasty , possibly over ruins of an earlier temple . Its architecture is similar to the shrine of Narasimha near the Mukti @-@ mandapa ( a temple hall ) in the Jagannath temple complex , dated to the ninth century . The <unk> Panji states that the temple was constructed by Yayati Keshari , a ruler of <unk> Dynasty of South Kosala . Kings Yayati I ( c . 922 – 955 ) and Yayati II ( c . 1025 – 1040 ) are known by the title Yayati Keshari . The sculptures , especially the <unk> ( attendant deities ) , as well as the background slab of the central icon , reflect the <unk> style and may be part of the original temple , on whose ruins the new temple was constructed . Vimala is believed to have preceded even the central Jagannath shrine . 
 Hindu philosopher and saint Adi Shankara ( c . 8th century ) is believed to have established Govardhana matha in Puri , with Vimala as its presiding goddess . According to <unk> ( author of The Jagannatha Temple at Puri ) , the Jagannath Temple was once a centre of worship for the Trimurti of Brahma , Vishnu and Shiva , along with their consorts and the three central forms of the Hindu Goddess , Sarasvati , Lakshmi and Parvati ( in the form of Vimala ) . The Shri Vidya sect devoted to Goddess worship was strong here until the 17th century . Slowly , Shri Vidya and Shiva @-@ centric Shaiva traditions were eroded but remnants continue , with the Vishnu @-@ centric Vaishnavism becoming the sole tradition . The Tantric Panchamakara , which includes fish , meat , liquor , parched grain and ritual intercourse , were replaced with vegetarian offerings and dance of <unk> . Fish was caught locally and offered to the goddess . King <unk> , who ruled between 1623 – 47 , ended the meat and fish offerings of the goddess , although the tradition was later partly revitalized . Today , the goddess is offered meat and fish on special days . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The temple is located in the south @-@ west corner of the inner enclosure of the Jagannath temple complex and on the right hand western corner of the tower of Jagannath , next to the sacred pond Rohini kunda . The temple faces east and is built of sandstone and laterite . It is built in the Deula style that has four components namely , vimana ( structure containing the sanctum ) , jagamohana ( assembly hall ) , nata @-@ mandapa ( festival hall ) and bhoga @-@ mandapa ( hall of offerings ) . The temple is maintained and was renovated around 2005 by the Archaeological Survey of India , Bhubaneswar Circle . 
 = = = Vimana = = = 
 The vimana is a Rekha deula ( a tall building with a shape of sugarloaf ) , 60 feet ( 18 m ) in height and in shape of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) square . It stands on a 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) platform , which is decorated with lotus and other floral designs and scrollwork . The outer wall of the vimana is divided into 5 parts ( from base to top ) : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> . The niches and intervening recesses of the first part of the wall are ornate , with <unk> mundis ( a type of niche ) , scrollwork , floral designs , creepers , love @-@ making couples and Nagas ( serpent @-@ men ) . The niches and intervening recesses of the second part of the wall are also decorated with <unk> mundis , <unk> ( a lion @-@ faced beast ) , <unk> ( an elephant @-@ faced lion trampling a lion ) , jaliwork , scrollwork , <unk> scene ( sages teaching disciples ) and kirtimukha ( a monster face ) motifs , along with the figurines of eight Dikpalas ( guardian gods of the directions ) and some goddesses . The third part of the outer wall has two horizontal mouldings decorated with <unk> @-@ kanyas ( beautiful human maidens ) , scrollwork and floral and lotus motifs . The niches and recesses of the fourth part of the wall are decorated with pidha mundis ( a type of niche ) , <unk> , erotic scenes , <unk> @-@ kanyas , scrollwork , jaliwork and floral designs , along with figures of the consorts of the Dikpalas , Nagas and their female consort <unk> and various goddesses . The Dikpalas and their consorts are seen with their mounts and aligned to their respective directions . 
 Images of the <unk> ( attendant deities ) are placed in the central niches of the outer wall ( <unk> ) on three sides : the eight @-@ armed Durga slaying Mahishasura on the south ; the six @-@ armed goddess Chamunda standing on Shiva on the west and an empty niche on the north , which probably had a goddess figure that was stolen . The lintel of the attendant deity niche has Gaja Lakshmi figurines . The frames of the niches are decorated with scrollwork and kirtimukha motifs and two female attendants accompany each niche . The uppermost part of the outer wall has ten horizontal mouldings , ornate with scrollwork , kirtimukha and lotus and floral motifs . Within the vimana lies the garbhagriha ( sanctum ) , which is topped with a <unk> @-@ style , curvilinear temple pinnacle . 
 The goddess Vimala is deified within the sanctum , the sixth century inner chamber that is devoid of wall decorations . The central icon of Vimala holds a rosary in the upper right hand . Her lower right hand is held in a boon @-@ giving gesture and her lower left holds a pitcher , considered to be filled with amrita ( celestial elixir of life ) . The attribute in the upper left hand is heavily disputed . Descriptions include a human figurine , a <unk> , a mermaid , a naga @-@ pasha ( serpent @-@ noose ) or some other object . She holds no weapons normally attributed to Durga . The icon is installed on a <unk> ( lion @-@ throne ) , adorned with the figures of the goddess ' female attendants Chhaya and Maya on the sides . The image is said to be made of <unk> ( a type of wax ) and slightly taller than 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . 
 The sanctum door , with a flight of stairs , leads down to the jagamohana . The lintel has the Gaja Lakshmi figurine in the centre surrounded with apsaras ( celestial maidens ) . The Navagraha ( deities of the classical planets ) are carved above the lintel . The doorjambs are decorated scrollwork , creepers , flowers and boys playing . Two gate @-@ keeper sculptors surround the door . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The jagamohana or <unk> is a pidha deula ( square building with a pyramid @-@ shaped roof ) , 35 feet ( 11 m ) in height with a 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) square base . It stands on a 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) high platform , which is decorated with floral designs and scrollwork . The outer wall is divided into 5 parts , as in the vimana . The niches and intervening recesses of the first part are adorned with <unk> mundi niches ( having amorous couples and erotic scenes ) , Naga pilasters , scrollwork , jaliwork and floral motifs . The <unk> has the same motifs as the vimana 's second part of the wall , barring the goddesses . The third part of the wall has three horizontal mouldings . The fourth part of the wall also resembles its counterpart in the vimana , except it does not have the Naga and goddess sculptures . The uppermost part of the wall has seven horizontal mouldings , the central portion of which is decorated with dancing women , amorous couples , elephants , deer , scrollwork and jaliwork . The <unk> ( decorative arch ) on the northern and southern sides are royal court and <unk> scenes , with a balustraded window on each side . The frames of the windows are decorated with scrollwork , jaliwork , playing boys , floral designs , creepers and dancing women . The structure is topped with a pyramidal shikhara . The inner walls have no ornamentation . The jagamohana has two doorways : one towards the sanctum ( already discussed in vimana section ) and other towards the natamandapa , which is similar in style and decoration to the former . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The natamandapa is a pidha deula , 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) in height and in shape of rectangle 35 feet ( 11 m ) in length by 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) . It is probably a later addition to the original temple , which consisted of the vimana and jagamohana . It stands on a 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) platform . The five divisions of the outer wall are undecorated . It is topped with a small pyramidal pinnacle . The natamandapa has four door ways , one on each side of the wall . Inner walls of the natamandapa are adorned with <unk> @-@ style traditional Orissan paintings , depicting sixteen forms of the Hindu Goddess , including the Mahavidyas . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The bhogamandapa is a pidha deula , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in height and in shape of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) square . It stands on a 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) platform . The five outer wall divisions are undecorated . It is topped with a small pinnacle . An eight @-@ armed dancing Ganesha and a 12 @-@ armed , six @-@ headed standing Kartikeya ( both are the sons of Parvati and Shiva ) occupy niches on the western inner wall . The ceiling has floral paintings with a lotus design in the middle , suspending downwards . The bhogamandapa has four doorways , opening on each side . Two female gatekeepers guard each door . A flight of steps at the eastern doorway serves as the main entrance of the temple . 
 At the entrance to the shrine outside the bhogamandapa , there is a 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) Gaja @-@ Simha , the lion – the goddess ' vahana ( mount or vehicle ) – riding over an elephant , symbolizing the victory of good over evil . It is covered by a flat roof . 
 = = Religious significance = = 
 The Vimala Temple is considered one of the Shakti Pithas , the most sacred temples of the Hindu Goddess , identified with Parvati or Durga as consort of the god Shiva . It is considered to be a prime example of the importance of the Shakti cult in Orissa . It is customary to worship Shiva at each Shakti Pitha in the form of Bhairava , the male counterpart or guardian of the presiding goddess of the Shakti Pitha . 
 In Goddess @-@ oriented worship , Vimala ( Bimala ) is regarded as the presiding goddess of the Purushottama ( Puri ) Shakti Pitha . Jagannath , a form of the god Vishnu / Krishna ( Krishna is generally regarded as an avatar of Vishnu ) , is worshipped as the Pitha 's Bhairava . This is a departure from the usual tradition of Bhairava as a form of Shiva . So , in this temple complex , Vishnu – one of the Hindu trinity – is equated with Shiva , another of the trinity ; this is interpreted to convey the oneness of God . In this regard , Vimala - generally associated with Shiva 's consort - is also considered as Lakshmi , the consort of Vishnu . Conversely , Tantrics consider Jagannath as Shiva @-@ Bhairava , rather than a form of Vishnu . 
 The main sanctum of the Jagannath Temple has three deities : Jagannath , Balabhadra ( elder brother of Krishna , sometimes identified with Shiva ) and Subhadra ( the younger sister of Krishna and Balabhadra ) . In Jagannath @-@ centric traditions , while Lakshmi is the orthodox consort of Jagannath in the temple complex , Vimala is the Tantric ( heterodox ) consort and guardian goddess of the temple complex . 
 Vimala is identified with the goddesses Katyayini , Durga , Bhairavi , Bhuvaneshvari and <unk> in various texts and rituals . She is considered the shakti of Vishnu as well as Shiva in the climactic Durga Puja festivities in the temple . She appears as Mahishasuramardini ( Durga as slayer of the demon Mahishasura ) or Vijayalakshmi ( the warrior form of Lakshmi ) in New Delhi Konark stele , 13th century stone stele originally from Konark Sun Temple and now housed in National Museum , New Delhi . 
 = = = In Shakti Pitha lists = = = 
 According to Hindu legend , Sati , the daughter of Prajapati Daksha , married Shiva against the wish of Daksha . Daksha organised a great yajna ( sacrifice ) , but did not invite Sati and Shiva . Uninvited , Sati reached the yajna @-@ site , where Daksha ignored Sati and vilified Shiva . Unable to withstand this insult , Sati sacrificed herself in the fire . The wild , grief @-@ stricken Shiva wandered the universe with her half @-@ burnt corpse . Finally , Vishnu dismembered her body into 51 parts , each of which fell on different places on the earth , each creating a Shakti Pitha . 
 The list of Shakti Pithas differ in various religious texts . Many mention Vimala or Jagannath temple complex as a Shakti Pitha , and calls the location by various names . In the Kalika Purana , four Pithas ( centres of Tantrism ) are mentioned , corresponding to the four cardinal directions . The <unk> or <unk> ( now clearly identified as Orissa ) in the west hosts the temple of Katyayini ( identified with Vimala ) and her consort Jagannath . The <unk> Tantra , which has a similar list , also mentions Katyayini as the Bhairavi and Jagannath as the Bhairava in the Pitha of <unk> ( Odra , identified with Orissa ) . 
 The <unk> or <unk> section from the <unk> mentions <unk> @-@ kshetra in Utkala ( present @-@ day Orissa ) as a Shakti Pitha , with Vimala as the presiding goddess ( Devi ) , Jagannath as Bhairava and her navel as the body part that fell here . One version of this text , however , demotes the site from a Pitha to an <unk> @-@ Pitha ( subordinate Pitha ) . Here , the Ucchishta ( that is , left @-@ over or partially eaten food ) of Sati is said to be the " fallen part " ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and the temple location is called <unk> or " Blue mountain " , which is the traditional name of the site of the Jagannath temple complex . <unk> or Nila Parvat is mentioned as an <unk> @-@ pitha also in the Shiva @-@ charita with Vimala and Jagannath as the Devi and Bhairava respectively . 
 The Tantric work <unk> Tantra names Vimala among 42 Siddha Pithas , where Siddhis - a set of supernatural powers - can be gained . The Devi Bhagavata Purana , Prana <unk> Tantra and <unk> Nila Tantra name the Vimala temple as a Pitha in their list of 108 temples . The Matsya Purana mentions Purushottama Kshetra with goddess Vimala as a Shakti Pitha . The Vamana Purana notes it as a sacred pilgrimage site . The <unk> <unk> also mentions Vimala and Jagannath as deities of the Pitha . In the <unk> <unk> , a Puranic list of 100 mother goddesses , Vimala of Purushottama is named . The Devi Purana also mentions it as a Pitha where feet of Sati fell . 
 = = Worship = = 
 The people of Orissa take pride in the Vimala temple . They consider it the most important temple to the Goddess and a must @-@ visit . Devotees visit the temple religiously every day and recite hymns from the Devi Mahatmya , attributed to the sage Markandeya , <unk> <unk> by Adi Shankara and <unk> composed by <unk> <unk> . It is prescribed that devotees pay their respects to the goddess Vimala before worshipping Jagannath in the main temple . The waters of Rohini kunda , the tirtha ( sacred pool ) of Vimala , are also considered holy . Tantrics often visit the temple , which they consider more important than the central Jagannath shrine . 
 The Goddess @-@ oriented festival of Durga Puja in the Hindu month of Ashvin ( October ) is celebrated for sixteen days , culminating with Vijayadashami . On Vijayadashami , Vimala is worshipped by the titular Gajapati king of Puri as the goddess Durga , who is believed to have slain the demon Mahishasura on this day . The earliest record of this is the New Delhi Konark stele , which narrate that King <unk> I ( reign : 1238 – 1264 ) worshipped Durga @-@ Madhava ( Vimala @-@ Jagannath ) on the tenth day of Durga Puja , that is , Vijayadashami . As the goddess is believed to assume a destructive aspect during the Durga Puja , women are debarred in the temple as they are considered too " weak @-@ hearted " to witness this terrible form of the goddess . 
 = = = Food offerings = = = 
 Generally , no separate food offerings are cooked for the goddess Vimala . The goddess is described to survive on the remnants ( Ucchishta ) of Jagannath 's meals . The vegetarian food offerings to Jagannath are offered to Vimala , after which they are sanctified as Mahaprasad ( see also prasad ) . The Mahaprasad consists of dried rice mixed with grated coconut , cheese , curd and butter . The Shankaracharya , head of the Govardhana matha , receives a pot of the <unk> and a plate of <unk> that is offered to the goddess , the presiding goddess ( Adya @-@ shakti ) of the matha as well as of the temple . 
 The legend narrates the tale behind the tradition of offering the Ucchishta , which otherwise is a taboo in Hinduism . Once , Shiva on a visit to Vishnu 's abode Vaikuntha , saw that a few food grains ( Ucchishta ) had fallen on the ground after Vishnu finished his meal . Shiva quickly picked up a grain and swallowed it . Unbeknownst to him , half of it stuck to his beard . When he returned to his abode , the sage Narada saw the half grain on Shiva 's beard , and ate it . Parvati , Shiva 's consort , was upset that her rightful share of Vishnu 's prasad had been eaten by Narada . In a peeved mood , she went to Vishnu and complained . Vishnu pacified her saying that in the Kali Yuga ( the present era as per Hindu beliefs ) , she would live at Puri as Vimala , and would daily eat the remnants of his food . 
 The only time in the year when separate food is cooked for the goddess is when she is offered non @-@ vegetarian offerings . During Durga Puja , Vimala is offered non @-@ vegetarian food and animal sacrifice , traditionally offered to the Hindu Mother Goddess . The goddess is considered to assume a destructive form during the festival and the meat is considered necessary to placate her . In strict secrecy during the pre @-@ dawn hours , animal sacrifice of a he @-@ goat is offered in the temple , while fish from the sacred <unk> temple tank are cooked and offered to Vimala , as per Tantric rituals . The rituals have to be completed before the doors of the main sanctum of the vegetarian Jagannath are opened at dawn and the first morning aarti is offered to the god . Vaishnava devotees of Jagannath are debarred from the temple . Only a few who witness the ceremony are given the Bimala <unk> ( Vimala 's cuisine ) as prasad . The animal sacrifice and the non @-@ vegetarian offerings to Vimala produced protests . 
 = Tropical Storm Danielle ( 1986 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Danielle was the only tropical storm to move through the Caribbean Sea in 1986 . A short @-@ lived cyclone , Danielle developed on September 7 to the east of the southern Lesser Antilles . Strengthening to peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , the storm moved through Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , where a rainband moved across the main island with hurricane @-@ force gusts . Continuing westward , Danielle absorbed dry air from northern South America and dissipated on September 10 . 
 The threat of Danielle prompted gale warnings in Barbados as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . On the former island , wind gusts reached 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . On Saint Vincent , the winds caused a major power outage , while heavy rainfall left crop damage . Another rain system affected the country a few weeks later , and the combined monetary damage totaled $ 9 @.@ 2 million ( 1986 USD , $ 18 million 2010 USD ) ; 142 people had to seek shelter after their homes were destroyed , and a total of 436 dwellings were impacted to some degree . In Trinidad and Tobago , the outer rainbands produced flooding and mudslides . Further west , Danielle briefly threatened Jamaica , although it dissipated before affecting the island . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Around September 1 , a tropical wave moved off the western coast of Africa . It progressed westward through the tropical Atlantic Ocean , initially at a moderate speed before accelerating to 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) on September 6 . A tropical depression developed along the tropical wave early on September 7 , and satellite imagery indicated that it quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Danielle about 385 mi ( 620 km ) east @-@ southeast of Grenada , an island in the Lesser Antilles . 
 On September 8 , Hurricane Hunters flew into Tropical Storm Danielle and reported maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , as well as a pressure of 1 @,@ 000 millibars ( 30 inHg ) . Initially , forecasters anticipated Danielle would strengthen further . As the storm moved through Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , a rainband north of the center contained winds of near hurricane force , which moved across the island of Saint Vincent . After maintaining peak winds for about 18 hours , Danielle began weakening in the eastern Caribbean Sea , due to entrainment of dry air from northern South America . Paralleling the northern coast of the continent , the circulation became dislocated from the convection . Late on September 9 , the system weakened to tropical depression status , and the next day it dissipated in the western Caribbean . It was the only tropical cyclone in the Caribbean Sea during 1986 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Before Tropical Storm Danielle moved through the Lesser Antilles , a small @-@ craft advisory was issued , and later , gale warnings were posted for Barbados as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . On Saint Vincent , the threat of the storm forced the closure of the main commercial airport , as well as schools , businesses , and stores . Further west , Danielle briefly posed a threat to Jamaica , prompting officials in that country to issue a tropical storm watch . Two months earlier , the precursor to Tropical Storm Andrew killed 49 people on the island ; to avoid a recurrence , the Jamaican government worked to evacuate fishermen from two small islands as a precaution . 
 As Danielle moved through the Lesser Antilles , a rainband struck the island of Saint Vincent with wind gusts of near hurricane @-@ force . The winds caused a major power outage on the island , and destroyed the roofs of more than 30 houses . Elsewhere in the country , the combination of winds and heavy rains caused heavy crop damage . Twelve days after Danielle struck , a severe rainstorm affected Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . The combined disasters produced a damage total of $ 9 @.@ 3 million ( 1986 USD , $ 18 million 2010 USD ) , the majority of it from crop damage . About 40 % of the banana crop was destroyed or unfit for cultivation , and 2 @,@ 050 acres ( 8 @.@ 3 km2 ) of other crops were seriously affected . The two storms caused the deaths of 120 animals , although there were no human fatalities . In addition to the crop damage , the combined impact of the two storms left over 100 houses destroyed , with a total of 436 dwellings damaged ; this forced 142 people to seek emergency shelter . Across the country , the heavy rainfall caused mudslides and flooding which disrupted the transportation and utility network . 
 During its passage , Danielle produced a 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) wind gust at the airport in Bridgetown , Barbados . A coast guard ship from Barbados ran aground into a reef in the southern Grenadines , but it was rescued . Further south , rainbands from Danielle swept through Trinidad and Tobago , producing up to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of flooding . The flooding caused 27 landslides and destroyed 4 bridges . Damage in the country was estimated at $ 8 million ( 1986 <unk> , $ 1 @.@ 2 million 1986 USD ) . 
 = The Tale of Peter Rabbit = 
 The Tale of Peter Rabbit is a British children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter that follows mischievous and disobedient young Peter Rabbit as he is chased about the garden of Mr. McGregor . He escapes and returns home to his mother who puts him to bed after dosing him with <unk> tea . The tale was written for five @-@ year @-@ old Noel Moore , son of Potter 's former governess Annie Carter Moore , in 1893 . It was revised and privately printed by Potter in 1901 after several publishers ' rejections but was printed in a trade edition by Frederick Warne & Co. in 1902 . The book was a success , and multiple reprints were issued in the years immediately following its debut . It has been translated into 36 languages and with 45 million copies sold it is one of the best @-@ selling books of all time . 
 The book has generated considerable merchandise over the decades since its release for both children and adults with toys , dishes , foods , clothing , videos and other products made available . Potter was one of the first to be responsible for such merchandise when she patented a Peter Rabbit doll in 1903 and followed it almost immediately with a Peter Rabbit board game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story focuses on a family of anthropomorphic rabbits , the widowed mother rabbit cautioning her young against entering a vegetable garden grown by a man named Mr. McGregor , telling them : " your Father had an accident there ; he was put in a pie by Mrs. McGregor " . Whereas her three daughters obediently refrain from entering the garden , going down the lane to pick blackberries , her rebellious son Peter enters the garden to snack on some vegetables . Peter ends up eating more than is good for him and goes looking for parsley to cure his stomach ache . However , Peter is spotted by Mr. McGregor and loses his jacket and shoes while trying to escape . He hides in a watering can in a shed , but then has to run away again when Mr. McGregor finds him , and ends up completely lost . After sneaking past a cat , Peter sees the gate where he entered the garden from a distance and heads for it , despite being spotted and chased by Mr. McGregor again . He finds difficulties in wriggling beneath the gate , but manages to escape the garden , only to spot his abandoned clothing articles being used to dress Mr. McGregor 's scarecrow . After returning home , a sick Peter is sent to bed by his mother whereas his well @-@ behaved sisters receive a sumptuous dinner of milk and berries as opposed to Peter 's supper of chamomile tea . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The story was inspired by a pet rabbit Potter had as a child , which she named Peter Piper . Through the 1890s , Potter sent illustrated story letters to the children of her former governess , Annie Moore , and , in 1900 , Moore , realizing the commercial potential of Potter 's stories , suggested they be made into books . Potter embraced the suggestion , and , borrowing her complete correspondence ( which had been carefully preserved by the Moore children ) , selected a letter written on 4 September 1893 to five @-@ year @-@ old Noel that featured a tale about a rabbit named Peter . Potter biographer Linda Lear explains : " The original letter was too short to make a proper book so [ Potter ] added some text and made new black @-@ and @-@ white illustrations ... and made it more suspenseful . These changes slowed the narrative down , added intrigue , and gave a greater sense of the passage of time . Then she copied it out into a stiff @-@ covered exercise book , and painted a coloured frontispiece showing Mrs. Rabbit dosing Peter with <unk> tea " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Private publication = = = 
 As Lear explains , Potter titled The Tale of Peter Rabbit and Mr. McGregor 's Garden and sent it to publishers , but " her manuscript was returned ... including Frederick Warne & Co . ... who nearly a decade earlier had shown some interest in her artwork . Some publishers wanted a shorter book , others a longer one . But most wanted coloured illustrations which by 1900 were both popular and affordable " . The several rejections proved frustrating to Potter who knew exactly how her book should look ( she had adopted the format and style of Helen Bannerman 's Little Black Sambo ) " and how much it should cost " . She decided to publish the book herself , and , on 16 December 1901 , the first 250 copies of her privately printed The Tale of Peter Rabbit " was ready for distribution to family and friends " . 
 = = = First commercial edition = = = 
 In 1901 , as Lear explains , a Potter family friend and sometime poet , Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley , set Potter 's tale into " rather dreadful didactic verse and submitted it , along with Potter 's illustrations and half her revised manuscript , to Frederick Warne & Co . , " which had been among the original <unk> . Warne editors declined Rawnsley 's version " but asked to see the complete Potter manuscript " – their interest stimulated by the opportunity The Tale of Peter Rabbit offered the publisher to compete with the success of Helen Bannerman 's wildly popular Little Black Sambo and other small format children 's books then on the market . When Warne inquired about the lack of colour illustrations in the book , Potter replied that rabbit @-@ brown and green were not good subjects for colouration . Warne declined the book but opened the possibility for future publication . 
 Warne wanted colour illustrations throughout the ' bunny book ' ( as the firm referred to the tale ) and suggested cutting the illustrations " from forty @-@ two to thirty @-@ two ... and marked which ones might best be eliminated " . Potter initially resisted the idea of colour illustrations but then realized her stubborn stance was a mistake . She sent Warne " several colour illustrations , along with a copy of her privately printed edition " which Warne then handed to their eminent children 's book illustrator L. Leslie Brooke for his professional opinion , who was impressed with to Potter 's work . Fortuitously , his recommendation coincided with a sudden surge in the small picture @-@ book market . 
 Meanwhile , Potter continued to distribute her privately printed edition to family and friends , with the celebrated creator of Sherlock Holmes , Arthur Conan Doyle , acquiring a copy for his children . When the first private printing of 250 copies was sold out , another 200 were prepared . She noted in an inscription in one copy that her beloved pet rabbit Peter had died . 
 Potter arrived at an agreement with Warne for an initial publication of 5 @,@ 000 commercial copies . Negotiations dragged on into the following year with a contract finally signed in June 1902 . Potter was closely involved in the publication process of the trade edition of the tale – redrawing when necessary , making minor adjustments to the prose and correcting punctuation . The blocks for the illustrations and text were sent to printer Edmund Evans for engraving , and she made adjustments to the proofs when she received them . Lear writes that " Even before the publication of the tale in early October 1902 , the first 8 @,@ 000 copies were sold out . By the year 's end there were 28 @,@ 000 copies of The Tale of Peter Rabbit in print . By the middle of 1903 there was a fifth edition sporting coloured endpapers ... a sixth printing was produced within the month " ; and a year after the first commercial publication there were 56 @,@ 470 copies in print . 
 = = = American copyright = = = 
 Warne 's New York office " failed to register the copyright for The Tale of Peter Rabbit in the United States " and unlicensed copies of the book " ( from which Potter would receive no royalties ) began to appear in the spring of 1903 . There was nothing anyone could do to stop them " . 
 The enormous financial loss ... [ to Potter ] only became evident over time " , but the necessity of protecting her intellectual property hit home after the successful 1903 publication of The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin when her father returned from the Burlington Arcade in Mayfair at Christmas 1903 with a toy squirrel labelled Nutkin . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Potter asserted her tales would one day be nursery classics , and part of the " longevity of her books comes from strategy " , writes Potter biographer Ruth MacDonald . She was the first to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales ; between 1903 and 1905 these included a Peter Rabbit stuffed toy , an unpublished board game , and nursery wallpaper . 
 Considerable variants on the original format and version of The Tale of Peter Rabbit as well as spin @-@ off merchandise have been made available over the decades . Variant versions include " pop @-@ ups , toy theatres , and lift @-@ the @-@ flap books " . By 1998 , modern technology had made available " videos , audio cassette , a CD @-@ ROMs , a computer program , and Internet sites " , as described by Margaret Mackey writing in The case of Peter Rabbit : changing conditions of literature for children . She continues : " Warne and their collaborators and competitors have produced a large collection of activity books and a monthly educational magazine " . A plethora of other Peter Rabbit related merchandise exists as well , and " toy shops in the United States and Britain have whole sections of store specially signposted and earmarked exclusively for Potter @-@ related toys and merchandise " . 
 Unauthorized copying of The Tale of Peter Rabbit has flourished over the decades with products only loosely associated with the original . In 1916 , American Louise A. Field cashed in on the popularity by writing books such as Peter Rabbit Goes to School or Peter Rabbit and His Ma , the illustrations of which showed him in his distinctive blue jacket . In an animated movie by Golden Films , The New Adventures of Peter Rabbit , " Peter is given buck teeth , an American accent and a fourth sister <unk> . " Another video " retelling of the tale casts Peter as a Christian preacher singing songs about God and Jesus . " 
 = = Literary criticism = = 
 Writing in Storyteller : The Classic that Heralded America 's Storytelling Revival , in discussing the difference between stories that lend themselves well to telling and stories that lend themselves well to reading , Ramon Ross explains Peter Rabbit is a story created for reading . He believes Potter created a good mix of suspense and tension , intermixed with lulls in the action . He goes on to write that the writing style — " the economy of words , the crisp writing " — lends itself well to a young audience . 
 Lear writes that Potter " had in fact created a new form of animal fable in : one in which anthropomorphic animals behave as real animals with true animal instincts " , and a form of fable with anatomically correct illustrations drawn by a scientifically minded artist . She further states Peter Rabbit 's nature is familiar to rabbit enthusiasts " and endorsed by those who are not ... because her portrayal speaks to some universal understanding of rabbity behaviour . " She describes the tale as a " perfect marriage of word and image " and " a triumph of fantasy and fact " . 
 According to Stuart Jeffries , " ... psychoanalytic critiques of her work have multiplied since her death in 1943 . " Carole Scott writes in Beatrix Potter 's Peter Rabbit that the reader cannot help but identify with rebellious little Peter and his plight as all the illustrations are presented from his low @-@ to @-@ the @-@ ground view , most feature Peter in close @-@ up and within touching distance , and Mr. McGregor is distanced from the reader by always being depicted on the far side of Peter . Scott explains : " This identification dramatically instills fear and tension in the reader , and interacts with the frequently distanced voice of the verbal narrative " , sometimes with contradictory effects . In the verbal narrative and the illustration for the moment when Mr. McGregor attempts to trap Peter under a garden sieve , for example , the verbal narrative presents the murderous intent of Mr. McGregor as a matter @-@ of @-@ fact , everyday occurrence while the illustration presents the desperate moment from the terrified view of a small animal in fear of his life – a view that is reinforced by the birds that take flight to the left and the right . 
 In the illustration of Peter standing by the locked door , the verbal narrative describes the scene without the flippancy evident in the moment of the sieve . The inability to overcome obstacles is presented in the verbal narrative with objective matter @-@ of @-@ <unk> and the statement , " Peter began to cry " is offered without irony or attitude , thus drawing the reader closer to Peter ’ s emotions and plight . The illustration depicts an unclothed Peter standing upright against the door , one foot upon the other with a tear running from his eye . Without his clothes , Peter is only a small , wild animal but his tears , his emotions , and his human posture intensifies the reader ’ s identification with him . Here , verbal narrative and illustration work in harmony rather than in disharmony . Scott suggests Potter ’ s tale has encouraged many generations of children to " self @-@ indulgence , disobedience , transgression of social boundaries and ethics , and assertion of their wild , unpredictable nature against the constrictions of civilized living . " 
 Frank Delaney notes " a self @-@ containment " in Potter 's writing reflective of an uninterested mother and a lonely childhood spent in the company of pets . John Bidwell , curator at the Morgan Library & Museum in New York , observed " ... the sardonic humor that makes Beatrix Potter so much fun for kids and grown @-@ ups . ” 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1938 , shortly after the success of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , Walt Disney became interested in making an animated film based on The Tale of Peter Rabbit . However , Beatrix Potter refused to give the rights to Disney because of marketing issues . 
 In 1971 , Peter Rabbit appeared as a character in the ballet film The Tales of Beatrix Potter . In the autumn of 1991 , HBO aired an animated musical adaptation of The Tale of Peter Rabbit , narrated by Carol Burnett , as part of the network 's Storybook Musicals series , which was later released to VHS by Family Home Entertainment . In 1992 , the tale was adapted to animation again for the BBC anthology series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends , which has since been released on VHS and DVD . In 2006 , Peter Rabbit was heavily referenced in a biopic about Beatrix Potter entitled Miss Potter . In December 2012 , a new CGI @-@ animated children 's TV series titled Peter Rabbit premiered on Nickelodeon , with a full series run beginning in February 2013 . 
 = Epaulettes ( stamp ) = 
 Epaulettes ( French : <unk> , Dutch : <unk> ) is the colloquial name of the first series of postage stamps issued by Belgium . The stamps , which depicted King Leopold I and his prominent epaulettes from which the type 's name derives , became legally usable on 1 July 1849 . They were produced as the result of a series of national reforms to the postal system in Belgium , based on the success of similar British reforms in 1840 . Two denominations with the same design were issued simultaneously : a brown 10 centimes and a blue 20 centimes . The stamps allowed postal costs to be pre @-@ paid by the sender , rather than the receiver , and led to a sharp increase in the volume of mail . Although quickly superseded by new types , the Epaulettes proved extremely influential and have since inspired several series of commemorative stamps . 
 = = Background = = 
 Heavily influenced by the example of the British postal system , which issued its first stamp , the Penny Black , in 1840 , the Belgian government supported the inauguration of a Belgian equivalent . Under the existing system , postage costs were paid by the receiver rather than the sender , which discouraged people from receiving , and therefore sending , letters . The idea of postage stamps , which would allow the sender to pay in advance , was officially sanctioned by Leopold I on the Loi <unk> des modifications au régime des <unk> ( " Law bringing modifications to the postal system " ) on 24 December 1847 while the radical liberal and future Prime Minister , Walthère Frère @-@ Orban , served as Minister of Public Works . The debate on the reform of the postage in Belgium occurred at the same time as widespread postage reform , influenced by the British example , in France , Bavaria and elsewhere . 
 A second act , the Loi sur la <unk> <unk> ( " Law on postal reform " ) , was signed on 22 April 1849 . The second law set out more detailed terms for the launch of the postal system and on 17 June 1849 , Leopold I officially requested the new Minister of Public Works , Hippolyte Rolin , to act on the new laws . 
 = = Stamps = = 
 On 1 July 1849 , the first postage stamps were launched , produced in two denominations with the same design . The first , a brown 10 centimes stamp , could be used to send a letter up to a distance of 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) ; the blue 20 centimes could be used on all other ordinary national mail . The successful design was just one of a variety of options produced by Jacob Wiener . 
 The stamps were officially described by an Avis <unk> ( " Ministerial notice " ) of 1849 as each being a " small engraving representing the portrait of the King , with indication as to their value ... they will be printed on a paper of which the reverse is coated in a thin layer of glue . " 
 The Epaulettes stamps depicted Leopold I wearing military uniform , with highly visible epaulettes , and were printed using the intaglio method . They were inscribed " <unk> " ( " postage " ) at the top , along with the stamp 's value in numbers . At the bottom was the stamps face value in French language text . No Dutch language version was produced . Like the first British stamps , it did not carry the name of its country of origin since they were intended for use only within Belgium . The stamp was designed by Charles <unk> , based on the King 's official portrait painted by the artist Liévin De Winne . It composition was by Jacob Wiener and the engraver John Henry Robinson . It was not perforated and was instead cut from sheets of <unk> by hand . 
 The stamp carried the two crossed " L " s monogram of Leopold I as a watermark . To attach it to an envelope , the stamp , which already contained gum , had to be moistened before application . Around 5 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 examples of each denomination were produced . 
 <unk> distinguish several minor variations among the series . For the 10 centimes , some slight colour variations exist , described as grey @-@ brown ( <unk> @-@ gris ) and russet @-@ brown ( <unk> @-@ roux ) . In the 20 centimes , variations in dark blue ( bleu @-@ <unk> ) and milky blue ( bleu @-@ <unk> ) have been noted . Of all the colour variations , the russet @-@ brown examples commanding the highest premium among collectors . Some double @-@ printed ( error ) stamps are also known . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The stamps were sold from post @-@ offices across the country but some were also issued to postmen for sale . Sales started on 25 June 1849 , however their use only became legal on 1 July . Because of the lack of an infrastructure of post boxes , particularly in rural areas , letters could be given directly to the postman in person rather than delivered to post offices to be sent . 
 For use , the stamps were cancelled with a heavy , circular black ink stamp . The cancellations , like their British equivalent , had a number in the centre ( between one and 135 ) which was different for each post office around the country . 
 = = Effects and legacy = = 
 The introduction of the postage stamp , along with daily delivery , allowed a large increase in the volume of mail carried . By 1849 , between ten and fifteen million letters were being carried each year . The creation of the stamps also led to a structural expansion of the national postage system , which in 1830 had counted just 123 post offices and 240 postmen . 
 The success of the initial Epaulettes series inspired the introduction of three new varieties with different designs and denominations in October 1849 . These new types replaced the epaulettes design with the so @-@ called " Medallion " ( <unk> ) type , featuring Leopold I 's portrait within a circular medallion window . In the same issue , a new denomination of forty centimes in red was produced for overseas mail . It was rumoured at the time that Leopold I did not like the design at the time , and believed that the epaulettes gave him a childlike aspect . The Epaulettes were officially superseded in 1859 , but remained legally valid until 1 July 1866 when , following Leopold I 's death , all stamps bearing his effigy were demonetised . 
 A nearly identical re @-@ impression was made in 1866 on laid paper which are distinguished by slightly different dimensions . Further re @-@ impressions date to 1895 . The Epaulettes have also subsequently been the subject of various commemorative stamps . The Epaulettes featured as part of the design of stamps issued by Belgium in 1925 and 1972 . For their 100th and 150th anniversary , in 1949 and 1999 , the Belgian postal service published commemorative series . 
 = Eduardo Núñez = 
 Eduardo Michelle Núñez Méndez ( born June 15 , 1987 ) is a Dominican professional baseball infielder for the Minnesota Twins of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played in MLB for the New York Yankees from 2010 through 2013 . Although shortstop is his primary position , Núñez serves as a utility infielder , and played in the outfield for the Yankees as well . 
 The Yankees signed Núñez as an international free agent in 2004 . He played minor league baseball in their organization from 2005 through 2010 , until he made his MLB debut with the Yankees on August 19 , 2010 . He has served to allow Derek Jeter and Alex Rodriguez the ability to take days off in the field . Due to struggles and inconsistency , the Yankees designated Núñez for assignment at the start of the 2014 season . He was traded to the Twins , and enjoyed a breakout season in 2016 , when he was named to appear in the MLB All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 The New York Yankees signed Núñez as an international free agent in February 2004 . The organization introduced him to Derek Jeter , his childhood idol , at a press conference , where they told Jeter that Núñez was to be their eventual replacement for Jeter as the Yankees ' starting shortstop . 
 Núñez made his professional debut in minor league baseball with the Staten Island Yankees of the Class A Short Season New York – Pennsylvania League in the 2005 season . Nunez represented the Yankees in the league 's All @-@ Star Game . That season , the Yankees won their third consecutive league championship , and Nunez was rated as the fourth @-@ best prospect in the New York – Penn League . Going into the 2006 season , Baseball America ranked Núñez the sixth @-@ best prospect in the Yankees organization , and the prospect with the best throwing arm . The Yankees started Núñez with the Tampa Yankees of the Class A @-@ Advanced Florida State League in 2006 ; he struggled with Tampa , and the Yankees demoted him to the Charleston RiverDogs of the Class A South Atlantic League ( SAL ) on May 17 . Overall , Núñez had a .214 batting average for Tampa and Charleston . 
 In 2007 , Núñez started the season with Charleston , and was named the starting shortstop for the Southern Division in the SAL All @-@ Star Game . He was promoted to Tampa on July 28 . He played for Tampa in 2008 , batting .271 with six home runs and 42 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 94 games . He was promoted to the Trenton Thunder of the Class AA Eastern League for the 2009 season . With Trenton , he had a .322 batting average in 123 games and appeared in the Eastern League All @-@ Star Game , in which he got two hits . The Yankees promoted Núñez to the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees of the Class AAA International League for the 2009 playoffs . Following the 2009 season , the Yankees added Núñez to their 40 @-@ man roster to protect him from being selected by another franchise in the Rule 5 draft . In 2010 , the Yankees assigned Núñez to Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre . There , he batted .289 in 118 games , with 55 runs scored , 25 doubles , three triples , four home runs , 50 RBI , and 23 stolen bases . He was named to the International League All @-@ Star team , the postseason All @-@ Star team , and the Topps Triple @-@ A All @-@ Star Team . Núñez won the Kevin Lawn Award as the Yankees ' minor league player of the year for 2010 . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Núñez was called up to the majors for the first time on August 19 , 2010 after Lance Berkman was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list . Núñez debuted on the same day , replacing Jeter in the seventh inning and fouling out in his only plate appearance . Núñez received playing time as a fill @-@ in for Jeter and the then @-@ injured Alex Rodriguez . On August 21 , Núñez recorded his first major league hit , a go @-@ ahead RBI single into right field . Núñez hit his first career home run against the Chicago White Sox on August 28 , 2010 . He also stole his first career base the same day . In 30 games for the Yankees , Nunez hit .280 , with one home run , seven RBIs , and scored 12 runs . After the season , Baseball America rated him as the eighth @-@ best prospect in the Yankees organization , while also naming him the " Best Defensive Infielder " and the " Best Infield Arm " in the Yankees organization . Núñez was part of the Yankees postseason in case Jeter or A @-@ Rod get injured again . The Yankees ventured through the playoffs until losing to the Texas Rangers in the 2010 ALCS . 
 Núñez beat out Ramiro Peña for the role as the utility infielder to start the 2011 season . With the Yankees , Núñez played approximately two games a week , allowing Derek Jeter and Alex Rodriguez to rest more often . Núñez batted .339 while filling in for the Yankees as their starting shortstop for three weeks while Jeter was injured ; he later became the team 's starting third baseman when Rodriguez required arthroscopic knee surgery . In addition to playing various infield positions , manager Joe Girardi also used Núñez as an outfielder when Nick Swisher experienced tendinitis in his elbow . Núñez played in 112 games for the Yankees , and led the team in errors with 20 , despite only playing part @-@ time . 
 Despite his defensive struggles , the Yankees viewed Núñez as likely to make their 25 @-@ man roster out of spring training in 2012 as a utility infielder . With Brett Gardner , the Yankees ' starting left fielder , injuring his elbow , Núñez received playing time in left field , as well as the infield . In his first twenty games of the 2012 New York Yankees season , Núñez hit .294 , but committed four errors in 58 chances . The day after he committed two errors in a game against the Tampa Bay Rays , Núñez was demoted to the Triple @-@ A Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre team . The team decided to abandon their approach of using Núñez as a utility player so that he can receive daily playing time at shortstop and second base , as the organization still views him as an everyday shortstop . 
 On September 1 , 2012 , the Yankees promoted Núñez from Triple @-@ A and manager Joe Girardi placed him into the starting lineup against the Baltimore Orioles for that day . He finished the regular season with a .292 batting average in 82 at @-@ bats . Though he was left off of the Yankees ' postseason roster for the 2012 American League Championship Series , he was added to the roster when Jeter suffered a fractured ankle . In Game 3 of the 2012 ALCS , Núñez hit his first career postseason home run off of Tigers pitcher Justin Verlander . The Yankees lost the series to the Tigers in a 4 @-@ game sweep . 
 Heading into the 2013 season , Yankees ' General Manager Brian Cashman said that if Núñez were to make the team , he would do so as a utility infielder , reversing the team 's position . However , Núñez only played shortstop during spring training . Jeter began the season on the disabled list , and Núñez started at shortstop for the Yankees on Opening Day . Núñez was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list on May 12 after missing the previous week due to soreness in his left rib cage . He was then transferred to the 60 @-@ day disabled list due to a strained left oblique . He was activated from the disabled list on July 6 after missing 2 months . He ended the season with .a 260 batting average and 28 RBIs in 90 games played . 
 In spring training in 2014 , Núñez competed with <unk> Wheeler , Yangervis Solarte , Dean Anna , and Scott Sizemore for a reserve infielder role with the Yankees . With reserve infielder Brendan Ryan starting the season on the disabled list , the Yankees chose Anna and Solarte over Núñez . To add Solarte to the roster , the Yankees designated Núñez for assignment . 
 = = = Minnesota Twins = = = 
 With the hope of improving their offense , the Minnesota Twins acquired Núñez from the Yankees on April 7 , 2014 , in exchange for minor league pitcher Miguel <unk> . The Twins optioned him to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League . After batting 7 @-@ for @-@ 22 ( .318 ) for Rochester , he was promoted to the Twins as the 26th man on their roster for a doubleheader on April 17 , and was optioned back the next day . He finished the season with a .250 batting average in 72 games played with the Twins . 
 Núñez and the Twins agreed to a $ 1 @.@ 025 million salary for the 2015 season , avoiding salary arbitration . In 72 games in 2015 , Núñez hit .282 / .327 / .431 with 4 HR and 20 RBI across 4 positions for the Twins . 
 Avoiding arbitration with the Twins at $ 1 @.@ 475 million for the 2016 season , Núñez entered the season expecting to compete for a reserve role . On the Twins Opening Day roster in 2016 , Núñez impressed in April , hitting .373 in 18 games in a reserve role . However , following an injury to shortstop Eduardo Escobar , Núñez began earning more playing time as the team 's starting shortstop . With an injury to third baseman Trevor Plouffe , Núñez remained in the lineup following Escobar 's return . He became the Twins ' leadoff hitter . On July 5 , Núñez was named to his first All @-@ Star Game . That day , he had a .315 batting average with 11 home runs and 19 stolen bases . 
 = = Scouting profile = = 
 The Yankees viewed Núñez as a possible replacement at shortstop for Jeter . Though they were willing to trade Jesús Montero , their top hitting prospect , the Yankees considered Núñez untouchable in trade negotiations . Scouts consider Núñez 's throwing arm to be strong , and compliment his ability to hit for average , hit for power , and baserunning ability . However , scouts feel he can get " lackadaisical in the field " and swings at too many pitches outside of the strike zone . 
 = Arcade Fire = 
 Arcade Fire is a Canadian indie rock band based in Montreal , Quebec consisting of husband and wife Win Butler and Régine Chassagne , along with Win 's younger brother Will Butler , Richard Reed Parry , Tim Kingsbury and Jeremy Gara . The band 's current touring line @-@ up also includes former core member Sarah Neufeld , frequent collaborator Owen Pallett , two additional percussionists , <unk> Edmond and <unk> <unk> , and saxophonists Matt Bauder and Stuart Bogie . 
 Founded in 2001 by friends and classmates Win Butler and Josh Deu , the band came to prominence in 2004 with the release of their critically acclaimed debut album Funeral . Their second studio album , Neon Bible , won them the 2008 Meteor Music Award for Best International Album and the 2008 Juno Award for Alternative Album of the Year . Their third studio album , The Suburbs , was released in 2010 to critical acclaim and commercial success . It received many accolades , including the 2011 Grammy for Album of the Year , the 2011 Juno Award for Album of the Year , and the 2011 Brit Award for Best International Album . In 2013 , Arcade Fire released their fourth album , Reflektor , and scored the feature film Her , for which band members William Butler and Owen Pallett were nominated in the Best Original Score category at the 86th Academy Awards . All four of their studio albums have received nominations for the Best Alternative Music Album Grammy ; the band 's work has also been named three times as a shortlist nominee for the Polaris Music Prize : in 2007 for Neon Bible , in 2011 for The Suburbs and in 2014 for Reflektor , winning the award for The Suburbs . 
 The band plays guitar , drums , bass guitar , piano , violin , viola , cello , double bass , xylophone , glockenspiel , keyboard , synthesizer , French horn , accordion , harp , mandolin , and hurdy @-@ gurdy , and takes most of these instruments on tour ; the multi @-@ instrumentalist band members switch duties throughout shows . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2001 – 03 : Formation and early work = = = 
 Win Butler and Josh Deu originally founded Arcade Fire in Montreal around 2001 , having first met at Phillips Exeter Academy as high school students . Both attended Concordia University where their musical ideas began to develop and the first incarnation of the band was born . The duo began rehearsing their material at McGill University where they met Régine Chassagne , a music student whom they asked to join them . Deu recalls , " Win and I played guitar . Everyone played guitar . We had no music to show her , but she ended up saying yes to joining us , and I don ’ t know why . Maybe there was a little spark with Win . " The trio recorded a set of demos and began performing live in the second half of 2001 . At that time , the band consisted of Butler , Chassagne , Deu , multi @-@ instrumentalist Tim Kyle ( later of Wild Light ) , bassist Alan <unk> ( later of Les Angles Morts , Crystal <unk> , and AIDS Wolf ) , guitarist / drummer Dane Mills ( later of <unk> ) , and multi @-@ instrumentalist Brendan Reed ( later of Les Angles Morts and founding member of Clues ) , who lived with Butler and Chassagne in Montreal 's Mile End neighbourhood at the time and was a collaborator with them on song @-@ writing and arrangement ( 2001 – 2003 ) . 
 The initial Montreal structure of the band began to dissolve in the summer of 2002 , when they travelled to Butler 's family farm on Mount Desert Island , Maine to record their self @-@ titled EP . Tension between Butler and bassist Myles <unk> led the latter to exit the band following the recording session . Richard Reed Parry , who had been enlisted to help the band record , began to collaborate with them during the sessions and would go on to join the band shortly afterwards . Around the same time , Joshua Deu left the band to continue his studies ; he continued to collaborate on the visual aspects of the band . In the winter of 2003 , the band celebrated the release of its EP with a show at Montreal 's Casa del Popolo . Before a crowd packed beyond capacity , the band 's set ended ( in the middle of an encore ) with an argument between Butler and Reed , who quit the band on @-@ stage . Mills told gathered friends in the crowd immediately thereafter that he considered the band to have broken up , as such resigning from the band as well . Following the on @-@ stage implosion , Butler 's brother William Butler ( subject of the early Arcade Fire song " William Pierce Butler " ) and Tim Kingsbury were brought in to replace Reed and Mills so that the band could continue , and they set out to promote the self @-@ titled EP . The eponymous release ( often referred to by fans as the Us Kids Know EP ) was sold at early shows . After the band achieved fame , the EP was subsequently remastered and given a full release . 
 The promise shown by the new band in its early live shows allowed them to land a record contract with the independent record label , Merge Records , before the end of its first year together . 
 When asked about the rumour that the band 's name refers to a fire in an arcade , Win Butler replied : " It 's not a rumour , it 's based on a story that someone told me . It 's not an actual event , but one that I took to be real . I would say that it 's probably something that the kid made up , but at the time I believed him . " 
 = = = 2004 – 06 : Funeral = = = 
 Funeral was released in September 2004 in Canada and February 2005 in Great Britain . The title of the debut album referred to the deaths of several relatives of band members ( prominently the Butlers ' grandfather , composer / arranger Alvino Rey ) during its recording . These events created a somber atmosphere that influenced songs such as " Une <unk> sans lumière " ( " A Year Without Light " ) , " In the Backseat " , and " Haïti " , Chassagne 's elegy to her homeland . 
 The album was critically and commercially acclaimed . It appeared on many top ten album lists for 2004 and 2005 ( due to delayed international releases ) , with Pitchfork , Filter , No Ripcord , and The MTV2 2005 Review crowning it the album of the year . NME named Funeral second in their list of 2005 's best albums . NME also named " Rebellion ( Lies ) " the second best track . By November 2005 , Funeral had gone gold in both Canada and the UK , and sold over half a million copies worldwide , a very large number for an independent release with minimal television or radio exposure . The album became Merge Records ' first in the Billboard 200 chart and the label 's biggest selling album to date , surpassing Neutral Milk Hotel 's In the Aeroplane Over the Sea . 
 The band booked small clubs for their 2004 tour , but growing interest forced many venue changes , far beyond the band 's expectations , and the tour continued into mid @-@ 2005 throughout the United States , Canada , Europe , the <unk> Festival in Japan , and the Hillside Festival in Guelph . Taking much of the summer of 2005 off , the band made key festival appearances at the Halifax Pop Explosion , Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , the Sasquatch ! Music Festival , Lollapalooza , <unk> Festival , Reading and Leeds Festival in the UK , Electric Picnic in Ireland and the Lowlands Festival in the Netherlands . 
 Arcade Fire was featured on the April 4 , 2005 cover of Time 's Canadian edition . On May 1 , 2005 , the band performed at the Coachella Valley Music & Arts Festival . In May 2005 , the band signed a short @-@ term publishing contract with EMI for Funeral , and in June the band released a new single , " Cold Wind " , on Six Feet Under , Vol . 2 : Everything Ends . The BBC used the track " Wake Up " on an advertisement for their autumn 2005 season , and the tracks " Rebellion ( Lies ) " and " Neighborhood No. 1 ( Tunnels ) " ( See Neighborhood 1 ( Tunnels ) ) on adverts in January 2006 . On September 9 , 2005 , the band appeared on the British / US television special " Fashion Rocks " , on which David Bowie joined them for " Wake Up " . This recording , as well as recordings of the band 's collaboration on Bowie 's " Life on Mars " and " Five Years , " were made available on the iTunes Music Store in a virtual live EP . The same trip to New York City took them to the Late Show with David Letterman and a concert in Central Park . The Central Park show featured a surprise appearance by Bowie . On September 11 , 2005 , Arcade Fire appeared on the long @-@ running BBC music series Top of the Pops , performing " Rebellion ( Lies ) " . The band also performed to a TV audience in Paris for Canal + , and the show was later screened on the British television 's Channel 4 . The band scored two number one songs on MTV2 ( UK ) NME Chart Show , with " Neighborhood No. 3 ( Power Out ) " and a three @-@ week run with " Wake Up " . This success followed Rough Trade Records 's last @-@ minute decision to release " Wake Up " only on 7 " vinyl . 
 " Wake Up " was played immediately before the Irish rock group U2 started their concerts on their 2005 – 06 Vertigo Tour ; Arcade Fire subsequently opened three shows for that tour , and at the third in Montreal , Canada , appeared on stage during U2 's encore to join in a cover of Joy Division 's " Love Will Tear Us Apart " . Additionally , The Dan Patrick Show , a daily national sports talk show in the US , plays the song as a lead @-@ out every Friday to signify the end of their show . The song was also heard numerous times during the Super Bowl telecast on February 5 , 2010 . 
 Funeral and the single " Cold Wind " were nominated for Grammys in the Best Alternative Rock Album and Best Song Written for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media categories ( Six Feet Under , Vol . 2 : Everything Ends ) , respectively . On April 2 , 2006 , in Halifax , Nova Scotia , Arcade Fire received the Juno Award for Songwriters Of The Year for three songs from Funeral : " Wake Up " , " Rebellion ( Lies ) " , and " Neighborhood No. 3 ( Power Out ) " . The band was nominated for three BRIT Awards : Best International Group , Best International Album , and Best International Breakthrough Act . 
 Arcade Fire made an appearance on the BBC show Later with Jools Holland on May 12 , 2005 , performing " Power Out " and " Rebellion ( Lies ) " . On December 27 , 2005 , Funeral was ranked No. 1 on MTV2 's " 50 Greatest Albums of the Year " in the United Kingdom . On October 22 , 2007 , Funeral was ranked No. 8 in Bob Mersereau 's book The Top 100 Canadian Albums . In late 2009 , Pitchfork Media ranked the album No. 2 in their list of the top 200 albums of the 2000s , behind Radiohead 's Kid A. 
 = = = 2006 – 10 : Neon Bible = = = 
 During the downtime between Funeral and the beginning of recording sessions for Neon Bible , the band purchased a defunct church in the small Quebec town of Farnham , approximately 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) southeast of Montreal , and spent the early part of 2006 converting it into a recording studio . 
 The first track officially released from Neon Bible was " Intervention " in December 2006 on iTunes . Proceeds from this release were dedicated to Partners in Health . An error resulted in a second song , " Black Wave / Bad Vibrations " , appearing on iTunes for a short time . The album was leaked to peer @-@ to @-@ peer networks on January 26 , 2007 , and was officially released March 5 , 2007 in the UK and March 6 in North America . Neon Bible premiered at number 1 on the Canadian Albums Chart and the Irish Album Charts , and number 2 on the US Billboard Top 200 charts and the UK Top 40 Album Chart for the week of March 12 , 2007 . The album was also number 1 on the Rock and Indie album charts . The first proper single , " Black Mirror " , reached the No. 1 spot on CBC Radio 3 's R3 @-@ 30 chart for five consecutive weeks , from March 22 to April 19 , 2007 , and was the first single by any band ever to spend more than two weeks atop the chart . The album gained much critical acclaim ( even being mooted as a strong contender for album of the year ) , and because of its success saw the band proclaimed the most exciting act on the earth by British music magazine Q. Paste voted it one of the five best albums of 2007 . Trouser Press writer Jason <unk> ranked Neon Bible " among the best indie rock recordings of all time . " 
 Arcade Fire made their first appearance on Saturday Night Live on February 24 , 2007 ( Episode 618 ) , performing " Intervention " and " Keep the Car Running " . Owen Pallett was not present as he was recording for his solo project . During the performance , one of Win Butler 's guitar strings broke , prompting him to rip the strings from his acoustic guitar and smash it on the floor until it shattered . On this guitar , " <unk> vide pa <unk> " was written in duct tape across the front . A Haitian proverb meaning " An empty sack cannot stand up " in Creole , this may have been a reference to the extreme poverty of Haiti , the country of origin of Régine Chassagne . 
 On July 10 , 2007 , Neon Bible was named to the shortlist for the 2007 Polaris Music Prize . Patrick Watson was announced as the winner at a gala ceremony on September 24 , 2007 . However , due to the band 's preference not to participate in compilation albums , they were the only nominee not to have a track on the Polaris promotional compilation 2007 Polaris Music Prize . Some media initially reported that the Polaris committee had snubbed the band by excluding them , leading the band and the committee to issue a joint press release confirming that the band chose not to have a track included on the album . 
 The Neon Bible tour continued into September 2007 with 25 + dates scheduled in North America and Europe through mid @-@ November . In Paris the band did a Take @-@ Away Show video session shot by Vincent Moon . The band toured Australia and New Zealand for the first time in early 2008 as part of the 2008 Big Day Out festival . On October 14 , 2007 , Win Butler and Régine Chassagne made a surprise guest appearance at a Bruce Springsteen show in Ottawa , playing " State Trooper " and " Keep the Car Running " . The band committed to give Partners in Health $ 1 @.@ 00 , £ 1 @.@ 00 , or € 1 @.@ 00 of every ticket sold on its 2008 European and North American tours . 
 Arcade Fire further helped PIH , when it recorded " Lenin " on Red Hot Organization 's latest album , Dark Was the Night . Sales from <unk> generated over $ 850 @,@ 000 in money donated to AIDS related charities — $ 300 @,@ 000 of which was given to PIH on Arcade Fire 's behalf . 
 In February 2008 , Win Butler announced on the band 's journal that the Neon Bible tour had come to an end , after one year of touring and a total of 122 shows ( including 33 festivals ) in 75 cities and 19 countries . 
 Win Butler has been a vocal supporter of Barack Obama since the end of the New Hampshire Primary . Arcade Fire performed two free concerts for Obama in Cleveland and <unk> , Ohio on March 2 , 2008 and March 3 , 2008 before the state 's March 4 primary . The band , with Superchunk , performed another two free concerts for Obama on May 1 in Greensboro , North Carolina , and on May 2 in Carrboro , North Carolina before the state 's May 6 primary . On January 21 , 2009 , Arcade Fire and Jay @-@ Z were the musical guests at the Obama Campaign Staff Ball at the DC Armory , at Obama 's request . Butler thanked President Obama for his stated intent to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay , and repeatedly thanked the Obama staffers for their work during the election . 
 The band was rumoured to be working with producer Markus Dravs on the soundtrack for the Richard Kelly film The Box . Win Butler denied the claims , but stated that he and Owen Pallett " may do an instrumental piece or two " for the film . 
 In December 2008 , Pitchfork reported the band set up the website <unk> @-@ <unk> to foreshadow the release of a concert film with the same title , reporting , " Miroir Noir will feature live footage from the Neon Bible tour . " The upcoming film was directed by Vincent <unk> . It was made available to pre @-@ order on December 15 , 2008 with the digital version available to download immediately , and the DVD shipping March 31 , 2009 . 
 A re @-@ recorded version of the band 's song " Wake Up " from their 2004 debut album , Funeral , has been used for the trailer of the Spike Jonze film Where the Wild Things Are , which was released on October 2009 . The song " Wake Up " has also become popular on sports radio talk shows in the US In 2009 , two nationally syndicated shows — The Dan Patrick Show and The Petros and Money Show — frequently used the song as " bumper " music . The National Football League featured this recording in commercials throughout the broadcast of the 2010 Super Bowl . The band donated the proceeds from licensing the song to the NFL to the charity Partners In Health . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : The Suburbs = = = 
 On May 27 , 2010 it was announced that a new double @-@ sided 12 " single would be released the same day , with the full album , called The Suburbs , to be released on August 2 in the UK and on August 3 in the US and Canada thanks to Merge Records . The album is produced by Markus Dravs , who worked on previous album , 2007 's Neon Bible and was engineered by Marcus Paquin , who has also previously worked with the band . A track @-@ by @-@ track review ahead of The Suburbs release by The Quietus website said , " The progression is similar to the one William Blake takes us through in Songs of Innocence and of Experience that suggests forward momentum and maturity . " The album was released with eight different covers . 
 The first show announced was Oxegen 2010 which took place in Ireland in July . The band announced that they would play songs from the new album in their headline performance at the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2010 , with Win Butler noting " We 're really looking forward to playing the new songs live ... [ it 's ] like an inventor emerging from his basement after a year 's work . " 
 In July 2010 , Arcade Fire announced they would be broadcasting their August 5 concert at Madison Square Garden live via YouTube . They later announced the video would be directed by Terry Gilliam . The Suburbs was released worldwide at the start of August 2010 to extensive critical acclaim comparable to Funeral and Neon Bible . During the 2010 tour Arcade Fire gave a tribute to Jay Reatard performing the cover of " Oh , It 's Such a Shame . " Win Butler confessed to Zane Lowe that the band wanted Jay Reatard to support the band on this tour , but he died . The Suburbs went on to debut at number one in the US ( on the Billboard 200 ) , selling 156 @,@ 000 units in its first week . It was also number one in the UK and Canada . 
 In August 2010 , Arcade Fire and Google released an interactive music video , written and directed by Chris Milk and produced by B @-@ Reel , which allows the viewer to enter the address where they grew up and the video is then " <unk> " . This video utilizes the band 's song " We Used to Wait " from The Suburbs , and showcases capabilities of HTML5 and Google 's Chrome browser . On November 13 , 2010 , Arcade Fire made their second appearance on Saturday Night Live , performing " We Used to Wait " and " Sprawl II ( Mountains Beyond Mountains ) " . 
 In a nod to the Butlers ' maternal grandfather , Alvino Rey , who was an amateur radio operator , the logo used by the band from this time was a variation of that used by the American Radio Relay League . Also , when playing the single " We Used to Wait " live , the background video screen features a radio exchange between Rey and a Canadian operator having Call Sign <unk> . The video also features many other amateur radio artifacts . 
 Arcade Fire performed at the 53rd Grammy Awards in February 2011 . The band was nominated for Grammy Awards in three categories : Album of the Year , Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , and Best Alternative Music Album ( for The Suburbs ) . Out of the three nominations , they won the award for Album of the Year . 
 At the 2011 BRIT Awards , The Suburbs won Best International Album , and Arcade Fire won the Award for Best International Group . 
 In March 2011 , Arcade Fire was honoured at the Juno Awards of 2011 . They won Group of the Year and Songwriter of the Year for " Ready to Start " , " Sprawl II ( Mountains Beyond Mountains ) " , and " We Used to Wait " , all off The Suburbs . The Suburbs also won Album of the Year and Alternative Album of the Year . 
 On April 19 , 2011 it was announced that Arcade Fire will release a deluxe edition of their album The Suburbs featuring the short film Scenes from the Suburbs , by director Spike Jonze , as well as two new tracks , " Culture War " and " Speaking in Tongues " featuring David Byrne . Scenes from the Suburbs , which debuted at the Berlin International Film Festival 2011 , has a running time of 30 minutes . The film screened at the SXSW Film Festival 2011 and saw its online premiere on <unk> on June 27 , 2011 . Writing for the Canadian Press , Nick Patch called the film " a sci @-@ fi puzzler that seems to blend the paranoia of Terry Gilliam films with the nostalgia of classic Steven Spielberg flicks . " 
 On June 16 , the album was named as a longlisted nominee ( one of 40 ) for the 2011 Polaris Music Prize . On July 6 , the album was named as a shortlisted ( one of 10 ) nominee for the 2011 award . On September 20 , 2011 , they were awarded the Polaris Prize . 
 On May 19 , 2012 Arcade Fire ( minus members Will and Tim ) made their third appearance on Saturday Night Live , playing as a backup band for musical guest and host Mick Jagger . The band played " The Last Time " with Jagger , and participated in Kristen Wiig 's farewell skit , playing " She 's a Rainbow " into " Ruby Tuesday " . The band wore <unk> rouges ( red squares ) to show support for the 2012 Quebec student protests . 
 Arcade Fire recorded a song for The Hunger Games soundtrack ( The Hunger Games : Songs from District 12 and Beyond ) , called " Abraham 's Daughter " . The song is featured in the movie 's end credits . The soundtrack was released on March 20 , 2012 , debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 . It sold more than 175 @,@ 000 copies in its first week according to Nielsen SoundScan . It 's the first theatrical film soundtrack to top the chart since Michael Jackson 's " This Is It " debuted at No. 1 on the list . It is also only the 16th soundtrack to debut at No. 1 in the history of the Billboard 200 chart ( those soundtracks include film , television , and straight @-@ to @-@ video efforts ) . 
 Arcade Fire also contributed to the movie 's original score , The Hunger Games : Original Motion Picture Score . The group composed the grand , fascistic @-@ inspired , ominous Panem national anthem , entitled " Horn of Plenty " , an important and signature leitmotif appearing throughout the film . “ We were interested in making music that would be more integral in the movie , just as a mental exercise , ” Butler , who co @-@ wrote the song with Chassagne , explained . “ And there ’ s an anthem that runs throughout the books , the national anthem of the fascist Capitol . So as a thought experiment , we tried to write what that might sound like . It ’ s like the Capitol ’ s idea of itself , basically . ” He further added that " it 's not a pop song or anything . More of an anthem that could be playing at a big sporting event like the [ Hunger ] Games . So we did a structure for that , and then James Newton Howard made a movie @-@ score version of it that happens in several places in the film . ” Arcade Fire 's Panem national anthem has received strong reviews . According to Spin Mobile , " ' Horn of Plenty ' sounds both exactly like Arcade Fire and exactly like a futuristic anthem . " 
 = = = 2013 – present : Reflektor and Her Soundtrack = = = 
 Arcade Fire and Mercury Records confirmed that they would release a fourth album in late 2013 . In December 2012 , the band 's manager Scott Rodger confirmed that Arcade Fire was in the studio working with regular producer of the band Markus Dravs and James Murphy , frontman of LCD Soundsystem . The official Arcade Fire pre @-@ order website sets the release date on October 28 , 2013 . The band announced on January 18 , 2013 that they were selling the church they had been using as a studio due to a collapsed roof . Throughout 2013 , the band worked on the album in several different recording studios - including Murphy 's DFA Records studio in New York . On June 22 , 2013 , Rolling Stone reported that new material from the album would be released on September 9 , 2013 . 
 On July 12 , the band announced via a reply on Twitter that their new album will be released on October 29 . 
 Arcade Fire 's 2013 tour generated controversy in some smaller clubs . The band made a mandatory dress code of " formal dress or costume " for a few locations , with negative reactions from fans . 
 Arcade Fire members William Butler and Owen Pallett received an Oscar nomination for Best Original score for Spike Jonze 's 2013 science @-@ fiction romance film Her . Speculation emerged in August that the album would be named Reflektor after images began circulating of street art using the name . These images were collected on an Instagram account and later uploads noted the date of September 9 and time of 9 P.M. Arcade Fire confirmed their connection to the campaign with a billboard put up in New York City on August 26 , 2013 . A week later , the band released a 15 @-@ second music clip on Spotify titled " 9pm 9 / 9 " under the album name Reflektor . 
 English rock musician David Bowie contributed to backing vocals on the title song , " Reflektor " after praising the song 's quality in fall 2013 . 
 Arcade Fire have recorded a version of the 1980 hit single " Games Without Frontiers " for the Peter Gabriel tribute album And I 'll Scratch Yours , which was released in September 2013 . 
 Arcade Fire were the musical guest on the 39th season premiere of Saturday Night Live on September 28 , 2013 . The episode drew six million viewers . They also appeared in a half hour special on NBC , Arcade Fire in Here Comes the Night Time , that aired immediately after SNL . The special featured cameo appearances by Ben Stiller , Bono , Bill Hader , Zach Galifianakis , Rainn Wilson , Aziz Ansari , Eric Wareheim , and Michael Cera . The concert footage was filmed at the band 's surprise September 9 appearance at Montreal 's Club <unk> . 
 Arcade Fire performed live at the YouTube Music Awards on November 3 , 2013 . The performance featured an experimental " live video " directed by Her writer and director Spike Jonze , and actress Greta <unk> . The band was nominated for a Satellite Award for Best Original Score for Her . They were also nominated for a Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Music Score . The band headlined the 2014 Glastonbury Festival on June 27 . 
 At the 2014 Juno Awards , Reflektor won Album of the Year and Alternative Album of the Year . The album was also a shortlisted nominee for the 2014 Polaris Music Prize . 
 A documentary film called The Reflektor Tapes , about the making of the album , was released on September 24 , 2015 and was shown at the 2015 Toronto Film Festival . The following day , a deluxe edition of the album containing original recordings and five unreleased songs was released . The documentary was directed by Kahlil Joseph , winner of the 2013 Sundance Grand Jury Prize for Short Films . 
 On May 25 , 2016 Win Butler and Régine Chassagne performed a surprise set outside the Louvre which included a new song . The pair were invited by the french street artist JR to DJ at the launch of his new exhibition titled JR Au Louvre , but set up set up drums and keyboards in the <unk> gardens . The band covered David Bowie 's Oh ! You Pretty Things and Nothing Compares 2 U by Sinéad O 'Connor . On June 17 , Butler hosted a Reddit AMA , where he answered fan questions about the next Arcade Fire album . He stated that the new record maybe released in spring 2017 and that the band had ' no definite schedule though . It 'll be done when it 's done . ' On July 5 , the band played their first complete full @-@ band concert in two years in Barcelona , Spain as a warm up for their upcoming summer festival dates in Canada , Portugal , Spain and USA . 
 On July 19 , Tim Kingsbury told the CBC that the band 's upcoming fifth album will be out in 2017 . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Funeral ( 2004 ) 
 Neon Bible ( 2007 ) 
 The Suburbs ( 2010 ) 
 Reflektor ( 2013 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Funeral Tour ( 2003 – 2005 ) 
 Neon Bible Tour ( 2007 – 2008 ) 
 The Suburbs Tour ( 2010 – 2011 ) 
 Reflektor Tour ( 2013 – 2014 ) 
 2016 Tour ( 2016 ) 
 = Outer Hebrides = 
 The Outer Hebrides , also known as the Western Isles ( Scottish Gaelic : Na h @-@ Eileanan Siar [ nə <unk> <unk> ] or Na h @-@ Eileanan an Iar [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , Innse Gall ( " islands of the strangers " ) or the Long Isle or Long Island ( Gaelic : An t @-@ Eilean Fada ) , is an island chain off the west coast of mainland Scotland . The islands are geographically coextensive with Comhairle nan Eilean Siar , one of the 32 unitary council areas of Scotland . They form part of the Hebrides , separated from the Scottish mainland and from the Inner Hebrides by the waters of the Minch , the Little Minch and the Sea of the Hebrides . Scottish Gaelic is the predominant spoken language , although in a few areas English speakers form a majority . 
 Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from ancient metamorphic rocks and the climate is mild and oceanic . The 15 inhabited islands have a total population of 27 @,@ 400 and there are more than 50 substantial uninhabited islands . From Barra Head to the Butt of Lewis is roughly 210 kilometres ( 130 mi ) . 
 There are various important prehistoric structures , many of which pre @-@ date the first written references to the islands by Roman and Greek authors . The Western Isles became part of the Norse kingdom of the Suðreyjar , which lasted for over 400 years until sovereignty was transferred to Scotland by the Treaty of Perth in 1266 . Control of the islands was then held by clan chiefs , principal of whom were the MacLeods , MacDonalds , Mackenzies and MacNeils . The Highland Clearances of the 19th century had a devastating effect on many communities and it is only in recent years that population levels have ceased to decline . Much of the land is now under local control and commercial activity is based on tourism , crofting , fishing , and weaving . 
 Sea transport is crucial and a variety of ferry services operate between the islands and to mainland Scotland . Modern navigation systems now minimise the dangers but in the past the stormy seas have claimed many ships . Religion , music and sport are important aspects of local culture , and there are numerous designated conservation areas to protect the natural environment . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The main islands form an archipelago of which the major islands include Lewis and Harris , North Uist , Benbecula , South Uist , and Barra . Lewis and Harris has an area of 217 @,@ 898 hectares ( 841 sq mi ) and is the largest island in Scotland and the third largest in the British Isles , after Great Britain and Ireland . It incorporates Lewis in the north and Harris in the south , both of which are frequently referred to as individual islands , although they are joined by a land border . The island does not have a common name in either English or Gaelic and is referred to as " Lewis and Harris " , " Lewis with Harris " , " Harris with Lewis " etc . 
 The largest islands are deeply indented by arms of the sea such as Loch Ròg , Loch Seaforth and Loch nam <unk> . There are also more than 7 @,@ 500 freshwater lochs in the Outer Hebrides , about 24 % of the total for the whole of Scotland . North and South Uist and Lewis in particular have landscapes with a high percentage of freshwater and a maze and complexity of loch shapes . Harris has fewer large bodies of water but innumerable small <unk> . Loch <unk> on Lewis is 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) long , and has several large islands in its midst , including Eilean Mòr . Although Loch <unk> has only 25 % of the <unk> 's surface area it has a mean depth of 33 metres ( 108 ft ) and is the most voluminous on the island . Of Loch <unk> on North Uist it has been said that " there is probably no other loch in Britain which approaches Loch <unk> in irregularity and complexity of outline . " Loch Bì is South Uist 's largest loch and at 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) long it all but cuts the island in two . 
 Much of the western coastline of the islands is machair , a fertile low @-@ lying dune pastureland . Lewis is comparatively flat , and largely consists of treeless moors of blanket peat . The highest eminence is <unk> at 574 m ( 1 @,@ 883 ft ) in the south west . Most of Harris is mountainous , with large areas of exposed rock and <unk> , the archipelago 's only Corbett , reaches 799 m ( 2 @,@ 621 ft ) in height . North and South Uist and Benbecula , ( sometimes collectively referred to as The Uists ) have sandy beaches and wide cultivated areas of machair to the west and virtually uninhabited mountainous areas to the east . The highest peak here is Beinn Mhòr at 620 metres ( 2 @,@ 034 ft ) . The Uists and their immediate outliers have a combined area of 74 @,@ 540 hectares ( 288 sq mi ) . This includes the Uists themselves and the islands that link to them by causeways and bridges . Barra is 5 @,@ 875 hectares ( 23 sq mi ) in extent and has a rugged interior , surrounded by machair and extensive beaches . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Much of the archipelago is a protected habitat including both the islands and the surrounding waters . There are 53 Sites of Special Scientific Interest of which the largest are Loch an Duin , North Uist at 15 @,@ 100 hectares ( 37 @,@ 000 acres ) and North Harris , which is 12 @,@ 700 hectares ( 31 @,@ 000 acres ) in extent . 
 Loch <unk> on South Uist is a national nature reserve owned and managed by Scottish Natural Heritage . The reserve covers 1 @,@ 677 hectares across the whole range of local habitats . Over 200 species of flowering plants have been recorded on the reserve , some of which are nationally scarce . South Uist is considered the best place in the UK for the aquatic plant Slender Naiad , which is a European Protected Species . 
 There has been considerable controversy over hedgehogs on the Uists . The animals are not native to the islands , having been introduced in the 1970s to reduce garden pests and their spread posed a threat to the eggs of ground nesting wading birds . In 2003 Scottish Natural Heritage undertook culls of hedgehogs in the area although they were halted in 2007 , with trapped animals now being relocated to the mainland . 
 Nationally important populations of breeding waders are present in the Outer Hebrides including common redshank , dunlin , lapwing and ringed plover . The islands also provide a habitat for other important species such as corncrake , hen harrier , golden eagle and otter . Offshore , basking shark and various species of whale and dolphin can be seen regularly , and the remoter islands ' seabird populations are of international significance . St Kilda has 60 @,@ 000 northern gannets , amounting to 24 % of the world population , 49 @,@ 000 breeding pairs of Leach 's petrel , up to 90 % of the European population and 136 @,@ 000 pairs of puffin and 67 @,@ 000 northern fulmar pairs , about 30 % and 13 % of the respective UK totals . Mingulay is an important breeding ground for razorbills , with 9 @,@ 514 pairs , 6 @.@ 3 % of the European population . 
 The bumblebee Bombus <unk> var. hebridensis is endemic to the Hebrides and there are local variants of the dark green fritillary and green @-@ veined white butterflies . The St Kilda wren is a subspecies of wren whose range is confined to the islands whose name it bears . 
 = = Population = = 
 The inhabited islands had a total population of 26 @,@ 502 at the time of the 2001 census and the 2011 figure was 27 @,@ 684 . During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 . The largest settlement in the Outer Hebrides is Stornoway on Lewis , which has a population of about 8 @,@ 100 . 
 In addition to the major North Ford ( Oitir Mhòr ) and South Ford causeways that connect North Uist to Benbecula via the northern of the <unk> 's , and Benbecula to South Uist , several other islands are linked by smaller causeways or bridges . Great Bernera and Scalpay have bridge connections to Lewis and Harris respectively , with causeways linking <unk> and Berneray to North Uist , Eriskay to South Uist , <unk> , Fraoch @-@ <unk> and the southern <unk> to Benbecula , and Vatersay to Barra . This means that all the inhabited islands are now connected to at least one other island by a land transport route . 
 = = = Uninhabited islands = = = 
 There are more than fifty uninhabited islands greater in size than 40 hectares ( 99 acres ) in the Outer Hebrides , including the Barra Isles , Flannan Isles , Monach Islands , the Shiant Isles and the islands of Loch Ròg . In common with the other main island chains of Scotland , many of the more remote islands were abandoned during the 19th and 20th centuries , in some cases after continuous habitation since the prehistoric period . More than 35 such islands have been identified in the Outer Hebrides alone . On Barra Head , for example , Historic Scotland have identified eighty @-@ three archaeological sites on the island , the majority being of a pre @-@ medieval date . In the 18th century the population was over fifty , but the last native islanders had left by 1931 . The island became completely uninhabited by 1980 with the automation of the lighthouse . 
 Some of the smaller islands continue to contribute to modern culture . The " Mingulay Boat Song " , although evocative of island life , was written after the abandonment of the island in 1938 and <unk> hosted the BBC television series Castaway 2000 . Others have played a part in Scottish history . On 4 May 1746 , the " Young Pretender " Charles Edward Stuart hid on Eilean <unk> with some of his men for four days whilst Royal Navy vessels patrolled the Minch . 
 Smaller isles and skerries and other island groups pepper the North Atlantic surrounding the main islands . Some are not geologically part of the Outer Hebrides , but are administratively and in most cases culturally , part of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar . 73 kilometres ( 45 mi ) to the west of Lewis lies St Kilda , now uninhabited except for a small military base . A similar distance to the north of Lewis are North Rona and Sula Sgeir , two small and remote islands . While Rona used to support a small population who grew grain and raised cattle , Sula Sgeir is an inhospitable rock . Thousands of northern gannets nest here , and by special arrangement some of their young , known as <unk> are harvested annually by the men of Ness . The status of Rockall , which is 367 kilometres ( 228 mi ) to the west of North Uist and which the Island of Rockall Act 1972 decreed to be a part of the Western Isles , remains a matter of international dispute . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from Lewisian gneiss . These are amongst the oldest rocks in Europe , having been formed in the Precambrian period up to three billion years ago . In addition to the Outer Hebrides , they form basement deposits on the Scottish mainland west of the Moine Thrust and on the islands of Coll and Tiree . These rocks are largely igneous in origin , mixed with metamorphosed marble , quartzite and mica schist and intruded by later basaltic dykes and granite magma . The gneiss 's delicate pink colours are exposed throughout the islands and it is sometimes referred to by geologists as " The Old Boy " . 
 Granite intrusions are found in the parish of <unk> in west Lewis , and another forms the summit plateau of the mountain <unk> in Harris . The granite here is anorthosite , and is similar in composition to rocks found in the mountains of the Moon . There are relatively small outcrops of Triassic sandstone at Broad Bay near Stornoway . The Shiant Isles and St Kilda are formed from much later tertiary basalt and basalt and gabbros respectively . The sandstone at Broad Bay was once thought to be Torridonian or Old Red Sandstone . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The Outer Hebrides have a cool temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude , due to the influence of the North Atlantic Current . The average temperature for the year is 6 ° C ( 44 ° F ) in January and 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) in summer . The average annual rainfall in Lewis is 1 @,@ 100 millimetres ( 43 in ) and sunshine hours range from 1 @,@ 100 to 1 @,@ 200 per year . The summer days are relatively long and May to August is the driest period . Winds are a key feature of the climate and even in summer there are almost constant breezes . According to the writer W. H. Murray if a visitor asks an islander for a weather forecast " he will not , like a <unk> answer dry , wet or sunny , but quote you a figure from the Beaufort Scale . " There are gales one day in six at the Butt of Lewis and small fish are blown onto the grass on top of 190 metre ( 620 ft ) high cliffs at Barra Head during winter storms . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 The Hebrides were originally settled in the Mesolithic era and have a diversity of important prehistoric sites . Eilean <unk> in Loch <unk> on North Uist was constructed circa 3200 – 2800 BC and may be Scotland 's earliest crannog ( a type of artificial island ) . The Callanish Stones dating from about 2900 BC are the finest example of a stone circle in Scotland , the 13 primary monoliths of between one and five metres high creating a circumference about 13 metres ( 43 ft ) in diameter . <unk> <unk> on South Uist , the only site in the UK where prehistoric mummies have been found and the impressive ruins of Dun <unk> broch on Lewis both date from the Iron Age . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The earliest written references that have survived relating to the islands were made by Pliny the Elder in his Natural History , where he states that there are 30 " Hebudes " , and makes a separate reference to " Dumna " , which Watson ( 1926 ) concludes is unequivocally the Outer Hebrides . Writing about 80 years later , in 140 @-@ 150 AD , Ptolemy , drawing on the earlier naval expeditions of Agricola , also distinguished between the Ebudes , of which he writes there were only five ( and thus possibly meaning the Inner Hebrides ) and Dumna . Dumna is cognate with the Early Celtic <unk> and means the " deep @-@ sea isle " . Pliny probably took his information from Pytheas of Massilia who visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC . It is possible that Ptolemy did as well , as Agricola 's information about the west coast of Scotland was of poor quality . Breeze also suggests that Dumna might be Lewis and Harris , the largest island of the Outer Hebrides although he conflates this single island with the name " Long Island " . Watson ( 1926 ) states that the meaning of Ptolemy 's " Eboudai " is unknown and that the root may be pre @-@ Celtic . Murray ( 1966 ) claims that Ptolemy 's " <unk> " was originally derived from the Old Norse <unk> , meaning " isles on the edge of the sea " . This idea is often repeated but no firm evidence of this derivation has emerged . 
 Other early written references include the flight of the <unk> people from Ireland to " Domon " , which is mentioned in the 12th @-@ century Lebor Gabála Érenn and a 13th @-@ century poem concerning Raghnall mac Gofraidh , then the heir to the throne of Mann and the Isles , who is said to have " broken the gate of Magh Domhna " . Magh Domhna means " the plain of Domhna ( or Domon ) " , but the precise meaning of the text is not clear . 
 In Irish mythology the islands were the home of the Fomorians , described as " huge and ugly " and " ship men of the sea " . They were pirates , extracting tribute from the coasts of Ireland and one of their kings was <unk> mac Dé <unk> ( i.e. <unk> , son of the goddess <unk> , who ruled over the deep seas ) . 
 In modern Gaelic the islands are sometimes referred to collectively as An t @-@ Eilean Fada ( the Long Island ) or Na h @-@ Eileanan a @-@ <unk> ( the Outer Isles ) . Innse Gall ( islands of the foreigners or strangers ) is also heard occasionally , a name that was originally used by mainland Highlanders when the islands were ruled by the Norse . 
 The individual island and place names in the Outer Hebrides have mixed Gaelic and Norse origins . Various Gaelic terms are used repeatedly : 
 There are also several islands called <unk> from the Norse <unk> meaning " tidal " or " ebb island " . 
 = = History = = 
 In Scotland , the Celtic Iron Age way of life , often troubled but never extinguished by Rome , re @-@ asserted itself when the legions abandoned any permanent occupation in 211 AD . Hanson ( 2003 ) writes : " For many years it has been almost axiomatic in studies of the period that the Roman conquest must have had some major medium or long @-@ term impact on Scotland . On present evidence that cannot be substantiated either in terms of environment , economy , or , indeed , society . The impact appears to have been very limited . The general picture remains one of broad continuity , not of disruption ... The Roman presence in Scotland was little more than a series of brief interludes within a longer continuum of indigenous development . " The Romans ' direct impact on the Highlands and Islands was scant and there is no evidence that they ever actually landed in the Outer Hebrides . 
 The later Iron Age inhabitants of the northern and western Hebrides were probably Pictish , although the historical record is sparse . Hunter ( 2000 ) states that in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD : " As for Shetland , Orkney , Skye and the Western Isles , their inhabitants , most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time , are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence . " The island of Pabbay is the site of the Pabbay Stone , the only extant Pictish symbol stone in the Outer Hebrides . This 6th century stele shows a flower , V @-@ rod and lunar crescent to which has been added a later and somewhat crude cross . 
 = = = Norse control = = = 
 Viking raids began on Scottish shores towards the end of the 8th century AD and the Hebrides came under Norse control and settlement during the ensuing decades , especially following the success of Harald Fairhair at the Battle of Hafrsfjord in 872 . In the Western Isles Ketill Flatnose was the dominant figure of the mid 9th century , by which time he had amassed a substantial island realm and made a variety of alliances with other Norse leaders . These princelings nominally owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown , although in practice the latter 's control was fairly limited . Norse control of the Hebrides was formalised in 1098 when Edgar of Scotland formally signed the islands over to Magnus III of Norway . The Scottish acceptance of Magnus III as King of the Isles came after the Norwegian king had conquered Orkney , the Hebrides and the Isle of Man in a swift campaign earlier the same year , directed against the local Norwegian leaders of the various islands petty kingdoms . By capturing the islands Magnus imposed a more direct royal control , although at a price . His skald Bjorn <unk> recorded that in Lewis " fire played high in the heaven " as " flame spouted from the houses " and that in the Uists " the king dyed his sword red in blood " . Thompson ( 1968 ) provides a more literal translation : " Fire played in the fig @-@ trees of <unk> ; it mounted up to heaven . Far and wide the people were driven to flight . The fire gushed out of the houses " . 
 The Hebrides were now part of Kingdom of the Isles , whose rulers were themselves vassals of the Kings of Norway . The Kingdom had two parts : the <unk> @-@ eyjar or South Isles encompassing the Hebrides and the Isle of Man ; and the <unk> @-@ eyjar or North Isles of Orkney and Shetland . This situation lasted until the partitioning of the Western Isles in 1156 , at which time the Outer Hebrides remained under Norwegian control while the Inner Hebrides broke out under Somerled , the Norse @-@ Celtic kinsman of the Manx royal house . 
 Following the ill @-@ fated 1263 expedition of Haakon IV of Norway , the Outer Hebrides along with the Isle of Man , were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth . Although their contribution to the islands can still be found in personal and placenames , the archaeological record of the Norse period is very limited . The best known find from this time is the Lewis chessmen , which date from the mid 12th century . 
 = = = Scots rule = = = 
 As the Norse era drew to a close the Norse @-@ speaking princes were gradually replaced by Gaelic @-@ speaking clan chiefs including the MacLeods of Lewis and Harris , the MacDonalds of the Uists and MacNeil of Barra . This transition did little to relieve the islands of internecine strife although by the early 14th century the MacDonald Lords of the Isles , based on Islay , were in theory these chiefs ' feudal superiors and managed to exert some control . 
 The growing threat that Clan Donald posed to the Scottish crown led to the forcible dissolution of the Lordship of the Isles by James IV in 1493 , but although the king had the power to subdue the organised military might of the Hebrides , he and his immediate successors lacked the will or ability to provide an alternative form of governance . The House of Stuart 's attempts to control the Outer Hebrides were then at first desultory and little more than punitive expeditions . In 1506 the Earl of Huntly besieged and captured Stornoway Castle using cannon . In 1540 James V himself conducted a royal tour , forcing the clan chiefs to accompany him . There followed a period of peace , but all too soon the clans were at loggerheads again . 
 In 1598 King James VI authorised some " Gentleman Adventurers " from Fife to civilise the " most barbarous Isle of Lewis " . Initially successful , the colonists were driven out by local forces commanded by Murdoch and Neil MacLeod , who based their forces on <unk> in Loch Ròg . The colonists tried again in 1605 with the same result but a third attempt in 1607 was more successful , and in due course Stornoway became a Burgh of Barony . By this time Lewis was held by the Mackenzies of Kintail , ( later the Earls of Seaforth ) , who pursued a more enlightened approach , investing in fishing in particular . The historian W. C. MacKenzie was moved to write : 
 At the end of the seventeenth century , the picture we have of Lewis that of a people pursuing their avocation in peace , but not in plenty . The <unk> ... , besides establishing orderly Government in the island .. had done a great deal to rescue the people from the slough of ignorance and <unk> in which they found themselves immersed . But in the sphere of economics their policy apparently was of little service to the community . 
 The Seaforth 's royalist inclinations led to Lewis becoming garrisoned during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms by Cromwell 's troops , who destroyed the old castle in Stornoway and in 1645 <unk> fought on the royalist side at the Battle of Auldearn . A new era of Hebridean involvement in the affairs of the wider world was about to commence . 
 = = = British era = = = 
 With the implementation of the Treaty of Union in 1707 the Hebrides became part of the new Kingdom of Great Britain , but the clan 's loyalties to a distant monarch were not strong . A considerable number of <unk> " came out " in support of the Jacobite Earl of Mar in the " 15 " although the response to the 1745 rising was muted . Nonetheless the aftermath of the decisive Battle of Culloden , which effectively ended Jacobite hopes of a Stuart restoration , was widely felt . The British government 's strategy was to estrange the clan chiefs from their kinsmen and turn their descendants into English @-@ speaking landlords whose main concern was the revenues their estates brought rather than the welfare of those who lived on them . This may have brought peace to the islands , but in the following century it came at a terrible price . 
 The Highland Clearances of the 19th century destroyed communities throughout the Highlands and Islands as the human populations were evicted and replaced with sheep farms . For example , Colonel Gordon of Cluny , owner of Barra , South Uist and Benbecula evicted thousands of islanders using trickery and cruelty and even offered to sell Barra to the government as a penal colony . Islands such as <unk> Mòr were completely cleared of their populations and even today the subject is recalled with bitterness and resentment in some areas . The position was exacerbated by the failure of the islands ' kelp industry , which thrived from the 18th century until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and large scale emigration became endemic . For example , hundreds left North Uist for Cape Breton , Nova Scotia . The pre @-@ clearance population of the island had been almost 5 @,@ 000 , although by 1841 it had fallen to 3 @,@ 870 and was only 2 @,@ 349 by 1931 . 
 For those who remained new economic opportunities emerged through the export of cattle , commercial fishing and tourism . During the summer season in the 1860s and 1870s five thousand inhabitants of Lewis could be found in Wick on the mainland of Scotland , employed on the fishing boats and at the quaysides . Nonetheless emigration and military service became the choice of many and the archipelago 's populations continued to dwindle throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries . By 2001 the population of North Uist was only 1 @,@ 271 . 
 The work of the Napier Commission and the Congested Districts Board , and the passing of the Crofting Act of 1886 helped , but social unrest continued . In July 1906 grazing land on Vatersay was raided by landless men from Barra and its isles . Lady Gordon Cathcart took legal action against the " raiders " but the visiting judge took the view that she had neglected her duties as a landowner and that " long indifference to the necessities of the cottars had gone far to drive them to exasperation " . Millennia of continuous occupation notwithstanding , many of the remoter islands were abandoned - Mingulay in 1912 , Hirta in 1930 , and Ceann Iar in 1942 among them . This process involved a transition from these places being perceived as relatively self @-@ sufficient agricultural economies to a view becoming held by both island residents and outsiders alike that they lacked the essential services of a modern industrial economy . 
 There were gradual economic improvements , among the most visible of which was the replacement of the traditional thatched blackhouse with accommodation of a more modern design . The creation of the Highlands and Islands Development Board and the discovery of substantial deposits of North Sea oil in 1965 , the establishment of a unitary local authority for the islands in 1975 and more recently the renewables sector have all contributed to a degree of economic stability in recent decades . The Arnish yard has had a chequered history but has been a significant employer in both the oil and renewables industries . Comhairle nan Eilean Siar , the local authority , employs 2 @,@ 000 people , making it the largest employer in the Outer Hebrides . See also the " Innse Gall area plan 2010 " and the Comhairle 's " Factfile - Economy " . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Modern commercial activities centre on tourism , crofting , fishing , and weaving including the manufacture of Harris tweed . Some of the larger islands have development trusts that support the local economy and , in striking contrast to the 19th and 20th century domination by absentee landlords , more than two thirds of the Western Isles population now lives on community @-@ owned estates . However the economic position of the islands remains relatively precarious . The Western Isles , including Stornoway , are defined by Highlands and Islands Enterprise as an economically " Fragile Area " and they have an estimated trade deficit of some £ 163 @.@ 4 million . Overall , the area is relatively reliant on primary industries and the public sector , and fishing and fish farming in particular are vulnerable to environmental impacts , changing market pressures and European legislation . 
 There is some optimism about the possibility of future developments in for example , renewable energy generation , tourism , and education , and after declines in the 20th century the population has stabilised since 2003 , although it is ageing . 
 = = Politics and local government = = 
 From the passing of the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1889 to 1975 Lewis formed part of the county of Ross and Cromarty and the rest of the archipelago , including Harris , was part of Inverness @-@ shire . 
 The Outer Hebrides became a unitary council area in 1975 , although in most of the rest of Scotland similar unitary councils were not established until 1996 . Since then , the islands have formed one of the 32 unitary council areas that now cover the whole country , with the council officially known by its Gaelic name , Comhairle nan Eilean Siar under the terms of the Local Government ( Gaelic Names ) ( Scotland ) Act 1997 . The council has its base in Stornoway on Lewis and is often known locally simply as " the Comhairle " or a ' <unk> . The Comhairle is one of only three Councils in Scotland with a majority of elected members who are independents . The other independent run Councils are Shetland and Orkney . Moray is run by a Conservative / Independent coalition . 
 The name for the British Parliament constituency covering this area is Na h @-@ Eileanan an Iar , the seat being held by Angus MacNeil MP since 2005 , while the Scottish Parliament constituency for the area is Na h @-@ Eileanan an Iar , the incumbent being Alasdair Allan MSP . 
 The Scottish independence referendum has led some islanders to call for a debate on the constitutional position of the Western Isles , linked with similar initiatives in Orkney and Shetland . 
 = = Gaelic language = = 
 The Outer Hebrides have historically been a very strong Scottish Gaelic ( Gàidhlig ) speaking area . Both the 1901 and 1921 census reported that all parishes were over 75 % Gaelic speaking , including areas of high population density such as Stornoway . However , the Education ( Scotland ) Act 1872 led to generations of Gaels being forbidden to speak their native language in the classroom , and is now recognised as having dealt a major blow to the language . People still living can recall being beaten for speaking Gaelic in school . Nonetheless , by 1971 most areas were still more than 75 % Gaelic speaking – with the exception of Stornoway , Benbecula and South Uist at 50 @-@ 74 % . 
 In the 2001 census , each island overall was over 50 % Gaelic speaking – South Uist ( 71 % ) , Harris ( 69 % ) , Barra ( 68 % ) , North Uist ( 67 % ) , Lewis ( 56 % ) and Benbecula ( 56 % ) . With 59 @.@ 3 % of Gaelic speakers or a total of 15 @,@ 723 speakers , this made the Outer Hebrides the most strongly coherent Gaelic speaking area in Scotland . 
 Most areas were between 60 @-@ 74 % Gaelic speaking and the areas with the highest density of over 80 % are Scalpay near Harris , <unk> and Kildonan , whilst <unk> , <unk> , Eriskay , Brue , <unk> , West Harris , <unk> , Soval , Ness , and <unk> all have more than 75 % . The areas with the lowest density of speakers are Stornoway ( 44 % ) , <unk> ( 41 % ) , <unk> ( 41 % ) , and <unk> ( 37 % ) . 
 The Gaelic Language ( Scotland ) Act was enacted by the Scottish Parliament in 2005 to provide continuing support for the language . However , by 2011 the overall percentage of Gaelic speakers in the Outer Hebrides had fallen to 52 % . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Scheduled ferry services between the Outer Hebrides and the Scottish Mainland and Inner Hebrides operate on the following routes : 
 Oban to Castlebay on Barra and <unk> on South Uist 
 Uig on Skye to Tarbert on Harris 
 Uig on Skye to Lochmaddy on North Uist 
 Ullapool to Stornoway on Lewis 
 Tiree to Castlebay , Barra ( summer only ) . 
 Other ferries operate between some of the islands . 
 National Rail services are available for onward journeys , from stations at Oban , which has direct services to Glasgow . However , parliamentary approval notwithstanding , plans in the 1890s to lay a railway connection to Ullapool were unable to obtain sufficient funding . 
 There are scheduled flights from Stornoway , Benbecula and Barra airports both inter @-@ island and to the mainland . Barra 's airport is the only one in the world to have scheduled flights landing on a beach . At high water the runways are under the sea so flight times vary with the tide . 
 Bus services are operated by Bus na Comhairle , based in Stornoway , and by numerous other operators , which run the bulk of services . 
 = = = Shipwrecks = = = 
 The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide , and lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at locations from Barra Head in the south to the Butt of Lewis in the north . There are numerous sites of wrecked ships , and the Flannan Isles are the location of an enduring mystery that occurred in December 1900 , when all three lighthouse keepers vanished without trace . 
 Annie Jane , a three @-@ masted immigrant ship out of Liverpool bound for Montreal , Canada , struck rocks off the West Beach of Vatersay during a storm on Tuesday 28 September 1853 . Within ten minutes the ship began to founder and break up casting 450 people into the raging sea . In spite of the conditions , islanders tried to rescue the passengers and crew . The remains of 350 men , women and children were buried in the dunes behind the beach and a small cairn and monument marks the site . 
 The tiny Beasts of Holm of the east coast of Lewis were the site of the sinking of HMS <unk> during the first few hours of 1919 , one of the worst maritime disasters in United Kingdom waters during the 20th century . <unk> in the Sound of Barra provided the inspiration for Compton MacKenzie 's novel Whisky Galore after the SS Politician ran aground there with a cargo of single malt in 1941 . 
 = = Religion , culture and sport = = 
 Christianity has deep roots in the Western Isles , but owing mainly to the different allegiances of the clans in the past , the people in the northern islands ( Lewis , Harris , North Uist ) have historically been predominantly Presbyterian , and those of the southern islands ( Benbecula , South Uist , Barra ) predominantly Roman Catholic . 
 At the time of the 2001 Census , 42 % of the population identified themselves as being affiliated with the Church of Scotland , with 13 % Roman Catholic and 28 % with other Christian churches . Many of this last group belong to the Free Church of Scotland , known for its strict observance of the Sabbath . 11 % stated that they had no religion . This made the Western Isles the Scottish council area with the smallest percentage of atheists in the population . There are also small Episcopalian congregations in Lewis and Harris and the Outer Hebrides are part of the Diocese of Argyll and The Isles in both the Episcopalian and Catholic traditions . 
 Gaelic music is popular in the islands and the Lewis and Harris Traditional Music Society plays an active role in promoting the genre . <unk> <unk> began in 1981 with the aim of developing the practice and study of the Gaelic language , literature , music , drama and culture on the islands of Barra and Vatersay . A two @-@ week festival , it has inspired 43 other <unk> throughout Scotland . The Lewis Pipe Band was founded in 1904 and the Lewis and Harris Piping Society in 1977 . 
 Outdoor activities including rugby , football , golf , shinty , fishing , riding , canoeing , athletics , and multi @-@ sports are popular in the Western Isles . The Hebridean Challenge is an adventure race run in five daily stages , which takes place along the length of the islands and includes hill and road running , road and mountain biking , short sea swims and demanding sea kayaking sections . There are four main sports centres : <unk> <unk> <unk> in Stornoway , which has a 25 m swimming pool ; Harris Sports Centre ; <unk> Sports Centre on Benbecula ; and Castlebay Sports Centre on Barra . The Western Isles is a member of the International Island Games Association . 
 South Uist is home to the <unk> Golf Course . The oldest links in the Outer Hebrides , it was designed by Old Tom Morris . Although it was in use until the 1930s , its existence was largely forgotten until 2005 and it is now being restored to Morris 's original design . 
 I Know Where I 'm Going ! is a 1945 British drama / romance film set mostly in the Outer Hebrides , depicting local lifestyles and speech . 
 = Cheap at Half the Price = 
 Cheap at Half the Price is a 1983 solo album by English guitarist , composer and improviser Fred Frith . It was Frith 's fifth solo album , and was originally released in the United States on LP record on The Residents ' Ralph record label . It was the third of three solo albums Frith made for the label . 
 Cheap at Half the Price was recorded by Frith at his home in New York City on a 4 @-@ track machine . He played all the instruments himself , with the exception of bass guitar on two tracks , and drums , for which he used tapes and samples previously recorded by other drummers . The record differed from Frith 's previous experimental albums in that it consisted largely of pop @-@ like songs , and he sang for the first time . 
 The LP 's release in 1983 caused a stir in progressive circles because of its " apparent simplicity " and its departure from the experimental music Frith had become known for . But a remastered version of the album released on CD in 2004 was better received by critics , who admitted that they had overlooked what Frith had been doing at the time . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Cheap at Half the Price was the third of a series of three solo albums Frith made for The Residents 's record label Ralph Records , the first being Gravity ( 1980 ) , an avant @-@ garde " dance " record that drew on rhythm and dance from folk music across the world , and the second being Speechless ( 1981 ) , a mixture of folk music , free improvisation , avant @-@ rock and noise . He had recorded with The Residents in the late 1970s and early 1980s , and appeared on several of their albums . Both Gravity and Speechless were well received by critics . 
 Frith recorded Cheap at Half the Price at his home in New York City on a 4 @-@ track machine . Unlike his two previous albums for Ralph Records , where he used backing bands , on this album Frith played all the instruments himself , with the exception of bass guitar on two tracks , and drums . Bill Laswell from Frith 's band Massacre played bass on " Same Old Me " , and Tina Curran played bass on " Too Much , Too Little " . For the drumming Frith used samples that had been previously recorded of drummers he had worked with , namely Frank Wuyts of Aksak Maboul , Fred Maher from Massacre , Paul Sears of The Muffins , and Hans Bruniusson from Samla Mammas Manna . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Cheap at Half the Price differed from Frith 's previous experimental albums in that it featured a collection of short songs and instrumentals in a " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek pop vein " . He also played a " cheap " Casio @-@ 101 on all the tracks and sang for the first time . AllMusic described Frith 's singing on the album as " strange [ ly ] high @-@ pitched " , and the songs as " pop @-@ like ditties " with a " simple and repetitive " structure . Leonardo Digital Reviews said most of the tracks had a " happy @-@ go @-@ lucky " feel to them . 
 The lyrics on Cheap at Half the Price are politically oriented , set during US President Ronald Reagan 's first term of office , with socialist commentaries on , amongst other things , dogs and insects . Despite Frith 's apparent departure from his previous progressive albums , some the tracks on this album have ties to his earlier work . " Some Clouds Do " has a similar " driving rhythm " to Paul Sears ' drumming on " What a Dilemma " on Gravity . " Absent Friends " , a traditional Swedish melody arranged by Frith , has the same " fun and dance " feel that occurs at the end of " Don 't Cry for Me " , also on Gravity . " Absent Friends " is also the only track on Cheap at Half the Price that departs from the album 's " pop vein " . 
 In contrast to the high @-@ pitched singing on most of the songs , " Same Old Me " , one of the few " dark " tracks on the album , is a " gloomily introspective " song featuring some " rough lyrics " that have been slowed to a drawl over " angry riffing " and " relentless bass and percussion " . Leonardo Digital Reviews said that this and many of the other songs on the album had a complex structure beneath the apparent " carefree and beaming surface " . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 Followers of Fred Frith 's music generally had trouble coming to terms with Cheap at Half the Price . To them Frith was " progressive , genre @-@ bending music 's last great hope " , and on this album he appeared to have abandoned this role . When the album was released on LP in 1983 , Recommended Records , founded and run by Chris Cutler ( Frith 's band @-@ mate from Henry Cow ) , elected not to stock it because Cutler felt it was not " terribly good " . Trouser Press said that the quality of the record suffered from the lo @-@ fi experiment of recording " at home on a 4 @-@ track " . 
 In 1985 Michael Bloom of The Boston Phoenix wrote that Cheap at Half the Price " will never get the hearing it deserves " . He said that Frith was trying to shake off this " progressive " mould he had been cast in , and believed that the songs on the album should be judged on their own merit and not as " rarefied art rock " . One 1984 reviewer found the album " a very enjoyable recording " , and stated that Frith 's music " is changing the way many musicians look at the sounds that they take so seriously " . The New Gibraltar Encyclopedia of Progressive Rock described Cheap at Half the Price as Frith 's response to punk , a low @-@ tech approach to performing songs . It called the album a " twisted pop " record , saying that it is " as uncompromising as everything else Frith recorded " . François Couture in a review of Frith 's 2002 album , Prints called Cheap at Half the Price " the best tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek take at the New Wave " . 
 Despite the criticism the LP received at the time of its release , the remastered CD issued 21 years later was generally well received . In the 2004 Recommended Records catalogue , Cutler wrote that the album had " raised eyebrows at the time ( from , as Fred calls them ' progressive music snobs ' — of which I guess I was one ) for its apparent simplicity and departure from what was then thought of as Fred Style . " René van Peer of Leonardo Digital Reviews admitted in 2005 that he was " one of those snobs " and wrote " I am astonished and embarrassed to find how little I grasped back then of what Frith had put into it . " Looking at Frith 's projects after Cheap at Half the Price made it clear that what he did on the album was not a departure from his musical experiments , as people saw it at the time , but rather a part of it . Van Peer said ( in retrospect ) that Cheap at Half the Price " bursts with inventiveness , and <unk> [ sic ] the irrepressible joy of playful creativity " . 
 Frith 's exploration of song forms on this album was later developed further with Tom Cora in Skeleton Crew , where Frith and Cora played " deceptively simple catchy songs " , often using melodies derived from Scandinavian and Eastern European traditional music . Songs from Cheap at Half the Price appeared in several of Frith 's later projects . Step Across the Border ( 1990 ) , a film on Frith , and its accompanying soundtrack , featured three such songs , " Same Old Me " , " Evolution " and " Too Much Too Little " . Keep the Dog , a 1989 – 1991 Fred Frith review band , played a number of arrangements of songs from this album , including " Walking Song " , " Some Clouds Do " and " Instant Party " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks by Fred Frith , except where noted . 
 = = = Original 1983 release = = = 
 = = = 1991 CD release = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Fred Frith – guitar , 6 @-@ string bass , Casio @-@ 101 , violin , xylophone , homemade instruments , voice 
 Frank Wuyts – drums 
 Fred Maher – drums 
 Paul Sears – drums 
 Hans Bruniusson – drum samples 
 Tina Curran – bass guitar ( " Too Much , Too Little " ) 
 Bill Laswell – bass guitar ( " Same Old Me " ) 
 Aksak Maboul – clapping ( " Absent Friends " ) 
