 In 2005 Cole announced she would no longer model for De Beers after being alerted to the situation of the Kalahari Bushmen being evicted from their lands in Botswana . 
 Cole wrote the foreword for Tamsin Blanchard 's 2007 book Green Is The New Black , a guide to being fashionable while remaining eco @-@ friendly . 
 In 2013 it was announced that Cole would receive the Doctor of Letters for her " outstanding contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes " from the chancellor of Glasgow Caledonian University , Professor Muhammad Yunus . 
 Cole was one of several celebrities who endorsed the parliamentary candidacy of the Green Party 's Caroline Lucas at the 2015 general election . 
 = = Business activities = = 
 Cole is the founder of socially networked gift economy website , <unk> ; a website that promotes requests for and offering of gifts and assistance . Cole is also part @-@ owner of a London bookshop . 
 Cole was involved in creating an environmentally friendly knitwear company , The North Circular , which launched in 2009 . The North Circular products are hand knit in the UK with British yarns , from which 5 % of all profits , and all of Cole 's , are donated to the Environmental Justice Foundation . She launched a womenswear range for the company in February 2010 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 28 February 2015 , Cole announced she was expecting her first child with partner Kwame Ferreira . Cole announced on 11 September 2015 that she had given birth to a daughter . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Gyromitra infula = 
 Gyromitra infula , commonly known as the hooded false morel or the elfin saddle , is a fungus in the family Helvellaceae . The dark reddish @-@ brown caps of the fruit bodies develop a characteristic saddle @-@ shape in maturity , and the ends of both saddle lobes are drawn out to sharp tips that project above the level of the fruit body . The stipe is white or flushed pale brown , smooth on the outside , but hollow with some chambers inside . It is found in the Northern Hemisphere , usually in the late summer and autumn , growing on rotting wood or on hard packed ground . G. infula is considered inedible as it contains the toxic compound gyromitrin , which , when metabolized by the body , is converted into monomethylhydrazine , a component of some rocket fuels . The toxin may be removed by thorough cooking . Gyromitra fungi are included in the informal category " false morels " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The fungus was first described in 1774 by German mycologist Jacob Christian Schäffer as Helvella infula ( the original genus spelling was <unk> ) . In 1849 , Elias Magnus Fries established the genus Gyromitra , distinguishing it from Helvella based on a <unk> hymenium ( marked with wavy lines or convolutions ) ; the genus was based on the type species Gyromitra esculenta . Later , in 1886 , French mycologist Lucien Quélet transferred the species to Gyromitra . The next few decades witnessed some lingering confusion as to the correct taxonomical placement of these fungi . In 1907 , Jean Boudier moved both G. esculenta and H. infula into a newly created genus he called <unk> ; he retained the genus Gyromitra but " based it on an entirely different character so as to exclude from the genus the very species on which it was founded " . In an attempt to reconcile the confusion surrounding the naming and identity of the two mushrooms , Fred J. Seaver proposed that both were synonymous , representing variable forms of the same species . His suggestion was not adopted by later mycologists , who identified various differences between the two species , including fruiting time as well as macroscopic and microscopic differences . 
 The genus name is derived from the Greek words gyros / <unk> " round " and mitra / <unk> " headband " ; the specific epithet is from the Latin <unk> , a heavy band of twisted wool worn by Roman <unk> at sacrifices . It is known more commonly as the elfin saddle or the hooded false morel . Additionally , G. infula is a member of a group of fungi collectively known as " false morels " , so named for their resemblance to the highly regarded edible true morels of the genus Morchella . This group includes other species of the genus Gyromitra , such as G. esculenta ( brain mushroom ) , G. caroliniana ( beefsteak mushroom ) and G. gigas ( snow morel ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of the fruit body ( technically an apothecium ) is up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) high by 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide and is reddish brown , and somewhat saddle @-@ shaped with 2 – 4 lobes . It frequently develops blackish @-@ brown spots on the surface . During the development of the mushroom , the periphery of the cap grows into the stipe below , to form a hollow , roughly bell @-@ shaped structure with the fertile spore @-@ bearing surface ( the hymenium ) on the outside ; as the surface growth of the hymenium continues to expand even after joining to the stipe , the hymenium can no longer follow and it arches up into folds and pads . The stipe , typically between 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) high and 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , can be various colors from reddish brown to whitish or even bluish , but is typically lighter colored than the cap . The stipe is minutely tomentose – covered with a layer of very fine hairs . The context is thin ( 1 – 2 mm ) and brittle . G. infula does not have any appreciable odor or taste . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Ascospores are ellipsoidal in shape , hyaline , smooth , thin @-@ walled , with dimensions of 17 – 22 by 7 – 9 µm . They are also <unk> , containing two large oil droplets at either end . The spore @-@ producing cells , the asci , are roughly cylindrical , eight @-@ spored , operculate ( opening by an apical lid to discharge the spores ) and have dimensions of 200 – 350 by 12 – 17 | µm . The diameter of the club @-@ shaped paraphyses is 7 – 10 µm at the apex . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 This fungus is inedible , as it contains the toxic compound gyromitrin , which when digested is metabolized into monomethylhydrazine , a major component of rocket fuel . Although much of the gyromitrin may be removed by parboiling with generous volumes of water , consumption is not advisable due to possible long @-@ term health effects — there is evidence that even small doses of gyromitrin may have a cumulative carcinogenic effect . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Gyromitra esculenta has a wrinkled surface ( similar to <unk> convolutions ) , not wavy or bumpy like G. infula . Gyromitra ambigua is very similar in appearance , and although it is usually not possible to discern between the two species without examining microscopic characteristics , G. ambigua is said to have more pronounced purple tints in the stipe . G. ambigua has larger spores that are about 22 – 30 µm long . The saddle @-@ shaped cap of G. infula might also lead to confusion with some species of Helvella , but these latter fungi typically have grayer colors and thinner , fluted stipes . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This fungus can be found growing singly to scattered in or near coniferous woodland in autumn , often on rotten wood . It is also commonly found on packed ground , such as beside country roads , or in campgrounds . Associated conifers include Picea glauca , Picea <unk> , Picea sitchensis , Pinus contorta , Pinus banksiana , Pinus monticola , Abies <unk> , Abies grandis , Pseudotsuga menziesii , Tsuga heterophylla , Larix occidentalis , Thuja <unk> , as well as the deciduous tree species Populus <unk> , Populus tremuloides , Acer <unk> , Alnus species , and Betula papyrifera . 
 Gyromitra infula is widely distributed throughout boreal , montane and coastal forests in North America . The North American range extends north to Canada and south to Mexico . It has also been reported from South America , Europe , and Asia . 
 = Obscene Publications Act 1959 = 
 The Obscene Publications Act 1959 ( c . 66 ) is an Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom Parliament that significantly reformed the law related to obscenity in England and Wales . Prior to the passage of the Act , the law on publishing obscene materials was governed by the common law case of R v Hicklin , which had no exceptions for artistic merit or the public good . During the 1950s , the Society of Authors formed a committee to recommend reform of the existing law , submitting a draft bill to the Home Office in February 1955 . After several failed attempts to push a bill through Parliament , a committee finally succeeded in creating a viable bill , which was introduced to Parliament by Roy Jenkins and given the Royal Assent on 29 July 1959 , coming into force on 29 August 1959 as the Obscene Publications Act 1959 . With the committee consisting of both censors and reformers , the actual reform of the law was limited , with several extensions to police powers included in the final version . 
 The Act created a new offence for publishing obscene material , repealing the common law offence of obscene libel which was previously used , and also allows Justices of the Peace to issue warrants allowing the police to seize such materials . At the same time it creates two defences ; firstly , the defence of innocent dissemination , and secondly the defence of public good . The Act has been used in several high @-@ profile cases , such as the trials of Penguin Books for publishing Lady Chatterley 's Lover and Oz for the Schoolkids OZ issue . 
 = = Background and passage = = 
 Obscene publications were , historically , something for the canon law ; the first prosecution in a court of common law was not until 1727 . Prior to the passing of the 1959 Act , the publication of obscene materials within England and Wales was governed by the common law and the Obscene Publications Act 1857 . The common law , as established in R v Hicklin [ 1868 ] 3 QB 360 , set the test of " obscenity " as " whether the tendency of the letter published is to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influence and into whose hands the publication might fall " , while the 1857 Act allowed any stipendiary magistrate or any two Justices of the Peace to issue a warrant authorising the police to search for , seize and destroy any obscene publications . It was generally accepted that the existing law was heavily flawed , for several reasons . Firstly , the so @-@ called " Hicklin test " from R v Hicklin was both unduly narrow and unyielding ; it did not , for example , take into account the intentions of the defendant . Secondly , the test meant that individual sections of a published work could by analysed and the entire work declared obscene , even if the rest of the work was fairly mild . Thirdly , there was no defence based on the public good , and no opportunity to submit evidence showing the artistic merits of the work , and <unk> , works could be destroyed without the author or publisher even being informed and given an opportunity to speak . 
 During the 1950s , efforts started to attempt reform of the law . Following the prosecution of several notable publishers , the Society of Authors formed a committee ( with Norman St John @-@ <unk> as legal advisor ) to recommend reform of the existing law , submitting their proposals and a draft bill to the Home Office in February 1955 . Instead of the wholesale reform the Society hoped for , the government instead chose limited reform through the Children and Young Persons ( Harmful Publications ) Act 1955 dealing with horror comics , which kept the Hicklin test but required that the work as a whole be examined . The Society and sympathetic Members of Parliament then attempted to introduce a Private Member 's Bill , but this was quashed by the ensuing general election . Another Private Member 's Bill was successfully introduced in March 1957 and sent to a committee . Composed of a mix of censors and reformers , the committee 's recommendations were mixed , consisting of both conservative ( further powers of search and seizure for the police ) and liberal ( the use of expert evidence attesting to the work 's artistic merit ) proposals . 
 The committee 's proposals were published in March 1958 , and a new bill was introduced under the Ten Minute Rule , failing to gain the requisite support . After A. P. Herbert stood for Parliament on a platform of obscenity reform , the Home Office had a change of heart and introduced a new bill through Roy Jenkins in 1959 , a compromise between the aims of the campaigners and the goals of the Home Office . It was introduced to the House of Lords by Lord Birkett , received the Royal Assent on 29 July 1959 , and came into force on 29 August 1959 as the Obscene Publications Act 1959 . 
 = = Act = = 
 The Act is relatively short , divided into 5 sections , the fifth covering the extent of the Act and its commencement date . Section 1 covers the test to determine if something is obscene ; an article is taken to be obscene if the entire article " is , if taken as a whole , such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely , having regard to all relevant circumstances , to read , see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it " . The test is based on " persons " ; DPP v Whyte [ 1972 ] AC 849 established that it was not sufficient for an individual to be depraved or corrupted , it must be that a significant number of people likely to read it would become corrupt . " article " is defined within Section 1 as anything containing material that is read or looked at , any sound recordings and any film or other picture record . A publisher , as used in the Act , is also defined in Section 1 ; " publisher " is taken to mean anyone who " distributes , circulates , sells , lets on hire , gives , or lends it , or who offers it for sale or for letting on hire " , or " in the case of an article containing or embodying matter to be looked at or a record , shows , plays or projects it " . The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 amended this section to include the transmission of the article electronically . 
 Section 2 covers the actual prohibition of publishing " obscene material " . Section 2 ( 1 ) creates a new offence , " publishing an obscene article " , which replaces the common law misdemeanour of " obscene libel " which was previously the crime . Somebody can be found guilty of this regardless of if it was done for profit or not . Where the article is a film , the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions is required before a prosecution can commence . Section 2 ( 4 ) states that , where an article is obscene , no other common law charges should be brought , and it should instead be dealt with through the 1959 Act , intended to limit prosecutions to those crimes found in this Act . Section 2 ( 5 ) creates a defence of " innocent dissemination " ; if the publisher can prove that they did not anticipate any obscenity problems , and did not examine the article in question for such issues , they cannot be convicted . 
 Powers of search and seizure are covered by Section 3 , which also repealed the Obscene Publications Act 1857 . This section allows a Justice of the Peace , if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe obscene publications are kept on certain premises for profit , to issue a warrant for that location . This warrant allows a police officer to enter the premises , search them and remove any suspect publications ; if such publications are found , the officer can also take records relating to the businesses trade . The articles must then be brought before a magistrate and either forfeited by the owners or returned . The owner , author or publisher of the articles , or the person from whom they were seized , may appear before the magistrate to argue why they should not be forfeited . 
 Section 4 creates the defence of public good , which applies both to prosecutions for publication of obscene materials and to the forfeiture proceedings described in Section 3 . This allows for a valid defence if the defendant can show that the publication of the materials was justifiable as for the " public good " , which is defined as " in the interests of science , literature , art or learning , or of other objects of general concern " . Experts and their testimony are admissible for determining the value of such publications . This section was initially treated very strictly by trial judges , but this attitude was reversed after the 1976 trial of the book Inside Linda Lovelace , where the jury found the publishers not guilty despite the judge saying that " if this isn 't obscene , members of the jury , you may think that nothing is obscene " . Three years later the Williams Committee recommended that restrictions on written pornography be lifted , and these restrictions have been largely abandoned . 
 = = Notable prosecutions under the Act = = 
 = = = Lady Chatterley 's Lover trial = = = 
 The first noted prosecution under the Obscene Publications Act was of Penguin Books in R v Penguin Books Ltd . [ 1960 ] for publishing Lady Chatterley 's Lover . The book , which contained the use of the words " fuck " and " cunt " multiple times , along with sexual scenes , was banned completely in England and Wales until the conclusion of the trial ; by the mid @-@ 1980s , it was on the school syllabus . Penguin Books relied on Section 4 's " public good " defence , with academics and literary critics such as E. M. Forster and Helen Gardner testifying at the trial that the book was one of literary merit . The trial at the Old Bailey eventually ended with a not guilty verdict , allowing the book to be openly published and sold in England and Wales for the first time since it was published in 1928 . This trial and its verdict is seen as heralding " a new wave of sexual ' morality ' for which the 1960s is now famous " . Graham Lord wrote that the case " was the first trumpet call of the permissive society , the moment many believe that British morality , manners and family life began seriously to deteriorate " . 
 = = = Schoolkids Oz trial = = = 
 In 1971 the editors of Oz were tried for publishing obscene materials , specifically the Schoolkids Oz issue . Oz was an underground magazine with a circulation of 40 @,@ 000 which aimed to challenge the " older generation 's outdated beliefs and standards of behaviour and morality " . For its 28th issue , 20 teenagers were invited to contribute and edit it . The published version was 48 pages long , with the front consisting of a sheet from the French erotic book <unk> <unk> , which depicted four naked women licking each other and performing sex acts . Inside were articles about homosexuality , lesbianism , sadism and a cartoon strip which showed Rupert Bear " ravaging " a " <unk> granny " . John Mortimer acted for the defence , and after the longest obscenity trial in English legal history the defendants were convicted . After a three @-@ day hearing in the Court of Appeal of England and Wales , this conviction was overturned ; the Court of Appeal recognised 14 errors of law and a large number of errors of fact in the trial judge 's summing up to the jury . 
 = = = Later cases = = = 
 Later cases have included : 
 1976 : the Inside Linda Lovelace obscenity trial ( found not guilty ) 
 1991 : David Britton 's " Lord Horror " prosecution ( not prosecuted - banned under the act , but later overturned ) 
 2009 : R v Walker where Darryn Walker was found not guilty under the Obscene Publications Act for posting a story entitled " Girls ( Scream ) Aloud " , a fictional written account on an internet erotic story site describing the kidnap , rape and murder of pop group Girls Aloud . 
 2010 : Gavin Smith who was charged after discussing his fantasies about spanking children . After the Crown Prosecution Service appealed the judge 's original ruling that there was no case to answer , he was subsequently convicted in 2012 . 
 2012 : R v Peacock where a man was unsuccessfully prosecuted for selling DVDs featuring BDSM , fisting and urolagnia . 
 = = Impact and assessment = = 
 The Act was found deficient in a variety of ways . Firstly , the test meant that " sting " operations where the police purchased " obscene " materials were not considered sufficient evidence of publication , since the police were not considered easy to " corrupt " due to their regular exposure to the materials . It also meant that prosecutors often had to prove that purchasers were unaware of the obscene nature of material on sale prior to purchase , as those who actively sought out such material were deemed not likely to be corrupted by it . Secondly , the offer of such materials for sale was not held to be publication , since it was merely an invitation to treat . Thirdly , the courts held in Straker v DPP [ 1963 ] 1 QB 926 that negatives for photographs could not be forfeited if it was not intended to publish them , regardless of their obscene nature . As a result , the Act was amended by the Obscene Publications Act 1964 , which created the offence of " possessing obscene articles for publication or sale " and also extended " obscene materials " to cover photograph negatives . Another criticism levelled at both Acts was that they failed to define " obscene " properly , relying on the old , common law definition and giving no help to the judge or jury as to how to apply it properly . The National Campaign for the Repeal of the Obscene Publications Acts ( <unk> ) was set up in 1976 by the actor David Webb ; it operated until the late 1990s . 
 = = = Current situation = = = 
 In 1996 there were 562 cases brought , in which 324 individuals were convicted . Even with this small number of trials , a third of convictions resulted in prison sentences , and only a small number of cases went to jury trials . The number of prosecutions has fallen , from 309 in 1994 , 131 in 1999 , 39 in 2003 to 35 in 2005 . This decline may be partly due to the behaviour of modern jurors , who are less likely to consider material as <unk> and corrupting , and are reluctant to convict defendants for the private use of material amongst consenting adults . Another reason for the decline may be the range of alternative legislation which can now often be used in place of the Act . Suggestions given by the Crown Prosecution Service include : 
 Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 ( " extreme pornography " ) 
 Protection of Children Act 1978 
 Video Recordings Act 1984 and 2010 
 Indecent Displays ( Control ) Act 1981 
 Customs Consolidation Act 1876 , Amendment Act 1887 ( Importation of Indecent and Obscene Material ) 
 Children and Young Persons ( Harmful Publications ) Act 1955 . 
 The Act continues to have a significant impact in English law , as its precedents serve to provide a definition of obscenity that is used in other legal contexts . For instance , anything deemed likely to contravene the Act is prohibited from videos awarded an R18 certificate by the British Board of Film Classification . A list of the categories of material most commonly prosecuted under the Act is published by the Crown Prosecution Service . 
 = Luis Daoíz y Torres = 
 This name uses Spanish naming customs ; the first or paternal family name is Daoíz and the second or maternal family name is Torres . 
 Luis Daoíz y Torres ( Seville , 10 February 1767 – Madrid , 2 May 1808 ) was a Spanish artillery officer and one of the leaders of the Dos de Mayo Uprising that signalled the start of the Spanish War of Independence . Daoíz 's surname is derived from the town of Aoiz in Navarre and he was descended from a long line of Spanish gentry with soldiering associations dating to the Reconquista . Daoíz 's great grandfather married the daughter of the Count of Miraflores de los Angeles and Daoíz spent much of his early life in palaces owned by the family . He was born in Seville and , after receiving a Catholic education , trained at the Royal School of Artillery in Segovia . Daoíz saw action against the Moors in Spanish North Africa , where he was commended for his bravery and promoted to lieutenant . He also served against the French in the short @-@ lived War of the Roussillon where he was captured . After refusing to serve in the French army , he was imprisoned . 
 After his release he served on secondment to the Spanish Navy during the Anglo @-@ Spanish War , participating in the Defence of Cadiz and on convoy duty to the Americas , for which he was rewarded with promotion to captain . He tired of the sea and rejoined his artillery regiment . His subsequent duties included assisting in the manufacture of new guns for the horse artillery , attending the signing of the Treaty of Fontainebleau with France and participating in the 1807 invasion of Portugal . He returned to Madrid in 1808 and was a leader of the Dos de Mayo Uprising in which he assisted civilians resisting French efforts to remove the royal family from Spain . His defence of the barracks at Monteleón was the only action that day in which the Spanish army fought the French and , although ultimately unsuccessful , it inspired the Spanish War of Independence . He died in the fighting and has been commemorated as a national hero . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Luis 's oldest known ancestor is Don Berenguer D <unk> , who was named for the town of Aoiz in Navarre and fought in the Reconquista of Spain from the Moors . Members of the family subsequently served in the militia , including Don García Garcés D ´ Aoiz who fought at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 , a decisive Christian victory and a turning point in the Reconquista . Other ancestors fought in the 15th century Granada War , the 16th century conquest of Naples and in 17th century Flanders . Luis 's great grandfather , Joaquín D ´ Aoiz , was sheriff of Gibraltar in the mid @-@ 17th century when he was forced to hand the territory over to the British , the family subsequently moving to El Puerto de Santa María and changing their surname to Daoíz . Joaquín 's grandson Martin married Francisca Torres Ponce de León , daughter of the Count of Miraflores de los Angeles , in 1766 and their son Luis was born in a palace owned by the Miraflores family in Calle del Horno , Seville . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Luis Daoíz was born on 10 February 1767 and baptised the same day as " Luis Gonzaga Guillermo Escolástica Manuel José Joaquín Ana y Juan de la Soledad Daoíz Torres " . Daoíz lived for much of his childhood at the palace in Calle del Horno , spending some of his summers at a house in Calle Iglesia ( now renamed Calle de Daoíz ) in <unk> del Alcor . He was educated at the Colegio de San Hermenegildo Jesuit college in Seville up to the age of 15 , when his parents decided that he would become an officer in the Spanish Army , which their families considered a career suitable for a gentleman . Daoíz 's father was able to arrange the necessary paperwork for him to enter the elitist artillery corps which only permitted noblemen to take commissions . 
 Daoíz entered the Royal School of Artillery at Segovia as a cadet on 10 February 1782 and graduated as an ensign on 9 February 1787 . According to his entrance report he had a dark complexion , brown hair , large eyes and a small stature , being less than five feet tall . At the school Daoíz excelled at mathematics and sports , in particular saber fencing and was able to speak French , English , Italian and Latin in addition to his native Spanish . After graduation Daoíz was assigned to the Real Regimiento de Artillería ( Royal Regiment of Artillery ) at Puerto de Santa Maria . He was able to use a considerable private income from property and farms owned by his family around Gibraltar to supplement his official salary . 
 = = Army career = = 
 Daoíz volunteered to help defend Ceuta against the Moors in 1790 and was given command of an artillery battery . He remained in North Africa to assist with the defence of Oran in 1791 , spending part of the time with a unit of miners . Daoíz was commended by his superiors , including artillery Brigadier Andres Aznar , for his courage and zeal in the battles and was promoted to lieutenant on 28 February 1792 . After Spain joined the First Coalition against Revolutionary France , Daoíz participated in the War of Roussillon , in the Pyrenees , from March 1794 but was captured in a French counterattack on 25 November 1794 . He was held as a prisoner of war at Toulouse where he turned down an offer of freedom and a commission in the French Army , which was short of artillery officers . After the Peace of Basel ended the war between France and Spain on 22 July 1795 , Daoíz was released and made his way back to El Puerto de Santa Maria . 
 Spain signed the Second Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1796 , allying itself with France against Great Britain and beginning the Anglo @-@ Spanish War . On 11 July 1797 Daoíz was placed in charge of a gunboat in the Defence of Cadiz , commanded by Admiral Jose de <unk> y Salazar , against the British blockading squadron . During the defence his gunboat , No. 5 , was involved in an attack on the British third @-@ rate HMS Powerful . Later that year he was seconded to the Spanish Navy , which was short of trained officers , for service aboard the 74 gun ship San Ildefonso . Daoíz sailed twice with the vessel to the Americas , escorting galleons . During this time he assisted the ship 's captain , Jose de Iriarte , by acting as a translator during negotiations with foreign officials and found time to write a short treatise on the instruction of soldiers and sailors . Whilst with the ship in Havana , Cuba , in November 1800 Daoíz was reading back issues of a gazette and was surprised to find that he had been promoted to captain on 4 March 1800 , whilst at sea . He did not enjoy the long trips away from Spain and requested a land based posting , serving initially as a lieutenant in the infantry before joining the newly formed 3rd Artillery Regiment of Seville on 7 July 1802 . Had he stayed aboard the San Ildefonso Daoíz may have seen action with the ship at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . 
 On 2 December 1803 Daoíz was ordered by General Godoy to be seconded to the Royal Bronze Foundry . There he sat on a committee , headed by Brigadier Maria Vicente Maturana , to decide the design and oversee the production of new light guns for the horse artillery . Daoíz agreed to wed a noblewoman from <unk> in 1807 , the marriage ceremony taking place in spring the next year . In 1807 Daoíz was commander of the Spanish artillerymen that attended the signing of the Treaty of Fontainebleau , an agreement between Spain and France to split up Portugal into three smaller states , and was part of the Franco @-@ Spanish force that invaded Portugal to enforce that treaty . He moved with his regiment to Madrid in 1808 and took command of a battery of the 2nd company ( some sources say 3rd company ) at the former palace of the Duke of Monteleón . He became known to the men under his command as " el <unk> " ( " the grandfather " ) due to his relative age and good temperament . 
 = = Dos de Mayo = = 
 As part of the Treaty of Fontainebleau , French troops began to arrive in Spain and occupy strategic points . Marshal Joachim Murat was ordered to Madrid with 30 @,@ 000 troops and began taking control of the main palaces and barracks of the city , which had just 2 @-@ 4 @,@ 000 Spanish troops in its garrison . The presence of a French garrison was resented by much of the populace and Daoíz himself had to be restrained from fighting a duel with a French soldier he overheard insulting Spain in a tavern . On 2 May a crowd , hearing of French plans to send members of the Spanish royal family away to France , gathered outside the Royal Palace in Madrid to protest . It is not known how the fighting started , but the British consul , John Hunter , recorded that by 11 am French troops were firing musket volleys into the crowded square and fighting had spread across Madrid . French troops were dispatched to take possession of the Spanish barracks to secure their arms and ammunition . 
 Daoíz , the highest @-@ ranking officer at the Monteleón barracks found himself in command of just 4 officers , 3 NCOs and 10 men . He sought reinforcements at his regimental headquarters and returned with the 3rd company of the 2nd Battalion , a further 33 men and 2 officers . Daoíz 's orders from the local junta were to remain in the barracks and co @-@ operate with French forces but , after conferring with Captain Pedro Velarde y <unk> , he decided that the French troops were hostile to Spain and that they would defend the barracks against any French interference . By this time a large crowd of civilians had gathered at the barracks , requesting weapons with which to oppose the French , and Daoíz ordered the armoury opened to them . With 9 cannon , and 120 soldiers and armed civilians under his command , Daoíz now made arrangements for the defence of the barracks . A battery of 24 pounder guns were placed at the main gate facing into the street and were loaded with canister shot by their military and civilian crews . A small detachment of French stationed near the barracks were captured by <unk> and their weapons and ammunition distributed to civilians . 
 According to Hunter , when the first French troops advanced up the street to take possession of the barracks they were fired upon and several were killed before they halted to await reinforcements and occupy neighbouring buildings . Soon the French commanding officer , General Joseph Lagrange , had around 2 @,@ 000 men in the area . French battalions , including a unit of Imperial Grenadiers , made two assaults on the guns , but both were repulsed , and the Spaniards captured a French colonel . A third wave of French troops reached the artillery lines and fired into the barracks , killing many of the defenders including Velarde , before charging with fixed bayonets . Hunter claimed that Daoíz , who had been shot in the hip , continued to issue orders despite his wound and was wounded twice more whilst fighting the French with his sabre . Daoíz is said to have been stabbed in the back with a bayonet and killed whilst approaching a French officer waving a white flag of truce . The dying Daoíz was dragged away by his men , who continued to fight within the barracks buildings before surrendering at the request of Spanish Captain @-@ General the Marquis de San Simón . The Spanish at Monteleón had held out against superior French numbers for around three hours . Daoíz was 41 years old when he died , and had over 26 years of continuous service in the Spanish Army . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French surgeon is said to have insisted on treating Daoíz before tending to his own men , but his efforts were in vain and Daoíz was buried in the Church of St Martin alongside his men . Velarde , who spearheaded the uprising alongside Daoíz , was also killed , but another artillery officer , Lieutenant Ruiz , managed to escape . Members of the Junta went around the city asking for resistance to stop , and by 2am the next morning calm had been restored . 
 Marshal Murat convened a military tribunal , chaired by General Emmanuel Grouchy , that morning to summarily try and sentence anyone found in possession of a potential weapon . Many Spaniards lost their lives , and artist Francisco Goya , who witnessed the aftermath of the executions , painted his famous painting The Third of May 1808 to commemorate this event . The fighting and executions claimed at least 154 French and 409 Spanish lives and inspired resistance to the French across the country , signalling the start of the Spanish War of Independence . After <unk> 's death his wife entered a convent in Seville . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Daoíz is commemorated as a leader of the initial resistance against French rule in Spain and , along with Velarde , is remembered in many monuments across the country . The ashes of Daoíz and Velarde , with those of others involved in the Dos de Mayo uprising , were transferred to the Monumento a los <unk> por España in Madrid after its construction in 1840 . The monument originally served as a memorial to those who lost their lives on the Dos de Mayo but on 22 November 1985 King Juan Carlos I redesignated it in memory of all Spaniards who died in war and it now serves as Spain 's national Tomb of the Unknown Soldier . 
 In 1852 a plaque was erected on the spot where Daoíz 's house stood in Seville , being replaced in 1869 by a twice lifesize statue depicting the pivotal moment of the Dos de Mayo when Daoíz decided to disobey his orders and resist the French . A monument commemorating the " Martyrs of Liberty " who died on 2 and 3 May stands on the spot of Murat 's executions and contains representations of both Daoíz and Velarde . A monument to Daoíz also stands in Segovia , where he studied at the artillery academy and in Madrid the two statues of lions that stand outside of the Spanish Congress of Deputies building are popularly known as Daoíz and Velarde . The Premio Daoíz military honour is awarded once every five years to an artillery officer in the Spanish Army . The award in memory of Daoíz is for services to the nation in the preceding five years and the honorary sabre is presented by the monarch in a ceremony held at the Alcázar of Segovia on 2 May . 
 = Never 7 : The End of Infinity = 
 Never 7 : The End of Infinity is a visual novel video game developed by KID . It was originally published by KID on March 23 , 2000 , for the PlayStation under the name Infinity , and has since been released on multiple platforms . The game is the first title in the Infinity series , and is followed by Ever 17 : The Out of Infinity , Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity , 12Riven : The Psi @-@ Climinal of Integral , and Code _ 18 . 
 In the game , the player takes the role of Makoto Ishihara , a college student who attends a seminar camp on an island together with three other students ; he also befriends three other people who he meets on the island . The game takes place over the course of a week , and consists of the player reading the story , occasionally making choices that affect the direction of the plot ; on the sixth day , one of the female characters dies , and the game moves back in time to the beginning , letting the player use knowledge from the first set of six days to make new choices , to try to prevent the character 's death . 
 The game was directed by Takumi Nakazawa , planned and written by Kotaro Uchikoshi , and composed for by Takeshi Abo . Uchikoshi included science fiction elements in the game , but was unable to make heavy use of use them , as his superiors at KID thought that the game needed to focus on cute female characters in order to sell . Abo composed music based on his first impressions of reading the game 's story , with a focus on its " emotional flow " . Because of the science fiction and theoretical themes , he composed " geometric music " . 
 A reviewer at RPGFan praised the game for its plot , its intimate scope , and its music , while a writer for Famitsu found the game 's mood to be boring . As the science fiction elements were well received , later entries in the series gradually moved away from the dating theme and became more focused on science fiction . The PlayStation Portable version of the game was the <unk> best selling video game of the year in Japan in 2009 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Never 7 is a visual novel in which the player reads the story , and presses a button to advance through the text . At certain points , the player gets to make choices which affect the direction the plot proceeds in ; these choices involve choosing what location to move to , and what the player character should say , as well as subtler choices such as whether to look a girl in the eyes or to take her hand . The game is presented from a first @-@ person perspective , with pre @-@ rendered backgrounds and 2D character portraits accompanying the text . The visuals mostly consist of still images , but with characters often changing their expression while talking . 
 After six days have passed in the game 's story , the game moves back in time to the beginning , allowing the player to make new choices based on the knowledge they have gained through the first six days to try to prevent certain events . Depending on the choices the player makes , the game either ends on a " bad ending " on the sixth day , or continues into a " good ending " on the seventh day . When replaying parts of the game , the player is able to use a fast forward function to move past sections of text that they have already read . After finishing the game , a picture gallery and a music test are made available in an omake mode . The game also includes an " Append Story " mode in which the player can play new scenarios that are downloaded from the developer 's website . 
 In the Dreamcast version of the game , a meter on the system 's Visual Memory Unit shows how the player is doing with the female characters : it shows three blocks , which have hearts inside if the player is doing well . In the PlayStation Portable version , the player has access to a glossary , which explains various key words used in the game . In the Android version , players get points throughout the game , which can be used to unlock applications such as a calculator , a calendar , and mini @-@ games . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Never 7 takes place in the week of April 1 – 7 , 2019 . Makoto Ishihara , the protagonist , is a college student and truant who rarely attends his classes . As a result , he is forced to attend a seminar camp being held on a remote island in order to be allowed to pass to his next grade . Three other students are at the camp : Yuka Kawashima , the leader of the group ; Haruka Higuchi , a quiet girl who is an ace student ; and Okuhiko Iida , a wealthy playboy who is the heir of the Iida Financial Group . Makoto also meets three girls unrelated to the seminar camp : a wealthy girl named Saki Asakura ; and the sisters Kurumi and Izumi <unk> , who are temporarily running the café <unk> on the island . The seven find they cannot leave the island due to a tropical cyclone that makes the boats unable to leave for a whole week , and become friends during the week . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins on April 1 , with Makoto awakening from a nightmare of a girl dying on April 6 with a bell in her hand . As the week goes on , he occasionally experiences premonitions of the future , all of which come true . Depending on the player 's choices , Makoto ends up getting close to one of the girls , and on April 5 , the story branches into different routes focusing on one of them . In each route , the girl Makoto was close to dies on April 6 with a bell in her hand . Afterwards , Makoto finds that he has traveled back in time to April 1 , retaining the memories of the previous six days . Concluding that he is trapped in an infinite loop , he vows to keep the girl alive and break free of the loop . He does so by rebuilding his relationships with her while dealing with the emotional problem troubling her . On April 6 , the girl ends up in a situation similar to when she died in the last loop , but Makoto saves her , breaking free of the loop and becoming her boyfriend . 
 After finishing Yuka , Haruka , Saki , and Kurumi 's routes , the player gets access to the Izumi Cure route , in which Makoto learns that Izumi and Okuhiko had deceived him into thinking that his premonitions were true . Makoto confronts Izumi , after which both he and Izumi fall off a cliff . They travel back in time , retaining their memories of the past six days . Makoto accepts that he has traveled through time , and Izumi reveals that she is the professor in charge of the seminar camp , and that the events of the past week were a science experiment ; she attempted to test the phenomenon known as Curé Syndrome , where if multiple people believe in a delusion and the delusion is spread to others , the delusion becomes reality . Makoto was the test subject of the experiment , which was meant to involve him having the delusion that he could have premonitions ; unexpectedly , he turned out to have real premonitions . 
 Izumi suggests that in the first six days , Makoto had been deceived by her and Okuhiko , but rather than believing in premonitions had believed he had traveled back in time . When Izumi died on April 6 , and Makoto had desired to travel back in time , Curé Syndrome manifested . She suggests that while he had thought that he was traveling back in time , he had only imagined a different past where events played out differently , as part of a delusion , and that he had given himself partial memories in the form of premonitions in each loop ; in the last loop , he would have given himself all his memories , other than the knowledge that he is experiencing a delusion . She says that once Makoto succeeds in saving her , he will break out of the delusion , and the six days in his delusion will become reality . Makoto refuses to believe her , claiming that everything around him is reality , but starts to doubt throughout the week . Depending on the player 's choices , the route branches into two endings . In one , the delusions appear to be changing reality , but are revealed to be a chain of coincidences . In the other , the delusions do change reality , and Makoto wakes up at the bottom of the cliff he fell down at the end of the last loop , badly wounded from having protected Izumi during the fall . It is left ambiguous as to what is real and what is a delusion , and whether Makoto has escaped to reality or still is trapped in his delusion . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was directed by Takumi Nakazawa , while Kotaro Uchikoshi was the planner and scenario writer . Development began immediately after Uchikoshi 's first visual novel , Memories Off , was finished . He was unable to make heavy use of science fiction themes in Never 7 , as his superiors at KID told him that the game needed to include cute girl characters in order to sell ; he kept science fiction themes light , and the game was designed with a focus on dating game elements , with the main focus being to develop a relationship with a girl . The Dreamcast version included new scenarios not available in the PlayStation version . 
 The development team depicted reality in the world of Never 7 as subjective and relative rather than absolute . As such , for each route , that route 's history is the only one Makoto knows and the only one that is real to him ; the Curé syndrome only exists to him in the routes where it is mentioned . The bells were used as symbols for reality being relative , and were described by the development team as " vague existences " , saying that one cannot know if they exist or not . In the bad ending to Izumi 's route , the bells , which " should be fictional " remain while something that should exist disappears ; this was a metaphor for the idea that delusions become reality while reality becomes a delusion . The game 's title comes from how Makoto is unable to escape the infinite loop and reach April 7 , and how most of the seven characters die at some point during the game . It is also based on the belief that 7 is a lucky number . The development team did not want to confirm or deny whether the game 's world was connected to that of the Memories Off series , saying that while characters with similar names may appear , they wanted to leave the player to decide for themselves what the answer would be . 
 The game 's soundtrack was composed by Takeshi Abo , and features " geometric music " because of the game 's theoretical and science fiction elements . Prior to composing the music , he read through the game 's story , to understand the setting and each character 's personality as much as possible . He would write his impressions of the plot , with a focus on the " emotional flow " and the events that occur throughout the story ; he valued his first impressions as very important for this . According to Abo , this method takes longer time , but allows him to make better music with a stronger relation to the game 's world than if he had just designated different songs to different points of the game . Because he enjoyed the story , the music strongly reflects Abo 's own musical tastes . The opening and ending themes of the PlayStation Portable version , titled " Sen Oku no Hoshikuzu <unk> Yoru no Sora " and " <unk> Hana " , respectively , were performed by the band Asriel . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was originally released by KID for PlayStation under the title Infinity on March 23 , 2000 . A Neo Geo Pocket version titled Infinity Cure was released on November 23 , 2000 , also by KID . On December 21 , 2000 , KID released a Dreamcast version titled Never 7 : The End of Infinity ; this version was also released for Microsoft Windows on October 26 , 2001 , and for PlayStation 2 on May 22 , 2003 . On March 3 , 2005 , it was released for Macintosh computers through the " <unk> for Mac " service . Cyberfront released it for PlayStation Portable on March 12 , 2009 , for Android on August 28 , 2012 , and for iOS on September 11 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In reviews around the time of the game 's release , reviewers appreciated the science fiction themes of the game . Neal Chandran at RPGFan called the plot excellent , and appreciated how the game 's story is a " personal , character @-@ driven , emotive , human tale based around gentle romance " rather than an apocalyptic " beat @-@ the @-@ bad @-@ guy kind of story " . He also liked how the game 's interactivity is on a more personal scope than in adventure games and role @-@ playing games he had played . He found the game 's pacing and writing quality to be good , and liked the music , finding it to complement the mood of the game well . While he thought the game 's graphics were not " anything special " , he was impressed by the character designs , especially that of the character Haruka . A writer at Famitsu , however , called the game 's mood boring from start to end in their review of the PlayStation version . 
 The PlayStation Portable version was the <unk> best selling video game of the year in Japan in 2009 , with 4 @,@ 250 copies sold . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After Never 7 , four more Infinity games were made : Ever 17 : The Out of Infinity , Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity , 12Riven : The Psi @-@ Climinal of Integral , and Code _ 18 ; Nakazawa worked on Ever 17 and Remember 11 , and Uchikoshi worked on all except Code _ 18 . As the science fiction elements of Never 7 had been positively received by critics , Uchikoshi gradually focused more on science fiction and less on dating with each title , with Remember 11 not featuring any dating elements at all . Originally , Never 7 was not intended to be part of a series , but during the development of Ever 17 , it was decided to connect the worlds of the two games . 
 = The Boat Race 1956 = 
 The 102nd Boat Race took place on 24 March 1956 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former rower Kenneth Payne , Cambridge won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 36 seconds , the fourth quickest time in the history of the event . The victory took the overall record to 56 – 45 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1955 race by sixteen lengths , and led overall with 55 victories to Oxford 's 45 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by H. H. Almond ( who had rowed for the Light Blues twice , in the 1950 and 1951 races ) , J. R. F. Best , C. B. M. Lloyd ( three @-@ time Light Blue between 1949 and 1951 ) , J. R. Owen ( who took part in the race in 1959 and 1960 ) and H. R. N. Rickett ( who rowed three times between 1930 and 1932 ) . Oxford 's coaches were A. G. S. Bailey , T. R. M. Bristow , Hugh Edwards ( who had rowed for Oxford in the 1926 and 1930 races ) , P. Gladstone ( who rowed in 1950 and 1952 ) and A. D. Rowe ( who represented the Dark Blues in the 1948 and 1949 races ) . The race was umpired for the fifth time by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . 
 Both crews experienced a reasonable build @-@ up to the race in favourable conditions . According to the rowing correspondent of The Times , Oxford made gains on Cambridge during this time , although he conceded " it is unlikely that Cambridge are , as yet , unduly worried about the future " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 2 @.@ 5 lb ( 83 @.@ 5 kg ) , 7 @.@ 5 pounds ( 3 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew had two rowers with Boat Race experience , including bow E. V. Vine and number two J. G. McLeod , both of whom were taking part in their third consecutive race . Similarly , Cambridge saw two participants return in M. G. Baynes and K. A. Masser ( who was rowing in his third consecutive race ) . Three of the race participants were registered as non @-@ British , all representing Oxford : Vine , McLeod and Roderick Carnegie were all Australian . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . In a south @-@ easterly wind and drizzle , the race was started by umpire Kenneth Payne at 11 : 30 a.m. Oxford out @-@ rated their opposition for the first minute , averaging 40 strokes per minute to Cambridge 's 37 , yet after a minute the Light Blues held a half @-@ length lead . With the Dark Blues continuing to stroke faster , the deficit was reduced to a quarter @-@ length by Craven Steps , which was passed in record time . By the Mile Post , and despite pushes from Oxford , the Light Blues were about half a length ahead . 
 A spurt at Harrods Furniture Depository saw them gain an extra half @-@ length before they passed under Hammersmith Bridge a length and a half ahead of Oxford . Although the Dark Blues were on the outside of the long bend in the river , they kept in touch , and prevented Cambridge from extending their lead . The Light Blues passed Chiswick Steps still with a length and a half lead as both crews faced a head wind going into Corney Reach . Along Dukes Meadow Cambridge started to tire and Oxford began to gain ; passing through the arches of Barnes Bridge , the Light Blues held a four @-@ second lead . Increasing their rate to 34 strokes per minute , Oxford 's stroke Mawer tried to pull them back into contention yet just as the boats began to overlap , Cambridge pushed on again to win by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 18 minutes 36 seconds . It was the fastest winning time since the 1934 race and the fourth fastest time in the history of the Boat Race , yet the narrowest winning margin since the 1952 race . It was the Light Blues ' second consecutive win , their third win in four years and took the overall record in the race to 56 – 45 in their favour . 
 According to the rowing correspondent of The Times , it was " one of the greatest battles in the history of the race " . Cambridge 's boat club president Masser said " I cannot speak too highly Oxford 's magnificent row . We had planned to build up an early lead and then row clean away ... but hard as we tried we could not shake Oxford off our tail . " 
 = Charles Scherf = 
 Charles Curnow Scherf , DSO , DFC & Bar ( 17 May 1917 – 13 July 1949 ) was an Australian flying ace of the Second World War . Born in New South Wales , Scherf was working on his father 's grazing property when he enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force in 1941 . On graduating as a pilot , he was sent to the United Kingdom for service in the European theatre . Flying de Havilland Mosquitos with No. 418 Squadron RCAF , Scherf was credited with the destruction of 7 ½ aircraft in the air and on the ground , and awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Afterward , he was posted for duties with Headquarters Air Defence Great Britain . He nevertheless returned occasionally to No. 418 Squadron and flew operational sorties with the unit , destroying a further 16 aircraft and earning two more decorations . By the end of the war , Scherf had achieved 14 ½ aerial victories in 38 operational sorties . He was also credited with destroying nine aircraft on the ground , and with damaging seven others . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Scherf was born at Emmaville , New South Wales , on 17 May 1917 , the son of Charles Henry Scherf , a grazier , and his Cornish wife Susan Jane ( née Curnow ) . An active sportsman , Scherf attended the local school where he obtained an Intermediate Certificate . In 1934 , he enlisted in the Citizens Military Force and was allotted to the 12th Light Horse Regiment as a private . He rose to the rank of corporal , before taking his discharge in 1939 . On 23 August 1939 , Scherf married Florence Hope O 'Hara in an Anglican ceremony at the Holy Trinity Church , Glen Innes ; the couple would have a son and three daughters . By this time he was working as a grazier on his father 's property . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 On 12 September 1941 , Scherf enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force for service during the Second World War . Posted for flight training at No. 10 Empire Flight Training School , Temora , and later No. 6 Service Flying Training School , Mallala , he graduated as a pilot with an " above average " rating on 2 July 1942 . Commissioned as a pilot officer on 17 September , Scherf embarked from Sydney bound for the United Kingdom the following month . Following a six @-@ week voyage , he disembarked on 27 November and was attached to Royal Air Force training units for " advanced flying and operational training " . He was promoted to flying officer during this time . On completion , Scherf was posted to No. 418 Squadron RCAF on 13 July 1943 , flying de Havilland Mosquito light bombers . 
 In August 1943 , Scherf commenced flying operational sorties against Axis airfields in France . On 15 September , he flew as an escort to a group of eight Lancaster bombers during a low level attack on the Dortmund @-@ Ems Canal , Germany . He was promoted to acting flight lieutenant on 29 December . During this time , Scherf took part in several night operations and was credited with damaging a variety of targets as well as shooting down four German aircraft at night . Praised for his " exceptional keenness and ... courage " , Scherf was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his night time exploits . The announcement and accompanying citation for the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 4 April 1944 . 
 During late February 1944 , Scherf took part in a sortie over Axis occupied territory with Squadron Leader Howie Clevelend ; Scherf flew the leading aircraft of the two . The pair attacked an Axis airfield at St Yan , France , and successfully destroyed three aircraft on the ground . Soon after , the two pilots spotted a Heinkel He 111Z twin @-@ fuselage glider tug towing two Gotha Go 242 gliders . Scherf and Clevelend attacked the party , with Clevelend firing first and destroying one of the gliders . Scherf then destroyed the second glider , before the pair assaulted the Heinkel . In the first pass , Scherf set the starboard engine ablaze while Clevelend hit the starboard side . Scherf made a second firing pass , before the Heinkel spiralled to the ground with three of its five engines on fire . This action was Scherf 's final sortie of his tour . The pair were consequently credited with shooting down three aircraft for their efforts in the operation , with an additional three others damaged or destroyed on the ground . 
 On 13 March 1944 , Scherf was promoted to acting squadron leader and , with his operation tour at an end , was posted to Headquarters Air Defence Great Britain as a controller of Intruder operations . By the time of this posting , Scherf had destroyed seven airborne or grounded German aircraft , with an additional shared victory . Despite his new position , Scherf 's " impatient spirit was far from satisfied with a staff position " , and he occasionally returned to No. 418 Squadron when he was off duty , taking part in operational sorties with the unit . On 5 April , Scherf joined the squadron in a sortie over Northern France . During the engagement , Scherf shot down two Axis aircraft in the air and damaged three more on the ground . For his actions on the two operations in February and April , Scherf was awarded a Bar to his Distinguished Flying Cross . The citation for the decoration was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 12 May 1944 , reading : 
 Air Ministry , 12th May , 1944 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the following awards in recognition of gallantry displayed in flying operations against the enemy — 
 Bar to Distinguished Flying Cross 
 Acting Flight Lieutenant Charles Curnow <unk> , DFC ( Aus <unk> ) , Royal Australian Air Force , No 418 ( RCAF ) Squadron . 
 Since being awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , this officer has taken part in numerous sorties and has continued to display the highest qualities of gallantry and skill . Towards the end of February , 1944 , he flew the leading aircraft of two detailed for a sortie far in enemy occupied territory . During the operation three enemy aircraft were shot down , and three others damaged on the ground . During another sortie over Northern France in April , 1944 , Flight Lieutenant Scherf destroyed two enemy aircraft in the air and damaged three others on the ground at an airfield . These 2 sorties were a fitting climax to an outstanding tour . This officer has destroyed at least 9 enemy aircraft , successes which pay an excellent tribute to his great fighting qualities and resolution . 
 On 2 and 16 May 1944 , Scherf took part in two further daylight sorties with No. 418 Squadron into " well @-@ defended areas far into Germany " . Leading a section of Mosquito aircraft in action against Luftwaffe bases in the Baltic area and over northern Germany , Scherf was ultimately credited with shooting down six aircraft in aerial combat , and damaging an additional three on the ground over the two operations . Commended for his " great skill , enterprise and fearlessness " , Scherf was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Service Order . The notification and accompanying citation for the decoration was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 27 June 1944 . 
 On 10 July 1944 , Scherf embarked from the United Kingdom to return to Australia . Arriving in Brisbane two months later , he was briefly posted to RAAF Station Sandgate . During October , Scherf was posted to No. 5 Operational Training Unit , Williamtown , as chief flying instructor . He served in this position until late December , when he was posted for duties with RAAF Base Richmond and later RAAF Bradfield Park . On 11 April 1945 , Scherf transferred to Royal Australian Air Force Reserve and returned to his home in Emmaville ; thus ending his wartime service . By this time , Scherf had been officially credited with shooting down 14 ½ Axis aircraft in aerial combat , as well as nine aircraft destroyed on the ground and a further seven damaged from a total of 38 operational sorties . 
 = = Later life = = 
 On 16 February 1946 , Scherf attended an investiture ceremony at Government House , Sydney , where he was presented with his Distinguished Service Order , Distinguished Flying Cross and Bar by the Governor @-@ General of Australia , Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . Scherf was discharged from the Royal Australian Air Force Reserve on 1 July 1947 . 
 Scherf found it difficult to re @-@ adjust to civilian life , and began to have nightmares about the Germans he had shot down and killed during the war . This consequently led him to drink heavily . On 13 July 1949 , Scherf was driving his car along the Inverell road approximately 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from Emmaville when he struck a tree and the vehicle overturned ; he died later that day from his injuries sustained during the crash . Survived by his wife , their three daughters and son , Scherf was buried in the local cemetery . 
 = Madoc ( poem ) = 
 Madoc is an 1805 epic poem composed by Robert Southey . It is based on the legend of Madoc , a supposed Welsh prince who fled internecine conflict and sailed to America in the 12th century . The origins of the poem can be traced to Southey 's schoolboy days when he completed a prose version of Madoc 's story . By the time Southey was in his twenties , he began to devote himself to working on the poem in hopes that he could sell it to raise money to fulfill his ambitions to start a new life in America , where he hoped to found Utopian commune or " Pantisocracy " . Southey finally completed the poem as a whole in 1799 , at the age of 25 . However , he began to devote his efforts into extensively editing the work , and Madoc was not ready for publication until 1805 . It was finally published in two volumes by the London publisher Longman with extensive footnotes . 
 The first half of the poem , Madoc in Wales , describes Madoc , a young Welsh nobleman , whose family breaks down into a series of bloody disputes over royal succession . Madoc , unwilling to participate in the struggle , decides to journey to America to start a new life . When he reaches America , he is witness to the bloody human sacrifices that the Aztec nation demands of the surrounding tribes in Aztlan . Madoc , believing it is a defiance against God , leads the Hoamen , a local tribe , into warfare against the Aztecs . Eventually , Madoc conquers them and he is able to convert the Americans to Christianity before returning to Wales to find more recruits for his colony . In the second part , Madoc in Aztlan , Madoc returns to find that the Aztecs have returned to their human sacrifices . After long and bloody warfare , Madoc is able to defeat the Aztecs and force them out of their homeland and into exile . 
 The poem contains Southey 's bias against superstition , whether Catholic , Protestant , or pagan . He believed that the work itself was more historical than epic , and it contained many of Southey 's political views . Critics gave the work mixed reviews , with many saying that there were beautiful scenes , but many feeling that the language fell short of being adequate for the subject matter . One review went so far to mock Southey 's reliance on Welsh and Aztec names . 
 = = Background = = 
 The basis for Southey wishing to write an epic poem came from his private reading of literature while attending Westminster School as a boy . In particular , the subject was suggested by a school friend that claimed to be a descendant of Madoc 's brother , Rhodri , and Southey began to write a prose version of the story in 1789 . In 1794 , the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Southey was attempting to publish works to raise money to support himself and Samuel Taylor Coleridge in an expedition to America to establish a Pantisocracy , a democratic form of government that the two invented . One of the poems he sought to publish was Madoc , which was an epic that he started working on while at school but he never finished . Southey and Coleridge were able to complete the poem Joan of Arc by summer 1795 while Southey worked on Madoc . However , in his notebook he claimed on 22 February 1797 . " This morning I began the study of law , this evening I began Madoc . " During 1797 , Southey had given up his ideas of Pantisocracy and was studying to become a lawyer . He spent the rest of his time working on other publications , such as a translating part of Jacques Necker 's On the French Revolution . Southey continued to work on Madoc through 1798 , and started his mornings by working on the poem . 
 It was not until mid @-@ 1799 that Southey was able to finish composing Madoc , and soon after began to work on Thalaba . Afterwards he travelled to Portugal , where he continued to work on Madoc for two more years to polish up the language . After Portugal went to war with France and Spain , Southey returned to England . While there , he travelled to Wales to get more information for his epic . He continued to travel in 1801 , and worked on the epic during this time . In May 1804 , Southey took the beginning of the poem to the publisher Longman , and he began to finish the second section in October . It was finished and published in two parts early in 1805 , with footnotes and a preface explaining Southey 's purpose . The work cost a lot of money to publish , which prompted Southey to write " By its high price , one half the edition is condemned to be furniture in expensive libraries , and the other to collect cobwebs in the publisher 's warehouses . I foresee that I shall get no solid pudding by it " . 
 = = Poem = = 
 = = = Part one : Madoc in Wales = = = 
 Southey intended Madoc to be a combination of the Bible , the works of Homer , and James Macpherson 's Ossian poems . The story deals with Madoc , a legendary Welsh prince who supposedly colonised the Americas in the 12th century . The book is divided into two parts , which represent a reversed division between the Iliad and the Odyssey . The work focuses on colonisation , but starts in Wales during King Henry II 's reign of England . This section is loosely based on the historical events following the death of Owain Gwynedd , supposedly Madoc 's father , in the late 12th century . The work begins as " Owen Gwynned " is crowned king of North Wales after removing his nephew <unk> from power . After Gwynned dies , one of his sons , David , takes the throne after killing or exiling his siblings . The youngest sibling , Madoc , leaves Britain to settle in a new land . He joins with Cadwallon , the son of <unk> , and other Welshmen to start their journey . After discovering America , they return to recruit people to help form a new colony . Madoc stays long enough to witness fighting between his living siblings and determines that he must leave immediately . 
 The story follows Madoc 's journey as they travel West again , contending with problems such as storms and dissent among the crew . Eventually , they reach America and are received by the natives . Madoc takes on one of the natives , <unk> , as his guide when they begin to explore the area of the Mississippi River . As they continue to travel , they soon come to Aztlan , the original homeland of the Aztec nation , and Madoc discovers that the Aztecs require human sacrifices for their gods . Madoc decides to interfere with tribal affairs and stop two children from being taken by the Aztecs to be sacrificed . Following this , he encourages a peaceful tribe , the Hoamen , to take up arms against the Aztecs . To further protect the Hoamen , Madoc goes to the Aztec capital to deal with their king . While there , he is shown by the king how great the Aztecs are and how no one could stand against them . Madoc witnesses among the buildings and monuments piles of skulls and corpses along with other horrific scenes . 
 Unwilling to allow the Aztecs to continue their practices , Madoc instigates war between the Aztecs and the much smaller Hoamen nation . While the Aztecs bring a large army , Madoc is able to use Welsh technology and superior tactics to overcome them . The Hoamen are able to take many prisoners while the Aztec king contracts a mortal illness . Following the battle Madoc shocks the Aztecs by releasing the prisoners instead of sacrificing them , and provides leeches to help the Aztec king recover from his disease . This leads to a treaty between the Aztecs and the Hoamen which abolishes human sacrifice . The Aztec priests fear to stop the practice , so the Aztec king decides that his people will abandon their religion and take up a monotheistic religion based on a God of love . 
 The rest of the story involves Madoc returning to Wales to recruit more settlers for his colony . During this time , he meets with Owen <unk> , a poet who tells Madoc to discuss the matter with the Congress of Bards . During the meeting , a young bard prophesies that Madoc would be like Merlin in America and that he is trying to recreate an Arthurian greatness . Afterward , he meets with Llewelyn , an individual trying to reclaim his title as Prince of Wales . Madoc tries and fails to convince him to come to America . Madoc returns to his original home , and there he stops an attempt to remove the body of Gwynned from a grave on holy ground . Instead , Madoc offers to take the corpse back with him to America where it could be buried without any worry . The rest of Madoc 's time back in Wales is spent trying to get his brother David , the king , to free another brother , Rodri , whom he has imprisoned . However , Rodri escapes after his release was promised . As Madoc sets out to return to the colony , they are met by Rodri 's boat . Rodri informs Madoc that he is working with Llewelyn to overthrow David and restore the rightful king . Although Madoc is upset by the potential warfare , he leaves with the promise by <unk> that Britain will be fine . 
 = = = Part two : Madoc in Aztlan = = = 
 The second part of the poem parallels the Iliad and follows the events in America after the first part . Madoc returns to America from Wales and finds that <unk> , the colony , is doing well . However , there are struggles with his people and the Aztecs because the Aztecs have turned back to their pagan gods . As such , the peace between the two groups ends while a shaman of the Hoamen people starts to convince the people to also worship pagan gods . The Hoamen begin to sacrifice children for their god by feeding them to a large snake . Madoc , angry , accuses a priest leading the sacrifices of being a traitor before killing both the priest and the snake . This feat brings the Hoamen back to Christianity . 
 The Aztec high priest , Tezozomoc , tells the people that they will not have the favour of their gods unless they kill the foreigners . Two warriors volunteer to capture a child to please their gods , and they return with Madoc and the child Hoel . Madoc is forced to fight other condemned men , until Madoc 's Welsh allies attack the city , allowing a woman , <unk> , to free Madoc and Hoel . At the same time the Aztec warrior <unk> attacks <unk> , but is defeated by the Welsh women . When Madoc returns , he joins the Welsh and Hoamen forces , and the battle continues until Madoc kills the Aztec king , <unk> . 
 The battle is followed by the Welshmen destroying the pagan temples while the Aztecs gather to appoint a new king . Games and events are established and follow after the battle . During the various events , a temple becomes covered in flames and idols to the pagan gods appear once again . This is followed by the Aztecs telling the Welsh to leave before attacking them . A battle takes place in the water surrounding the Aztec city on boats , and the superior Welsh ships are able to win . The Aztecs , unwilling to stop , turn to superstitious rituals and priests travel to a sacred mountain to make sacrifices . However , a sudden lava eruption kills the priests . This causes the Aztecs to believe that they do not have the support of their gods and they cease their fighting . Admitting defeat , the Aztecs leave the area and head south for Mexico . 
 = = Themes = = 
 During his time in Portugal , Southey cultivated a strong anti @-@ Catholic bias , and saw Catholic rituals as superstitious and pagan @-@ like . However , he did not limit his feelings to only Catholics , and he believed that Methodists and Calvinists were also superstitious and a political threat . He distrusted religious enthusiasm and any alteration of the mind away from reason . Southey wrote that Madoc , in following these beliefs , was about a " gentle tribe of savages delivered from priestcraft . " With such an intent , Southey also believed that he was dealing closely with history and scholarship . The footnotes within Madoc reinforce such an intent . He did not call it an epic like some of his other works . Instead , he argued that there was evidence that the story had a historical basis . The story , according to Southey , was that Madoc came from Britain to America to replace paganism with Christianity . 
 In terms of politics , Southey believed that war with the post @-@ revolution France was inappropriate when he first started composing Madoc . By the time the poem was finished , Southey was an advocate for a war against Napoleon 's government . Instead of supporting his own government in return , he was opposed to the government of Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger . The poem is also heavily grounded in Southey 's ideas on Pantisocracy , and it includes an earlier version of his democratic ideal within a mythic form . The connection between Wales and America within the poem alludes to Southey 's own plans to travel from Wales to settle in America to start a new societal system . 
 The endings of the two poems are the same but have opposite results : they both have a sunset and an exodus from the country , but the first deals with Wales and the second with the Aztec lands . The first is messianic and heralds a return of Wales 's greatness , and the second deals with a new country being created . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Southey intended Madoc to rival the works of Homer , and Coleridge believed that the poem would be better than the Aeneid . However , Madoc received mixed reviews from critics ; while one critic believed it was comparable to John Milton 's Paradise Lost , another felt that it was unreadable . In letter written by William Wordsworth on 3 June 1805 , he claimed that he was " highly pleased with it ; it abounds in beautiful pictures and descriptions happily introduced , and there is an animation diffused through the whole story though it cannot perhaps be said that any of the characters interest you much , except perhaps young <unk> whose situation is highly interesting , and he appears to me the best conceived and sustained character in the piece [ ... ] The Poem fails in the highest gifts of the poet 's mind Imagination in the true sense of the word , and knowledge of human Nature and human heart . There is nothing that shows the hand of the great Master " . He followed this with a letter on 29 July 1805 saying " Southey 's mind does not seem strong enough to draw the picture of a Hero . The character of Madoc is often very insipid and contemptible [ ... ] In short , according to my notion , the character is throughout languidly conceived " . Dorothy Wordsworth , William 's sister , wrote on 11 June 1805 to claim that " We have read Madoc with great delight [ ... ] I had one painful feeling throughout , that I did not care as much about Madoc as the Author wished me to do , and that the characters in general are not sufficiently distinct to make them have a separate after @-@ existence in my affection . " 
 A review by John <unk> in the October 1805 Monthly Review argued , " It has fallen to the lot of this writer to puzzle our critical discernment more than once [ ... ] He has no contrived to manufacture a large quarto , which he has styled a poem , but of what description it is no easy matter to decide [ ... ] The poem of Madoc is not didactic , nor elegiac , nor classical , in any respect [ ... ] Respecting the manners , Mr. Southey appears to have been more successful than in his choice of the story . He has adhered to history where he could discover any facts adapted to his purpose ; and when history failed him , he has had resource to probability . " <unk> continued with an attack on the Welsh names that appear within the poem : " we own that the nomenclature of his heroes has shocked what Mr. S. would call our prejudices . <unk> and <unk> and Rodri and <unk> may have charms for Cambrian ears , but who can feel an interest in Tezozomoc , <unk> , or <unk> [ ... ] how could we swallow <unk> , <unk> , and , above all , the <unk> jaw @-@ dislocating <unk> ? — These torturing words , particularly the latter , remind us so strongly of the odious cacophony of the Nurse and Child , that they really are not to be tolerated . " 
 An anonymous review in the Imperial Review in November 1805 stated , " something should be said of the language . This undoubtedly is not its chief excellence . The style , in many places , is trailing , flat , and uninteresting , — deficient both in strength and animation . The author <unk> avails himself of any artificial ornaments [ ... ] Though we feel ourselves compelled to make these observations , it is hardly necessary to add , that upon the whole we think very highly of this performance . " The review continues by comparing Madoc to Paradise Lost : " were the style adorned by a little artificial colouring , and enriched with all the allowable decorations of poetry , Madoc would hardly yield to Paradise Lost . As it stands , it is certainly the second heroic production in the English language . Its leading characteristics are not fire and sublimity , but tenderness and humanity . Milton astonishes the head — Southey touches the heart . The first we may admire — the last we can love . " 
 Jack Simmons , in his 1945 biography , believed that the poem was " the longest , the least successful , the most tedious " of Southey 's poems . In 1972 , Ernest Bernhardt @-@ Kabisch argued " Southey would perhaps have done well to have ended the poem here [ at the end of part one ] . In its larger framework of Welsh history , the American adventure and its clash of culture is interesting and is comparable in purpose and proportion , if not in power and dramatic nuance , to <unk> ' exotic flashback narrative at the court of <unk> . The Welsh narrative [ ... ] appeals to a variety of Romantic interests – patriotic and picturesque , sentimental and libertarian . And though , as always , thought tends to be commonplace and pathos <unk> , the quality of the writing is almost uniformly high , and there are memorable and moving passages of description and rhetoric , as well as suggestive images " . He continued adding that " Southey 's epic thereby becomes , in fact , the crowning effort of eighteenth @-@ century English literature to deal poetically with the American Indian " . 
 In 1990 Northern Irish poet Paul Muldoon published his long poem Madoc : a Mystery , inspired by Southey 's work and the events surrounding it . Muldoon 's work takes as its premise the idea that Southey and Coleridge actually came to America to found their ideal state , and offers a multi @-@ layered poetic exploration of what might have happened . It won the 1992 Geoffrey Faber Memorial Prize . 
 = 1865 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1865 Atlantic hurricane season included two landfalling hurricanes , with one that caused over 325 deaths . The first storm was reported on May 30 by ships in the western Caribbean . A month later , a storm hit southern Texas , and in late August , a storm paralleled the coastline of the Carolinas . The fourth storm of the season was also the longest @-@ lasting , forming east of the Lesser Antilles before hitting Guadeloupe and eventually moving ashore in Louisiana . In both of its major landfalls , the storm left many houses destroyed . There was confusion whether or not the fifth storm of the season was separate from the fourth storm , as both systems struck Louisiana in September . Another hurricane occurred in late September , before the final storm of the season developed north of Panama . The final hurricane struck Cuba and Key West , Florida before dissipating north of Bermuda on October 25 . 
 At one time , one hurricane researcher identified a tropical storm over Cuba in late August , although there was no evidence the storm actually existed . There was also a report of a hurricane over Louisiana on October 22 , although it is unknown if it was related to other storms in the season . There may have been additional unconfirmed tropical cyclones during the season . Meteorologist Christopher Landsea estimates up to six storms were missed from the official database , due to small tropical cyclone size , sparse ship reports , and relatively unpopulated coastlines . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 On May 30 , a tropical storm in the western Caribbean Sea wrecked a ship named the " Golden Rule " , which was sailing from New York to the east coast of Nicaragua . The ship first encountered the storm on May 29 , reporting high winds and heavy rainfall . After the wreck , the crew sailed to a nearby island , where they were rescued by two United States ships after 10 days . The winds were estimated at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , although the entire track of the storm is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 The second known storm of the season was reported near Brownsville , Texas on June 30 . Its existence is known based on a newspaper report in the New Orleans Times . The winds were estimated at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) ; however , it is a potentially unreliable estimate due to a lack of significant population providing observations . The entire track of the storm is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 A ship off the coast of Hatteras , North Carolina sustained damage from a storm on August 20 . Further ship reports indicated the tropical storm maintained a general northeast track off the North Carolina coastline . On August 22 the storm made its closest approach to the state , and while remaining offshore it produced winds of around 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) along the coast . Around that time , the storm attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) over the ocean . On August 23 , high waves from the storm left one ship 's cargo a complete wreck . It was last observed on August 24 to the southeast of Nantucket . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The fourth tropical cyclone of the season , also the longest @-@ lasting , was first observed on September 6 to the east of the Lesser Antilles . A small cyclone , it tracked westward and struck Guadeloupe as a fully developed hurricane . Many residents in the small nearby island of Marie @-@ Galante evacuated to Guadeloupe , but some died in the attempt . In Îles des Saintes , the hurricane destroyed all but two buildings . Damage was similarly heavy in Basse @-@ Terre . The overall death toll was estimated at 300 , including 36 on Marie @-@ Galante . After moving through the Lesser Antilles , the hurricane moved through the Caribbean Sea , passing between Jamaica and Haiti and bypassing Cuba to the south . It curved northward in the Gulf of Mexico , moving ashore on September 13 near the border between Texas and Louisiana with an estimated atmospheric pressure of 969 millibars ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . 
 Upon moving ashore , the hurricane produced high tides as far east as the mouth of the Mississippi River , in addition to as far inland as Calcasieu Lake , Louisiana . Three towns were destroyed , causing two of them to be abandoned . Across the state , there were 25 deaths , many of them in Leesburg . In neighboring Texas , damage was greatest in Orange , where 196 homes were destroyed out of the 200 in the town . The hurricane capsized 19 boats in the Sabine River , causing multiple deaths . The hurricane weakened over Louisiana and dissipated over Arkansas on September 14 . It was also known as the " Sabine River @-@ Lake Calcasieu Storm " . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 A tropical storm struck the south @-@ central Louisiana coast on September 7 , while the previous system was located over the Caribbean . The storm wrecked a ship , and its winds were estimated around 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) . The track was incomplete , and there was a possibility that the storm was misreported as the previous hurricane . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 On September 28 , a ship encountered a hurricane to the northeast of the Turks and Caicos islands . The winds in the hurricane extended far to the northwest , and high waves affected the southeast United States coast from Charleston , South Carolina to Cape Hatteras . The hurricane 's track is unknown . 
 = = = Hurricane Seven = = = 
 The final tropical cyclone of the season formed on October 18 , just north of the coast of Panama . The storm brushed the country 's coast with high waves for several days , causing $ 300 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1865 USD ) . Moving north @-@ northwestward , the storm intensified into a hurricane by October 21 over the western Caribbean . After turning more to the north , it struck Cuba , producing strong winds that destroyed the roof of the Belen College Observatory in Havana . In the city , the hurricane destroyed several boats and houses . A station on the island recorded a pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 78 inHg ) , suggesting winds of about 80 mph ( 135 km / h ) . 
 After crossing the island , the hurricane intensified further over the Florida straits until striking Key West , Florida , where peak winds were estimated around 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Its pressure was estimated at 969 millibars ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) , and the hurricane either sunk or washed every boat ashore at the harbor in Key West . Rainfall totaled 4 @.@ 10 in ( 104 mm ) over a three @-@ day period . In nearby Fort Jefferson in the Dry Tortugas , the hurricane destroyed one building and damaged several others , killing one person . It later moved across the Florida mainland , weakening slightly . About a dozen ships encountered the hurricane across the western Atlantic , before the storm was last observed on October 25 north of Bermuda . 
 = Emigrant Trail in Wyoming = 
 The path followed by the Oregon Trail , California Trail and Mormon Trail ( collectively referred to as the Emigrant Trail ) spans 400 miles ( 640 km ) through the U.S. state of Wyoming . The trail entered from Nebraska on the eastern border of the state near the present day town of Torrington and exited on the western border near the towns of <unk> and Afton . An estimated 350 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 settlers traveled on the trail through Wyoming between 1841 and 1868 . All three trails follow the same path through most of the state . The Mormon Trail splits at Fort Bridger and enters Utah , while the Oregon and California Trails continue to Idaho . 
 = = North Platte River = = 
 In the eastern plains , the Emigrant Trail follows the North Platte River into Wyoming . The trail follows the river upstream to Fort Laramie , a prominent military and trading post in the region . Prior to 1850 the northern side of the river was thought to be impassable beyond Fort Laramie , so the wagon trains that were traveling on the northern side of the river through Nebraska had to undertake a dangerous crossing at the fort . After crossing , trains on the main trail to the south of the river had to cross the North Platte again 100 miles ( 160 km ) upstream . In 1850 several wagon trains successfully blazed a path along the northern side of the river . This new route , which reduced the risk and expense of crossing the river twice , was preferred for all subsequent traffic on the northern side of the river . The northern route is sometimes called Child 's Route after Andrew Child who describe it in a guide book published in 1852 . Above Fort Laramie , Child 's Route follows the North Platte River through the present day town of Douglas , and near the site of Fort Fetterman which was built in 1867 . This is the point at which the Bozeman Trail turned north to the gold fields of Montana in the 1860s . 
 The southern route also follows the river along the edge of the Laramie Mountains to an area near the current towns of Casper and <unk> . In 1847 , during the first Mormon emigration , Brigham Young established a ferry near present day Casper known as Mormon Ferry . The next year the ferry was moved a few miles downriver . The ferry was free for Latter Day Saints , but charged a toll for other users . The ferry was manned by groups of Mormons every summer from 1848 until 1852 . In 1853 John Baptiste Richard built a toll bridge near the ferry site , which would eventually put all ferries on the North Platte out of business . In 1859 , Louis <unk> built the Platte Bridge near the site of the original Mormon Ferry . <unk> also built a trading post at one end of the bridge which eventually became Fort Caspar . 
 Famous landmarks along the southern route included Ayres Natural Bridge and Register Cliff , one of a number of locations along the trail in Wyoming where settlers carved their names . 
 = = Sweetwater River = = 
 Continuing upstream from Casper , the North Platte bends to the south . The original trail proceeded several miles along the river to Red Buttes , where a bend in the river formed a natural amphitheater dominated by red cliffs on the hill above . The river was easier to ford here for those who were unwilling or unable to pay to cross at one of the ferries downstream . This was the last good camp spot before leaving the river and entering the waterless stretch between the North Platte and the Sweetwater River . From here the settlers entered a difficult portion called Rock Avenue which moved from spring to spring across mostly alkaline soil and steep hills until it reached the Sweetwater River . Later settlers who had crossed to the northern side of the river at Casper would come to favor a route through a small valley called Emigrant Gap which headed directly to Rock Avenue , bypassing Red Buttes . 
 Upon arrival in the Sweetwater valley , the trail encounters one of the most important landmarks on the trail , Independence Rock . Independence Rock was named because settlers tried to reach it by July 4 ( Independence Day in the United States ) in order to help ensure that they will be at their destinations in California or Oregon before the winter snows come . Many of the travelers left their names on the rock , either carved or painted on with axle grease . It is estimated that more than 50 @,@ 000 signatures were inscribed on Independence Rock . Other notable landmarks along the Sweetwater valley include Split Rock , Devil 's Gate and Martin 's Cove , where , in November 1856 , the Martin Handcart Company was stranded by heavy snow until a rescue party from Salt Lake City arrived . 
 The trail continues west along the Sweetwater River eventually crossing the meandering river nine times , including three times within a 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) section through a narrow canyon in the Rattlesnake Hills . Prior to the 6th crossing , the trail crossed an unusual location known as Ice Slough . A covering of peat like vegetation grew over a small stream . The stream froze in winter and didn 't thaw until early summer due to the insulating layer of vegetation . The ice was a welcome treat for settlers who were enduring temperatures over 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) in July . The trail crosses the Sweetwater three more times and encounters a large hill known as Rocky Ridge on the northern side of the river . This barren and rocky section lasted almost 12 miles ( 19 km ) , and was considered a major obstacle in the trail . The same storm in November 1856 that debilitated the Martin Handcart Company also stranded the Willie Handcart Company on the eastern side of the ridge . Before rescuers could arrive , 21 people died in freezing temperatures . Following Rocky Ridge , the trail descends one more time into the Sweetwater valley to the ninth and final crossing of the Sweetwater at Burnt Ranch . 
 In 1853 , a new route named Seminoe cutoff was established on the southern side of the river . It was named after trapper Basil <unk> who was referred to as Seminoe by the Shoshone Indians . The Seminoe cutoff split from the main trail at the 6th crossing and rejoined it at Burnt Ranch , bypassing both Rocky Ridge and four of the river crossings , which was an advantage in the early spring and summer during high runoff . The route was used extensively in the 1850s , especially by the Mormon companies . 
 Immediately after crossing the Sweetwater at Burnt Ranch the trail crosses the continental divide at South Pass , unarguably the most important landmark on the entire trail . South Pass itself is an unimpressive open saddle between the Wind River Range to the north and the Antelope Hills to the south , but it represented a major milestone in the trip . In 1848 , Congress created the Oregon Territory which included all the territory in Wyoming west of the Continental Divide . Crossing South Pass meant that the settlers had truly arrived in the Oregon Territory , though their ultimate destination was still a great distance away . Nearby Pacific Springs offered the first water since the trail had left the Sweetwater River and marked the beginning of a relatively dry stretch of trail until the settlers reached the Green River more than 40 miles ( 64 km ) away . 
 = = Sandy River = = 
 Leaving Pacific Springs , the trail moves southwest alongside Pacific Creek for a short distance until it swoops to the west to intersect Dry Sandy creek , a small stream that is a tributary of the Little Sandy River which in turn flows into the Big Sandy River . True to its name , the water level on the Dry Sandy varied depending on the time of year and was often dry . South of the Dry Sandy ford , the trail split into two major sections , the main route which continues south to Fort Bridger , and the Sublette cutoff , which proceeds west directly to the Green River and Bear River valleys , bypassing Fort Bridger . The point at which the trails diverge is known as Parting of the Ways . 11 miles ( 18 km ) south the main trail fords the Little Sandy . Here , a secondary path to the Sublette cutoff leads from the Little Sandy Pony Express station that was based here during the emigration period . The main trail goes on to ford the Big Sandy near the present day town of Farson . The trail proceeds along the northern side of the Big Sandy to its confluence with the Green River . <unk> the Green River was very risky , so most travelers used one of a number of ferries operating on the Green River , including the Lombard Ferry and the Robinson Ferry . 
 = = Fort Bridger = = 
 Continuing toward Fort Bridger from the Green River , the main trail crosses Hams Fork near Granger and followed Blacks Fork to Fort Bridger . Established in 1842 by legendary frontiersman Jim Bridger and his partner Louis Vasquez , Fort Bridger was a vital refueling post and a welcome rest after the particularly difficult journey from South Pass . Even after the Sublette cutoff was established , settlers destined for Oregon who were low on livestock and supplies would bypass the cutoffs and make the longer trip to Fort Bridger to restock . Fort Bridger is the point at which the Mormon Trail splits from the Oregon Trail and California Trail for good . The Mormon Trail continues southwest , fording the Bear River and crossing into Utah south of the current town of Evanston . The other trails turn and proceed northwest , crossing the Bear River Divide and into the Bear River valley on the western side of the state . The trail meets the Sublette cutoff near <unk> and the rejoined trails follow the Bear River upstream and into Idaho , heading for Fort Hall . 
 = = Sublette @-@ Greenwood Cutoff = = 
 The Sublette @-@ Greenwood Cutoff was opened in 1844 by the Stephens @-@ Townsend @-@ Murphy Party led by mountain men Caleb Greenwood and Isaac Hitchcock . Hitchcock , an old trapper and one of the first of his kind to have been in California in 1832 , recommended that the wagon trail go due west from the Little Sandy and cross 40 miles ( 64 km ) of desert territory to the Green River and from there cross the ridge into the Bear River Valley , completely bypassing Fort Bridger and the crossing of Bear River Ridge . The route shaved about 85 miles ( 137 km ) and 7 days off the main route , but the decision to cross nearly 45 waterless miles before reaching the Green River was not one to be taken lightly . Settlers had to decide between time and the health of their livestock . A traveler in 1846 wrote : 
 We lay by preparing to Crossing the Cut off to Green river a distance of 40 miles without Wood or Water set out on the Journey at 3AM and landed on Green river the distance aforesaid at <unk> of the 19th it being 24 hours drive 
 The route reached the height of popularity during the California Gold Rush of the 1850s when a desire to speed to the California gold fields outweighed the risks . The route was named the Sublette cutoff by Joseph Ware in his popular 1849 guide book to the trail after an individual named Solomon Sublette who told him about the route , and not William Sublette as is popular myth . The popularity of the guide book during the 1850s cemented the name , though most scholars today call it the Sublette @-@ Greenwood Cutoff after its original discoverer . 
 As on the main route , several ferries operated where the cutoff crossed the Green River near the present day town of La Barge . Early settlers crossed the Names Hill Ford , which was barely passable when the water was low . Later The Names Hill Ferry offered a safer alternative . The nearby Mormon Ferry was located a mile upstream , and the Mountain Man Ferry operated during the Gold Rush days . West of the ford is its namesake , Names Hill , which is a prominent emigrant " recording area " with signatures and other carvings . One notable signature is James Bridger , 1844 , Trapper . It is unclear if the signature is authentic , since Bridger was known to be illiterate . The hill also features native American pictographs . 
 A secondary cutoff named the Slate Creek or Kinney Cutoff breaks from the main trail near the Lombard Ferry on the Green River , and meets the Sublette cutoff on Slate Creek Ridge at Emigrant Springs . This route was slightly longer than the Sublette , but had the advantage of only 10 waterless miles rather than the 45 endured on the Sublette trail . 
 = = Lander Cutoff = = 
 The Lander Road , located further north than the main trail to Fort Hall , also bypassed Fort Bridger and was about 85 miles ( 137 km ) shorter to Fort Hall . It was built under the supervision of Frederick W. Lander by federal contractors in 1858 — one of the first federally sponsored roads in the west . Lander 's Road officially was called the Fort Kearney , South Pass and Honey Lake Road and was a federally funded attempt to improve the Oregon and California trails . The little used Honey Lake part of the proposed route near the present states of Nevada and California border was improved in 1859 under Lander 's direction but did not go much beyond improving some watering holes — work ceased in 1860 . The " Lander Road " was the first section of the federally funded road through the future states of Wyoming and Idaho . Expeditions under the command of Frederick W. Lander surveyed a new route starting at Burnt Ranch following the last crossing of the Sweetwater River before it turned west over South Pass . The Lander Road followed the Sweetwater River further north , skirting the Wind River Range before turning west and crossing the continental divide north of South Pass . 
 The road crossed the Green River ( Utah ) near the present town of Big Piney , Wyoming and then passing over 8 @,@ 800 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) Thompson Pass in the Wyoming Range near the head of the Grey 's River and then crosses another high pass across the Salt River Range before descending into Star Valley ( Wyoming ) . The trail entered Star Valley about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south of the present town of Smoot , Wyoming . From Smoot , the road then continued north about 20 miles ( 32 km ) down Star Valley west of the Salt River before turning almost due west at Stump Creek near the present town of Auburn , Wyoming and passing into the present state of Idaho and following the Stump Creek valley about ten miles ( 16 km ) northwest over the Caribou Mountains ( Idaho ) ( this section of the trail is now accessible only by US Forest Service path as the main road ( Wyoming Highway 34 ) now goes through <unk> canyon to get across the Caribous . ) After crossing the Caribou Range the road split , turning almost ninety degrees and progressing southwest to Soda Springs , Idaho or alternately heading almost due west and passing south of Grays Lake ( now part of the Grays Lake National Wildlife Refuge ) to Fort Hall Idaho . The Lander Road had good grass , fishing , water and wood but was high , rough and steep in many places . Later , after 1869 , it was mostly used by ranchers moving their stock to and from summer grazing and / or markets . For maps of the Lander road in Wyoming and Idaho see NPS National Trail Map For more information visit Afton , Wyoming to see its Lander and Pioneer Museum . 
 By crossing the lush Wyoming and Salt River Ranges instead of circling via the deserts to the south , the route provided ample wood , grass and water for the travelers , and cut nearly 7 days off the total travel time for wagon trains going to Fort Hall . Despite the better conditions for livestock , the mountainous terrain and unpredictable weather made passage sometimes difficult and required continuing federally funded maintenance on the mountainous road — not a sure thing just before , during and after the American Civil War . Funds were appropriated in 1858 and 115 men ( hired in Utah ) completed the road in Wyoming and Idaho in 90 days , clearing timber and moving about 62 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 47 @,@ 000 m3 ) of earth . The Lander 's road or cutoff opened in 1859 when it was extensively used . Records after 1859 are lacking and its use after that period are assumed to sharply decrease since the Sublette Cutoff , the Central Overland Route and other cutoffs were just about as fast or faster and were much less strenuous . Today the Lander cutoff road ( s ) are roughly followed by a series of county and Forest Service roads . 
 = SMS Grosser Kurfürst ( 1913 ) = 
 SMS Grosser Kurfürst was the second battleship of the four @-@ ship König class . Grosser Kurfürst ( or Großer Kurfürst ) served in the German Imperial Navy during World War I. The battleship was laid down in October 1911 and launched on 5 May 1913 . She was formally commissioned into the Imperial Navy on 30 July 1914 , days before the outbreak of war between Germany and the United Kingdom . Her name means Great Elector , and refers to Frederick William I , the Prince @-@ elector of Brandenburg . Grosser Kurfürst was armed with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets and could steam at a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Along with her three sister ships , König , Markgraf , and Kronprinz , Grosser Kurfürst took part in most of the fleet actions during the war , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The ship was subjected to heavy fire at Jutland , but was not seriously damaged . She shelled Russian positions during Operation Albion in September and October 1917 . Grosser Kurfürst was involved in a number of accidents during her service career ; she collided with König and Kronprinz , grounded several times , was torpedoed once , and hit a mine . 
 After Germany 's defeat and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , Grosser Kurfürst and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet were interned by the Royal Navy in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and limited to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , days before the treaty was signed , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . Unlike her sister ships , Grosser Kurfürst was raised in 1938 for scrapping and subsequently broken up in Rosyth . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 Grosser Kurfürst was ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm and built at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Hamburg under construction number 4 . Her keel was laid in October 1911 and she was launched on 5 May 1913 . At her launching ceremony , Prince Oskar of Prussia christened the ship . Due to the heightening political tensions in Europe in mid @-@ 1914 , the final construction work was accelerated , so the first set of dockyard trials were conducted on 15 July , and fitting @-@ out work was completed by the 30th , the day she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . Grosser Kurfürst cost the Imperial German Government 45 million Goldmarks . 
 Grosser Kurfürst displaced 25 @,@ 796 t ( 25 @,@ 389 long tons ) as built and 28 @,@ 600 t ( 28 @,@ 100 long tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 175 @.@ 4 m ( 575 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 19 @.@ 5 m ( 64 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 19 m ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She was powered by three AEG @-@ Vulcan steam turbines , each of which drove a propeller shaft and developed 44 @,@ 483 shp ( 33 @,@ 171 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 21 @.@ 2 knots ( 39 @.@ 3 km / h ; 24 @.@ 4 mph ) . Steam was supplied by three oil @-@ fired and 12 coal @-@ fired Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers operating at up to 16 atmospheres of pressure . The ship had a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 41 officers and 1 @,@ 095 enlisted sailors . 
 She was armed with ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns arranged in five twin gun turrets : two superfiring turrets each fore and aft and one turret amidships between the two funnels . Her secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns for surface use and four 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns and five 50 cm ( 20 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow and two on each beam . The ship 's main armored belt was 350 millimeters ( 14 in ) thick . The deck was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick ; the main battery turrets and forward conning tower were armored with 300 mm ( 12 in ) thick steel plates . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in July 1914 , Grosser Kurfürst underwent sea trials in the Baltic . The ship 's first combat operation was the Raid on Yarmouth on 2 – 3 November 1914 . The raid was conducted by the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group . Grosser Kurfürst and the other dreadnoughts sailed in distant support of Hipper 's force . After a brief bombardment , the German fleet withdrew back to port . On 7 December , Grosser Kurfürst sustained no damage when she accidentally rammed her sister König . 
 Her second operation , the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , followed on 15 – 16 December . On the evening of the 15th , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the fleet commander , that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back toward Germany . 
 On 22 January 1915 , Grosser Kurfürst and the rest of III Squadron were detached from the fleet to conduct maneuver , gunnery , and torpedo training in the Baltic . They returned to the North Sea on 11 February , too late to assist the I Scouting Group at the Battle of Dogger Bank . Following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank , the Kaiser removed von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February . Admiral Hugo von Pohl replaced him as commander of the fleet . Grosser Kurfürst then took part in several sorties into the North Sea . On 29 March , she sailed with the fleet out to Terschelling without any contact with the enemy . Another fleet advance occurred on 22 April , again without result . On 23 April , III Squadron returned to the Baltic for another round of exercises lasting until 10 May . 
 Grosser Kurfürst participated in a fleet advance into the North Sea from 29 until 31 May which ended without combat . The ship covered a minelaying operation on 11 – 12 September off Texel . Another uneventful fleet advance followed on 23 – 24 October . Grosser Kurfürst ended the year with a two @-@ week training cruise in the Baltic , which lasted from 5 to 20 December . Another round of exercises in the Baltic followed on 18 – 23 January 1916 . Grosser Kurfürst went into drydock in Wilhelmshaven for periodic maintenance on 12 February . Work lasted until 3 March ; two days later the ship sailed for a sweep into the Hoofden , though this again failed to encounter any British forces . The fleet conducted another sortie on 23 March to the Amrun Bank , followed by another a month later to Horns Reef on 21 – 22 April . 
 On 24 – 25 April , Hipper 's battlecruisers conducted another bombardment of the English coast ; Grosser Kurfürst and the rest of the High Seas Fleet sailed in support . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 CET , and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Grosser Kurfürst was present during the fleet operation on 31 May and 1 June 1916 that resulted in the Battle of Jutland . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . Grosser Kurfürst was the second ship in the German line , behind her sister König and followed by Markgraf and Kronprinz . The four ships made up the V Division of the III Battle Squadron , and they were the vanguard of the fleet . The III Battle Squadron was the first of three battleship units ; directly astern were the Kaiser @-@ class battleships of the VI Division , III Battle Squadron . The III Squadron was followed by the Helgoland and Nassau classes of the II Battle Squadron ; in the rear guard were the obsolescent Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the I Battle Squadron . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that resulted the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König 's crew spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 Grosser Kurfürst engaged the battlecruiser HMS Princess Royal at a range of 21 @,@ 000 yd ( 19 @,@ 000 m ) . Simultaneously , her secondary guns fired on British destroyers attempting to make torpedo attacks against the German fleet . The faster British ships began to pull away from their pursuers , and at 18 : 00 Grosser Kurfürst was forced to shift fire from Princess Royal to the battleship Valiant , though by 18 : 16 Valiant too had moved out of range . Grosser Kurfürst 's shells straddled Valiant four times and her gunners incorrectly claimed a hit on the British ship . The ship did not escape unscathed herself though ; at 18 : 09 she was hit by a 15 in ( 380 mm ) shell from either the battleships Malaya or Warspite . The shell struck the water some 30 to 60 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 to 18 @.@ 3 m ) from the ship and either ricocheted or exploded , impacting the hull approximately 85 ft ( 26 m ) from the bow . The hit caused no significant damage . During this period , she claimed three hits from her 15 cm battery on a destroyer , which was most likely <unk> . At 18 : 22 , the ship briefly fired her secondary guns at the destroyer HMS Moresby at extreme range , without scoring a hit . At the same time , Grosser Kurfürst came back into range of the battleship Valiant , and engaged her with her two forward turrets . The ship fired for eight minutes , though her shots all fell short of their target . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible ; Rear Admiral Paul Behncke in König attempted to maneuver his four ships to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . Grosser Kurfürst and her sisters fired heavily on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . Grosser Kurfürst fired a pair of salvos at extremely close range from her main guns at the armored cruiser Defence , which , under heavy fire from several German capital ships , exploded and sank at 19 : 19 . Observers aboard the ship noted that both salvos hit Defence , though did not ascribe credit for the latter 's destruction to the hits . Grosser Kurfürst then shifted fire to the armored cruiser Warrior , which was heavily damaged and forced to withdraw . Warrior foundered on the trip back to port the following morning . 
 By 20 : 00 , the German line was ordered to turn eastward to disengage from the British fleet , commanded by Admiral John Jellicoe . Shortly thereafter , four British light cruisers from the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron resumed the attacks on the crippled Wiesbaden ; the leading German battleships , including Grosser Kurfürst , opened fire on the cruisers in an attempt to drive them off . Grosser Kurfürst began firing at 20 : 07 , at ranges between 10 @,@ 000 and 18 @,@ 000 yd ( 9 @,@ 100 and 16 @,@ 500 m ) . Despite the heavy fire , the British cruisers managed to escape without serious damage . At around the same time , the British fleet came back into range and seven battleships took the V Division under heavy fire . Grosser Kurfürst was hit seven times , four hits occurring at 20 : 18 and 20 : 19 . Three of the hits were from the 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 cm ) guns of Marlborough , though her gunners incorrectly claimed a fourth hit . The remaining four hits came from the 15 @-@ inch guns of Barham or Valiant . One of the 15 @-@ inch shells destroyed the No. 2 port @-@ side 15 cm gun , and another struck the main belt and burst on impact . Though it did not penetrate the belt , it forced the plating in by as much as 13 in ( 33 cm ) for a length of some 26 ft ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . Damage control teams managed to temporarily stop the resulting flooding , after approximately 800 t ( 790 long tons ; 880 short tons ) of water had entered the ship . The flooding caused a list of 4 ° , though counter @-@ flooding efforts reduced it to less than a degree . As the battle continued , the flooding worsened , and by the time Grosser Kurfürst reached Helgoland the following morning , an estimated 3 @,@ 000 t ( 2 @,@ 950 long tons ; 3 @,@ 310 short tons ) of water had entered the ship . More hits were sustained , but these shells burst on impact and caused relatively minor damage . 
 The heavy fire of the British fleet forced Scheer to order the fleet to turn away ; this turn reversed the order of the fleet and placed Grosser Kurfürst toward the end of the line . After successfully withdrawing from the British , Scheer ordered the fleet to assume night cruising formation , though communication errors between Scheer aboard Friedrich der Grosse and Westfalen , the lead ship , caused delays . The fleet fell into formation by 23 : 30 , with Grosser Kurfürst the 15th vessel in the line of 24 capital ships . Around 02 : 45 , several British destroyers mounted a torpedo attack against the rear half of the German line ; Grosser Kurfürst spotted six unidentified destroyers in the darkness . She engaged them with her 15 cm and 8 @.@ 8 cm guns while turning away to avoid any torpedoes that might have been launched . Grosser Kurfürst scored one 15 cm hit on the destroyer Nessus at a range of about 2 @,@ 200 yd ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) , disabling one of Nessus 's boilers . Heavy fire from the German battleships forced the British destroyers to withdraw . 
 The High Seas Fleet managed to punch through the British light forces without drawing the attention of Jellicoe 's battleships , and subsequently reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . Off Helgoland , Grosser Kurfürst had taken in so much water that she was forced to reduce speed . She fell out of formation , but later rejoined the fleet outside the Schillig roadstead . Upon reaching Wilhelmshaven , Grosser Kurfürst went into harbor while several other battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead . The ship was transferred to Hamburg where she was repaired in AG Vulcan 's large floating dock . Repair work was completed by 16 July . In the course of the battle , Grosser Kurfürst fired a total of 135 shells from her main battery and 216 rounds from her 15 cm guns . She was hit by eight large @-@ caliber shells , which killed fifteen men and wounded ten . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Following completion of the repair work , Grosser Kurfürst conducted training maneuvers in the Baltic until 4 August . Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the original Jutland plan on 18 – 19 August . The battlecruiser squadron , however , had been reduced to only two operational ships — Von der Tann and Moltke — so Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and the newly commissioned Bayern were temporarily transferred to the squadron . The British were aware of the German plans , and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Unit training with the III Squadron followed from 21 October to 2 November . Two days later , the ship formally rejoined III Squadron . On the 5th , a pair of U @-@ boats grounded on the Danish coast . Light forces were sent to recover the vessels , and III Squadron , which was in the North Sea en route to Wilhelmshaven , was ordered to cover them . The British submarine J1 torpedoed Grosser Kurfürst some 30 nmi ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) northwest of Horns Reef . The torpedo destroyed the port @-@ side rudder and flooded the rudder rooms , though the ship maintained a speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . She returned to the AG Vulcan dockyard , where she was repaired from 10 November to 9 February . That same day , while in transit to Kiel , the ship ran aground off <unk> in the Elbe river . Damage was minimal and the ship proceeded to unit training in the Baltic , but on the return to the North Sea on 4 March , she accidentally rammed Kronprinz . Her bow was pushed in , necessitating repairs in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven until 22 April . 
 Grosser Kurfürst rejoined the fleet on 23 April and conducted training with the rest of III Squadron in the Baltic from 17 May to 8 June . After returning to the North Sea the ship was assigned to security duties in the German Bight . Another round of exercises in the Baltic followed on 11 – 23 September . She then sailed to Putziger Wiek to prepare for Operation Albion , the planned conquest of the islands off Riga . On 12 October , Grosser Kurfürst took up a position in Tagga Bay off Cape <unk> . But she struck a mine while maneuvering into firing position , which allowed around 280 t ( 280 long tons ; 310 short tons ) of water into the ship . Despite the mine damage , the ship continued with the bombardment of Russian coastal guns on the Cape . She was detached from the invasion force later that day ; she sailed to Wilhelmshaven via Kiel , where repairs were completed by 1 December . 
 Upon her return to service , Grosser Kurfürst resumed picket duties in the Bight . She was present during the abortive anti @-@ convoy operation on 23 – 25 April 1918 . While entering the lock outside Wilhelmshaven following the conclusion of the operation , the ship was damaged . She was back in dock for repairs from 27 April to 2 May . At the end of the month , Grosser Kurfürst ran aground just off the Helgoland 's north harbor . The ship 's port @-@ side propeller shaft was bent , necessitating repairs at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel from 2 – 9 June and 21 – 31 July . She finally rejoined the fleet on 12 August . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Grosser Kurfürst and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . On the 31st , Scheer ordered the fleet dispersed ; Grosser Kurfürst and the rest of III Squadron was sent to Kiel . On 4 November , the ship 's crew joined the general mutiny and hoisted the red flag of the Socialists . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . When informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated , " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that escorted the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Grosser Kurfürst sank at 13 : 30 ; unlike her sisters , she was ultimately raised on 29 April 1938 and sold for scrapping in Rosyth . Her bell was sold and was used for many years as a garden ornament . It was sold at auction in March 2014 and was bought by the National Museum of the Royal Navy , Portsmouth , Hampshire . 
 = Battle of Tripoli ( 1825 ) = 
 The Battle of Tripoli was a battle between the navies of the Kingdom of Sardinia and Vilayet of Tripoli on 26 September 1825 during the Sardinian @-@ Tripolitanian war of the same year . In order to resist Tripolitanian demands for increased tribute , the Sardinian king sent a squadron to force Tripoli to a favorable peace treaty . The Tripolitanians refused to change their demands and as a result the Sardinian squadron assaulted the city of Tripoli , sinking several vessels and landing a force to attack the city . Suffering heavy naval losses the Tripolitanian government quickly agreed to a favorable peace treaty with Sardinia , thus ending the war on favorable terms for the Sardinians . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1825 , the ruler of Tripoli , Yusuf Karamanli , had become enraged when the new Sardinian consul arrived without bringing tribute with him , as had previously been the custom . When learning that Sardinia 's King Charles Felix refused to give in and pay the request sum , the Tripolitanians expelled his consul and declared war on the Sardinian government on 7 August . Karamanli then began sending his corsairs out cruising against Sardinian merchant ships . To bring the Tripolitanians to terms , Charles Felix ordered a naval squadron to Tripoli under Francesco Sivori in his flagship , the frigate Commercio , along with Captain Luigi <unk> 's frigate Cristina , Giuseppe <unk> 's corvette <unk> , and Maurizio Antonio <unk> 's brig <unk> . Sivori left and after being delayed due to poor weather at Tunis , arrived at Tripoli on 25 September . 
 Once his squadron arrived in Tripoli , <unk> sent the <unk> into the harbor under a flag of truce in order to begin negotiations with Karamanli 's government . With assurances from the resident British consul that they would be safe , <unk> went ashore on the 26th and met the Tripolitanian envoy , General <unk> Mohammed . Although negotiations at first seemed to be going well , the next day Karamanli sent a note with suggested terms that essentially abrogated the peace treaty that British Admiral Edward Pellew had negotiated on Sardinia 's behalf after the Bombardment of Algiers in 1816 . Seeing that Karamanli had no intention of offering acceptable terms , Sivori decided his best course of action would be to attack Tripoli . Before returning to his squadron Sivori managed to get the British consul to take under his protection what Sardinians remained in Tripoli . Salvori 's force had a significant advantage over the Tripolitanian fleet , which only had a 12 @-@ gun brig and a pair of 6 @-@ gun schooners defending the harbor . Despite the disadvantage in naval power , Karamanli had significant forces ashore and several forts and shore batteries defending the harbor . Upon returning to his vessel , Salvori gave Karamanli a four @-@ hour ultimatum that he would bombard the city unless better peace terms were offered by the Tripolitanians . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The four hours passed with no reply , and Salvori began formulating his plan of attack against Tripoli . Though the Sardinian commander had initially wished to use his squadron 's frigates in the assault on the city , the seas were too rough to ensure their safety close to shore , so he instead made plans to attack Tripoli using several boats from his squadron 's vessels . Sivori placed 260 men in ten boats separated into three divisions under the command of Commercio 's Lieutenant Giorgio Mamelli . One division would attack the Tripolitanian brig , another the schooners , and the third group of boats would assault the city 's dockyard and customs house to ensure no reinforcements could enter the harbor . 
 When the boats first started for the port , the Tripolitanians began firing upon them with their shore batteries . The shelling lasted until 11 : 00 PM and delayed the assault until 1 : 00 AM when the <unk> began escorting the boats in closer to shore . Though at first the second Sardinian attack was unnoticed by the Tripolitanians , a sentry sighted the approaching force at 2 : 30 AM . Despite resistance from the Tripolitanian fleet and forces ashore , Mamelli pushed his force onward through grapeshot and musket fire . He soon reached the Tripolitanian brig and had his force board her , killing its officers and captain as well as a large portion of its crew . A second section of boats assaulted the schooners , taking them by boarding . At the same time , the third section of Sardinian boats managed to force their way ashore despite heavy opposition , capturing the dockyard and routing its Tripolitanian defenders . At 3 : 30 AM Mamelli fired off two rockets to signal a retreat , and burned the Tripolitanian ships his force had captured . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of the action the Tripolitanians had lost their three largest vessels and suffered heavy casualties , while the Sardinians only had two dead and five wounded . Later in the day while Sivori was making preparations for another attack on the city , a Dutch brig sailed out of port saluting him and signaling that it wished to communicate with him . Upon contacting the squadron , the brig 's captain sent Sivori the congratulatory remarks of the British consul at Tripoli . The Sardinian commander sent the Dutch vessel back into port with a message to Karamanli that if he did not commence negotiations , further military action would be taken against the city . Rather than suffer continued action from the Sardinians , Karamanli acceded to the Sardinian requests and sent an envoy out to the Sardinian squadron . 
 Upon negotiating with the Tripolitanian envoy , Sivori was able to get an agreement restoring the diplomatic situation to as it had been prior to the events that had sparked the hostilities . In order to ensure that Karamanli would abide by the terms of the treaty , the Sardinians included a provision that if the treaty were not ratified within four hours of its signing , Sardinian hostilities against Tripoli would recommence . Karamanli promptly acceded to the treaty upon receiving it and had the Sardinian consulate 's national colors raised and saluted by his forces . The next day Sivori upon invitation arrived at Karamanli 's palace , where he and his force were greeted with great respect and honor by the monarch . Though a stipulation was included in the peace treaty that required Sardinia to pay Tripoli 7 @,@ 000 gold francs , it was canceled and as a result the long practice of Sardinian tributary payments to the Tripolitanians finally ended . 
 = Jackie Evancho = 
 Jacqueline Marie " Jackie " Evancho ( / <unk> / ee @-@ <unk> @-@ koh ; born April 9 , 2000 ) is an American classical crossover singer who gained wide recognition at an early age and , since 2009 , has issued an EP and five albums , including a platinum and gold album and three Billboard 200 top 10 debuts . She has made three solo Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) specials . 
 Between 2008 and 2010 , Evancho entered several talent competitions ; made singing appearances , including the US national anthem at a Pittsburgh Pirates baseball game and in concerts with Tim Janis and David Foster ; issued an independent album , Prelude to a Dream ; and attracted interest on YouTube . In 2010 , at the age of ten , she gained wider popularity with her 2nd @-@ place finish in the fifth season of America 's Got Talent . With the 2010 holiday release of her O Holy Night EP , Evancho became the best @-@ selling debut artist of 2010 , the youngest top @-@ 10 debut artist in US history and the youngest solo artist ever to go platinum in the US . She performed at the 2010 National Christmas Tree lighting in Washington , D.C. In 2011 , her first full @-@ length album , Dream With Me , produced by Foster , debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 chart , and she became the youngest top @-@ 5 debut artist in UK history . Billboard ranked Evancho the top Classical Albums Artist for 2011 . Later that year , Evancho released another album , Heavenly Christmas , and became the youngest person ever to give a solo concert at Lincoln Center in New York City as part of her Dream With Me Tour . 
 Evancho is the ambassador for Mission : Humane , a US Humane Society program that encourages children to help protect animals . A national cotillion organization listed her as one of the " ten best @-@ mannered people of 2011 " . From late 2012 to 2014 , she toured the US , performing songs from her 2012 album , Songs from the Silver Screen , which was Evancho 's third top @-@ ten album debut . In 2013 she headlined benefit concerts at Carnegie Hall , the LDS Conference Center and with Cirque du Soleil in Las Vegas for the One Drop Foundation . She also appeared in the 2013 Robert Redford film The Company You Keep and modelled for Guess Kids clothing . Evancho 's 2014 album , Awakening , was her fifth consecutive No. 1 release on the Billboard Classical Albums chart . Since then she has toured in support of Awakening and released several singles and collaborations in between her public school studies . She is expected to release a new album in 2016 . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Evancho 's parents are Lisa and Michael Evancho . Her father operated a video security business until 2010 . She has an older sister Juliet , a younger brother Zachary , and a younger sister Rachel . She and her family are Catholic and reside in a suburb of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . Evancho began her education in the Pine @-@ Richland School District public schools , but in 2010 , because of her touring schedule , she switched to cyber schooling . In 2014 she returned to public school . Evancho 's interests include playing the violin and piano , sewing , swimming , playing with her pets , drawing and archery . 
 Evancho saw the film version of the musical The Phantom of the Opera and liked it so much that her mother purchased the DVD ; Evancho began singing the songs around the family home . Her parents have said that they did not recognize that her voice was unusual until her first talent competition , which she entered just before her 8th birthday . In the competition , Kean Idol , Evancho finished in second place to a 20 @-@ year @-@ old opera singer . She began taking voice lessons , and her parents began receiving requests for her to sing at various events , churches and nursing homes , mostly in Pennsylvania . She also started a YouTube channel , sang in the Children 's Festival Chorus of Pittsburgh during its 2008 – 09 season , and performed the title role in a 2009 school musical version of Little Red Riding Hood . 
 In January 2009 , Evancho competed in Las Vegas in the 15th annual U.S.A. World Showcase Talent Competition , where she also finished in second place . She entered the 2009 Kean Idol contest and was again runner @-@ up . In 2009 talent contests , she won the Golden Ribby Award – <unk> and the Talent Quest TV Show ( both in Massachusetts ) . Also in 2009 , she sang " Ave Maria " in composer and conductor Tim Janis 's PBS television special " Celebrate America " and performed in other concerts and TV shows with Janis , who sought her out after seeing her on YouTube . She made various singing appearances around Pennsylvania in 2009 and 2010 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = David Foster and Prelude to a Dream = = = 
 Evancho first caught record producer David Foster 's attention in 2009 . After sending a video to him , she was selected for the regional semifinals of his “ Hitman Talent Search Contest ” , finishing as runner @-@ up , and in October 2009 she sang in the " David Foster & Friends " concert at the Prudential Center in Newark , New Jersey . 
 In November 2009 , Evancho released her independent debut album , Prelude to a Dream . The album featured mainly covers of classical crossover songs such as " Con te partirò " , " The Prayer " , " To Where You Are " , " Concrete Angel " and " Amazing Grace " . It debuted on the Billboard 200 at No. 121 , and at No. 2 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart , in August 2010 , after Evancho 's first performance on America 's Got Talent . Evancho 's parents withdrew the album later in the same month , citing Evancho 's vocal progress since its release . Since Evancho 's success on America 's Got Talent , the album has become a collector 's item . 
 = = = America 's Got Talent = = = 
 After two earlier unsuccessful auditions for the show , Evancho was accepted as a contestant on the fifth season of the America 's Got Talent TV show ( AGT ) by placing first in its 2010 YouTube competition . On August 10 , 2010 , Evancho performed the aria " O mio babbino caro " in the show 's quarter @-@ final round . She received a standing ovation after her performance and was awarded a family trip to Universal Studios Florida for receiving the most fan votes of all the YouTube submissions to the show . Judge Howie Mandel said in his critique that the show sought to " find that one moment , that one gem , that one star from a place we 've never looked before . ... This is the moment . You 're the star . " After Evancho 's performance , commentators queried whether her performance had been lip @-@ synched . On the next evening 's live show , Evancho sang an impromptu voice exercise to demonstrate that the broadcast was of her live voice . In an interview , Mandel addressed the issue : " what people are ... really saying [ is ] that it 's really too good to be true . You are so perfect and so wonderful that people have never heard a talent like this . ... You 've got to take that as a compliment . ... Even if you don 't love that kind of music , you can 't deny that [ it ] is perfection . " 
 Her semifinal performance was " Time to Say Goodbye " , on August 31 , 2010 . She advanced to the Top 10 round where , on September 7 , 2010 , she performed " Pie Jesu " from Andrew Lloyd Webber 's Requiem and was voted into the Final 4 . Pittsburgh leaders declared the following week " Jackie Evancho Week " in appreciation " for her positive representation of our city " showing " poise and determination well beyond her years " . Her final competition performance was of Gounod 's " Ave Maria " on September 14 . The following evening at the AGT season finale , Evancho sang " Time to Say Goodbye " together with guest artist Sarah Brightman ; then Evancho was announced as the runner @-@ up , finishing second to singer Michael Grimm . Many viewers and commentators felt that Evancho should have won , and even Grimm expressed surprise . The show brought Evancho wide exposure to American audiences , as up to 16 million viewers watched her performances each week . The finale show was AGT 's highest @-@ rated episode in three years . Evancho became one of the two most successful AGT alumni . She was a guest on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno a week after the finale , where she sang and gave her first late @-@ night interview with Jay Leno . Evancho was subsequently profiled and interviewed in the 2013 book Inside AGT : The Untold Stories of America 's Got Talent . 
 Evancho performed in 10 of the 25 cities in the America 's Got Talent : Live Tour from October 1 to November 5 , 2010 . On October 8 , 2010 , Evancho signed a record deal with <unk> music and Columbia Records . One week later , she performed in Las Vegas with David Foster . From June 2010 until mid @-@ 2011 , Evancho was coached by voice teacher Yvie Burnett , a mezzo @-@ soprano from Scotland , who has worked with many of the singers appearing on AGT . Tim Janis scheduled Evancho to perform in his show at Carnegie Hall in New York City on December 2 , 2010 , where she would have been the venue 's youngest female vocal soloist . During the AGT tour , however , her parents withdrew her from the Carnegie Hall event ; by the time of that event , Evancho had begun making promotional appearances for Columbia Records . 
 = = = O Holy Night = = = 
 Evancho 's first release on a major record label was a Columbia Records EP entitled O Holy Night . It was released on November 16 , 2010 and entered the Billboard 200 at No. 2 , making Evancho the top @-@ selling debut artist for 2010 and the youngest solo artist ever to debut in the top 10 . It also launched at No. 1 on Billboard 's Classical Albums chart . It was No. 2 on Billboard 's Holiday Albums Chart . The album sold 239 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . On December 10 , 2010 , the album was certified platinum by the RIAA , shipping in excess of a million copies in the US , making Evancho the youngest solo artist ever to go platinum in the US . 
 Evancho promoted the album on TV beginning with The Oprah Winfrey Show on October 19 , 2010 , where she sang " Pie Jesu " . Among several other talk shows , QVC appearances and holiday singing appearances , Evancho performed songs from the album and was interviewed on The Today Show and Fox & Friends , The View and Martha Stewart Living . In November 2010 , Evancho sang " O Holy Night " in the My Macy 's Holiday Parade in Pittsburgh and again on NBC 's Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree lighting special , Christmas in Rockefeller Center , where she also duetted with Katherine Jenkins , singing " Silent Night " . Such a duet had been anticipated since Piers Morgan commented on the similar appearance of the two singers . On December 9 , 2010 , Evancho performed at the National Christmas Tree lighting in Washington , D.C. , singing " O Holy Night " , where she met President Obama and his family . Also in December , she returned to the Tonight Show and performed at the 27th annual Disney Parks Christmas Day Parade , on ABC television . 
 In its 2011 year @-@ end charts ( including releases from November 2010 ) , Billboard ranked O Holy Night at No. 1 on its Classical Albums chart . It also ranked the album as the No. 15 best @-@ selling album of 2011 in the US . O Holy Night also ranked as the No. 31 Canadian Album of 2011 . 
 = = = Dream with Me = = = 
 Evancho 's second full @-@ length feature album ( her first on a major label ) , Dream with Me , produced by David Foster for Sony and Syco Music , was released on June 14 , 2011 . The album debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 chart , reached No. 1 on Billboard 's Classical Albums Chart , and was certified gold by the RIAA . The album also performed well internationally , with Evancho becoming the youngest artist ever to debut in the UK in the top 5 . The album includes 14 tracks ranging from popular songs ( " Angel " ) to classical arias ( " Ombra mai fu " ) , and original songs , including the title track , for which Evancho contributed to the lyrics . Evancho sings duets with Barbra Streisand ( " Somewhere " ) and Susan Boyle ( " The Prayer " ) . A deluxe edition of Dream with Me available only at the Target website includes four bonus tracks : " Someday " , " Mi <unk> " , " The Impossible Dream " and " A Time For Us " . Allmusic gave the album 3 @-@ 1 / 2 stars out of a possible five , commenting : " Dream with Me hits all of the right notes , though there are few surprises or big moments to be found ... resulting in a solid " official " debut from a rising star at the dawn of her career . " USA Today rated the album 2 @-@ 1 / 2 stars out of four : " [ Evancho 's ] sweet , unblemished vocal tone and slow , careful vibrato hardly betray her young age . ... But Dream 's predictable and often bombastic odes to love and faith can undermine the tween 's most appealing quality : innocence . I 'd have preferred a little less pomp and Puccini and more youthful wonder . " 
 Evancho promoted the album on talk shows and at concerts in the US and in Toronto . She recorded a solo concert television special for the 2011 PBS Great Performances series that includes nearly the same songs as the album . The special , titled Dream With Me In Concert , was the most broadcast program of the year on the PBS network . Evancho was the youngest person ever to have a special on the series . It " became one of the most viewed specials in the 38 @-@ year @-@ history of the Great Performances series [ and ] raised record amounts of money for PBS stations . " The concert was co @-@ hosted by David Foster , who played the piano in the orchestra for many of the selections , while Conrad Tao played piano and violin , respectively , for two songs . The special was shown on PBS stations beginning in June 2011 and was released as a CD / DVD set in September 2011 , Dream With Me In Concert , reaching No. 1 on Billboard 's Top Music Video chart . Allmusic noted : " the concert version ... sounds nearly identical ( outside of the waves of applause ) to the studio album ... but the accompanying DVD , which features the heavily choreographed performance , as well as an extensive photo gallery and interviews with both Evancho and Foster , should provide enough eye and ear candy to appease fans of the gifted young vocalist until a proper follow @-@ up appears . " The Sun wrote that the " classical crossover set ... showcases the extraordinary beauty of the child 's pipes . " 
 In July 2011 , the singer began her first solo tour across the United States , to promote the album . It consisted of 18 performances with symphony orchestras , beginning with eight stops in the US during 2011 , including one with her hometown Pittsburgh Opera on October 16 . Evancho made her New York City solo concert debut at Avery Fisher Hall in November 2011 , becoming the youngest person ever to sing a solo concert at Lincoln Center . Her last appearance in 2011 was in Las Vegas on December 29 , 2011 , where Evancho headlined a concert with David Foster and Kenny G , featuring mostly songs from Dream With Me . In 2012 , she continued her US tour to promote the album , together with tenor Josh Page , who sang a duet of " The Prayer " with her and performed two solos to break up Evancho 's sets . After a concert in Tokyo in January 2012 with the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra , she made seven concert stops from January to March 2012 in California and Utah . Evancho 's three February tour stops constituted the tenth top @-@ grossing tour reported by Billboard for the relevant week . In June 2012 , Evancho concluded the tour with performances on the East Coast . 
 On its 2011 year @-@ end charts , Billboard ranked Dream With Me as the No. 2 best @-@ selling Classical Album for the year and as the No. 45 US album of 2011 . Dream With Me was listed on the Billboard 200 for 28 weeks and the Classical Albums chart for a total of 74 weeks . Billboard ranked Dream With Me In Concert the No. 21 music video album of 2011 and the No. 16 music video album of 2012 . Dream With Me In Concert was ranked on the Billboard.biz Top Music Video chart for 64 weeks . Dream With Me , and Foster 's production of the album , are discussed in detail in the 2013 Ph.D. dissertation of Evancho 's uncle , composer Matthew Evancho . 
 = = = Heavenly Christmas = = = 
 Evancho 's 2011 Christmas album , Heavenly Christmas , has twelve tracks and was produced by Rob Mounsey , who conducts the Orchestra of St. Luke 's on the album . The selections include traditional Christmas carols like " The First Noël " and " O Little Town of Bethlehem " , standards like " I 'll Be Home for Christmas " and " White Christmas " , and newer songs , such as " Walking in the Air " ( from the 1982 animated film The Snowman ) and " Believe " ( from the 2004 movie The Polar Express ) . The album was released on November 1 , 2011 , exclusively at Walmart in the US and at other US retailers in October 2012 . 
 The album entered the Billboard Classical Albums chart at No. 1 , the Holiday Albums chart at No. 3 , and the Billboard 200 at No. 16 , peaking at No. 11 . It peaked at No. 9 on the Canadian Albums chart . Allmusic 's review gives the album three stars , commenting , " Evancho 's vocals are impressive as always , and the arrangements are mostly tasteful , with only occasional moments of bombast " . The Salt Lake City Tribune rated the album " A- " , writing : " some of us are still taken aback when we hear such a strong , womanly voice float out of an 11 year @-@ old child . ... Her best offering is the cherubic ' Believe ' . " Christopher John Farley of The Wall Street Journal wrote , " when she sings , she sounds like she ’ s channeling a past life , a future self , or possibly an actual angel . " 
 As with her previous albums , Evancho made talk show appearances on all major television networks to promote Heavenly Christmas , singing " The First Noël " on The View and The Talk , and " Believe " on The Tonight Show . She gave concerts that featured songs from the album in December 2011 in Buffalo , New York ; Atlantic City , New Jersey ; and Pittsburgh , all with duet partner tenor Christopher <unk> . As of January 2012 , more than 300 @,@ 000 copies of Heavenly Christmas had been sold in the US . On its 2011 year @-@ end charts , Billboard ranked Dream With Me as the No. 4 best @-@ selling Classical Album of the year . It ranked the album No. 41 on the 2012 year @-@ end Canadian Albums chart . 
 = = = Songs from the Silver Screen = = = 
 Evancho 's fourth full @-@ length album , Songs from the Silver Screen , was released on October 2 , 2012 . The album is composed of 12 songs used in popular films , arranged by Bill Ross . The tracks range from the whimsical ( " Pure Imagination " from Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory ) to Disney songs ( " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " from The Lion King and " I See the Light " from Tangled ) to inspirational anthems ( " My Heart Will Go On " from Titanic , featuring Joshua Bell , violin ) , to romantic standards ( " Some Enchanted Evening " from South Pacific ) . Other collaborations on the album are " The Summer Knows " from Summer of 42 , featuring Chris Botti , trumpet , and " Come What May " Moulin Rouge ! , featuring The Canadian Tenors . An Allmusic review awarded the album 3 @-@ 1 / 2 stars out of five , stating that the CD " finds Evancho more than up to the task , displaying maturity and poise . " 
 A PBS Great Performances special called Jackie Evancho : Music of the Movies , filmed at the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles , features nearly the same selections as the album . It was directed and co @-@ produced by David Horn and Humberto Gatica , and conducted and arranged by Bill Ross . The special aired on PBS stations beginning on August 11 , 2012 . A review of the special commented that the songs fit Evancho 's classical crossover style . 
 Evancho began a live 42 @-@ stop tour to promote the album in August 2012 , giving her first solo concert featuring songs from the album in Japan with the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra . She continued the tour in the US , appearing first with The Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia . The first leg of the tour included concerts in two dozen North American cities between September 2012 and June 2013 . Evancho also appeared on television shows on NBC , ABC , CBS , Fox and CNN in October and November 2012 , where she sang songs from the album and was interviewed . She resumed touring from October 2013 to January 2014 , with appearances in a dozen more cities , and the last six concerts in the series were from April to August 2014 . 
 The album debuted at No. 7 on the Billboard 200 , No. 1 on the Classical Albums chart and No. 22 on the Canadian Albums chart . The debut made the 12 @-@ year @-@ old the second artist who ever " amassed three top 10 albums [ on the Billboard 200 ] at such a young age . " The album remained on the Billboard 200 for 13 weeks and appeared on the Billboard Classical Albums chart in 72 weeks . Songs from the Silver Screen was the No. 4 Classical Album of 2013 and the No. 36 Classical Album of 2014 . 
 = = = Awakening = = = 
 Evancho released her fifth full @-@ length studio album , Awakening , on September 23 , 2014 on Sony Masterworks ' Portrait Records label . Evancho promoted the album with a concert tour that began in November 2014 and continued into 2016 , and a third PBS special based on the album that debuted the same month . The album consists of 12 tracks , including a mix of classical pieces , like Rachmaninoff 's " <unk> " , the art song " <unk> Jesu " and the Vavilov version of " Ave Maria " ; classical crossover covers of more contemporary pieces like U2 's " With or Without You " , Ennio Morricone 's " Your Love " , Lara Fabian 's " Je t 'aime " and Within Temptation 's " Memories " ; and several original songs . Walmart offered a deluxe edition with six bonus holiday songs . Evancho 's cover of " My Immortal " by Evanescence was included as a bonus track exclusively on the version of the album sold in Japan . 
 In June 2014 , Evancho released her first single from the album , a cover of " The Rains of <unk> " from Game of Thrones . A writer for the Orlando Sentinel said of the song that Evancho 's " mature voice sounds stunning . " Evancho released a shadow @-@ art video for the single in July 2014 . She offered a second track , " Think of Me " from The Phantom of the Opera , in July 2014 . A video for the song was released , together with a feature piece on Evancho , by People , in September 2014 . The same month , Evancho released a digital download of a track called " Go Time " promoting Justice clothing stores , which displayed it on their website , made it available for free download to their shoppers , and played it in their stores on the video monitors . In September , Billboard streamed Evancho 's third single from the album , " Your Love " , which became available on the day of the album 's release . A last single and corresponding video from the album of " Ave Maria " was released in November 2014 . 
 Evancho began her television promotions of the album with a return to America 's Got Talent as a guest artist , singing " Think of Me " at Radio City Music Hall , in September 2014 during the show 's ninth season . Other September television performances included The Today Show , where she sang " Your Love " . Among other television and media appearances , she performed on The Queen Latifah Show and was profiled on the Oprah Winfrey Network , both in October . Evancho made a third PBS special to promote the album : Awakening : Live in Concert . The special was filmed at Longwood Gardens in Pennsylvania and began airing on PBS stations on November 29 , 2014 ; Cheyenne Jackson co @-@ hosts and sings " Say Something " as a duet with Evancho . The special includes all of the songs from Awakening , as well as " My Immortal " , and two additional songs ( " Say Something " and " O Mio <unk> Caro " ) . Evancho appeared on the Dr. Phil show in December , singing " Ave Maria " . 
 Her Awakening : Live in Concert tour began in November 2014 . It included stops across the U.S. and one concert in each of Costa Rica and Canada . For this tour , for the first time , Evancho usually used an ensemble of about a dozen live musicians enhancing a pre @-@ recorded soundtrack , although a few stops used a larger orchestra . 
 Awakening debuted at No. 17 on the Billboard 200 chart and No. 1 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart . This was Evancho 's fifth consecutive release at No. 1 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart . Markos Papadatos of Digital Journal gave Evancho 's album an A rating , calling it " stunning from start to finish thanks to her warm classical vocals . " He called her renditions of the songs " ethereal " , " crystalline " and " haunting " . On its 2014 year @-@ end charts , Billboard ranked Awakening as the No. 11 best @-@ selling Classical Album of the year , and in 2015 ranked it as the No. 3 best @-@ selling Classical Album of the year . The album remained on the Billboard Classical Albums chart for a consecutive 72 weeks . 
 = = = Other music performances and philanthropy = = = 
 2009 to 2011 
 Evancho performed the American national anthem at various events in 2009 and 2010 , including the September 2009 memorial ceremony for the victims of United Flight 93 , the Pittsburgh Pirates baseball team 's 2010 home opener , and the NHL Winter Classic on January 1 , 2011 , at Heinz Field in Pittsburgh . In January 2011 , she performed Nella Fantasia at the Beverly Hills Chefs for Seals event in support of efforts to end the annual Canadian seal hunt . The event was sponsored by the Humane Society of the United States , of which Evancho is the ambassador for Mission : Humane , a program that encourages children to help protect animals . In February 2011 , she performed her first full @-@ length concert as a headliner , in Houston Texas with the Houston Chamber Choir . In March , she sang at the 2011 Festival of the Arts Boca , along with young stars of the Metropolitan Opera . Evancho sang at Muhammad Ali 's " Celebrity Fight Night " charity event to battle Parkinson 's Disease , in Phoenix , Arizona , later the same month . She also sang the introduction to " Somewhere Over the Rainbow " on Oprah 's farewell special broadcast on May 25 , 2011 . 
 In June 2011 , Evancho performed as a guest artist at the season finale of Britain 's Got Talent . After touring over the summer , in September , she returned to America 's Got Talent as a guest artist , performing " Nessun <unk> " during the finale of the sixth season . She recorded a duet with Tony Bennett of the song " When You Wish upon a Star " , which appears as a bonus track on the deluxe edition of his 2011 album Duets II and she lent her voice to a " happy birthday " tribute to Bennett as part of a 2011 Target advertisement . She also sings " Pie Jesu " on the 2011 album Hit Man Returns : David Foster & Friends ( 2011 ) . The album was recorded live in Las Vegas in October 2010 , and PBS broadcast the concert , including Evancho 's " Pie Jesu " and " O Mio <unk> Caro " , beginning in March 2011 . Her recording of " Silent Night " is included in the 2011 Sony album 30 Stars of Christmas . She sang in two David Foster & Friends concerts in October 2011 , in Tokyo , where she also appeared in several Japanese television interviews . 
 2012 to 2013 
 Evancho returned to Japan to participate in the newly reopened Bunkamura Orchard Concert Hall 's program , called " Musical meets Symphony " , and to give her own concert there with the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra in January 2012 . While there , she sang for the Imperial family . In February 2012 , Evancho sang at the US National Prayer Breakfast before President Obama and congressional and international leaders . In April , Evancho appeared on Dancing with the Stars . She sang " Ave Maria " and " Dark Waltz " to accompany two dance teams . She performed as a guest star on the May 2012 season finale of Canada 's Got Talent . In June , she sang in Russia at the opening ceremonies of the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum . The outdoor concert in Palace Square , billed as a " Bouquet of Opera " , also featured Dmitry <unk> and Sumi Jo . 
 Evancho sang in August 2012 at the annual So The World May Hear Gala to benefit the Starkey Hearing Foundation , which supplies hearing aids to people in need in the US and other countries . She sang in Hiroshima , Japan , later in August , in the " Peace for World " concert , with Christopher Cross and others . At the end of the month , Evancho performed together with Tony Bennett at the Ironstone Amphitheatre in Murphys , California , where she was accompanied by members of the Stockton Symphony . In October , she performed with the Dallas Symphony Orchestra as part of the opening celebrations for <unk> Warren Park in Dallas , Texas . In late 2012 , Evancho partnered with <unk> , <unk> and Sephora to offer a bath product , to believe , inspired by the lyrics of her song " To Believe " . All net proceeds from the product support <unk> 's efforts to end world hunger . 
 Evancho participated with over 200 Cirque du Soleil performers and others at Bellagio in Las Vegas in March 2013 in the event " One Night for One Drop on World Water Day " . Evancho 's water and aerial performances benefited the One Drop Foundation 's worldwide clean water access and education programs . Robin Leach wrote : " 12 @-@ year @-@ old superstar singer Jackie [ Evancho ] stole the night with her " Bridge Over Troubled Water " sung barefoot in the water of the giant stage alone except for the background pianist . She also dominated the fantastic finale flying in as an angel on a harness from the theater rooftop . " The following month , she sang in concert in Taiwan with José Carreras . She performed another concert with Tony Bennett in May , in Alpharetta , Georgia , with the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra . Of performing with Evancho , Bennett said : " She ’ s just wonderful ... my own reaction is , ' How the heck am I going to follow that ? ' " On July 4 , Evancho was a featured performer in the televised annual show A Capitol Fourth , singing the national anthem and ' " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " , from her album Songs from the Silver Screen . 
 Evancho headlined a benefit concert , called Jackie Evancho & Friends : We are Hope , at the LDS Conference Center in Salt Lake City in November 2013 , for the <unk> World Foundation 's programs to encourage the teaching of music and art in US public schools . She sang the US national anthem on Thanksgiving Day , at the Green Bay Packers vs. Detroit Lions football game , broadcast on Fox . She headlined a Christmas @-@ themed benefit concert at Carnegie Hall produced by her old mentor , Tim Janis , and featuring James Galway , in December . 
 2014 to present 
 Evancho was the performer for Susan G. Komen 's Perfect Pink Party in Palm Beach , Florida , in January 2014 , to benefit breast cancer research . In March , Evancho headlined a concert with the San Bernardino Symphony Orchestra at Citizens Business Bank Arena in Ontario , California , to benefit the Loma Linda University Children 's Hospital . She appeared in May 2014 at the annual gala to benefit Chicago 's <unk> television and WFMT radio stations and in Washington DC at the 2014 National Memorial Day Concert , broadcast by PBS . Evancho performed at the Songwriters Hall of Fame 2014 awards dinner in June singing " Over the Rainbow " . In September 2014 , Evancho performed at a David Foster Foundation concert to benefit families with children who need a major organ transplant . In November , she sang a " touching rendition " of John Lennon 's song " Imagine " at the United Nations to introduce the UNICEF # Imagine program . Also in 2014 , Evancho recorded the Leonard Cohen song " Hallelujah " with Peter <unk> for his self @-@ titled album , and the two released a video for the song . A reviewer for Mashable called it " a gift from the a cappella gods " . 
 In 2015 , Evancho made a video to support the Humane Society 's fight against seal hunting . In April of that year , she joined Andrea Bocelli as a guest in his concert in Thailand . The English @-@ language newspaper The Nation commented : " If there 's anything on Earth close to the sound of an angel , it must be the heavenly voice of Jackie Evancho " . In August 2015 , she participated in a " David Foster and Friends " concert in Malaysia . The same month , she released a new video and corresponding video covering Ed Sheeran 's , " All of the Stars " , supporting acceptance of LGBT people . In September , Evancho participated in a concert with David Foster and Andrea Bocelli in Forte dei <unk> , Italy , to benefit the Celebrity Fight Night Foundation . The same month , she performed at the World Meeting of Families in Philadelphia as part of the celebration of Pope Francis 's visit to that city . In October 2015 , Evancho performed at a benefit for the Global Lyme Alliance in New York City . In December , she sang the US national anthem at the Pittsburgh Steelers game against the Indianapolis Colts and released the first single on her own JE Touring label , a cover of Taylor Swift 's " Safe & Sound " . A video of the single was also released . The single is expected to be part of Evancho 's upcoming 2016 album . 
 In January 2016 , Evancho appeared at the <unk> Broken Hearts With Hope luncheon to benefit The Shelter for Abused Women & Children in Naples , Florida . The same month , she released another single and video on JME Touring , a cover of Sam Smith 's " Writing 's on the Wall " . This was followed by another single and video in March , Skylar Grey 's " Coming Home ( Part II ) " . In April Evancho sang the national anthem at the Pittsburgh Pirates ' 2016 opening home game . She also released an original pop song by Peter Zizzo , " Apocalypse " , which is expected to be included on her upcoming 2016 album . Billboard wrote that she " has found a brand @-@ new sound . The 16 @-@ year @-@ old singer ... is taking a step outside the classical world that made her famous " , but Evancho told Billboard : " I 'm not going to get rid of my classical voice , because that 's my roots , that 's what I love the most . " She also released a video of the song and performed it on the Today show and Live ! with Kelly and Michael later in April . 
 Evancho provided the entertainment at the 2016 Project Sunshine benefit gala in May and returned to Washington , DC , to participate in the 2016 broadcast and live performance of A Capitol Fourth . She headlined a concert at Festa Italiana at the BMO Harris Pavilion in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , later in July 2016 . She expects to perform more concerts in the Northeast US in November . 
 = = = Acting and modeling = = = 
 Evancho had some early theatre experience performing in High School Musical with Pittsburgh Musical Theater in 2007 and musical theatre versions of A Christmas Carol and Little Red Riding Hood , in which she played the title role in 2009 . She also appeared briefly as an extra in the 2010 film She 's Out of My League . Her first featured television appearance was in the 2011 episode " Back To Max " from the Disney Channel series Wizards of Waverly Place where she sang " America the Beautiful " to work off school detention . 
 Evancho appears in the feature film The Company You Keep , a political thriller that premiered at film festivals in 2012 . The film played in foreign markets and in the US beginning in April 2013 . Evancho played Isabel , the eleven @-@ year @-@ old daughter of a widowed attorney turned fugitive , Jim Grant , played by Robert Redford , who also directed the film . When Grant 's true identity as a former Weather Underground militant is uncovered , he is pursued across the US by the FBI and by an ambitious journalist ( Shia LaBeouf ) . To be reunited with Isabel , Grant must clear his name . Jon Weisman wrote that Evancho " showed she 's more than a singing prodigy with her earnest sweetness as the daughter of Robert Redford 's character " . Redford cast Evancho only days before filming began . Evancho said in 2012 : " I don 't think I want to act full time . I think I might like to do something with a Disney special or make a movie once in a while that would give me enough time to sing and record , but that 's about it . " 
 Evancho modelled for GUESS Kids in 2012 and for Justice Girls Clothing in 2014 , and she occasionally has appeared in other product advertisements and public service announcements . 
 = = Reception and reputation = = 
 = = = Earliest assessments = = = 
 After Evancho 's performance of " Ave Maria " on America 's Got Talent , judge Piers Morgan said : " I have never seen an act , on this show or the British show or any of the other talent shows in the world , with more potential than Jackie Evancho . That was perfection . Perfection ! " Christopher Hahn , General Director of the Pittsburgh Opera , commented of Evancho 's performance of " O mio babbino caro " on AGT , " It 's very unusual for a young child to have a voice that sounded so rich and developed . " " I thought she was just lovely , sweetly compelling " , said Hahn . " It is quite unusual to hear a young girl with that level of warmth and roundness . " Hahn particularly praised Evancho 's phrasing . 
 Composer Tim Janis commented in 2010 that Evancho " takes a classical piece and makes it friendly and accessible . ... Her voice is so pure and natural , there 's no flaw in it . People say ' I can hear her potential coming , ' but no , it 's here , it 's now . " Critic Tim Page disagreed , writing of Evancho 's AGT performance of " O mio babbino caro " that Evancho " has many years of work ahead of her before she becomes any sort of musician . " Claudia <unk> , Assistant Professor of musical theatre at Carnegie Mellon University , said that Evancho " has an unusually adult feel for the repertoire . ... She sings to the important part of the phrase , and then backs off . That 's instinctual . ... She takes breaths sometimes where an adult would not , but that 's just because she 's young and little . ... She sings from the healthy part of her voice . " Doctor Clark Rosen , director of the University of Pittsburgh Voice Center , commented that Evancho 's talent is made possible by how her brain coordinates her body for singing : " Very few people are gifted enough to have that naturally , or with subsequent learning , to create a voice we 'd love to hear . " 
 A review of Evancho 's 2011 concert with Pittsburgh Opera noted that " what was most impressive ... was how musical she was ... her focus on phrasing and an understanding of the emotion in the ... musical numbers . " The review also praised " her reverberant chest voice [ and ] her head voice , hitting the highest register with intonation and purity " and echoed Janis : " That she continues to be greeted with skepticism is unfair . ... Yes , the concert showed that Jackie is a young girl , yet one with artistry to be appreciated now without debating about what her future might hold . " Antony Walker , Pittsburgh Opera 's music director , said : " she has a very sincere way of singing . ... Her voice has a lovely quality to it . It 's very simple singing but it comes from the heart . You rarely hear someone so young with such a beautiful voice " . Nekesa Mumbi Moody , writing for Associated Press and ABC News , commented that , although " there is a youthful quality in Jackie 's voice , it 's hardly childlike : It 's a soprano that deftly traverses the musical scales " . Bob Boilen of NPR wrote , " I simply couldn 't believe my eyes and ears . Seeing Jackie Evancho sing for the first time is nearly beyond belief . " He called her voice " beyond @-@ beautiful " when she performed " for a stunned audience at the NPR Music offices . She clearly is a very happy girl with an amazing musical gift . " A review of her 2011 Sun Valley concert stated that " Evancho transported [ her audience ] with pure , joyous , unaffected notes " . 
 The Los Angeles Times commented in June 2011 , reviewing Dream With Me , that " her voice has matured quite a lot over the past 10 months . " The paper continued , " what makes us feel like she will survive the journey from child star to adult performer is her magnificent sense of pitch , her natural ability to shape phrases and the ease with which she performs . This is what makes her a joy to listen to . Since she 's still a kid , and we all have affectations when we 're learning , we 'll pretend we didn 't notice the Brightman arms . " In reviewing her 2011 Pittsburgh Opera concert , the Pittsburgh Tribune @-@ Review called her voice " beautifully in tune and well supported . ... Evancho 's sincerity of delivery was affecting " . A reviewer from The New York Times wrote of her 2011 Avery Fisher Hall concert that : " In the first half of the show Ms. Evancho often receded , but toward the end of the night she found purpose , delivering ' A Time for Us ' with punch , and closing out Sarah McLachlan ’ s ' Angel ' with what felt like real yearning " . The Wall Street Journal called Evancho 's 2011 performance of the song " Angel " on the Tonight Show " moving " . 
 = = = 2012 and later = = = 
 A San Francisco Chronicle review of a 2012 concert judged her singing " an impressive thing to witness , and Evancho 's technical precision and enormous range only serve to make it seem less fluky . The girl can sing " , but felt that " every selection sounded alike " . Another reviewer wrote that Evancho " displayed her famous combo of poise and articulation " , but he noted " the burden of being a kid soprano , a true phenomenon . People pay a lot to see you and orchestras line up to get you on their stage . But still folks wonder if you really comprehend your life ; if you shouldn ’ t be home ... eating ice cream instead of in Denver . ... And yet they rise to their feet , yet again , as you finish . " A Naples Daily News review stated : " Her poise . Her control . Her range . ... Her voice and her performance exhausted all of the superlatives in the dictionary . " In 2013 , a reviewer commented : " Her pure and well @-@ formed vowel sounds touched the hearts of everyone at the concert . Every year her voice seems to get better and better . " A reviewer for The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution called Evancho " awesomely talented " and " technically flawless " , commenting : " Evancho possesses the voice of an angel . " The Buffalo News reporter wrote : " there is a poignancy to the sound of this mature voice coming out of this child . Her high notes are a joy . " 
 In 2014 , a reviewer for Billboard magazine commented : " Evancho ’ s stratospheric vocals are of course impressive for someone her age , though pipes like this are incredible for just about anyone . " in 2015 , the reviewer for Digital Journal wrote : " The control she displays over her voice is tremendous , and she tackles the high notes ... effortlessly , showcasing her angelic vocals and piercing pipes . ... Evancho 's voice is an eighth world wonder " . Robin Leach wrote of Evancho 's January 2015 concert in Las Vegas : " She ’ s still got the voice of an angel . It ’ s remarkable , and her power is growing as she grows up . [ She ] had the audience on its feet with wild applause at the end of every song " . A review of a later 2015 concert in The Washington Post called her voice a " bell @-@ like instrument , devoid of any messy human emotions [ with ] an <unk> floating tone . ... But imagine what Evancho can achieve once she stops obsessing over just sounding pretty , and actually listens to the words she ’ s singing . " In the 2016 book , Voicing Girlhood in Popular Music : Performance , Authority , Authenticity , a chapter by Dana <unk> @-@ <unk> , Assistant Professor of Music at Georgia College , is devoted to analyzing Evancho 's career and influence . <unk> @-@ <unk> writes : 
 With her embodiment of both sheltered innocence ... and <unk> ... [ Evancho ] expands the fan base for classical crossover , dethrones elitist conceptions of opera , challenges conventions of the classical canon , and forges a new path for the next cohort of girl performers who have the courage to follow in her footsteps . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Evancho appeared on the National League of Junior <unk> ' list of " Ten Best @-@ <unk> People of 2011 " for " demonstrating humility and politeness as a young performer . " She was honored on April 13 , 2012 by the Senator John Heinz History Center at its 20th Annual History Makers Award Dinner as one of five " distinguished <unk> ... recognized for their exceptional contributions to the history of Western Pennsylvania , the nation , and the world " . Evancho was the youngest person ever to be so honored . The Kean Quest Talent Search , since 2011 , has given an annual " Jackie Evancho Award " to a contestant who " exemplifies courage and motivation and pushes through to follow their dreams . " In both 2011 and 2012 , Billboard magazine named Evancho to its list of " 21 Under 21 : Music 's Hottest Minors " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Billboard ranked Evancho the No. 1 Classical Albums Artist of 2011 , as she released three of the top four albums on the Billboard 2011 year @-@ end Classical Albums chart . Billboard also ranked her as the No. 10 Billboard 200 Artist of 2011 , and the No. 3 Internet Albums Artist . Billboard ranked Evancho the No. 2 Classical Albums Artist of 2012 , as three of her albums ranked in the top seven albums on the Billboard 2012 year @-@ end Classical Albums chart . Billboard also ranked her as the No. 37 Billboard 200 Artist of 2012 . 
 Billboard ranked Evancho the No. 5 Classical Albums Artist of 2013 , even though she did not release any new albums during the year . Evancho 's 2014 album Awakening was Evancho 's fifth consecutive release at No. 1 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart . Billboard ranked Evancho the No. 7 Classical Albums Artist of 2014 and the No. 4 Classical Albums artist of 2015 , as Awakening was the No. 3 classical album of 2015 . 
 = Sognsvann Line = 
 The Sognsvann Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a rapid transit line on the Oslo Metro of Norway . It branches from the Common Tunnel at Majorstuen and runs 6 @.@ 0 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to Sognsvann . After Ullevål stadion , the Ring Line branches off . The Sognsvann Line serves the northwestern and northern neighborhoods of Oslo , mostly within the borough of Nordre Aker . The line is owned and maintained by Kollektivtransportproduksjon and has nine stations . The western end of line 5 serves the entire line . Line 4 and the eastern end of line 5 serve the southern part of the line up to Ullevål stadion before branching off and continuing along the Ring Line . This gives an average five @-@ minute headway on the southern part and an average fifteen @-@ minute headway on the northern part of the line . 
 The line opened on 10 October 1934 as a light rail . In 1993 , it was upgraded to metro standard as the first light rail west of Oslo , with two stations being closed . The Ring Line opened in 2003 . Forskningsparken has transfer to the Oslo Tramway and serves Rikshospitalet . Forskningsparken and Blindern both serve the University of Oslo , while Ullevål stadion serves Norway 's largest football venue . North of there the line mainly serves residential areas . Sognsvann serves the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences and the recreational area Nordmarka . 
 = = History = = 
 The first plans for a light rail along the route of the Sognsvann Line were launched by Holmenkolbanen in 1904 . They called for a branch from Gaustad Station on the Holmenkoll Line to <unk> and onwards to Sagene . The next proposal for a line was launched in 1917 , when Aker Municipality established the company Akersbanerne . It started work planning the Østensjø Line as well as the Sognsvann Line . The neighborhoods of Sogn and Tåsen were being built , and the municipality wanted to establish a good transport system to make the areas more attractive . Holmenkolbanen stated that they should be prioritized to build the system , since they already had a line in the area , but the municipality wanted to have political control over the development of the area . 
 In 1920 , Holmenkolbanen applied to build a branch from Frøen via Tåsen to Nydalen and Grefsen , along what is today the Ring Line . This proposal included a branch to Sognsvann . The Ministry of Labour granted the concession to Akersbanerne , who started construction in January 1922 . However , due to a labor conflict , the work was put on hold in 1924 . In 1924 , the Røa Line ( at the time called the Smestad Line ) was taken over by Akersbanerne , but Holmenkolbanen retained the operation . After the first part of the Common Tunnel , from Majorstuen to Nationaltheatret , opened in 1928 , Holmenkolbanen was in financial distress , and in 1932 Akersbanerne took over the majority of the shares of Holmenkolbanen . At the same time , the Røa and Sognsvann Lines were merged into Holmenkolbanen . 
 Work commenced again in 1933 and the line opened on 10 October 1934 . At first the line was built with double track from Frøen to Østhorn and single track to Sognsvann . Between 1937 and 1939 , the upper section was converted to double track . The construction spurred a massive residential construction along the line giving a good foundation for ridership . 
 After the municipal merger between Oslo and Aker in 1948 , Akersbanerne was merged into Oslo Sporveier , although Holmenkolbanen remained a partially owned subsidiary . In 1973 , Oslo Sporveier bought the remaining shares , and two years later the operations were transferred to Oslo Sporveier , with Holmenkolbanen remaining a pure real estate company . The municipal take @-@ over resulted in an upgrade to both the track and the rolling stock . New overhead wires and new and heavier track were laid . From 1978 , the T1300 trains were taken into use . With the take @-@ over , the lines were numbered , and the Sognsvann Line designated 81 , although this was quickly changed to 13 . 
 During the 1980s , the city decided to connect the four suburban lines west of the city center with the Oslo Metro . The Sognsvann Line was selected as the first line to be upgraded , so the two systems would become compatible . The line was upgraded to metro standard by replacing the overhead wire with a third @-@ rail power supply and installing automatic train protection . All the stations were rebuilt , with platforms lengthened from fitting two @-@ car to fitting four @-@ car trains , and the platform height increased . The third rail required all level crossings to be removed , resulting in the line being rebuilt several places to allow the road to underpass or overpass . The light rail permitted passengers to cross the lines at the stations , but this was made impossible with metro standard . Because of this , underpasses or overpasses were built at the stations . 
 Frøen Station was rebuilt so only the trains on the Holmenkollen Line would stop there , while Nordberg Station was closed . All the stations , except Ullevål stadion , were built in the same architectural style . They are constructed in concrete with steel columns and wooden sheds and fences . All platforms have a shed ; Ullevål stadion has a larger weather cover and has a design inspired by football . The upgrade also included the installation of third @-@ rail from Majorstuen to Stortinget in the Common Tunnel . From 10 January 1993 , the Sognsvann Line re @-@ open , and from 4 April , the line started operating through the Common Tunnel and connected to the Lambertseter Line . The new service became operated with T1000 rolling stock . 
 Following the 1991 decision to build a new Rikshospitalet at Gaustad , it was decided to extend the Ullevål Hageby Line of the tramway there , which would pass under the Sognsvann Line . Plans called for a transfer station at Blindern , but this was later discarded in favor of a new station , Forskningsparken . It would replace Vestgrensa , which was considered too far away to be a suitable transfer point . Forskningsparken would also serve the northern part of the Blindern campus . Not until 1998 were the necessary political agreements in place to allow construction to start . The new light rail started services on 1 June 1999 , and the rapid transit station opened on 22 August . With the opening , Line 4 of the metro was extended from Blindern , via Forskningsparken , to Ullevål stadion . There were complaints from local residents that the increased traffic on the line was causing too much noise , and neighbors demanded that noise shields be built . 
 In 1991 , Oslo Sporveier presented plans to connect the Sognsvann Line to the Grorud Line with a new Ring Line . The company also considered building the ring as part of the tramway , and have combined operation with both tram and metro on the Sognsvann Line . This was later discarded , despite the higher investment costs with a metro , since the tramway would give higher operating costs and longer travel time . A detailed suggestion was presented by Oslo Sporveier in August 1996 . It became clear that Berg would not be served by the Ring Line . Many neighbors to the Sognsvann Line complained about the proposal , stating that they had hoped that the section from Majorstuen to Berg would have been rebuilt as a tunnel . They also argued that it was irrational that the line was running at @-@ grade in densely populated areas , while it would run in a tunnel through the then mostly unpopulated Nydalen . To compensate , Oslo Sporveier stated that they would build noise screens along the line . 
 The city council voted in favor of building the Ring Line on 25 June 1997 , against the votes of the Progress Party . Financing was partially ensured in December , when a political agreement was reached for Oslo Package 2 , a financing plan for investments in public transport in Oslo and Akershus between 2002 and 2011 . Construction started in June , with the Agency for Road and Transport of the municipality responsible for construction . The first section opened from Ullevål stadion via Nydalen to Storo on 20 August 2003 . With the opening , and Line 4 was extended from Ullevål stadion to Storo . On 20 August 2006 , the final section opened , from Storo via Sinsen to Carl Berners plass . 
 In 2002 , the Sognsvann Line was closed during the summer vacations due to improvements of the track and third rail . In 2008 , the line was closed for approximately one week , due to leaves that had covered the tracks . The operation of the line was replaced by buses that served temporary stops in <unk> and <unk> . In 2010 , a truck was stuck under the train bridge between Holstein and Kringsjå over Carl <unk> vei . The bridge was damaged , and allowed for only one @-@ way @-@ traffic for two weeks . Half the trains had to stop at Berg in the meantime . 
 = = Route = = 
 The line branches off from the Common Tunnel after Majorstuen , and heads northwards through the borough of Nordre Aker . The first two stations , Blindern and Forskningsparken , serve the Blindern campus of the University of Oslo . At Forskningsparken , there is transfer to the Ullevål Hageby Line of the Oslo Tramway , which allows connection with the two largest hospitals in the country : Rikshospitalet and Ullevål University Hospital . Ullevål stadion serves Norway 's largest sports venue , Ullevål Stadion , the home ground of Norwegian Premier League side Vålerenga and the national football team . 
 North of Ullevål stadion , just before reaching Berg , the Ring Line with services 3 and 4 branches off . The Ring Line serves three stations , Nydalen , Storo and Sinsen before reaching the Grorud Line . From Berg to Tåsen , the line runs parallel to the motorway Ring 3 . North of Berg , the Sognsvann Line mainly serves residential areas , including student dormitories at Sogn and Kringsjå . The Norwegian School of Sport Sciences and the National Archival Services of Norway is served by Sognsvann Station . The station also serves the recreational area Nordmarka and the lake Sognsvann . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Sognsvann Line is served by lines 4 and 5 of the Oslo Metro . Half of line 5 trains operate the full length of the Sognsvann Line , while line 4 and the other half of the line 5 trains branch off after Ullevål stadion and serve the Ring Line . All services operate with a fifteen @-@ minute headway , except during late evenings and weekend mornings . This gives the stations Blindern , Forskningsparken and Ullevål stadion an average five @-@ minute headway to the city center and all stations in the Common Tunnel , and an average ten @-@ minute headway to Nydalen and Storo . On the east side of the city , Line 5 connects with the Ring Line , and makes a full loop before it leaves Oslo on the Grorud Line . Line 4 connects with the Lambertseter Line . Travel time from Stortinget to Sognsvann is 18 minutes . The Oslo Metro is operated by Oslo T @-@ banedrift on contract with Ruter . 
 Transfer to the Kolsås , Røa and Holmenkollen Lines is possible at Majorstuen . Transfer to Oslo Central Station , which serves all mainline trains in Eastern Norway , is available at Jernbanetorget . Most west @-@ bound mainline trains can also be reached at Nationaltheatret . The Oslo Tramway can be reached from Majorstuen and Forskningsparken , as well as in the city center from Jernbanetorget , Stortinget and Nationaltheatret . 
 = Tris Speaker = 
 Tristram E. Speaker ( April 4 , 1888 – December 8 , 1958 ) , nicknamed " The Grey Eagle " , was an American baseball player . Considered one of the best offensive and defensive center fielders in the history of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , he compiled a career batting average of .345 ( sixth all @-@ time ) . His 792 career doubles represent an MLB career record . His 3 @,@ 514 hits are fifth in the all @-@ time hits list . Defensively , Speaker holds career records for assists , double plays , and unassisted double plays by an outfielder . His fielding glove was known as the place " where triples go to die . " 
 After playing in the minor leagues in Texas and Arkansas , Speaker debuted with the Boston Red Sox in 1907 . He became the regular center fielder by 1909 and led the Red Sox to World Series championships in 1912 and 1915 . In 1915 , Speaker 's batting average dropped to .322 from .338 the previous season ; he was traded to the Cleveland Indians when he refused to take a pay cut . As player @-@ manager for Cleveland , he led the team to its first World Series title . In ten of his eleven seasons with Cleveland , he finished with a batting average greater than .350 . Speaker resigned as Cleveland 's manager in 1926 after he and Ty Cobb faced game fixing allegations ; both men were later cleared . During his managerial stint in Cleveland , Speaker introduced the platoon system in the major leagues . 
 Speaker played with the Washington Senators in 1927 and the Philadelphia Athletics in 1928 , then became a minor league manager and part owner . He later held several roles for the Cleveland Indians . Late in life , Speaker led a short @-@ lived indoor baseball league , ran a wholesale liquor business , worked in sales and chaired Cleveland 's boxing commission . He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1937 . He was named 27th in the Sporting News 100 Greatest Baseball Players ( 1999 ) and was also included in the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Speaker was born on April 4 , 1888 , in Hubbard , Texas , to Archie and Nancy Poer Speaker . As a youth , Speaker broke his arm after he fell from a horse ; the injury forced him to become left @-@ handed . In 1905 , Speaker played a year of college baseball for Fort Worth Polytechnic Institute . Newspaper reports have held that Speaker suffered a football injury and nearly had his arm amputated around this time ; biographer Timothy Gay characterizes this as " a story that the macho Speaker never <unk> [ sic ] . " He worked on a ranch before beginning his professional baseball career . 
 Speaker 's abilities drew the interest of Doak Roberts , owner of the Cleburne Railroaders of the Texas League , in 1906 . After losing several games as a pitcher , Speaker converted to outfielder to replace a Cleburne player who had been struck in the head with a pitch . He batted .318 for the Railroaders . Speaker 's mother opposed his participation in the major leagues , saying that they reminded her of slavery . Though she relented , for several years Mrs. Speaker questioned why her son had not stayed home and entered the cattle or oil businesses . 
 He performed well for the Texas League 's Houston Buffaloes in 1907 , but his mother stated that she would never allow him to go to the Boston Americans . Roberts sold the youngster to the Americans for $ 750 or $ 800 ( equal to $ 19 @,@ 047 or $ 20 @,@ 317 today ) . Speaker played in seven games for the Americans in 1907 , with three hits in 19 at bats for a .158 average . In 1908 , Boston Americans owner John I. Taylor changed the team 's name to the Boston Red Sox after the bright socks in the team 's uniform . That year , the club traded Speaker to the Little Rock Travelers of the Southern League in exchange for use of their facilities for spring training . Speaker batted .350 for the Travelers and his contract was repurchased by the Red Sox . He logged a .224 batting average in 116 at bats . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Speaker became the regular starting center fielder for Boston in 1909 and light @-@ hitting Denny Sullivan was sold to the Cleveland Naps . Speaker hit .309 in 143 games as the team finished third in the pennant race . Defensively , Speaker was involved in 12 double plays , leading the league 's outfielders , and had a .973 fielding percentage , third among outfielders . In 1910 the Red Sox signed left fielder Duffy Lewis . Speaker , Lewis and Harry Hooper formed Boston 's " Million @-@ Dollar Outfield " , one of the finest outfield trios in baseball history . Speaker was the star of the Million @-@ Dollar Outfield . He ran fast enough that he could stand very close to second base , effectively giving the team a fifth infielder , but he still caught the balls hit to center field . In 1910 and 1911 , Boston finished fourth in the American League standings . 
 Speaker 's best season came in 1912 . He played every game and led the American League ( AL ) in doubles ( 53 ) and home runs ( 10 ) . He set career highs with 222 hits , 136 runs , 580 at @-@ bats , and 52 stolen bases . Speaker 's stolen base tally was a team record until Tommy Harper stole 54 bases in 1973 . He batted .383 and his .567 slugging percentage was the highest of his dead @-@ ball days . Speaker set a major league single @-@ season record with three hitting streaks of twenty or more games ( 30 , 23 , and 22 ) . He also became the first major leaguer to hit 50 doubles and steal 50 bases in the same season . In August , Speaker 's mother unsuccessfully attempted to convince him to quit baseball and come home . In Fenway Park 's first game , Speaker drove in the winning run in the 11th inning , giving Boston the 7 – 6 win . 
 The 1912 Red Sox won the AL pennant , finishing 14 games ahead of the Washington Senators and 15 games ahead of the Philadelphia Athletics . In the 1912 World Series , Speaker led the Red Sox to their second World Series title by defeating John McGraw 's New York Giants . After the second game was called on account of darkness and ended in a tie , the series went to eight games . The Red Sox won the final game after Fred Snodgrass dropped an easy fly ball and later failed to go after a Speaker pop foul . After the pop foul , Speaker tied the game with a single . The Red Sox won the game in the bottom of the tenth inning . He finished the series with a .300 batting average , nine hits and four runs scored . Speaker was named the AL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) for 1912 . Though he did not lead the league in any offensive categories in 1913 , Speaker finished fourth in AL MVP voting . 
 Speaker batted .338 and tied his career high of 12 double plays as an outfielder in 1914 . He hit .322 in 1915 . The Red Sox beat the Philadelphia Phillies in the 1915 World Series . The Red Sox were led by pitcher Babe Ruth , who was playing in his first full season . Ruth won 18 games and hit a team @-@ high four home runs . Speaker got five hits , including a triple , in 17 at @-@ bats during the series . He scored twice but did not drive in any runs . 
 = = = Traded to the Indians = = = 
 After 1915 , Red Sox president Joseph Lannin wanted Speaker to take a pay cut from about $ 15 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 350 @,@ 872 today ) to about $ 9 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 210 @,@ 523 today ) because of the drop in his batting average ; Speaker refused and offered $ 12 @,@ 000 ( $ 280 @,@ 697 today ) . On April 8 , 1916 , Lannin traded Speaker to the Cleveland Indians . In exchange , Boston received Sad Sam Jones , Fred Thomas and $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 087 @,@ 309 today ) . The angry Speaker held out until he received $ 10 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 217 @,@ 462 today ) of the cash that Boston collected . With an annual salary of $ 40 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 869 @,@ 847 today ) , Speaker was the highest paid player in baseball . Speaker hit over .350 in ten of his eleven years with Cleveland . In 1916 , he led the league in hits , doubles , batting average , slugging percentage and on @-@ base percentage . Cobb had won the previous nine consecutive AL batting titles ; Speaker <unk> him with a .386 batting average compared to Cobb 's .371 . 
 The center field fence at Cleveland 's Dunn Field was 460 feet from home plate until it was shortened to 420 feet in 1920 . Even so , Speaker played so shallow in the outfield that he was able to execute six career unassisted double plays at second base , catching low line drives on the run and then beating baserunners to the bag . At least once he was credited as the pivot man in a routine double play . He was often shallow enough to catch pickoff throws at second base . At one point , Speaker 's signature move was to come in behind second base on a bunt and make a tag play on a baserunner who had passed the bag . 
 While in Cleveland , Speaker participated in diverse activities off the baseball field . Speaker enrolled in an aviator training program in 1918 . Though World War I ended less than two months after he enrolled , Speaker completed his training and served in the naval reserves for several years . He also owned a ranch in Texas and competed in roping events during the baseball offseason . 
 = = = <unk> as player @-@ manager = = = 
 From the day that Speaker arrived in Cleveland , manager Lee Fohl rarely made an important move without consulting him . George Uhle recalled an incident from 1919 during his rookie year with the Indians . Speaker often signaled to Fohl when he thought that a pitcher should be brought in from the bullpen . One day , Fohl misread Speaker 's signal and brought in a different pitcher than Speaker had intended . To avoid the appearance of overruling his manager , Speaker let the change stand . Pitcher Fritz <unk> lost the game , Fohl resigned that night and Speaker became manager . Uhle said that Speaker felt bad for contributing to Fohl 's departure . 
 Speaker guided the 1920 Indians to their first World Series win . In a crucial late season game against the second @-@ place White Sox , Speaker caught a hard line drive hit to deep right @-@ center field by Shoeless Joe Jackson , ending the game . On a dead run , Speaker leaped with both feet off the ground , snaring the ball before crashing into a concrete wall . As he lay unconscious from the impact , Speaker still held the baseball . In the 1920 World Series against Brooklyn , Speaker hit an RBI triple in the deciding game , which the Indians won 3 – 0 . Cleveland 's 1920 season was also significant due to the death of Ray Chapman on August 17 . Chapman died after being hit in the head by a pitch from Carl Mays . Chapman had been asked about retirement before the season , and he said that he wanted to help Speaker earn Cleveland 's first World Series victory before thinking of retirement . 
 During that championship season , Speaker is credited with introducing the platoon system , which attempted to match right @-@ handed batters against left @-@ handed pitchers and vice versa . Sportswriter John B. Sheridan was among the critics of the system , saying , " The specialist in baseball is no good and won 't go very far ... The whole effect of the system will be to make the players affected half men ... It is farewell , a long farewell to all that player 's chance of greatness ... It destroys young ball players by destroying their most precious quality – confidence in their ability to hit any pitcher , left or right , alive , dead , or waiting to be born . " Baseball Magazine was supportive , pointing out that Speaker had results that backed up his system . 
 The 1921 Indians remained in a tight pennant race all year , finishing 4 1 ⁄ 2 games behind the Yankees . The Indians did not seriously contend for the pennant from 1922 through 1925 . Speaker led the league in doubles eight times , including every year between 1920 and 1923 . He led the league 's outfielders in fielding percentage in 1921 and 1922 . On May 17 , 1925 , Speaker became the fifth member of the 3 @,@ 000 hit club when he hit a single off pitcher Tom Zachary of the Washington Senators . Only Napoleon Lajoie had previously accomplished the feat as a member of the Indians . 
 AL President Ban Johnson asked Speaker and Detroit manager Cobb to resign their posts after a scandal broke in 1926 . Pitcher Dutch Leonard claimed that Speaker and Cobb fixed at least one game between Cleveland and Detroit . In a newspaper column published shortly before the hearings were to begin , Billy Evans characterized the accusations as " purely a matter of personal revenge " for Leonard . The pitcher was said to be upset with Cobb and Speaker after a trade ended with Leonard in the minor leagues . When Leonard refused to appear at the January 5 , 1927 hearings to discuss his accusations , Commissioner Landis cleared both Speaker and Cobb of any wrongdoing . Both were reinstated to their original teams , but each team declared its manager free to sign elsewhere . Speaker did not return to big league managing and he finished his MLB managerial career with a 617 – 520 record . 
 At the time of his 1926 resignation , news reports described Speaker as permanently retiring from baseball to pursue business ventures . However , Speaker signed to play with the Washington Senators for 1927 . Cobb joined the Philadelphia Athletics . Speaker joined Cobb in Philadelphia for the 1928 season ; he played part @-@ time and finished with a .267 average . Prior to that season , Speaker had not hit for a batting average below .300 since 1908 . 
 Speaker 's major league playing career ended after 1928 . He retired with 792 doubles , an all @-@ time career record as of 2014 . Defensively , Speaker holds the all @-@ time career records ( as of 2013 ) for assists as an outfielder and double plays as an outfielder . He remains the last batter to hit 200 triples in a career . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1929 Speaker replaced Walter Johnson as the manager of the Newark Bears of the International League . In two seasons with Newark , he also appeared as a player in 59 games . When Speaker resigned during his second season , the Bears were in seventh place after a sixth @-@ place finish in 1929 . In January 1933 he became a part owner and manager of the Kansas City Blues . By May , Speaker had been replaced as manager but remained secretary of the club . By 1936 , he had sold his share of the team . In 1937 , Speaker was voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame during its second year of balloting . He was honored at the hall 's first induction ceremony in 1939 . 
 After his playing and managing days , Speaker was an entrepreneur and salesman . By 1937 , Speaker had opened a wholesale liquor business and worked as a state sales representative for a steel company . He chaired Cleveland 's boxing commission between 1936 and 1943 . Newspaper coverage credited Speaker with several key reforms to boxing in Cleveland , including the recruitment of new officials and protections against fight fixing . Under Speaker , fight payouts went directly to boxers rather than managers . Speaker sorted out a scheduling conflict for a 1940 boxing match in Cleveland involving former middleweight champion Teddy <unk> . <unk> defeated Jimmy Reeves in ten rounds and the fight attracted over 8 @,@ 300 spectators . 
 In 1937 , Speaker sustained a 16 @-@ foot fall while working on a flower box near a second @-@ story window at his home . Upon admission to the hospital , he underwent facial surgery . He was described as having " better than an even chance to live " and was suffering from a skull fracture , a broken arm and possible internal injuries . He ultimately recovered . 
 In 1939 , Speaker was president of the National Professional Indoor Baseball League . The league had teams in New York , Brooklyn , Philadelphia , Boston , Cleveland , Chicago , Cincinnati and St. Louis . The league shut down operations due to poor attendance only two months after its formation . Speaker was one of the founders of Cleveland 's Society for Crippled Children and he helped to promote the society 's rehabilitation center , Camp Cheerful . Speaker served as vice president of the society , ran fundraising campaigns and received a distinguished service award from the organization . He became seriously ill with pneumonia in 1942 . Speaker ultimately recovered , but Gay characterized Speaker 's condition as " touch @-@ and @-@ go for several days " . 
 In 1947 , Speaker returned to baseball as " ambassador of good will " for Bill Veeck and the Cleveland Indians . He remained in advisory , coaching or scouting roles for the Indians until his death in 1958 . In an article in the July 1952 issue of SPORT , Speaker recounted how Veeck hired him in 1947 to be a coaching consultant to Larry Doby , the first black player in the AL and the second in the major leagues . Before the Indians had signed Doby , he was the star second baseman of the Newark Eagles of the Negro Leagues . A SPORT photograph that accompanied the article shows Speaker mentoring five members of the Indians : Luke Easter , Jim Hegan , Ray Boone , Al Rosen and Doby . Speaker was inducted into the Texas Sports Hall of Fame in 1951 . Texas was the first state to establish a state sports hall of fame and Speaker was in its inaugural induction class . 
 = = Death = = 
 Speaker died of a heart attack on December 8 , 1958 , at the age of 70 , at Lake Whitney , Texas . He collapsed as he and a friend were pulling their boat into the dock after a fishing trip . It was his second heart attack in four years . Speaker was buried at Fairview Cemetery in Hubbard , Texas . 
 After Speaker 's death , Cobb said , " Terribly depressed . I never let him know how much I admired him when we were playing against each other ... It was only after we finally became teammates and then retired that I could tell Tris Speaker of the underlying respect I had for him . " Lajoie said , " He was one of the greatest fellows I ever knew , both as a baseball player and as a gentleman . " Former Boston teammate Duffy Lewis said , " He was a team player . As great a hitter as he was , he wasn 't looking out for his own average ... Speaker was the bell cow of our outfield . Harry Hooper and I would watch him and know how to play the hitters . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Immediately after Speaker 's death , the baseball field at the city park in Cleburne , Texas was renamed in honor of Speaker . In 1961 , the Tris Speaker Memorial Award was created by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America to honor players or officials who make outstanding contributions to baseball . In 1999 , he ranked number 27 on the Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players . He was named to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . Speaker is mentioned in the poem " Line @-@ Up for Yesterday " by Ogden Nash . 
 In 2008 , former baseball players ' union chief Marvin Miller , trying to defend the recently retired catcher Mike Piazza against claims that he should not be elected to the Hall of Fame because of association with the use of steroids , on the basis that the Hall of Fame has various unsavory people in it , opined that Speaker should be removed from the Hall of Fame because of alleged membership in the Ku Klux Klan . Miller said , " Some of the early people inducted in the Hall were members of the Ku Klux Klan : Tris Speaker , Cap Anson , and some people suspect Ty Cobb as well . I think that by and large , the players , and certainly the ones I knew , are good people . But the Hall is full of villains . " Miller 's comment about Anson has no basis , other than speculating that he could have been a Klansman since he was a racist during his playing career , which ended in 1897 , although he was umpiring games with black players by 1901 , including featuring the all @-@ black Columbia Giants . Miller , age 91 at the time the 2008 article appeared , is the earliest source for declaring that it is factual that Anson was a member of the Klan , based purely on an Internet search of sources that try to link Anson to the Klan . By contrast , Speaker @-@ Cobb @-@ Rogers Hornsby biographer Charles C. Alexander , a Klan expert in his general history writings , told fellow baseball author Marty Appel , apparently referring to the 1920s ( Anson died in 1922 ) , “ As I ’ ve suggested in the biographies , it ’ s possible that they [ Speaker , Cobb and Hornsby ] were briefly in the Klan , which was very strong in Texas and especially in Fort Worth and Dallas . The Klan went all out to recruit prominent people in all fields , provided they were native born , Protestant and white . ” 
 Baseball historian Bill James does not dispute this claim in apparently referring to Speaker and possibly Cobb , but says that the Klan had toned down its racist overtures during the 1920s and pulled in hundreds of thousands of non @-@ racist men , including Hugo Black . James adds that Speaker was a staunch supporter of Doby when he broke the American League color barrier , working long hours with the former second baseman on how to play the outfield . 
 = = Regular season statistics = = 
 = HMS Hardy ( 1936 ) = 
 HMS Hardy was the flotilla leader for the H @-@ class destroyers , built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 the ship spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Hardy was transferred to Freetown , Sierra Leone , in October 1939 to hunt for German commerce raiders in the South Atlantic with Force K. After returning to the United Kingdom in early 1940 , the ship became flagship of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla assigned to the Home Fleet . During the Norwegian campaign of 1940 , Hardy participated in the First Battle of Narvik where she sank one German destroyer . As the British ships were withdrawing , they were discovered by two other German destroyers that so badly damaged Hardy that she had to be run aground to stop her from sinking . The ship was lifted by a rising tide and eventually capsized . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hardy displaced 1 @,@ 455 long tons ( 1 @,@ 478 t ) at standard load and 2 @,@ 053 long tons ( 2 @,@ 086 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 337 feet ( 102 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 34 feet ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 9 inches ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 38 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 28 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Hardy carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 175 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted five 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Hardy had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were carried originally , but this was increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Hardy was laid down by Cammell Laird and Company at Birkenhead on 30 May 1935 , launched on 7 April 1936 and commissioned on 11 December 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 278 @,@ 482 . The ship was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . Hardy patrolled Spanish waters from 1937 through 1939 during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the policies of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . After the destroyer HMS Hunter struck a mine off Almeria on 13 May 1937 , Hardy stood by in case Hunter needed further assistance . Hardy was berthed in Palma , Majorca on 23 May 1937 when that port was bombed by the Spanish Republican Air Force , but was not damaged . After the end of the Spanish Civil War in 1939 , she began a refit in Devonport Dockyard between 2 June and 29 July . The ship was in Malta when World War II began in September . 
 In October Hardy ( pennant no . <unk> ) was transferred to Freetown , Sierra Leone , to hunt for German commerce raiders in the South Atlantic with Force K. The ship and her half @-@ sisters HMS Hostile , HMS Hereward , and HMS Hasty rendezvoused with the battlecruiser HMS Renown , the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal , and the light cruiser HMS Neptune on 17 December . They refuelled in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil before proceeding to the estuary of the River Plate in case the damaged German pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee attempted to escape from Montevideo , Uruguay , where she had taken refuge after losing the Battle of the River Plate . She was given a brief overhaul at Devonport between 25 January and 12 February 1940 and was then transferred to Greenock , Scotland for convoy escort duties . The ship rejoined the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet in Scapa Flow on 9 March and became its flagship . 
 On 6 April Hardy and the rest of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla escorted the four destroyer minelayers of the 20th Destroyer Flotilla as they sailed to implement Operation Wilfred , an operation to lay mines in the Vestfjord to prevent the shipment of Swedish iron ore from Narvik to Germany . The mines were laid on the early morning of 8 April , before the Germans began their invasion , and the destroyers then joined the battlecruiser HMS Renown and her escorts . 
 The Admiralty ordered Captain Warburton @-@ Lee to attack German shipping in Narvik , Norway on 9 April . The following morning Hardy led four of her half @-@ sisters down Ofotfjord in a surprise dawn attack on Narvik harbour during a blinding snowstorm . A torpedo from Hardy blew off the stern of the German flagship , <unk> Wilhelm Heidkamp , and killed the German flotilla commander , Commodore Friedrich Bonte . Heidkamp sank the next day . Another hit a merchant ship in the stern . A second salvo of four torpedoes was fired at two other German destroyers , but missed and badly damaged the ore docks . After regrouping , Captain Warburton @-@ Lee led another attack on the harbour later that morning , but inflicted little additional damage due to poor visibility . 
 As the British destroyers completed their second attack , they were engaged by three more German destroyers . The British destroyers attempted to withdraw to the west , but were pursued by the German ships . Two additional German destroyers crossed the T of the British ships and quickly knocked out Hardy 's forward guns . More hits to the ship 's bridge and superstructure set her on fire , mortally wounded Captain Warburton @-@ Lee and killed or wounded all of the other officers on the bridge except Paymaster Lieutenant G.H. Stanning , the Captain 's Secretary . Although badly wounded , he took command and after several more hits disabled her boilers ordered her run aground at <unk> . The First Lieutenant , who had not been present on the bridge , assumed command and ordered the ship abandoned . Some of the crew delayed doing so until the last torpedo was fruitlessly fired at a German ship and No. 4 gun fired until it was out of ammunition . 
 Captain Warburton @-@ Lee was brought ashore but died after an hour from his head wounds . 139 other men managed to get ashore , although 26 were seriously wounded . Captain Warburton @-@ Lee was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross . Hardy was lifted off the beach at high tide and drifted to the head of <unk> fjord where she capsized in shallow waters . The wreck was still visible as late as 1963 . 
 = Vaan = 
 Vaan ( ヴァン , Van ) is a fictional character in the Final Fantasy series from Square Enix . Created by Yasumi Matsuno and designed by Akihiko Yoshida , he first appeared in Itadaki Street Special and then appeared in Final Fantasy XII as the protagonist . Final Fantasy XII establishes Vaan as an orphaned teenager from Rabanastre who dreams of becoming a sky pirate . He and his best friend Penelo join Dalmasca Princess Ashe in her fight against the tyranny of the Archadian Empire . Vaan also takes a more active role in the sequel Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings and has also been featured in few Final Fantasy crossover games . 
 Vaan was conceptualized as the main character for Final Fantasy XII in order to contrast the older hero from Square 's previous title Vagrant Story as a result of negative feedback received by fans . Critical reception to Vaan 's character has been mixed as a result of his lack of involvement with the Final Fantasy XII 's plot although various video game publications still found him likable . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Vaan was first introduced in the 2004 crossover board game Itadaki Street Special for the PlayStation 2 . He also appears in Itadaki Street Portable for the PlayStation Portable . 
 The protagonist of Final Fantasy XII , Vaan is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old orphaned street urchin who lost his parents in a plague when he was 12 years old . His only brother , Reks , died two years prior to the start of the game , during the Archadian invasion of Dalmasca . He makes a living as Migelo 's assistant , running various errands for him , while at the same time pickpocketing from Archadian soldiers while claiming to take back what is Dalmasca 's . He is a cheerful and energetic boy . Vaan dreams of someday becoming a sky pirate in command of his own airship . He trains to meet this goal by killing dire rats in the sewers of Rabanastre on a daily basis , for which Dalan gave him the nickname " Vaan <unk> . " Despite nominally being the protagonist , the majority of the game focuses on the events and conflicts of the world as a whole and of Ashe , rather than Vaan 's individual problems , with his character instead used as a narrative device to allow the player to follow the events as an outside observer . During the course of the game , Vaan comes to understand that he has spent his time running from his problems and blaming the Archadian empire for them , rather than moving on with his life after his brother and parents ' deaths . Vaan ends the game as a sky pirate , traveling the world along with Penelo . He also reprises his role from Final Fantasy XII in the manga adaptation by Gin Amou . 
 During the events of Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings , Vaan becomes captain of the Airship Galbana and uses it to travel to Lemurés , meeting old friends while making new ones . By Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift Vaan 's and Penelo 's adventures take them to the Jylland region of Ivalice , where they get caught up in events surrounding Clan Gully and a boy from another world named Luso Clemens , eventually joining up with the clan for a time . 
 Vaan also appears in the PlayStation Portable fighting game , Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy . His inclusion in such title met difficulties due to the fact Kouhei Takeda was busy with other works to voice him . However , following a Japanese popularity survey , the staff in charge hired Kenshō Ono to replace Takeda as fans wanted him to appear in Dissidia 012 . He is featured in his Final Fantasy XII design , while alternative ones depict him as in Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift , a new one by Yoshitaka Amano and another one featuring him as sea pirate by Akihiko Yoshida . He is also featured in the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy as the main character representing Final Fantasy XII . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Yasumi Matsuno added Vaan and Penelo to be male and female avatar characters for the player in Final Fantasy XII . They would see and learn about Ivalice in sync with the player over the course of the game but would not be deeply connected to the story . The development team explained that their previous game , Vagrant Story , which featured a " strong man in his prime " as the protagonist had been unsuccessful and unpopular ; the change regarding Final Fantasy XII from a " big and tough " protagonist to a more effeminate one was thus decided after targeting demographics were considered . Although originally conceived as more " rugged " , Vaan was changed during development of the game to be more effeminate after " taking into consideration the target demographic " . He was designed by character designer Akihiko Yoshida to look Asian . In response to criticism from Western fans regarding Vaan 's design executive producer Akitoshi Kawazu noted that while several members from the development team were not feeling Vaan was the right main character owing to his young age , it was common for Japanese RPG to start with an inexperienced characters who grow across the game . Motomu Toriyama , the writer and director of Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings , picked Vaan as his favourite character in the game . 
 Vaan was voiced in Final Fantasy XII by Bobby Edner in English and by Kouhei Takeda in Japanese . With the casting of Takeda for the voice acting and motion capture , Vaan became a little less feminine and more " active , upbeat bright and positive " than planned . When asked how he compares to other Final Fantasy protagonists , Hideo Minaba stated that due in part to being designed by a different character designer than before , he did not feel he could be compared to any other Final Fantasy character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The similarities between the design of Vaan and Tetsuya Nomura 's have been criticized , which artist Akihiko Yoshida noted was likely due to the similar colours used . In the book Final Fantasy and Philosophy : The Ultimate <unk> , he is described by Greg <unk> as a pick pocket and , unlike many of Final Fantasy 's protagonists , lacking in a " sense of honesty and justice " . GameSpot editor Greg Kasavin described Vaan as the " token androgynous male lead " , also describing him as an " Aladdin @-@ type " . G4 TV editor Greg Orlando described him as " eminently likable " due to the game 's focus on " political intrigue " and Vaan trying to understand it all . Cyril <unk> of <unk> stated that while he was not a fan of Vaan , he was surprised by how his story turned out . 1UP.com editor Andrew Pfister stated that while everyone was expecting to hate what he describes as an " angsty teen " , this is " tempered by the presence of Balthier and Basch " , two fellow characters . 
 His lessened involvement with the plot compared to protagonists from preceding Final Fantasy titles was met with mixed reception . Destructoid editor Aaron Linde described him as " arguably the most uninspiring character in the game " . <unk> editor Andrew <unk> described Vaan as an " <unk> figure " . Eurogamer editor Rob Fahey stated that while " players may initially be somewhat dismayed to find themselves largely following around the cheerful <unk> Vaan " , the game introduces new characters who " fill out the cast superbly " . PSX Extreme editor Cavin Smith commented that due to the game not focusing on just one character , Vaan " spends the entire game as an observer of the events unfolding in front of him " , adding that it is a " far different take on the protagonist compared to Nomura 's egocentric tendencies " . PALGN editor Phil Larsen called him a " rogue @-@ ish bad boy with a heart of gold " , adding that " while this may seem clichéd at first , Vaan is always presented as extremely young and never tries to control every situation " , citing Tidus as an example of someone who does . Worthplaying editor Agustin described the set @-@ up as being " Dragon Quest @-@ like " , and that while he acts as a vehicle for players to view the plot through , he compared him to critically acclaimed characters Crono and Link from the Chrono Trigger and The Legend of Zelda series respectively . 
 Bobby Edner 's portrayal of Vaan has been met with mostly positive reception . Cavin Smith praised his acting , stating that he sounds like an actual teenager without sounding whiny . Agustin praised the developers for giving Vaan a voice actor , commenting that it prevents any awkward silences from a silent protagonist . He added however that Vaan is " decidedly quiet " , owing to many of the conversations not requiring his input , which Agustin called a " brilliant interactive storytelling device " . His design change from Final Fantasy XII to Revenant Wings was criticized by RPGFan editor Patrick Gann , for going from a teenage design to what appears to be the design of a 10 @-@ year @-@ old Vaan . 
 = Juan Davis Bradburn = 
 Juan Davis Bradburn ( 1787 – April 20 , 1842 ) , born John Davis Bradburn , was a brigadier general in the Mexican Army . His actions as commandant of the garrison at Anahuac in Mexican Texas in 1831 and 1832 led to the events known as the Anahuac Disturbances . 
 Born and raised in the United States , Bradburn 's first career was as a merchant and slave trader . He likely first entered Mexico in 1812 as part of the Gutiérrez @-@ Magee Expedition fighting Spanish control of Texas . When the expedition was quashed , Bradburn moved to Louisiana , where he served in the Louisiana militia during the Battle of New Orleans . After his discharge , Bradburn spent several years fighting for Mexican independence . Spain relinquished its hold on Mexico in 1821 , and Bradburn became an officer in the new Mexican army . He served as a courier for Mexican emperor Agustín de Iturbide . 
 In 1830 , Bradburn established a new military and customs post , Anahuac , in Texas . The local settlers resented Bradburn 's efforts to withhold land titles from those who had squatted in unauthorized areas . They were further angered by his attempts to enforce customs laws which had been largely ignored . The hard feelings escalated when Bradburn , following Mexican law , refused to return runaway slaves to their owners in the United States . After receiving a hoax letter claiming that armed men were marching on Anahuac to retrieve runaway slaves , Bradburn arrested local lawyers William Barret Travis , Patrick Churchill Jack . Settlers were outraged that Travis did not receive some of the protections offered by the United States Bill of Rights , even though these rights were not guaranteed in Mexico . A large force of Texians marched on Anahuac to secure Travis 's release . The resulting confrontation forced Bradburn 's expulsion from Texas and encouraged other immigrants to take armed action against Mexican soldiers . As a result of his actions , Bradburn was " one of the most maligned men in historical accounts of " Texas in the 19th century . 
 = = Early years = = 
 John Davis Bradburn was born in 1787 in Virginia . His father was probably William C. Bradburn , and John likely had an elder brother , also named William . At some point after 1800 , the family moved to Christian County , Kentucky . As a young adult , Bradburn became a merchant in nearby Springfield , Tennessee . He trafficked in slaves and was once jailed in Natchez , Mississippi over a disputed slave sale . 
 It is likely that Bradburn participated in the 1812 Gutiérrez @-@ Magee Expedition , which intended to establish independent Mexican control of Spanish Texas . The rebels were initially successful , taking Nacogdoches , Goliad , and provincial capital San Antonio de Béxar . After the execution of Governor Manuel María de Salcedo , many Americans left the movement in disgust . The remaining members of the expedition were decisively defeated by royalist forces at the Battle of Medina in August 1813 ; a small number of Americans escaped to Louisiana . 
 By 1814 , Bradburn resided in Louisiana . Rumors abounded that British troops were preparing to invade New Orleans . After the December call for volunteers to help defend the state , Bradburn enrolled in the Eighteenth Louisiana Regiment and was elected third lieutenant . His unit arrived in New Orleans on January 24 , just after the Battle of New Orleans , and remained until martial law ended March 11 . 
 = = Mexican War of Independence = = 
 Following his discharge from the militia , Bradburn remained in New Orleans . The Mexican War of Independence was raging , and many filibusters — men planning unauthorized military expeditions — gathered in the city to plan the liberation of Texas from Spanish control . Bradburn became a sergeant major in the movement led by Juan Pablo Anaya and Henry Perry . When Perry 's forces entered Texas in early 1816 , Bradburn was initially stationed in Nacogdoches to direct recruits and supplies to the main body of the expedition . In June , Bradburn joined Perry at his headquarters , a bluff along the Trinity River which became known as Perry 's Point . Little activity occurred over the next few months . 
 In November 1816 , another filibuster , Francisco Javier Mina , arrived with additional men and supplies . Mina planned to invade Tampico and assist the revolutionary army in the Mexican interior . Bradburn allied himself with Mina , whose plan was better @-@ developed than Perry 's , and was soon appointed second @-@ in @-@ command of the American troops , under Colonel Gilford Young . The filibusters traveled to Fort Sombrero , an insurgent stronghold in Guanajuato province . Rebel supplies dwindled when the fort was besieged by Spanish royalist troops . Mina attempted to negotiate a surrender , but the Spanish offered safe passage only to native Mexicans ; Americans and other foreigners were required to surrender at discretion . As the filibusters pondered this development , Young was killed , leaving Bradburn in sole command of the American troops . On August 19 , he ordered a retreat . Spanish cavalrymen attacked , and less than one @-@ quarter of the Americans escaped . 
 Bradburn remained in Mexico and soon joined the forces led by Vicente Guerrero . Despite Guerrero 's reputation for cruelty , the two men developed a close relationship . At least once , Bradburn countermanded Guerrero 's orders , refusing to allow the execution of captured Spanish officers . His action impressed Agustín de Iturbide , the commander of the Spanish forces fighting Guerrero . In December 1820 , Bradburn left the insurgent army to join Iturbide . Most Mexican historians believe his defection was due to a weariness with the conflict ; at least one historian speculates that Bradburn joined the Spanish army as Guerrero 's spy . Within a month , Bradburn had been appointed intermediary between Iturbide and Guerrero . 
 Iturbide defected from the Spanish army , intending to place himself at the head of a new independent Mexico . He recruited his forces from both the Spanish and rebel armies , offering all who joined him an equal or higher rank in his new organization . Bradburn was appointed a colonel . 
 = = Independent Mexico = = 
 In August 1821 , Mexico officially received its independence from Spain . The following year Iturbide became emperor of Mexico and sent Bradburn as an envoy to the United States . Bradburn returned with news that the United States was prepared to recognize the Mexican republic as an independent country . Later that year , Iturbide arranged Bradburn 's marriage to a well @-@ connected Mexican woman , Maria Josefa Hurtado de Mendoza y Caballero de los Olivos . Her brother , Agustin Hurtado , was the 9th Count of the Valley of Orizaba . Bradburn and his wife had one son , who entered the priesthood as a young man . 
 Iturbide was overthrown in 1823 . The new government was based on federalist principles , and Bradburn , a staunch centralist , kept a discreet distance from politics over the next few years . He reappears in Mexican records in 1828 , when he was granted a monopoly on steamboat traffic on the Rio Grande from the Gulf of Mexico through Coahuila . His charter was revoked in 1830 when he was unable to meet its terms . 
 = = Texas = = 
 The new federalist government officially authorized immigration from the United States to Mexican Texas in 1824 . The resulting mass influx of settlers , combined with failed attempts by the United States government to purchase the territory , concerned Mexican authorities , who feared that the United States wished to forcibly take Texas . In response , on April 6 , 1830 the Mexican government enacted a series of laws restricting immigration from the United States . The laws also called for the establishment of customs houses within Texas to begin enforcing customs duties . On October 4 , 1830 , Bradburn was ordered to create the first customs post , to be located at Galveston Bay . He was chosen for the assignment partly because he was bilingual and would be able to communicate with both the immigrants from the United States and the native Mexicans and partly due to his knowledge of the area and its terrain . 
 Bradburn and his men arrived at Galveston Bay on October 26 and established a post atop the same 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) bluff where Bradburn had camped with Perry . As ordered , Bradburn named the fort Anahuac after the Anahuac Valley , the ancient capital of the Aztecs . The soldiers erected two large kilns to produce bricks to build a more permanent fort . When the kilns were operational , however , Bradburn sold the bricks to settlers who wished to live near the fort . The town grew quickly and by June 1 the population had reached 300 civilians and 170 military personnel . At this point , Bradburn redirected his attention to building a permanent fort . The soldiers , who had been largely idle while the kilns produced bricks for settlers , were angry that they were now expected to do significant physical labor . Their displeasure was augmented by Bradburn 's high standards ; he often forced the men to tear down and rebuild sections that did not meet his benchmark for quality . Many soldiers deserted . 
 Bradburn also angered the colonists . The Mexican Constitution of 1824 prohibited immigrants from settling with 26 miles ( 42 km ) of the coast , and many foreigners had established homes close to the coast . In January 1831 , a new state land commissioner , Jose Francisco Madero , arrived to grant land titles to people who had settled in the area before 1830 . Bradburn believed that only the federal government had the authority to grant titles in the area near the coast , and that as the representative of the federal government he was the only individual who could authorize surveys of the land . 
 Bradburn arrested Madero and his assistant , José María Jesús Carbajal . Within 10 days , Bradburn received orders from his superiors to release the men . Madero issued deeds as quickly as he could . Madero then established an official council , an ayuntamiento , for the residents in the disputed area . The new community , " Villa de la Santissima Trinidad de la Libertad " , is now known as Liberty , Texas . Although Bradburn believed that Liberty was created illegally , as the town was too close to the coast , he made no attempt to interfere with its establishment . On December 9 , however , Bradburn 's superior , commandant general Manuel Mier y Teran , ordered Bradburn to dismantle the town and establish the ayuntamiento at Anahuac . 
 = = = Tariffs = = = 
 The Mexican government had granted specific tariff exemptions to the first group of immigrants to Texas . Known as the Old Three Hundred , this initial colony had been established by empresario Stephen F. Austin . Most Texas colonists , including those who settled in Austin 's other land grants , erroneously assumed the exemption applied to all settlers . With Bradburn 's arrival , tariff collections began . After hearing complaints from ship captains , Bradburn 's influence helped the law be amended to curtail some excessive charges . Nevertheless , colonists were angry that their goods were more expensive . Many of the settlers in Austin 's colony also refused to accept that their exemption had expired and were vocal in their dislike of the tariffs and Bradburn . To keep the peace , Bradburn appointed local men to collect fees near Austin 's colony ; these men did not try to enforce the law rigidly , and tensions cooled . 
 In an effort to resolve the issues , Stephen F. Austin wrote Bradburn seeking help in getting the tariffs repealed throughout Texas . Bradburn promptly forwarded the letter up the chain of command . Bradburn 's commander sent Austin a sharply @-@ worded letter which , according to Bradburn 's biographer Margaret Swett Henson , " remind [ ed ] the empresario that tariff was collected by every nation in the world but that only in Brazoria did it cause rioting " . Austin blamed Bradburn for the reprimand . 
 = = = Anahuac Disturbances = = = 
 In January 1832 , Bradburn received a letter listing 10 men in his jurisdiction who favored separating Texas from Mexico . From that point on , according to Henson , " Bradburn became increasingly obsessed about the Anglo @-@ Americans and their intentions , believing that every event was part of a conspiracy to detach Texas " . Several months later , local men organized a militia , supposedly to protect the settlement from Indian attacks . Mexican law forbade residents from creating militias , so Bradburn arrested the ringleader , Patrick Jack . Although citizens were outraged , few were willing to intervene . An exception was Robert " Three @-@ Legged Willie " Williamson — his threat to kill Bradburn resulted in Jack 's release . 
 Bradburn was also worried about the intentions of Jack 's law partner , William Barret Travis . The previous year , Bradburn had granted asylum to two men who had escaped slavery in Louisiana . Travis represented the men 's owner in a series of failed attempts to return the former slaves to the United States . In May 1832 , Bradburn received a letter warning that 100 armed men were stationed 40 miles ( 64 km ) away , intent on reclaiming the slaves . After realizing the letter was a hoax , Bradburn arrested Travis for questioning . He intended to send Travis to Matamoros for a military trial on charges of attempted insurrection . Conviction on this charge would have led to Travis 's execution . The settlers were outraged that the arrest did not require a warrant , a statement of charges , or trial by jury . Most were unfamiliar with Mexican law and assumed that the United States Bill of Rights still applied to them . 
 Jack threatened Bradburn , who angrily rearrested him . Colonists had reached their limit , and men began marching towards Anahuac from various Texas settlements . By early June , over 150 Texians had gathered . They elected Frank W. Johnson as commander . Without firing a shot , Johnson 's group soon captured Bradburn 's 19 cavalry officers , who had been trying to reconnoiter the Texian position . This left Bradburn with only 80 soldiers ; the rest had deserted . 
 On June 10 , the insurgents occupied buildings in northern Anahuac and began negotiations to peacefully end the dispute . Mexican officers agreed to release their prisoners into civilian custody if the Texians would release the captured cavalry officers and then withdraw from the town to Turtle Bayou . Although most of the rebels left Anahuac , 15 to 30 men remained scattered through the town . Bradburn believed this violated their agreement and in retaliation threatened to fire on the village within 2 hours . Most of the Texians believed that Bradburn had never intended to follow the agreement . 
 Fearing imminent cannon fire , the women and children of Anahuac fled . Mexican soldiers briefly engaged the men who remained , leading to the deaths of 5 Mexican soldiers and 1 Texan . After the skirmish , the remaining Texians gathered at Turtle Bayou to await the arrival of cannons that were stored at Brazoria . Taking advantage of the civil war currently engulfing the Mexican interior , the Texians drafted the Turtle Bayou Resolutions . In this document , they declared themselves federalists who supported rebellious Mexican general Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna and decried " the present dynasty " which gave them military order instead of civil authority . 
 While the Texians waited for their artillery , Bradburn sent messages to Colonel Piedras , stationed at Nacogdoches ( 200 miles ( 320 km ) north ) , and Colonel <unk> at San Antonio ( 300 miles ( 480 km ) to the west ) . On June 19 , Piedras and about 100 of his men set out to reinforce Bradburn . Unsure how many Texians he actually faced , Piedras was eager to defuse the conflict without violence . At his urging , Bradburn agreed to relinquish his authority , but his chosen successor , Lieutenant Colonel Felix Maria <unk> , refused to take his place . Piedras agreed to take temporary command of the garrison . On July 2 , he transferred the prisoners to civilian authorities ; within a week they were all released with no charges filed . Piedras left for Nacogdoches on July 8 ; three days later , the bulk of the Anahuac troops declared themselves federalists . Only Bradburn and a few others remained committed to the centralist cause . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After an aborted assassination attempt — widely attributed to Travis — Bradburn resolved to leave Texas . None of the local ship captains would allow him passage . On July 13 , <unk> announced that he would not guarantee the safety of any officers who still supported the centralist government . That night , Bradburn left Anahuac on foot . Years later , Anahuac carpenter William B. <unk> related that after Bradburn 's departure , locals gathered up the other centralist officers and tarred and feathered them before taking them into the water and " scour [ ing ] them with corn cobs to scrub their Bradburn sins off " . 
 On August 6 , Bradburn arrived in New Orleans and sought refuge with the Mexican consul . Many New Orleans residents had a highly unfavorable view of Bradburn ; ten days earlier the local paper had published a letter from Travis describing Bradburn as a " tyrant " and claiming that Travis had been jailed solely for his political opinions . Bradburn quickly booked passage to Matamoros . On arriving in Mexico , he learned that he had been officially relieved of his duties in Anahuac on June 29 , before his superiors had learned of the armed conflict . 
 Bradburn remained in the army , fighting for the centralist government . Acting president Anastasio Bustamante promoted Bradburn to brigadier general after his bravery in a large battle on September 18 . For the next few months , Bradburn commanded a regiment near Reynosa . In December , Bustamante and Santa Anna negotiated an end to the war . Bradburn 's forces were merged with that of the federalist general operating in the same area , Lorenzo Cortina . Cortina commanded the joint regiment , and Bradburn retired from military service . For several years , Bradburn raised vegetables near Matamoros . Henson related that " a Texas visitor noted that [ Bradburn ] had the respect of the foreign community in the city , even the Anglo merchants " . 
 When the Texas Revolution erupted in 1835 , Bradburn rejoined the military under General Jose de Urrea on the condition that he was not required to fight in eastern Texas . Urrea 's forces eradicated opposition along the Texas Gulf Coast , and Bradburn was left to command the small port at Copano , just north of the Nueces River . In April 1836 , Santa Anna ( now president of Mexico ) was captured at the Battle of San Jacinto and all Mexican troops were ordered to retreat beyond the Rio Grande . Bradburn remained at Copano to intercept Mexican supply vessels before they could fall into the hands of the Texians . In mid @-@ May , he was ordered to retreat south to Refugio and wait for the arrival of a specific supply ship . His force was reduced to five men . After two deserted and the remainder fell ill , Bradburn set out alone and on foot for Mexico . He reached Matamoros in ill health on June 13 . 
 Bradburn again served in the army during the federalist war in 1838 , but by the end of 1840 he had retired to Matamoros . He died on April 20 and was buried on his ranch , likely east of present @-@ day Mission . The property is now the home of the La Lomita Seminary , but there is no record of the location of Bradburn 's grave . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bradburn 's death was announced in Texas newspapers in a very neutral manner . The Telegraph and Texas Register said simply that " Gen. Bradburn , who had long been in the Mexican service , and formerly commanded the garrison of Anahuac , lately died at Matamoros " . However , the history books of the time did not speak kindly of his actions . In his 1841 book Texas and the Texans ; or , Advance of the Anglo @-@ Americans to the South @-@ West Henry Stuart Foote described Bradburn as an " evil spirit , hovering , with gloomy and malignant aspect , in the rear of Santa Anna 's army " . Henson posits that Bradburn was " one of the most maligned men in historical accounts of that period " , partially because he had no descendants to try to " <unk> [ e ] his name and reputation in Texas " . 
 Many of Bradburn 's contemporaries appeared to share Stephen F. Austin 's belief that : " The fact is [ Bradburn ] is incompetent to such a command and is half crazy part of his time . " His actions " appeared arbitrary and authoritarian to the colonists , who were ignorant about the power traditionally exercised by the Mexican military " . Texians were further disgusted that Bradburn , who shared their American roots , often sided against American immigrants . However , according to historian J. R. Edmondson , colonists " would probably have resented any officer — Anglo or not — sent among them to initiate the collection of customs " . Few Texans in the 19th century understood that Bradburn was following orders and attempting to enforce the national laws of Mexico , and that he was no longer bound by the laws of the United States . Even as late as the 20th century , historians often described Bradburn as a " petty tyrant " . 
 Historian William C. Davis believes that Bradburn " overreacted and made heroes of two local malcontents whose actions their own people otherwise had not been much inclined to sanction " . The resulting Turtle Bayou Resolutions empowered other Texians to follow a similar course of action . Many communities began declaring in favor of Santa Anna , and in August Piedras and his troops were driven from Nacogdoches . Their retreat into the Mexican interior temporarily left eastern Texas free of Mexican military control , encouraging the colonists to increase their political activity . Shortly thereafter , colonists organized the Convention of 1832 , which marked the first attempt to gather Texians from each of the colonies to discuss their common goals . 
 Shortly after Bradburn left Texas , the garrison at Anahuac was dismantled . With no troops to purchase supplies , the civilians in the area soon dispersed . The fort was not <unk> until January 1835 , when Captain Antonio <unk> arrived with 40 men . His command was no more successful than Bradburn 's ; within months Travis led a group of insurgents to overthrow <unk> in the second of the Anahuac Disturbances . 
 = Hooded crow = 
 The hooded crow ( Corvus cornix ) ( also called hoodie ) is a Eurasian bird species in the Corvus genus . Widely distributed , it is also known locally as Scotch crow , Danish crow , and grey crow ( in Slavic languages , Ireland and Denmark ) . Found across Northern , Eastern , and Southeastern Europe , as well as parts of the Middle East , it is an ashy grey bird with black head , throat , wings , tail , and thigh feathers , as well as a black bill , eyes , and feet . Like other corvids , it is an omnivorous and opportunistic forager and feeder . 
 It is so similar in morphology and habits to the carrion crow ( Corvus corone ) , for many years they were considered by most authorities to be geographical races of one species . Hybridization observed where their ranges overlapped added weight to this view . However , since 2002 , the hooded crow has been elevated to full species status after closer observation ; the hybridisation was less than expected and hybrids had decreased vigour . Within the hooded crow species , four subspecies are recognized , with one , the Mesopotamian crow , possibly distinct enough to warrant species status itself . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The hooded crow was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in his 18th @-@ century work Systema Naturae and it bears its original name of Corvus cornix . The binomial name is derived from the Latin words Corvus , " raven " , and cornix , " crow " . It was subsequently considered a subspecies of the carrion crow for many years , hence known as Corvus corone cornix , due to similarities in structure and habits . 
 It is locally known as a hoodie in Scotland and Northern Ireland . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Four subspecies of the hooded crow are now recognised ; previously , all were considered subspecies of Corvus corone . A fifth , C. c. <unk> ( <unk> , 1939 ) has been listed though it has been alternately partitioned between C. c. sharpii ( most populations ) , C. c. cornix ( Corsican population ) , and the Middle Eastern C. c. pallescens . 
 C. c. cornix , the nominate race , occurs in the British Isles ( principally Scotland and Ireland ) and Europe , south to Corsica . 
 C. c. pallescens ( <unk> , 1904 ) is found in Turkey and Egypt , and is a paler form as its name suggests . 
 C. c. sharpii ( Oates , 1889 ) is named for English zoologist Richard Bowdler Sharpe . This is a paler grey form found from western Siberia through to the Caucasus region and Iran . 
 C. c. <unk> ( P.L. Sclater , 1877 ) is known as the Mesopotamian crow or Iraqi pied crow . This distinctive form occurs in Iraq and southwestern Iran . It has very pale grey plumage which looks almost white from a distance . It is possibly distinct enough to be considered a separate species . 
 = = = Genetic difference from carrion crows = = = 
 The hooded crow ( Corvus cornix ) and carrion crow ( Corvus corone ) are two closely related species whose geographical distribution across Europe is illustrated in the accompanying diagram . It is believed that this distribution might have resulted from the glaciation cycles during the Pleistocene , which caused the parent population to split into isolates which subsequently re @-@ expanded their ranges when the climate warmed causing secondary contact . <unk> and coworkers sequenced almost the entire genomes of both species in populations at varying distances from the contact zone to find that the two species were genetically identical , both in their DNA and in its expression ( in the form of RNA ) , except for the lack of expression of a small portion ( < 0 @.@ 28 % ) of the genome ( situated on avian chromosome 18 ) in the hooded crow , which imparts the lighter plumage colouration on its torso . Thus the two species can viably hybridize , and occasionally do so at the contact zone , but the all @-@ black carrion crows on the one side of the contact zone mate almost exclusively with other all @-@ black carrion crows , while the same occurs among the hooded crows on the other side of the contact zone . It is therefore clear that it is only the outward appearance of the two species that inhibits hybridization . The authors attribute this to <unk> mating ( rather than to ecological selection ) , the advantage of which is not clear , and it would lead to the rapid appearance of streams of new lineages , and possibly even species , through mutual attraction between mutants . Unnikrishnan and <unk> propose , instead , that <unk> is a more parsimonious explanation for the resistance to hybridization across the contact zone , despite the absence of physiological , anatomical or genetic barriers to such hybridization . 
 = = Description = = 
 Except for the head , throat , wings , tail , and thigh feathers , which are black and mostly glossy , the plumage is ash @-@ grey , the dark shafts giving it a streaky appearance . The bill and legs are black ; the iris dark brown . Only one moult occurs , in autumn , as in other crow species . The male is the larger bird , otherwise the sexes are alike . Their flight is slow and heavy and usually straight . Their length varies from 48 to 52 cm ( 19 to 20 in ) . When first hatched , the young are much blacker than the parents . Juveniles have duller plumage with bluish or greyish eyes and initially a red mouth . Wingspan is 98 cm ( 39 in ) and weight is on average 510 g . 
 The hooded crow , with its contrasted greys and blacks , cannot be confused with either the carrion crow or rook , but the <unk> call notes of the two are almost indistinguishable . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The hooded crow breeds in northern and eastern Europe , and closely allied forms inhabit southern Europe and western Asia . Where its range overlaps with carrion crow , as in northern Britain , Germany , Denmark , northern Italy , and Siberia , their hybrids are fertile . However , the hybrids are less well @-@ adapted than purebred birds , and this is one of the reasons this species was split from the carrion crow . Little or no interbreeding occurs in some areas , such as Iran and central Russia . 
 In the British Isles , the hooded crow breeds regularly in Scotland , the Isle of Man , and the Scottish Islands . It also breeds widely in Ireland . In autumn , some migratory birds arrive on the east coast of Britain . In the past , this was a more common visitor . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The hooded crow is omnivorous , with a diet similar to that of the carrion crow , and is a constant scavenger . It drops molluscs and crabs to break them after the manner of the carrion crow , and an old Scottish name for empty sea urchin shells was " crow 's cups " . On coastal cliffs , the eggs of gulls , cormorants , and other birds are stolen when their owners are absent , and this crow will enter the burrow of the puffin to steal eggs . It will also feed on small mammals , scraps , smaller birds , and carrion . The crow has the habit of hiding food , especially meat or nuts , in places such as rain gutters , flower pots , or in the earth under bushes , to feed on it later , sometimes on the insects that have meanwhile developed on it . Other crows often watch if another one hides food and then search this place later when the other crow has left . 
 = = = Nesting = = = 
 Nesting occurs later in colder regions : mid @-@ May to mid @-@ June in northwest Russia , Shetland , and the Faroe Islands , and late February in the Persian Gulf region . In warmer parts of the British Isles , the clutch is laid in April . The bulky , stick nest is normally placed in a tall tree , but cliff ledges , old buildings , and pylons may be used . Nests are occasionally placed on or near the ground . The nest resembles that of the carrion crow , but on the coast , seaweed is often interwoven in the structure , and animal bones and wire are also frequently incorporated . The four to six brown @-@ speckled blue eggs are 4 @.@ 3 cm × 3 @.@ 0 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 in × 1 @.@ 2 in ) in size and weigh 19 @.@ 8 g ( 0 @.@ 70 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . The altricial young are incubated for 17 – 19 days by the female alone , that is fed by the male . They fledge after 32 to 36 days . <unk> females have been reported to obtain most of their own food and later that for their young . 
 The typical lifespan is unknown , but that of the carrion crow is four years . The maximum recorded age for a hooded crow is 16 years , and 9 months . 
 This species is a secondary host of the parasitic great spotted cuckoo , the European magpie being the preferred host . However , in areas where the latter species is absent , such as Israel and Egypt , the hooded crow becomes the normal corvid host . 
 This species , like its relative , is seen regularly killed by farmers and on grouse estates . In County Cork , Ireland , the county 's gun clubs shot over 23 @,@ 000 hooded crows in two years in the early 1980s . 
 = = Status = = 
 The IUCN Red List does not distinguish the hooded crow from the carrion crow , but the two species together have an extensive range , estimated at 10 million km2 ( 3 @.@ 8 million mi2 ) , and a large population , including an estimated 14 to 34 million individuals in Europe alone . They are not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , so are evaluated as Least Concern . The carrion crow / hooded crow hybrid zone is slowly spreading northwest , but the hooded crow has on the order of three million territories in just Europe ( excluding Russia ) . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 In Celtic folklore , the bird appears on the shoulder of the dying Cú Chulainn , and could also be a manifestation of the Morrígan , the wife of <unk> , or the Cailleach . This idea has persisted , and the hooded crow is associated with fairies in the Scottish highlands and Ireland ; in the 18th century , Scottish shepherds would make offerings to them to keep them from attacking sheep . In Faroese folklore , a maiden would go out on Candlemas morn and throw a stone , then a bone , then a clump of turf at a hooded crow – if it flew over the sea , her husband would be a foreigner ; if it landed on a farm or house , she would marry a man from there , but if it stayed put , she would remain unmarried . 
 The old name of Royston crow originates from the days when this bird was a common winter visitor to southern England , the sheep fields around Royston , Hertfordshire , providing carcasses on which the birds could feed . The local newspaper , founded in 1855 , is called The Royston Crow , and the hooded crow is also featured on the crest of the North Hertfordshire District Council . 
 The hooded crow is one of the 37 Norwegian birds depicted in the Bird Room of the Royal Palace in Oslo . Jethro Tull mentions the hooded crow on the song " Jack Frost and the hooded crow " as a bonus track on the digitally remastered version of <unk> and the Beast and on their The Christmas Album . 
 = Booze Cruise ( The Office ) = 
 " Booze Cruise " is the eleventh episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's seventeenth episode overall . Written by Greg Daniels and directed by Ken Kwapis , the episode first aired in the United States on January 5 , 2006 on NBC . The episode featured Rob Riggle and Amy Adams as guest stars . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) brings the office on a booze cruise and plans on doing some " motivational " speaking . After he learns that the captain of the boat has other plans , a power struggle emerges . Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) and Roy 's ( David Denman ) previously stagnant relationship blossoms , while Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Katy 's ( Amy Adams ) begins to falter . 
 The story for " Booze Cruise " was inspired by a friend of B. J. Novak 's who had gone on a booze cruise . Novak told Daniels about the trip , and Daniels then proceeded to write an episode about it . The episode featured the third and final appearance of Katy , portrayed by Amy Adams . The filming of the episode was a departure from the norm of the series ; filming took place on an actual boat and because of this , many cast members got sea sick . " Booze Cruise " received largely positive reviews from critics . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 5 in the 18 – 49 demographic and was viewed by 8 @.@ 7 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Dunder Mifflin crew goes on a cruise on a Lake <unk> ship Princess — in January . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) plans to use the cruise as both a party and a leadership training exercise . However , " Captain Jack " ( Rob Riggle ) keeps preventing him from giving a business lecture . 
 The captain puts Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) in charge of a prop wheel , which Dwight thinks is real . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , who has brought his girlfriend Katy ( Amy Adams ) on the cruise with him , and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) share an awkward moment alone on the deck away from their significant others . Michael continually tries to take charge of the event by standing next to the captain and interrupting everything he says . After Michael falsely declares that the ship is sinking , sending the passengers into a panic and causing one passenger to grab a life vest and jump off the ship , the captain temporarily detains him by zip tying him to the railing on the deck outside . 
 Just before Roy talks to the captain , Michael asks Jim who he would save on a sinking ship . Jim covers up in saying that he would save the customer , but makes it clear afterwards that he would save the receptionist . He approaches Pam to perhaps tell her his feelings at the same time that Roy is hearing a war story from the captain . A drunken Roy Anderson ( David Denman ) is inspired to announce a date for his wedding with Pam , just before Jim can reach her . Jim is crushed and breaks up with Katy , realizing that he does not want to be with her . He confesses to Michael his feelings for Pam , which surprises Michael , who claims he has a " radar for things like that " . As Jim is seemingly ready to give up on Pam , Michael , in an uncharacteristically serious moment , encourages him to pursue her . Jim 's facial expression indicates that Michael 's endeavors to motivate him in some way might have actually succeeded . Afterwards , Michael finally informs Dwight the wheel he has been steering is not real . It is evident in deleted scenes that Jim , in giving his toast , intended to make an emotional speech about his close relationship with Pam , but is swiftly cut off by Dwight . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Booze Cruise " was written by Greg Daniels , making it his fourth writing credit , and his second season two credit , after " Halloween " earlier in the year . The episode was directed by Ken Kwapis , making it his sixth directing credit for the series . Greg Daniels referred to this episode as " our Scranton version of James Cameron 's Titanic . " The idea came from B. J. Novak because a friend of his went on a booze cruise . Novak told Daniels about the trip , and Daniels then proceeded to write an episode about it . 
 " Booze Cruise " featured the third and final appearance of Katy , portrayed by Amy Adams . Adams thoroughly enjoyed her work on the show . In an interview with Advocate.com , she said , " [ The Office ] was the best work experience . I loved that show and that cast so much . I don ’ t know if they believe me , but every time I see them I ’ m like , ' Oh my gosh , I ’ ll do anything to come back . ' " 
 Shooting for the episode was a departure from the norm of the series , due to the fact that filming was not on the Dunder Mifflin set . Furthermore , the episode was not filmed during the day , but rather during the night , from 6pm to 6am . Principal filming took place in Long Beach Harbor , California . Because the episode took place on an actual boat , many cast members got sea sick . Rainn Wilson got especially nauseated on the second night ; Jenna Fischer and David Denman felt nauseated on the last night of shooting . During the final sound mixing for the episode , Greg Daniels recalls yelling at the shot of Jim and Pam on deck . He noted that he had " seen it many , many times , but I was yelling , ' Do it , you idiot ! Kiss her ! ' " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the conference room scene , Michael asks if anyone has seen the 1997 film Titanic . Pam and Jim pretend that they 've never heard of the movie , and Pam suggests that Michael is thinking of the 1990 movie The Hunt for Red October . Upon boarding , Michael soon stands at the front of the boat and yells , " I 'm the king of the world ! " in reference to the famous scene in Titanic . 
 When the employees are boarding the boat , Michael sings the " Ballad of Gilligan 's Island " , the theme from the 1964 television series Gilligan 's Island . Michael assigns the following roles : Pam is Mary Ann , Jim is The Professor , Katy is Ginger , Angela is Mrs. Howell , Kelly is a " native " , Stanley is one of the Harlem Globetrotters , Michael is The Skipper , and Dwight is Gilligan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Booze Cruise " originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 5 , 2006 . The episode received a 4 @.@ 5 rating / 11 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . At the time , this was the best 18- 49 rating that the show had had . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 7 million viewers . Furthermore , the series retained 87 percent of its My Name is Earl lead @-@ in audience . An encore presentation of the episode , on June 27 , 2006 , received a 1 @.@ 8 / 6 rating and was viewed by over 4 @.@ 1 million viewers . 
 " Booze Cruise " received largely positive reviews from critics . M. Giant of Television Without Pity graded the episode with an " A " . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad stated " This sitcom gets better every week " and that " What made this one quite good was that they didn 't rely on Dwight too much , although the bits with him ' driving ' the boat were good . " Monique <unk> of Zap2it said that the " 28 seconds of silence between co @-@ workers Jim and Pam capture all the awkwardness and longing of unspoken love better than any words could . And it 's these private moments caught on film by the unseen documentary crew that give this otherwise tart sitcom its sweetness . " John Krasinski stated that " Booze Cruise " included two of his favorite scenes to film : Jim 's conversation with Pam , and Jim 's conversation with Michael . He later called both of the shots " beautiful " and noted that it was " nothing short of an honor " to film them with Fischer and Carell , respectively . TV Fanatic reviewed several of the episodes quotes ; Steve Marsi rated Jim 's quote , " You know what ? I would save the receptionist . Just wanted to clear that up " a 3 out of 5 . Marsi also rated Jim and Michael 's conversation about Pam a 5 out of 5 . 
 = Cosas del Amor ( song ) = 
 " Cosas del Amor " ( " Things About Love " ) is a song by American recording artist Vikki Carr and Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Ana Gabriel . It was released as the lead single from Carr 's studio album Cosas del Amor ( 1991 ) . Written by Roberto Livi and Rudy Pérez , the song portrays the relationship between two friends and confidences between both due to marital problems of one of them . 
 The song became commercially successful when it reached the top of the Billboard Latin Songs chart , the first for Carr and the fifth number @-@ one single for Gabriel . " Cosas del Amor " has been widely covered by several artists including Ana Bárbara , Milly Quezada , Jenni Rivera , Olga Tañón , and Yuri , among others . The accompanying music video portrays Carr and Gabriel discussing the situation described in the song and witnessing a solar eclipse . The track earned awards such as a Lo Nuestro for Best Pop Song and the Single of the Year mention by the Radio y Música journal . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Cosas del Amor " was written by Roberto Livi and Rudy Pérez , performed by American singer Vikki Carr and included on the album of the same title , Carr 's fourteenth Spanish language studio album and thirty @-@ third overall . Carr was already a well known singer in the United States and the United Kingdom when she decided to record her first Spanish language album in 1972 , Vikki Carr , En Español . Thirteen years later Carr was awarded her first Grammy Award for Simplemente Mujer , an album recorded with mariachi and produced by Pedro Ramírez . Carr recorded Cosas del Amor under the guidance of Roberto Livi in 1991 , and was released a year after her duet album with Mexican singer Vicente Fernández which gave the singer her second top ten single in the Billboard Latin Songs chart with " Dos Corazones " ( " Two Hearts " ) peaking at number ten . The first single released was recorded in a duet with Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Ana Gabriel , who was also signed on Carr 's record label Sony Music . About singing in Spanish , Carr stated : " for business I 'm very American , but my heart is totally Latin . " 
 = = Chart performance and awards = = 
 The song debuted in the Billboard Top Latin Songs chart ( formerly Hot Latin Tracks ) chart at number 21 in the week of July 27 , 1991 , climbing to the top ten the following week . " Cosas del Amor " peaked at number @-@ one in August 31 , 1991 , replacing " Todo , Todo , Todo " by Mexican singer Daniela Romo and being succeeded ten weeks later by " Por Qué Será " by Venezuelan singer @-@ songwriter Rudy La Scala . During six consecutive weeks Ana Gabriel also held the runner @-@ up position on the chart with " Ahora " , the lead single from her studio album Mi México . " Cosas del Amor " ended 1991 as the fourth best performing Latin single of the year in the United States . The song became the fifth number @-@ one single for Gabriel following " Ay Amor " ( 1988 ) , " Simplemente Amigos " ( 1989 ) , " Quién Como Tú " and " Es <unk> Tarde " ( both 1990 ) , and the first ( and to date only ) for Carr . 
 " Cosas del Amor " earned a Lo Nuestro Award for Pop Song of the Year and was named Single of the Year by the journal Radio y Música . For the parent album Carr received a Grammy Award for Best Latin Performance and in Venezuela was awarded the " Album of the Year " ( the ' Grammy ' equivalent of the country ) . The album also peaked at number @-@ one in Ecuador , Colombia , Costa Rica , Puerto Rico , the Billboard Latin Pop Albums in the United States , and Venezuela . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Cosas del Amor " was filmed in Cuernavaca , Morelos on July 11 , 1991 , and presents Carr arriving at a house where Gabriel is waiting for her . Upon entering the house , Gabriel begins to discuss the situation described in the song . The video is interspersed with scenes of both singers performing the song and some scenes where they witness a solar eclipse . The video concludes with Carr comforting Gabriel for her love situation . The video received a Billboard Music Award nomination for Latin Duo or Group Video of the Year . 
 = = Legacy and cover versions = = 
 In November 1999 , " Cosas del Amor " was labeled as one of the " hottest tracks " for Sony Discos in a list including the most successful songs released by the label since the launching of the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart in 1986 . The song was also included in the compilation album Free to Be created by Jaime Ikeda and released by Right Stuff Records in order to create an all inclusive musical collection targeting the homosexual demographic . Only four Spanish language recorded songs were added to the album : " Tres <unk> " and " Lo Que Son Las Cosas " by Ednita Nazario , " Un Amor Como el <unk> " by Lunna , and " Cosas del Amor " . Argentinean duo Pimpinela recorded the song for their album Pimpinela ' 92 . Mexican singers Yuri and Ana Bárbara included their version on Yuri 's self @-@ titled album in 2004 . The song was performed live for the first time by the singers at the " <unk> " held in Acapulco , Mexico . José Feliciano and Rudy Pérez performed a duet on Feliciano 's album , José Feliciano y Amigos . 
 Puerto @-@ Rican American singer Olga Tañón recorded a cover version of the track on Éxitos en 2 Tiempos ( 2007 ) , the first album by <unk> to include covers of songs previously recorded by other artists . The song was performed in a duet with Dominican singer Milly Quezada for the pop version and with American singer Jenni Rivera for the Regional / Mexican version , and upon released as a single peaked at number 40 in the Billboard Latin Songs and at number 20 in the Latin Pop Songs chart , respectively . This version was nominated for Tropical Airplay Song of the Year , Female at the 2009 Latin Billboard Music Awards. which was ultimately won by Ivy Queen and " Dime " . Margarita Vargas " La <unk> de la Cumbia " ( " The Goddess of Cumbia " ) joined Mariana <unk> on a recording of " Cosas del Amor " included on <unk> 's fourth studio album Está de Fiesta ... <unk> ! ! ! ( 2007 ) . Mexican singers María José and Edith Márquez recorded " Cosas del Amor " for José 's studio album <unk> de lo <unk> in 2009 . Carr was awarded the Latin Recording Academy Lifetime Achievement Award at the 9th Latin Grammy Awards in 2008 . Carr attended the ceremony and performed " Cosas del Amor " with Olga Tañón and Jenni Rivera , in a presentation described as " boring " by Carlos Reyes of the magazine Club Fonograma . 
 = South Jordan , Utah = 
 South Jordan is a city in the U.S. state of Utah . The city lies in the Salt Lake Valley between the 9 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) peaks of the Oquirrh Mountains and the 12 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) peaks of the Wasatch Mountains and is part of the Salt Lake City metropolitan area . The Jordan River flows through the middle of the valley and the city has a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) section of the Jordan River Parkway that contains fishing ponds , trails , parks and natural habitat . Salt Lake County fair grounds and equestrian park , 67 @-@ acre ( 27 ha ) Oquirrh Lake and 27 other parks are located inside the city . As of the 2010 Census , its population was 50 @,@ 418 . 
 The city was founded 18 miles ( 29 km ) south of Salt Lake City along the banks of the Jordan River in 1859 by Mormon settlers . An agrarian town for most of its history , today it is a rapidly growing bedroom community of Salt Lake City . Kennecott Land , a land development company , has recently begun construction on the master @-@ planned Daybreak Community for the entire western half of South Jordan . Daybreak could potentially double South Jordan 's population . South Jordan is the first city in the world with two temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( Jordan River Utah Temple and Oquirrh Mountain Utah Temple ) . The city has two TRAX light rail stops , as well as one commuter rail stop on the FrontRunner . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ European = = = 
 The first known inhabitants were members of the Desert Archaic Culture who were nomadic hunter @-@ gatherers . From 400 A.D. to around 1350 A.D. , the Fremont people settled into villages and farmed corn and squash . Changes in climatic conditions to a cooler , drier period and the movement into the area of ancestors of the Ute , Paiute , and Shoshone , led to the disappearance of the Fremont people . When European settlers arrived , there were no permanent Native American settlements in the Salt Lake Valley , but the area bordered several tribes – the territory of the Northwestern Shoshone to the north , the <unk> band of the Utes to the south in Utah Valley , and the Goshutes to the west in Tooele Valley . 
 The only recorded trapper to lead a party through the area was Étienne Provost , a French Canadian . In October 1824 , Provost 's party was lured into an Indian camp somewhere along the Jordan River north of Utah Lake . The people responsible for the attack were planning revenge against Provost 's party for an earlier unexplained incident involving other trappers . Provost escaped , but his men were caught off @-@ guard and fifteen of them were killed . 
 = = = Early Mormon settlement = = = 
 On July 22 , 1847 , an advanced party of the first Mormon pioneers entered the valley and immediately began to irrigate land and explore the area with a view to establishing new settlements . Alexander Beckstead , a blacksmith from Ontario , Canada , moved his family to the West Jordan area in 1849 , and became the first of his trade in the south Salt Lake Valley . He helped dig the first ditch to divert water from the Jordan River , powering Archibald Gardner 's flour mill . In 1859 , Beckstead became the first settler of South Jordan by moving his family along the Jordan River where they lived in a dugout cut into the west bluffs above the river . The flood plain of the Jordan was level , and could be cleared for farming if a ditch was constructed to divert river water along the base of the west bluff . Beckstead and others created the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) " Beckstead Ditch " , parts of which are still in use as of 2010 . 
 In 1863 , the South Jordan LDS Branch was organized as a branch of the West Jordan Ward , giving South Jordan its name . The Branch consisted of just nine families . A school was built in 1864 out of adobe and also served as the LDS Meetinghouse for the South Jordan Branch . As South Jordan grew , a new and larger building was constructed in 1873 on the east side of the site of the present @-@ day cemetery . It had an upper and lower entrance with a granite foundation using left @-@ over materials brought from the granite quarry at the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon . The upper story was made of oversized adobe bricks . The main hall had curtains which could be pulled to section off the hall for classes . The meetinghouse also served as the " ward " school when it was held during the fall and winter months . It came to be known as the " Mud Temple " , and was in use until 1908 . 
 In 1876 , work was completed on the South Jordan Canal which took water out of the Jordan River in Bluffdale and brought it above the river bluffs for the first time . As a result of the new canal , most of the families moved up away from the river onto the " flats " above the river which they could now irrigate . In 1881 , the Utah and Salt Lake Canal was completed . It runs parallels to the west side of today 's Redwood Road . With the completion of the canal system , greater acreage could be farmed , which led to the area 's population increasing . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 In the late 1890s , alfalfa hay was introduced and took the place of tougher native grasses which had been used up to that point for feed for livestock . In good years , alfalfa could produce three crops that were stored for winter . Sugar beets were introduced to South Jordan around 1910 . Farmers liked sugar beets because they could be sold for cash at the Utah @-@ Idaho Sugar Company factory in West Jordan . Sugar beet farming became so integral to the region , that the region 's high school ( Jordan High School ) mascot was named the " <unk> " . 
 A big celebration was held on January 14 , 1914 , to commemorate the arrival of electrical power , the addition of a water tank and supply system for indoor pumping and a new park for South Jordan . By the 1930s , the area needed a water tank to store water for residents living further west . The only way to get a federal grant was to incorporate and become a city . Citizens voted to incorporate on November 8 , 1935 , and immediately issued bonds to obtain money for the water tank . The city was initially governed by a Town Board with responsibilities over parks , water and the cemetery . In 1978 , the city moved to a mayor @-@ council form of government and assumed local supervision of police , fire , road and building inspections from Salt Lake County . 
 One of the worst school bus accidents in United States history occurred on December 1 , 1938 . A bus loaded with 38 students from South Jordan , Riverton , and Bluffdale crossed in front of an oncoming train that was obscured by fog and snow . The bus was broadsided killing the bus driver and 23 students . The concern about bus safety from the South Jordan accident led to changes in state and eventually federal law mandating that buses stop and open the doors before proceeding into a railroad crossing . The same railroad crossing was the site of many other crashes in the following years with the last deadly crash occurring on December 31 , 1995 , when three teens died while crossing the tracks in their car . The crossing was finally closed , but not until crashes occurred in 1997 and 2002 . 
 In 1950 , Salt Lake County had 489 @,@ 000 acres ( 198 @,@ 000 ha ) devoted to farming . But by 1992 , due to increasing population , land devoted to farming had decreased to 108 @,@ 000 acres ( 44 @,@ 000 ha ) . As a result of this urbanization , South Jordan 's economy went from agrarian to being a bedroom community of Salt Lake City . Kennecott Land began a development in 2004 called Daybreak , which is a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) planned community that will contain more than 20 @,@ 000 homes and includes commercial and retail space . In 1981 , the LDS Jordan River Utah Temple was completed . In 2009 , the LDS Oquirrh Mountain Utah Temple was completed and became the second temple to be built in South Jordan . South Jordan is the first city in the world to have two LDS Temples , Oquirrh Mountain Utah Temple and the Jordan River Utah Temple , the second city being Provo , Utah . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 22 @.@ 1 square miles ( 57 km2 ) , of which , 0 @.@ 08 square miles ( 0 @.@ 21 km2 ) , 0 @.@ 34 percent , is water . South Jordan is located in the southwestern portion of the Salt Lake Valley . The city lies between the Oquirrh Mountains to the west , West Jordan to the north , the Jordan River and Sandy to the east , Draper to the southeast , Riverton to the south , and Herriman to the southwest . 
 The relative flatness of South Jordan is due to lacustrine sediments of a pleistocene lake called Lake Bonneville . Lake Bonneville existed from 75 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 years ago and its peak some 30 @,@ 000 years ago , the lake reached an elevation of 5 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) above sea level and had a surface area of 19 @,@ 800 square miles ( 51 @,@ 000 km2 ) . The elevation of South Jordan ranges from approximately 4 @,@ 300 feet ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) near the Jordan River in the east and rises gently to the foothills of the Oquirrh Mountains at 5 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) . A notable exception is a bluff at the western edge of the Daybreak Community which is an old sandbar of Lake Bonneville . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the 2010 census , there were 50 @,@ 418 people residing in 14 @,@ 333 households . The population density was 2 @,@ 278 people per square mile ( 880 / km ² ) . There were 14 @,@ 943 housing units at an average density of 675 @.@ 3 per square mile ( 260 @.@ 8 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 91 @.@ 5 % White , 0 @.@ 2 % African American , 0 @.@ 2 % Native American , 2 @.@ 6 % Asian , 0 @.@ 9 % Pacific Islander , and 2 @.@ 4 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6 @.@ 0 % of the population . The racial makeup of Salt Lake County was 81 @.@ 2 % White , 1 @.@ 6 % African American , 0 @.@ 9 % Native American , 3 @.@ 1 % Asian , 1 @.@ 4 % Pacific Islander , and 1 @.@ 9 % from two or more races . Hispanic of any race was 16 @.@ 4 % . The racial makeup of Utah was 92 @.@ 9 % White , 1 @.@ 3 % African American , 1 @.@ 4 % Native American , 3 @.@ 3 % Asian , 1 @.@ 5 % Pacific Islander , and 3 @.@ 1 % from two or more races . Hispanic of any race was 17 @.@ 1 % . 
 There were 14 @,@ 433 households out of which 46 @.@ 8 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 76 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 6 @.@ 6 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 14 @.@ 1 % were non @-@ families . 11 @.@ 0 % of all households were made up of individuals and 4 @.@ 3 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3 @.@ 83 compared to 2 @.@ 94 for Salt Lake County and 3 @.@ 03 for Utah . 
 In the city , the population was spread out with 37 @.@ 8 % under the age of 20 , 6 @.@ 0 % from 20 to 24 , 25 @.@ 3 % from 25 to 44 , 21 @.@ 7 % from 45 to 64 , and 7 @.@ 1 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 29 @.@ 9 years . For every 100 females there were 100 @.@ 4 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 97 @.@ 3 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 91 @,@ 199 , Salt Lake County was $ 58 @,@ 004 and Utah was $ 56 @,@ 330 . Males had a median income of $ 65 @,@ 722 versus $ 41 @,@ 171 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 28 @,@ 387 . About 1 @.@ 6 % of families and 2 @.@ 7 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 2 @.@ 7 % of those under age 18 and 2 @.@ 4 % of those age 65 or over . In Salt Lake County , 10 @.@ 3 % of the population were below the poverty line and 10 @.@ 8 % of the population in Utah was below the poverty line . Of those people 25 years and older in the city , 96 @.@ 8 % were high school graduates compared to 86 @.@ 8 % in Salt Lake County and 87 @.@ 7 % in Utah . Those attaining a college degree were 36 @.@ 4 % of South Jordan 's population . 
 There were 22 @,@ 368 people employed over the age of 16 with 17 @,@ 258 people working in the private sector , 2 @,@ 744 in the government sector , 1 @,@ 186 self @-@ employed and 32 unpaid family workers . The mean travel time to work of 23 @.@ 8 minutes . There were 4 @,@ 153 people employed in educational services , health care and social assistance . There were 2 @,@ 862 people employed in professional , scientific , management , administrative and waste management services . There were 2 @,@ 420 people employed in finance , insurance , real estate and rental and leasing . There were 2 @,@ 316 people employed in retail trade , 1 @,@ 633 in construction and 2 @,@ 050 in manufacturing . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 For the year 2010 , the city had 27 violent crimes reported to law enforcement , and 1 @,@ 050 reports of property crimes . The violent crime rate was 48 per 100 @,@ 000 people compared to a national average of 404 and 213 for Utah . The property crime rate was 1 @,@ 858 per 100 @,@ 000 compared to a national rate of 2 @,@ 942 and 3 @,@ 180 for the State . The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) defines violent offenses to include forcible rape , robbery , murder , non @-@ negligent manslaughter , and aggravated assault . Property crimes are defined to include arson , motor vehicle theft , larceny , and burglary . 
 Statistics published by the Utah Department of Public Safety 's Bureau of Criminal Identification showed a steady trend in the South Jordan crime rate between 2000 and 2008 . The rate for index crimes , a group comprising the combined violent offenses and property crimes stated above , was 2 @,@ 269 per 100 @,@ 000 in 2000 and 2 @,@ 277 per 100 @,@ 000 in 2008 . The 2008 rate for index crimes in Salt Lake County was 5 @,@ 290 per 100 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 529 per 100 @,@ 000 for the entire State of Utah . 
 In 2010 , South Jordan had a total of 57 total law enforcement employees for a rate of 1 @.@ 13 employees per 1 @,@ 000 residents . City police officers made a total of 910 arrests . Total crimes reported were 3 @,@ 810 . Total crimes contain 22 categories that include everything from murder , rape and assault to drug offenses , larceny and prostitution . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 The city has 27 municipal parks and playgrounds ranging in size from 0 @.@ 39 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 16 ha ) Bolton Park in the north @-@ west part of the city to the 59 @-@ acre ( 24 ha ) Riverfront Park along the Jordan River and the 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) City Park along Redwood Road . City Park includes baseball and softball fields , football , soccer , and lacrosse fields , volleyball courts , tennis courts and a skate park . Riverfront Park includes two fishing ponds stocked with rainbow trout and catfish by the Division of Wildlife Resources and 22 acres ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) of natural habitat . Other recreational facilities owned by South Jordan City include the Aquatic and Fitness center , Community Center providing the senior programs , Mulligan 's two miniature golf and two nine @-@ hole executive golf <unk> and an outdoor ice skating rink next to City Hall . 
 Two trails meander through South Jordan . The Bingham Creek Trail starts in the northwest part of the city and travels 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) North @-@ East until it reaches the West Jordan border . A 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) section of the Jordan River Parkway trail runs through the city from northern edge of the city all the way to the southern edge . The trail has a combined bike and jogging path , plus an equestrian path . 
 Salt Lake County operates the 120 @-@ acre ( 49 ha ) Equestrian Park that sits adjacent to South Jordan City Park . The park grounds contain a horse racing track , a polo and dressage field , indoor arenas and stables . The Salt Lake County Fair is held every August at the park . 
 The 67 @-@ acre ( 27 ha ) Oquirrh Lake sits inside 137 acres ( 55 ha ) of park and wetlands located at the Daybreak Community . Recreational opportunities include fishing , sail boating , kayaking and canoeing . The lake has been stocked with trout , <unk> bass , channel catfish , bluegill , and fathead minnows . Of the fish they catch , anglers can only keep trout . The lake and the surrounding park land are privately owned , but open to the public , with future plans to turn it over to South Jordan City . In addition to the lake , the Daybreak community includes 22 miles ( 35 km ) of trails , community gardens , tennis courts , basketball courts , pocket parks and community @-@ only swimming pools . 
 Privately owned , but open to the public , <unk> Golf course is inside city limits . Salt Lake County @-@ owned Mountain View Golf Course is 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) north in West Jordan and Sandy @-@ owned River Oaks Golf Course borders the Jordan River in Sandy . 
 = = Government = = 
 South Jordan has a council @-@ manager form of government . The council , the city 's legislative body , consists of five members and a mayor , each serving a four @-@ year term . The council sets policy , and the city manager oversees day @-@ to @-@ day operations . The current mayor is David L. Alvord . The city council meets the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6 : 00 PM . 
 Mia Love , a Republican , represents South Jordan as part of Utah 's 4th congressional district of the United States House of Representatives . Aaron Osmond , a Republican , represents South Jordan as part of the 10th Utah Senate District in the Utah Senate and has announced he will step down in December , 2015 . Rich Cunningham , a Republican , represents South Jordan as part of 50th Utah House District of the Utah House of Representatives and is hoping to replace Osmond in the Senate . 
 = = Education = = 
 South Jordan lies within Jordan School District . The district has six elementary schools , two middle schools ( South Jordan Middle and Elk Ridge Middle ) and four high schools ( Bingham High School , Herriman High School , <unk> Early College High School and Valley High ( an alternative school ) ) serving the students of South Jordan . In addition , there is Paradigm public charter high school , Early Light Academy public charter elementary and three private schools ( American Heritage , Mountain Heritage Academy and Stillwater Academy ) . 
 Salt Lake Community College 's Jordan Campus is located on the boundary between of South Jordan and West Jordan . The Jordan Campus offers general education classes as well as all of the college 's health science courses . Jordan School District 's Applied Technology Center and <unk> Early College High School are also located on campus . Salt Lake Community College 's Miller Campus is located in Sandy next to the border with South Jordan and is home to the college 's Culinary Institute , Miller Business Resource Center for corporate training programs , and training facilities for the Utah Department of Public Safety . The private university in South Jordan is the Roseman University of Health Sciences , which houses schools of pharmacy , dentistry , and an online accelerated nursing program . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Interstate 15 , a twelve @-@ lane freeway , is located on the eastern edge of the city and provides two interchanges inside city limits at 10600 South and 11400 South . Bangerter Highway ( State Route 154 ) , a six @-@ lane expressway , traverses the center of the city with interchanges at 9800 South , <unk> South and 11400 South . The Mountain View Corridor , an eventual ten @-@ lane freeway , is located on the western edge of the Daybreak Community . 
 South Jordan is served by the Utah Transit Authority ( UTA ) bus system and UTA 's TRAX light rail Red Line . The Red Line connects the TRAX line running to downtown Salt Lake City and the University of Utah . Two TRAX stations , with park and ride lots , are located inside the Daybreak Community . The Daybreak North Station is located at approximately 10600 South and has 400 shared park and ride spaces . The Daybreak South Station is located at 11400 South and has 600 park and ride spaces . Two other stations are located inside West Jordan at the city boundary with South Jordan , the 5600 West Station and the 4800 West Station . The travel time between the Daybreak South Station to downtown Salt Lake City is approximately 60 minutes . 
 UTA 's FrontRunner commuter rail system has a station at South Jordan 's eastern edge at <unk> South . The FrontRunner extends north to Pleasant View and south to Provo . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Electric service to South Jordan residents is provided by Rocky Mountain Power . Natural gas service is provided by <unk> Corporation . Qwest Communications handles local telephone service ; long @-@ distance service is available from several providers . Comcast and Qwest both offer high @-@ speed Internet connections . 
 South Jordan city owns the water distribution system . Drinking water is provided by Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District . Secondary water , a non @-@ potable water used for landscaping , is provided from the canals running through the city . South Valley Sewer District owns and bills for the sewer system . South Jordan City contracts out to Allied Waste Industries for curbside pickup of household garbage ; recyclables are picked up once a week . 
 The Intermountain Riverton Hospital , owned by Intermountain Healthcare , is a 58 @-@ bed , full @-@ service hospital in Riverton that also includes a satellite facility for Primary Children 's Medical Center . Jordan Valley Medical Center , owned by <unk> Healthcare , is a 183 @-@ bed , full @-@ service hospital located in West Jordan . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Principal employers = = = 
 According to South Jordan 's 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report , the principal employers in the city are : 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Current resident Apolo Anton Ohno was a short track speed skating athlete . Ohno is the most decorated American Winter Olympic athlete of all time with eight medals . Current resident Edward J. <unk> is a sculptor of western themes and inventor . <unk> invented technology used in Automatic dependent surveillance @-@ broadcast ( ADS @-@ B ) . ADS @-@ B is used for tracking and finding aircraft positions using satellites . <unk> player Star <unk> also lives in south Jordan . <unk> Curtis is a former resident who , as of 2010 , is a wide receiver for the NFL Kansas City Chiefs . Curtis graduated from Bingham High School where he played football and basketball . Denise Parker is a former resident who is a three time Summer Olympic competitor in Archery . Parker was the youngest member of the 1988 U.S Summer Olympic team at age 14 where she won a bronze medal . As of 2010 , Parker is Chief Executive Officer for USA Archery , the national governing body for the sport of archery . 
 Current resident Samantha Gordon is a girl football player whose highlight video of her football season was viewed 5 million times in just three days . She is the first female football player to make the cover of the Wheaties box . She had been interviewed on Good Morning America , ESPN 's Sports Center , Katie Couric , Conan O 'Brien , Steve Harvey , Fox and friends , and more . Sam was also in a NFL commercial and a Super Bowl commercial and was invited to the Super Bowl by NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell . In South Jordan December 18 is Sam Gordon Day . 
 = Subwoofer = 
 A subwoofer ( or sub ) is a woofer , or a complete loudspeaker , which is dedicated to the reproduction of low @-@ pitched audio frequencies known as bass . The typical frequency range for a subwoofer is about 20 – 60 Hz for consumer products , below 100 Hz for professional live sound , and below 80 Hz in THX @-@ approved systems . Subwoofers are intended to augment the low frequency range of loudspeakers covering higher frequency bands . 
 Subwoofers are made up of one or more woofers mounted in a loudspeaker enclosure — often made of wood — capable of withstanding air pressure while resisting deformation . Subwoofer enclosures come in a variety of designs , including bass reflex ( with a port or passive radiator in the enclosure ) , infinite baffle , horn @-@ loaded , and bandpass designs , representing unique tradeoffs with respect to efficiency , bandwidth , size and cost . Passive subwoofers have a subwoofer driver and enclosure and they are powered by an external amplifier . Active subwoofers include a built @-@ in amplifier . 
 The first subwoofers were developed in the 1960s to add bass response to home stereo systems . Subwoofers came into greater popular consciousness in the 1970s with the introduction of Sensurround in movies such as Earthquake , which produced loud low @-@ frequency sounds through large subwoofers . With the advent of the compact cassette and the compact disc in the 1980s , the easy reproduction of deep and loud bass was no longer limited by the ability of a phonograph record stylus to track a groove , and producers could add more low frequency content to recordings . As well , during the 1990s , DVDs were increasingly recorded with " surround sound " processes that included a Low @-@ frequency effects ( <unk> ) channel , which could be heard using the subwoofer in home theater systems . During the 1990s , subwoofers also became increasingly popular in home stereo systems , custom car audio installations , and in PA systems . By the 2000s , subwoofers became almost universal in sound reinforcement systems in nightclubs and concert venues . 
 = = History = = 
 In September 1964 Raymon Dones , of El Cerrito , CA , received a US Patent ( numbered <unk> ) which was the first for a subwoofer specifically designed to omni @-@ directionally augment the low frequency range of modern stereo systems . Able to reproduce distortion @-@ free low frequencies down to 15 cycles per second , a specific objective of Dones ’ invention was to provide portable sound enclosures which provide for high fidelity reproduction of @-@ low frequency sound waves without giving an audible indication of the portion of the room from which they emanate . Dones ' loudspeaker was marketed in the US under the trade name " The Octavium " from the early 60s to the mid @-@ 1970s . The Octavium was utilized by several recording artists of that era , most notably the Grateful Dead , bassist Monk Montgomery , bassist Nathan East , and the Pointer Sisters . The Octavium speaker and Dones ' subwoofer technology was also utilized , in a few select theaters , to reproduce low pitch frequencies for the 1974 blockbuster movie " Earthquake " . During the late 1960s Dones ’ Octavium was favorably reviewed by audiophile publications including Hi @-@ Fi News and Audio Magazine . 
 Another early subwoofer enclosure made for home and studio use was the separate bass speaker for the Servo Statik 1 , by New Technology Enterprises . Designed as a prototype in 1966 by physicist Arnold <unk> and airline pilot Cary Christie in <unk> 's garage , the design used a second winding around a custom <unk> Vega 18 @-@ inch ( 45 cm ) driver to provide servo control information to the amplifier , and it was offered for sale at $ 1795 , some 40 % more expensive than any other complete loudspeaker listed at Stereo Review . In 1968 , the two found outside investment and reorganized as Infinity . The subwoofer was reviewed positively in Stereophile magazine 's Winter 1968 issue as the SS @-@ 1 by Infinity . The SS @-@ 1 was reviewed very highly in 1970 by High Fidelity magazine . 
 One of the first subwoofers was developed during the late 1960s by Ken Kreisel , the former president of the Miller & Kreisel Sound Corporation in Los Angeles . When Kreisel 's business partner , Jonas Miller , who owned a high @-@ end audio store in Los Angeles , told Kreisel that some purchasers of the store 's high @-@ end electrostatic speakers had complained about a lack of bass response in the electrostatics , Kreisel designed a powered woofer that would reproduce only those frequencies that were too low for the electrostatic speakers to convey . Infinity 's full range electrostatic speaker system that was developed during the 1960s also used a woofer to cover the lower frequency range that its electrostatic arrays did not handle adequately . 
 The first use of a subwoofer in a recording session was in 1973 for mixing the Steely Dan album Pretzel Logic when recording engineer Roger Nichols arranged for Kreisel to bring a prototype of his subwoofer to Village Recorders . Further design modifications were made by Kreisel over the next ten years , and in the 1970s and 1980s by engineer John P. D 'Arcy ; record producer Daniel Levitin served as a consultant and " golden ears " for the design of the crossover network ( used to partition the frequency spectrum so that the subwoofer would not attempt to reproduce frequencies too high for its effective range , and so that the main speakers would not need to handle frequencies too low for their effective range ) . 
 Subwoofers received a great deal of publicity in 1974 with the movie Earthquake which was released in Sensurround . Initially installed in 17 U.S. theaters , the Sensurround system used large subwoofers which were driven by racks of 500 watt amplifiers which were triggered by control tones printed on one of the audio tracks on the film . Four of the subwoofers were positioned in front of the audience under ( or behind ) the film screen and two more were placed together at the rear of the audience on a platform . Powerful noise energy in the range of 17 Hz to 120 Hz was generated at the level of 110 – 120 decibels of sound pressure level , abbreviated dB ( SPL ) . The new low frequency entertainment method helped the film become a box office success . More Sensurround systems were assembled and installed . By 1976 there were almost 300 Sensurround systems leapfrogging through select theaters . Other films to use the effect include the WW II naval battle epic Midway in 1976 and Rollercoaster in 1977 . Deep @-@ Bass speakers were once an exotic commodity and are now much more popular with different sizes and capabilities of sound output . 
 For owners of 33 rpm LPs and 45 singles , loud and deep bass was limited by the ability of the phonograph record stylus to track the groove . Some hi @-@ fi aficionados solved the problem by using reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape players which were capable of delivering accurate , naturally deep bass from acoustic sources , or synthetic bass not found in nature . With the popular introduction of the compact cassette and the CD , it became possible to add more low frequency content to recordings , and satisfy a larger number of consumers . Home subwoofers grew in popularity , as they were easy to add to existing multimedia speaker setups and they were easy to position or hide . 
 = = Construction and features = = 
 = = = Loudspeaker and enclosure design = = = 
 Subwoofers use speaker drivers ( woofers ) typically between 8 " ( 20 cm ) and 21 " ( 53 cm ) in diameter . Some uncommon subwoofers use larger drivers , and single prototype subwoofers as large as 60 " ( 152 cm ) have been fabricated . On the smaller end of the spectrum , subwoofer drivers as small as 4 " ( 10 cm ) may be used , depending on the design of the loudspeaker enclosure , the desired sound pressure level , the lowest frequency targeted and the level of permitted distortion . The most common subwoofer driver sizes used for sound reinforcement are 10 " , 12 " , 15 " and 18 " models ( 25 cm , 30 cm , 40 cm , and 45 cm respectively ) . The largest available sound reinforcement subwoofers , 21 " ( 53 cm ) drivers , are less commonly seen . 
 The efficiency of a speaker driver is given by : 
 <formula> 
 Where the variables are Thiele / Small parameters . Deep low frequency extension is a common goal for a subwoofer and small box volumes are also considered desirable . Hofmann 's Iron Law therefore mandates low efficiency under those constraints , and indeed most subwoofers require considerable power , much more than other individual drivers . 
 So for the example of a sealed speaker box , the box volume to achieve a given <unk> is proportional to Vas : 
 <formula> Where : <formula> 
 Therefore , a decrease in box volume and the same F3 will decrease the efficiency of the sub woofer . Similarly the F3 of a speaker is proportional to Fs : 
 <formula> 
 As the efficiency is proportional to <unk> , small improvements in low frequency extension with the same driver and box volume will result in very significant reductions in efficiency . For these reasons , subwoofers are typically very inefficient at converting electrical energy into sound energy . This combination of factors accounts for the higher power output of subwoofer amplifiers , and the requirement for greater power handling for subwoofer drivers . Enclosure variations ( e.g. , bass reflex designs ) are sometimes used for subwoofers to increase the efficiency of the driver / enclosure system , helping to reduce the amplifier power requirement . 
 Subwoofers have been designed using a number of enclosure approaches : bass reflex , acoustic suspension , infinite baffle , horn loaded , tapped horn , transmission line and bandpass . Each enclosure type has advantages and disadvantages in efficiency increase , bass extension , cabinet size , distortion , and cost . Subwoofers are typically constructed by mounting one or more woofers in a cabinet of medium @-@ density fibreboard ( MDF ) , oriented strand board ( OSB ) , plywood , fiberglass , aluminum or other stiff materials . Because of the high air pressure they produce in the cabinet , subwoofer enclosures often require internal bracing to distribute the resulting forces . 
 The smallest subwoofers are typically those designed for desktop multimedia systems . The largest common subwoofer enclosures are those used for concert sound reinforcement systems or dance club sound systems . An example of a large concert subwoofer enclosure is the 1980s @-@ era <unk> MT @-@ 4 " Bass Cube " system , which used four 18 " ( 45 cm ) drivers . An example of a subwoofer that uses a bass horn is the <unk> B @-@ Two , which loads an 18 " ( 45 cm ) driver onto an 11 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) long folded horn . Folded horn @-@ type subwoofers can typically produce a deeper range with greater efficiency than the same driver in an enclosure that lacks a horn . Some experimental fixed @-@ installation subwoofer horns have been constructed using brick and concrete to produce a very long horn that allows a very deep sub @-@ bass extension . 
 Subwoofer output level can be increased by increasing cone surface area or by increasing cone excursion . Since large drivers require undesirably large cabinets , most subwoofer drivers have large excursions . Unfortunately , high excursion , at high power levels , tends to produce more distortion from inherent mechanical and magnetic effects in electro @-@ dynamic drivers ( the most common sort ) . The conflict between assorted goals can never be fully resolved ; subwoofer designs are necessarily compromises . <unk> 's Iron Law ( the efficiency of a woofer system is directly proportional to its cabinet volume and to the cube of its cutoff frequency ) applies to subwoofers just as to all loudspeakers . 
 = = = Frequency range and frequency response = = = 
 The frequency response specification of a speaker describes the range of frequencies or musical tones a speaker can reproduce , measured in hertz ( Hz ) . The typical frequency range for a subwoofer is between 20 – 200 Hz . Professional concert sound system subwoofers typically operate below 100 Hz , and THX @-@ approved systems operate below 80 Hz . Subwoofers vary in terms of the range of pitches that they can reproduce , depending on a number of factors such as the size of the cabinet and the construction and design of the enclosure and driver ( s ) . Specifications of frequency response depend wholly for relevance on an accompanying amplitude value — measurements taken with a wider amplitude tolerance will give any loudspeaker a wider frequency response . For example , the JBL <unk> <unk> Subwoofer System , a now @-@ discontinued system which was designed for movie theaters , had a frequency response of 23 – 350 Hz when measured within a 10 @-@ decibel boundary ( 0 dB to -10 dB ) and a narrower frequency response of 28 – 120 Hz when measured within a six @-@ decibel boundary ( ± 3 dB ) . 
 Subwoofers also vary in regard to the sound pressure levels achievable and the distortion levels they can produce over their range . Some subwoofers , such as " The Abyss " by <unk> for example can reproduce pitches down to around 18 Hz ( which is about the pitch of the lowest rumbling notes on a huge pipe organ with 32 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) <unk> Hz @-@ bass pipes ) to 120 Hz ( ± 3 dB ) . Nevertheless , even though the Abyss subwoofer can go down to 18 Hz , its lowest frequency and maximum SPL with a limit of 10 % distortion is 35 @.@ 5 Hz and 79 @.@ 8 dB at 2 meters . This means that a person choosing a subwoofer needs to consider more than just the lowest pitch that the sub can reproduce . 
 = = = Amplification = = = 
 <unk> subwoofers ' include their own dedicated amplifiers within the cabinet . Some also include user @-@ adjustable equalization that allows boosted or reduced output at particular frequencies ; these vary from a simple " boost " switch , to fully parametric equalizers meant for detailed speaker and room correction . Some such systems are even supplied with a calibrated microphone to measure the subwoofer 's in @-@ room response , so the automatic equalizer can correct the combination of subwoofer , subwoofer location , and room response to minimize effects of room modes and improve low frequency performance . 
 <unk> subwoofers ' have a subwoofer driver and enclosure , but they do not include an amplifier . They sometimes incorporate internal passive crossovers , with the filter frequency determined at the factory . These are generally used with third @-@ party power amplifiers , taking their inputs from active crossovers earlier in the signal chain . Inexpensive Home Theatre in a Box packages often come with a passive subwoofer cabinet that is amplified by the multi @-@ channel amplifier . While few high @-@ end home @-@ theater systems use passive subwoofers , this format is still popular in the professional sound industry . 
 = = = Equalization = = = 
 Equalization can be used to adjust the in @-@ room response of a subwoofer system . Designers of active subwoofers sometimes include a degree of corrective equalization to compensate for known performance issues ( e.g. , a steeper than desired low end roll @-@ off rate ) . In addition , many amplifiers include an adjustable low @-@ pass filter , which prevents undesired higher frequencies from reaching the subwoofer driver . For example , if a listener 's main speakers are usable down to 80 Hz , then the subwoofer filter can be set so the subwoofer only works below 80 . Typical filters involve some overlap in frequency ranges ; a steep filter is not generally desired for subwoofers . The crossover section may also include a high @-@ pass " infrasonic " or " subsonic " filter which prevents the subwoofer driver from attempting to reproduce frequencies below its safe capabilities . 
 Some systems use parametric equalization in an attempt to correct for room frequency response irregularities . Equalization is often unable to achieve flat frequency response at all listening locations in part because of the resonance ( i.e. , standing wave ) patterns at low frequencies in nearly all rooms . Careful positioning of the subwoofer within the room can also help flatten the frequency response . Multiple subwoofers can manage a flatter general response since they can often be arranged to excite room modes more evenly than a single subwoofer , allowing equalization to be more effective . 
 = = = Phase control = = = 
 Changing the relative phase of the subwoofer with respect to the woofers in other speakers may or may not help to minimize unwanted destructive acoustic interference in the frequency region covered by both subwoofer and main speakers . It may not help at all frequencies , and may create further problems with frequency response , but is even so generally provided as an adjustment for subwoofer amplifiers . Phase control circuits may be a simple polarity reversal switch or a more complex continuously variable circuits . 
 Continuously variable phase control circuits are common in subwoofer amplifiers , and may be found in crossovers and as do @-@ it @-@ yourself electronics projects . Phase controls allow the listener to change the arrival time of the subwoofer sound waves relative to the same frequencies from the main speakers ( i.e. , at and around the crossover point to the subwoofer ) . A similar effect can be achieved with the delay control on many home theater receivers . The subwoofer phase control found on many subwoofer amplifiers is actually a polarity inversion switch . It allows users to reverse the polarity of the subwoofer relative to the audio signal it is being given . This type of control allows the subwoofer to either be in phase with the source signal , or 180 degrees out of phase . 
 The subwoofer phase can still be changed by moving the subwoofer closer to or further from the listening position , however this may not be always practical . 
 = = = Servo subwoofers = = = 
 Some active subwoofers use a servo feedback mechanism based on cone movement which modifies the signal sent to the voice coil . The servo feedback signal is derived from a comparison of the input signal to the amplifier versus the actual motion of the cone . The usual source of the feedback signal is a few turns of voice coil attached to the cone or a microchip @-@ based accelerometer placed on the cone itself . An advantage of a well @-@ implemented servo subwoofer design is reduced distortion making smaller enclosure sizes possible . The primary disadvantages are cost and complexity . 
 Servo controlled subwoofers are not the same as <unk> subwoofers whose primary mechanism of sound reproduction avoids the normal voice coil and magnet combination in favor of a high @-@ speed belt @-@ driven servomotor . The <unk> design increases output power , reduces harmonic distortion and virtually eliminates the loss of loudspeaker output that results from an increase in voice coil impedance due to overheating of the voice coil ( called power compression . ) This feature allows high power operation for extended periods of time . <unk> was nominated for a TEC Award for its Servo Drive Loudspeaker ( SDL ) design in 1986 and for the Bass Tech 7 model in 1990 . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Home audio = = = 
 The use of a subwoofer augments the bass capability of the main speakers , and allows them to be smaller without sacrificing low frequency capability . A subwoofer does not necessarily provide superior bass performance in comparison to large conventional loudspeakers on ordinary music recordings due to the typical lack of very low frequency content on such sources . However , there are recordings with substantial low frequency content that most conventional loudspeakers are ill @-@ equipped to handle without the help of a subwoofer , especially at high playback levels , such as music for pipe organs with 32 ' ( 9 @.@ 75 meter ) bass pipes ( 16 Hz ) , very large bass drums on symphony orchestra recordings and electronic music with extremely low synth bass parts , such as bass tests or bass songs . 
 Frequencies which are sufficiently low are not easily localized by humans , hence many stereo and multichannel audio systems feature only one subwoofer channel and a single subwoofer can be placed off @-@ center without affecting the perceived sound stage , since the sound produced will be difficult to localize . The intention in a system with a subwoofer is often to use small main speakers ( of which there are two for stereo and five or more for surround sound or movie tracks ) and to hide the subwoofer elsewhere ( e.g. behind furniture or under a table ) , or to augment an existing speaker to save it from having to handle woofer @-@ destroying low frequencies at high levels . This effect is possible only if the subwoofer is restricted to quite low frequencies , usually taken to , say , 100 Hz and below — still less localization is possible if restricted to even lower maximum frequencies . Higher upper limits for the subwoofer ( e.g. , 125 Hz ) are much more easily localized , making a single subwoofer impractical . 
 Some users add a subwoofer because high levels of low bass are desired , even beyond what is in the original recording , as in the case of house music enthusiasts . Thus , subwoofers may be part of a package that includes satellite speakers , may be purchased separately , or may be built into the same cabinet as a conventional speaker system . For instance , some floor standing tower speakers include a subwoofer driver in the lower portion of the same cabinet . Physical separation of subwoofer and " satellite " speakers not only allows placement in an inconspicuous location , but since sub @-@ bass frequencies are particularly sensitive to room location ( due to room resonances and reverberation ' modes ' ) , the best position for the subwoofer is not likely to be where the " satellite " speakers are located . 
 For greatest efficiency and best coupling to the room 's air volume , subwoofers can be placed in a corner of the room , far from large room openings , and closer to the listener . This is possible since low bass frequencies have a long wavelength ; hence there is little difference between the information reaching a listener 's left and right ears , and so they cannot be readily localized . All low frequency information is sent to the subwoofer . However , unless the sound tracks have been carefully mixed for a single subwoofer channel , it 's possible to have some cancellation of low frequencies if bass information in one channel is out of phase with another . 
 The physically separate subwoofer / satellite arrangement has been popularized by multimedia speaker systems such as Bose <unk> Home Entertainment Systems , Polk Audio <unk> Series and Klipsch Audio Technologies <unk> , among many others . Low @-@ cost " home theater in a box " systems advertise their integration and simplicity . 
 Particularly among low cost " Home Theater in a Box " systems and with " boom boxes " , however , inclusion of a subwoofer may be little more than a marketing device . It is unlikely that a small woofer in an inexpensively @-@ built compact plastic cabinet will have better bass performance than well @-@ designed conventional ( and typically larger ) speakers in a plywood or MDF cabinet . Mere use of the term " subwoofer " is no guarantee of good or extended bass performance . Many multimedia " subwoofers " might better be termed " bass drivers " as they are too small to produce deep bass . 
 Further , poorly designed systems often leave everything below about 120 Hz ( or even higher ) to the subwoofer , meaning that the subwoofer handles frequencies which the ear can use for sound source localization , thus introducing an undesirable subwoofer " localization effect " . This is usually due to poor crossover designs or choices ( too high crossover point or insufficient crossover slope ) used in many computer and home theater systems ; localization also comes from port noise and from typically large amounts of harmonic distortion in the subwoofer design . Home subwoofers sold individually usually include crossover circuitry to assist integration into an existing system . 
 = = = Car audio = = = 
 Automobiles are not well suited for the " hidden " subwoofer approach due to space limitations in the passenger compartments . It is not possible , in most circumstances , to fit such large drivers and enclosures into doors or dashboards , so subwoofers are installed in the trunk or back seat space . Some car audio enthusiasts compete to produce very high sound pressure levels in the confines of their vehicle 's cabin ; sometimes dangerously high . The " SPL wars " have drawn much attention to subwoofers in general , but subjective competitions in sound quality ( " SQ " ) have not gained equivalent popularity . Top SPL cars are not able to play normal music , or perhaps even to drive normally as they are designed solely for competition . Many non @-@ competition subwoofers are also capable of generating high levels in cars due to the small volume of a typical car interior . High sound levels can cause hearing loss and tinnitus if one is exposed to them for an extended period of time . 
