 = = Myths and misconceptions = = 
 Stroheim was known to exaggerate events from his life and create myths about himself , such as his fictitious aristocratic origins and military record in Austria . He claimed that shortly after having moved to the US in the early 1910s , he had found a copy of McTeague in a motel in New York and had read it in one sitting . He also said that wanting to adapt the book inspired him to make a career in filmmaking . Georges Sadoul later stated that Stroheim had first read the novel in 1914 , while living in poverty in Los Angeles . 
 Claims that Stroheim 's original cut was a completely unabridged version of McTeague are not accurate . Stroheim 's 300 @-@ page script was almost as long as the original novel , but he rethought the entire story and invented new scenes , as well as extensively elaborating existing ones . In the Norris novel , McTeague 's back story in Placer County and relationships with his father , mother and Potter were remembered as a flashback and took two paragraphs . In Stroheim 's original Greed , this sequence took up the first hour of the film and was not a flashback . Stroheim also modernized the novel 's time span to between 1908 and 1923 , a quarter @-@ century later than the novel . 
 Greed has sometimes been said to be over 100 reels long . Stroheim said that his initial edit was 42 reels , although several of the people who saw this cut remembered it as being anywhere from 42 to 47 reels . Grant Whytock remembered the edited version that Stroheim initially sent to him as between 26 and 28 reels . MGM 's official studio files list the original cut of the film at 22 reels . As recently as 1992 , former MGM Story Editor Samuel Marx erroneously claimed that the original version of Greed was 70 reels . 
 June Mathis is credited with co @-@ writing the script due to her work on the 10 @-@ reel version . Mathis was the head of the Story Department at MGM and her contract stipulated that she would receive writing credit for all MGM films . She did not actually write any part of the screenplay . She is also said to have changed its title from McTeague to Greed during post @-@ production ; however , a publicity still of the cast and crew taken during production clearly indicates that it was titled Greed before the MGM merger even took place . The film 's working title was " Greedy Wives , " a joke on Stroheim 's previous film Foolish Wives ; this working title was never considered as the film 's actual title . 
 The original version of Greed has been called the " holy grail " for film archivists . Various reports of the original version proved to be unfounded . Among these " sightings " are a claim that a copy existed in a vault in South America that was only screened once a year for invited guests on New Year 's Eve . Another claim was that a copy in the possession of a Texan millionaire was sold to Henri Langlois of Cinémathèque Française . Other claims include that a film society in Boston held a private screening of a print found by a World War II veteran in Berlin from a tip by Emil Jannings , that David Shepherd of the American Film Institute had found a copy at a garage sale , and that the head of a film society in Redwood City , California , owned " the longest existing version of Greed ( purchased in Europe ) . " Stroheim himself once stated that Benito Mussolini owned a personal copy of the film . Stroheim 's son Joseph von Stroheim once claimed that when he was in the Army during World War II , he saw a version of the film that took two nights to fully screen , although he could not remember exactly how long it was . 
 There were also reports that MGM had retained a copy of the original version . Iris Barry of the Museum of Modern Art claimed that a copy was locked in the MGM vaults , although Thalberg denied it . It was also reported that John Houseman had a private screening at MGM and that MGM owned two copies stored in a vault in a Utah salt mine . Lotte Eisner once claimed that in the 1950s and 1960s , several cans of films labeled " McTeague " were found in MGM 's vaults and destroyed by executives who did not know that it was footage from Greed . MGM executive Al Lewin said that several years after the film 's release Stroheim asked him for the cut footage . Lewin and editor Margaret Booth searched MGM 's vault but could not find any missing footage . 
 = BabyFirst = 
 BabyFirst is a media company that produces and distributes content for babies through television , the internet and mobile apps . The content is intended to develop a baby 's skills , such as color recognition , counting and vocabulary . There are about 90 BabyFirst TV shows and 41 apps for mobile devices . As of 2014 , the network is distributed to 81 million homes , and is based in Los Angeles , California . 
 BabyFirst was founded in 2004 by Guy Oranim and Sharon <unk> . Its first broadcast was through DirecTV in 2006 . It was founded by Regency Enterprises , <unk> , and <unk> Capital . Distribution expanded through agreements with the <unk> Dish Network , Comcast , AT & T U @-@ verse and others . It also developed a premium BabyFirst YouTube channel , and mobile apps . One app developed with AT & T U @-@ verse allows babies to interact with the television programming by drawing on a mobile device . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 BabyFirst was founded in 2004 by Guy Oranim and Sharon <unk> . The network was launched on May 11 , 2006 on DirecTV and was later made available through EchoStar 's Dish Network that June . It was made available through EchoStar 's Dish Network that June . The BabyFirst network is based in Los Angeles and was initially funded by Regency Enterprises ( a Hollywood movie studio ) , <unk> ( a holding company ) and <unk> Capital ( a private fund ) . BabyFirst was controversial when it was introduced , because it was the first 24 @-@ hour channel for children six months to three years in age . However , the channel was popular among parents and grew quickly . 
 = = = Distribution expansion = = = 
 In 2007 , BabyFirst obtained agreements to distribute the channel in the United Kingdom through the BSkyB satellite network as well as in Mexico through Sky Mexico and Cablevision . A French version was introduced with <unk> in 2007 . By the end of 2007 , it had arranged broadcasting agreements throughout Europe , the Middle @-@ East and Canada among others . 
 BabyFirst also started broadcasting in ten territories in the Asia Pacific , such as China and Korea . In October 2008 , <unk> started distributing the channel to the Singapore audience . It was also being broadcast in Africa and Latin America . In May 2008 , it signed a distribution agreement with Time Warner Cable . In 2009 , HBO Asia became the exclusive distributor for the channel in Asia . A bilingual Latin / English channel , BabyFirst Americas , was launched with Comcast in 2012 . A premium BabyFirst YouTube channel was introduced in June 2013 . 
 In the early 2000s , the Federal Trade Commission responded to a complaint by the Campaign for a Commercial Free Childhood alleging that BabyFirst 's advertising that it helped babies develop skills was misleading . The FTC did not impose any sanctions . As of 2014 , it has 81 million viewers and is broadcast in 33 countries , in ten languages . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In 2013 , former ABC Network President Steven McPherson and Rich Frank , the former chairman of Disney Channel became investors and board members as the company worked to develop new content and improve advertising revenues . In May 2014 , BabyFirst and AT & T U @-@ verse released a co @-@ developed second @-@ screen app for mobile devices that allows children to interact with the television programming through tablets or smartphones . 
 = = Programming = = 
 BabyFirst 's television channel provides 24 @-@ hour programming for babies . About 90 percent of the 90 shows BabyFirst produces are original content created at BabyFirst 's studios . It produces and broadcasts short videos three to five minutes in length that are either live @-@ action or animated . 
 The New York Times described the content as " decidedly unhurried " and said it makes extensive use of bright colors and upbeat music . Programming development is guided by child psychology experts and is designed to encourage a child 's skills development , such as counting , vocabulary and color recognition . The BabyFirst logo in the corner changes colors to indicate the skills a segment is intended to develop . Late @-@ night programming is intended to lull viewers to sleep . 
 There are also 41 BabyFirst apps for mobile devices . An app available to AT & T U @-@ verse viewers allows children to draw on a mobile device and have the drawing appear on the television screen . 
 Some experts argue that exposing children to television at such an early age is taking technology too far or that parents are using BabyFirst as a digital babysitter . Parents in @-@ turn refute that argument , claiming that experts have lost touch with the realities of raising a child . BabyFirst suggests the programming is intended to be watched by parents and their children together in an interactive way . The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends against exposing children under the age of two to television , while a 2003 study by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that most children under two years of age are already watching TV . According to The Washington Post , very little is known about whether young children watching television has a negative or positive effect on them . 
 = John Michael Wright = 
 John Michael Wright ( May 1617 – July 1694 ) was a portrait painter in the Baroque style . Described variously as English and Scottish , Wright trained in Edinburgh under the Scots painter George Jamesone , and acquired a considerable reputation as an artist and scholar during a long sojourn in Rome . There he was admitted to the Accademia di San Luca , and was associated with some of the leading artists of his generation . He was engaged by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria , the governor of the Spanish Netherlands , to acquire artworks in Oliver Cromwell 's England in 1655 . He took up permanent residence in England from 1656 , and served as court painter before and after the English Restoration . A convert to Roman Catholicism , he was a favourite of the restored Stuart court , a client of both Charles II and James II , and was a witness to many of the political maneuverings of the era . In the final years of the Stuart monarchy he returned to Rome as part of an embassy to Pope Innocent XI . 
 Wright is currently rated as one of the leading indigenous British painters of his generation , largely for the distinctive realism in his portraiture . Perhaps due to the unusually cosmopolitan nature of his experience , he was favoured by patrons at the highest level of society in an age in which foreign artists were usually preferred . Wright 's paintings of royalty and aristocracy are included amongst the collections of many leading galleries today . 
 = = Early years and Scottish connections = = 
 John Michael Wright , who at the height of his career would interchangeably sign himself " <unk> " or " Scotus " , is of uncertain origin . The diarist John Evelyn called him a Scotsman , an epithet repeated by Horace Walpole and tentatively accepted by his later biographer , Verne . However , writing in 1700 , the English antiquarian Thomas Hearne claims Wright was born in Shoe Lane , London and , after an adolescent conversion to Roman Catholicism , was taken to Scotland by a priest . A London birth certainly seems supported by a baptismal record , dated 25 May 1617 , for a " Mighell <unk> " , son of James Wright , described as a tailor and a citizen of London , in St Bride 's Church , Fleet Street , London . 
 What is known is that , on 6 April 1636 , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Wright was apprenticed to George Jamesone , an Edinburgh portrait painter of some repute . The Edinburgh Register of Apprentices records him as " <unk> , son to James W ( right ) , tailor , citizen of London " . The reasons for this move to Scotland are unclear , but may have to do with familial connections ( his parents may have been London Scots ) or the advent of plague in London . During his apprenticeship , Wright is likely to have lodged at the High Street tenement near the Netherbow Gate that served as Jameson 's workplace . The apprenticeship was contracted for five years , but may have been curtailed by Jameson 's imprisonment in late 1639 . There is no record of any independent work by Wright from this period ( his earliest known painting being a small portrait of Robert Bruce , 1st Earl of Ailesbury , painted in the early 1640s during his time in Rome ) . 
 It is also possible that Wright met his wife during his Scottish residency . Nothing is known of her , except from a statement of thirty years later which describes her as " related to the most noble and distinguished families of Scotland . " If this is accurate , it may explain how Wright was later able to find aristocratic patronage . All that is known for certain is that Wright had at least one child by her , a son , Thomas . 
 = = Rome and the Netherlands = = 
 There is evidence to suggest that Wright went to France following his apprenticeship , however his eventual destination was Italy . It is possible that he arrived in Rome as early as 1642 in the entourage of James Alban Gibbes ( a scholar of English descent ) , but he was certainly resident there from 1647 . Although details of his time there are sketchy , his skills and reputation increased so much so that by 1648 he had become a member of the prestigious Accademia di San Luca ( where he is recorded as " Michele Rita , <unk> <unk> " ) . At that time , the Accademia included numbers of established Italian painters as well as illustrious foreigners including the French Nicolas Poussin and Spaniard Diego Velázquez . On 10 February that year he was elected to the <unk> dei <unk> al Pantheon , a charitable body promoting the Roman Catholic faith through art , which hosted an annual exhibition in the Pantheon . 
 Wright was to spend more than ten years in Rome . During that time became an accomplished linguist as well as an established art connoisseur . He also became prosperous enough to build up a substantial collection of books , prints , paintings , gems and medals , including works attributed to Mantegna , Michelangelo , Raphael , Titian and Correggio . He acquired some forty paintings – perhaps as much through dealing as collecting . Richard Symonds , the amateur painter and royalist , catalogued Wright 's collection in the early 1650s ( and interestingly designated him as " Scotus " ) . 
 = = = Antiquarian for Leopold of Austria = = = 
 In 1654 , after a decade in Rome , Wright travelled to Brussels where his abilities were recognised by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria then governor of the Spanish Netherlands . Leopold employed him not as an artist , but as an advisor on antiquities . As the younger brother of the Emperor Ferdinand III and cousin of Philip IV of Spain , the Archduke had the wherewithal to amass a large collection of paintings and antiquities . Moreover , in the spring of 1655 , the Archduke was enjoying a period of cordial relations with Oliver Cromwell , then Lord Protector of England . ( Indeed , the two had been exchanging gifts of horses , and Leopold had provided Cromwell with choice tapestries and other artefacts for the refurbishment of the Palace of Whitehall . Cromwell also received an embassy from the Habsburgs congratulating him on his new office . ) 
 Since the execution of Charles I in 1649 , Leopold had been purchasing artworks from the royal collections and those of various aristocrats , and , against this background , commissioned Wright to travel to London and acquire further specimens . A passport was issued to him as " ' Juan Miguel Rita , <unk> Ingles , qua va a <unk> a <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , y otras costa <unk> , que le <unk> ... " to allow him to travel to England . The passport is dated 22 May 1655 , and signed by the Archduke at Brussels , indicating that Wright had left Italy for Flanders by this time . ( The addition of the saint 's name name , John , probably marks his conversion to Roman Catholicism at some time prior . ) 
 As one on an official mission , Wright would probably have offered greetings to Leopold 's ambassador extraordinary in London , the Marqués de <unk> , and to Alonso de Cárdenas , the regular Habsburg ambassador , who had also been engaged since 1649 in art procurement for the Spanish Monarch . The lack of records means that the timing and duration of this visit remain uncertain . However , de <unk> left in late June , and de Cárdenas a few weeks later – as relations between Cromwell and the Habsburgs deteriorated – so Wright probably arrived back in Flanders , with any acquisitions he had made , just in time to learn of the Archduke 's impending departure – and that of his huge art collection – from Brussels in the autumn of 1655 . 
 However , after the relocation of his patron to Vienna , Wright again visited London . On 9 April 1656 he passed through Dover , and the register of visitors indicates : 
 Michael Wright Englishman landed at Dover the 9th present out of the <unk> boat from Dunkerque and came to London on the 12th and <unk> at the house of Mrs Johnston in <unk> in the parish of Gyles in the fields in Middlesex and saith that having exercised the Art of Picture drawing in France & Italy & other parts the greatest part of his life , he <unk> shortly to returne to Italy where he left his family 
 Perhaps tactfully , the record glosses Wright 's employment in Flanders , ( euphemistically referred to as " other parts " ) as England and the Habsburgs were now at open war , and it fails to mention his membership of the Accademia di San Luca , which would have identified him as a Roman Catholic . 
 = = England = = 
 Whatever his intentions , Wright did not return to Italy , rather he was joined in England by his family soon after . Despite his Roman Catholicism and the strong Protestantism of the Protectorate ( 1653 – 1659 ) , Wright seems to have been able to find prestigious work . Indeed , Waterhouse speaks of him engaging in " the most deliberate and <unk> toadying to Cromwell " in his 1658 painting of a small posthumous portrait of Elizabeth Claypole , Oliver Cromwell 's daughter ( now in the National Portrait Gallery ) . This is an allegorical portrait depicting Elizabeth as Minerva , leaning on a carved relief representing the goddess springing from the head of Jove with the motto " Ab Jove <unk> " – an allusion to Cromwell himself , whose cameo portrait she holds . Seemingly , he was also willing to work the other side of the political divide : in 1659 he painted Colonel John Russell who was a player in the " Sealed Knot " conspiracy to restore Charles II to the throne . That particular portrait is regarded by at least one critic as Wright 's " masterpiece " . 
 After the restoration of Charles II in 1660 , Wright 's Roman Catholicism became less of a handicap , due to the King 's preference for religious toleration . Never a good businessman , Wright encountered some financial difficulties and King Charles granted him the privilege of disposing of his collection of Old Masters by means of a lottery . The King himself acquired 14 of the paintings . By the early 1660s Wright had established a successful studio in London , and was described by diarist John Evelyn as " the famous painter Mr Write " . Later , the Great Plague of London ( 1665 ) drove Wright out to countryside , where he painted at least three members of the Catholic family of Arundell of Wardour . 
 Ironically , in the next year , the Great Fire of London ( 1666 ) was to be of benefit to him , when he received one of the City of London 's first new artistic commissions to paint twenty @-@ two full length portraits of the so @-@ called ' Fire Judges ' ( those appointed to assess the property disputes arising from the fire ) . These paintings , completed in 1670 , hung in London 's Guildhall until it was bombed during World War II ; today only two ( those of Sir Matthew Hale and Sir Hugh Wyndham ) remain in the Guildhall Art Gallery the remainder having been destroyed or dispersed . 
 = = = Royal patronage = = = 
 Charles II , who promoted a number of Roman Catholics at court , granted Wright a measure of royal art patronage . In 1661 , soon after the coronation , he painted a formalised portrait of the monarch , seated in front of a tapestry representing the Judgement of Solomon , wearing St. Edward 's Crown , the robes of the Garter , and carrying the orb and sceptre . Wright was also commissioned to paint an allegorical ceiling for the King 's bedchamber at Whitehall Palace , and he was further appointed in 1673 to the office of " picture drawer in ordinary " , allowing him to exercise his right to sign his pictures " Pictor Regis " . However , to his disappointment , he did not receive the coveted office of King 's Painter , which was held in the 1660s by Sir Peter Lely alone . In contrast to Wright 's sympathetic realism , and carefully observed landscape backgrounds , Lely had a more glamorous style , favoured by the court , and based on Van Dyck 's pre @-@ Civil War style . This prompted the diarist Samuel Pepys to remark , after an enjoyable visit to Lely 's studio , " thence to Wright 's the painters : but Lord , the difference that is between their two works " . 
 Unlike Lely , who was knighted , Wright never received significant recognition from King Charles . However , at least one admirer thought he did deserve it . In 1669 , Wright and the miniaturist Samuel Cooper had met Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany . Cosimo later called at Wright 's studio where he commissioned a portrait of the Duke of Albemarle from Wright . On 3 March 1673 , perhaps some time after Wright had painted his state picture of Charles II ( now in the Royal Collection ) , a strange letter was sent from an obscure " <unk> Lady <unk> " ( evidently a fellow Roman Catholic ) to Cosimo , asking him to intercede with the King to grant Wright a baronetcy . However , nothing came of the request . 
 As antipathy towards Catholics intensified in London from the late 1670s , Wright spent more time working away from court . He painted six family portraits for Sir Walter Bagot of <unk> in Staffordshire in 1676 / 7 . In 1678 , he removed to Dublin for a number of years , perhaps due to the anti @-@ Catholic hysteria generated by Titus Oates 's Popish Plot . Here , still styling himself " Pictor Regis " , he painted " The Ladies Catherine and Charlotte Talbot " , which is today in the National Gallery of Ireland . He also painted two full @-@ lengths portraits of costumed chieftains , the " Sir Neil O 'Neill " ( c . 1680 ) , now in the Tate Collection , and the " Lord Mungo Murray " ( <unk> ) , now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery . Sir Neil O 'Neill was a fellow Roman Catholic , also in exile in Dublin . Wright portrayed him in the dress costume of an Irish chieftain , with suit of rare Japanese armour at his feet . The significance of this armour is that it is thought to be a coded symbol of a triumph over the persecutors of Roman Catholicism , of whom , at that time , the Japanese were notorious . The portrait of Mungo Murray ( the 5th son of the Royalist Marquis of Atholl ) is notable for being considered one of the first instance of Scottish tartan being portrayed in art . 
 = = = Roman embassy = = = 
 In 1685 , when the openly Roman Catholic James II ascended the throne , Wright was able to return to royal service . However , significantly , James did not employ Wright as an artist , but gave him the " time consuming and futile post " of steward on a diplomatic embassy . He was appointed as steward to Roger Palmer , 1st Earl of Castlemaine husband of Barbara Villiers , the late King 's mistress . Wright 's knowledge of Rome and of the Italian language may have played a part in this , as Castlemaine was dispatched , in 1686 , on an embassy to Pope Innocent XI to demonstrate that England could become a player on the Roman Catholic side in impending European conflicts . Wright 's role in the embassy was to oversee the production of elaborate coaches , costumes and decorations for the procession , which secured a papal audience in January 1687 . He also arranged a stupendous banquet for a thousand guests in the Palazzo Doria <unk> , complete with sugar sculptures and a large state portrait of James II . While in Rome , Wright published an illustrated Italian account of the embassy , dedicated to the Duchess of Modena and , on his return , an English version was published in October 1687 , dedicated to her daughter Queen Mary . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Wright 's career came to an end in 1688 with the expulsion of King James II during the Glorious Revolution . He seems to have accepted the inevitable end of his royal favour with the accession to the throne of the Protestant William of Orange . He lived on , in relative poverty , for a further six years until 1694 . In March of that year , he made a will leaving his house in St Paul 's parish to his niece Katherine Vaux . His collection of drawings , prints and books were left to his nephew , the painter Michael Wright ; however a codicil to the will stated that the books were to be sold on behalf of his son Thomas , who was then abroad . The books were auctioned on 4 June and on 1 August 1694 , John Michael Wright was buried at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields . 
 = = Artistic legacy = = 
 Much of the scholarly appreciation of Wright 's work is fairly recent . In 1982 , an exhibition of his work : ‘ John Michael Wright – The King ’ s Painter ’ – in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery – led to a renewed interest in his contributions , and the catalogue ( edited by Sara Stevenson and Duncan Thomson ) re @-@ wrote and uncovered much of the known biographical details . New works continue to be discovered and previously known ones re @-@ attributed to him . Wright is now viewed as amongst the most successful of seventeenth @-@ century Britain 's indigenous artists , and is rated alongside contemporaries such as Robert Walker and William Dobson . One modern exhibition catalogue described him as " the finest seventeenth century British @-@ born painter " . Certainly , he was one of the few who painted the elite aristocracy of his day , and was responsible for some of the most magnificent royal portraiture surviving . This achievement is particularly significant in an age where even British patrons had tended to favour foreign artists like Holbein and Van Dyck , and would continue to favour immigrants such as Lely and Kneller . Indeed , part of the reason for Wright 's success is recognised as being his unusually cosmopolitan training : no prior British artist had so much exposure to European influence . During his Italian sojourn , and his participation in the Accademia di San Luca , not only had Wright collected works attributed to continental giants like Michelangelo , Raphael and Titian , he had also been influenced by , and even copied , much of their tone and style . 
 In his field and day , Wright was certainly eclipsed by his rival the more prolific Lely , to whom he is often compared . One critic , Millar , observes that any comparisons undertaken would " ruthlessly expose Wright 's weaknesses and mannerisms " but that positively " they would also demonstrate his remarkable independence , his unfailing integrity and charm , the sources of which must partly lie in his unusual origins , fragmented career and attractive personality " . Millar suggests that a particularly useful comparison can be made between Lely and Wright 's respective portrayals of the Duchess of <unk> ( Barbara Villiers ) ( above ) . Whereas Lely portrayed her as a " full @-@ blown and palpably desirable strumpet " , the more seriously minded Wright , who was not really in sympathy with the morality of the new court and its courtesans , rendered a more puppet @-@ like figure . 
 However , even if Lely was considered the more masterly and fashionable of the two in seventeenth @-@ century Britain , Wright is generally accepted as portraying the more lively and realistic likenesses of his subjects , a fact that reinforces Pepys 's observation that Lely 's work was " good but not like " . Neither should Wright 's realism be confused with a prudishness ; as can be seen , for example , in his portrait the lady , thought to be Ann Davis ( right ) . The picture , with the sitter 's clothing left undone and her modesty barely preserved by a red drape , has been described as exhibiting a fresh – even risky – reality : erotic by contemporary standards . Whereas Wright 's contemporaries might have used the ‘ disguise ’ of presenting the sitter in the guise of a classical goddess to protect against accusation of <unk> , Wright 's portrait rather depends on his realism , notably in his flesh tones , and depth . 
 = On the Internet , nobody knows you 're a dog = 
 " On the Internet , nobody knows you 're a dog " is an adage which began as a cartoon caption by Peter Steiner and published by The New Yorker on July 5 , 1993 . The cartoon features two dogs : one sitting on a chair in front of a computer , speaking the caption to a second dog sitting on the floor listening to the first . As of 2011 , the panel was the most reproduced cartoon from The New Yorker , and Steiner has earned over US $ 50 @,@ 000 from its reprinting . 
 = = History = = 
 Peter Steiner , a cartoonist and contributor to The New Yorker since 1979 , said the cartoon initially did not get a lot of attention , but later took on a life of its own , and that he felt similar to the person who created the " smiley face " . In fact , Steiner was not that interested in the Internet when he drew the cartoon , and although he did have an online account , he recalled attaching no " profound " meaning to the cartoon ; it was just something he drew in the manner of a " make @-@ up @-@ a @-@ caption " cartoon . 
 In response to the comic 's popularity , he stated , " I can 't quite fathom that it 's that widely known and recognized . " 
 = = Context = = 
 The cartoon marks a notable moment in the history of the Internet . Once the exclusive domain of government engineers and academics , the Internet had by then become a subject of discussion in general interest magazines like The New Yorker . Lotus Software founder and early Internet activist Mitch <unk> commented in a Time magazine article in 1993 that " the true sign that popular interest has reached critical mass came this summer when the New Yorker printed a cartoon showing two computer @-@ savvy canines " . 
 The cartoon symbolizes an understanding of Internet privacy that stresses the ability of users to send and receive messages in general anonymity . Lawrence Lessig suggests " no one knows " because Internet protocols do not force users to identify themselves ; although local access points such as a user 's university may , this information is privately held by the local access point and is not an intrinsic part of the Internet transaction . 
 A study by Morahan @-@ Martin and Schumacher ( 2000 ) on compulsive or problematic Internet use discusses this phenomenon , suggesting the ability to self @-@ represent from behind the computer screen may be part of the compulsion to go online . The phrase can be taken " to mean that cyberspace will be liberatory because gender , race , age , looks , or even ' <unk> ' are potentially absent or alternatively fabricated or exaggerated with unchecked creative license for a multitude of purposes both legal and illegal " , an understanding that echoed statements made in 1996 by John Gilmore , a key figure in the history of Usenet . The phrase also suggests the ability to " computer cross @-@ dress " and represent oneself as a different gender , age , race , etc . On another level , " the freedom which the dog chooses to avail itself of , is the freedom to ' pass ' as part of a privileged group ; i.e. human computer users with access to the Internet " . 
 According to Bob <unk> , The New Yorker 's cartoon editor , " The cartoon resonated with our wariness about the facile façade that could be thrown up by anyone with a rudimentary knowledge of <unk> . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The cartoon has inspired the play Nobody Knows I 'm a Dog by Alan David Perkins . The play revolves around six different individuals unable to communicate effectively with people in their lives who find the courage to socialize on the Internet , protected by their anonymity . 
 The Apple Internet suite <unk> was named after this cartoon . 
 A cartoon by <unk> Hafeez published in The New Yorker on February 23 , 2015 features a similar pair of dogs watching their owner sitting at a computer , with one asking the other , " Remember when , on the Internet , nobody knew who you were ? " 
 = I Am God = 
 " I Am God " is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fortieth episode overall . Written by Diane Ruggiero and Cathy Belben and directed by Martha Mitchell , the episode premiered on UPN on April 11 , 2006 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a high school student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica experiences persistent and vivid nightmares of the students who died in the bus crash , and she attempts to piece together the clues she 's gotten from these dreams . Meanwhile , Logan ( Jason Dohring ) and Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) are forced to work together on a science experiment . 
 During the filming of " I Am God " , several press members , primarily bloggers , were allowed to visit the show 's set , an event that was the first of its kind for Veronica Mars . Bloggers had been an important source of the show 's fandom and press coverage , and the event was set up by UPN executives as a public relations project . The episode also features a guest appearance by Kayla Ewell and the first appearance by James Jordan . The episode received 1 @.@ 76 million viewers in its original US airing , and it received mixed reviews from television critics , with reviewers divided on the use of dream sequences as well as the episode 's emotional impact overall . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Veronica has a dream of the students who died in the bus crash , which takes place in " Normal Is the Watchword " , before she visits the guidance counselor , Rebecca ( Paula Marshall ) , who talks to her about her problems , and Veronica tells her about her nightmares . Veronica lists the bus crash victims and asks Rebecca about a janitor named Lucky ( James Jordan ) , whom Meg used to talk about a lot . Veronica describes some more dreams and tells Rebecca that she met with a student named Rhonda , who handed her a phone with a voice recording of Dick on the bus . Veronica recounts a dream encounter with her father , in which she discovered a piece of paper with the words “ I am God ” and pictures of nine coffins . Veronica talks to Logan about Lucky , the janitor , and Logan says that Veronica met Lucky before . 
 Veronica talks to Dick about his relationship with Betina . Veronica talks to one of Betina ’ s friends , who says that Dick mistreated her , and Betina ’ s goal was for Dick to get her pregnant so she could get him in trouble . Veronica asks Keith about whether or not he has resumed a relationship with Rebecca , and Veronica gets into Stanford University . Veronica is pushed into second place at the Kane scholarship after Angie . Rebecca denies having a relationship with Keith , while Angie also gets into Stanford . Wallace points out Rhonda ’ s sister to Veronica , but she doesn ’ t give Veronica any information . Veronica asks Keith to dig into the financial records of the bus crash victims . Veronica learns that none of the families had very much money , except for Rhonda ’ s family , who got a $ 2 million bailout from Woody ( Steve Guttenberg ) . 
 Keith meets with Principal Clemmons and finds Veronica in the closet . Veronica talks to Mr. Wu about one of his students , Peter , who had feelings for Mr. Wu . However , Mr. Wu is not gay . That night , Veronica has a dream about Peter , who “ asks ” her why he would even want to go to a baseball stadium . Veronica talks to Beaver , who was pushed into a wall by <unk> , a <unk> who died in the bus crash . Keith solves a case for Principal Clemmons about students who get diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder from the same doctor for better grades . Angie wins the experiment competition , and we learn that Angie was one of the students who was diagnosed with GAD for money . Principal Clemmons revokes exceptions for GAD students . Veronica has a dream about <unk> , who says that the perpetrator was probably in the vicinity of the bus crash . Veronica learns that the “ I am God ” image is actually an album cover . Keith tells Veronica that the perpetrator was probably targeting Dick and Beaver . Veronica has another , more frightening dream . 
 In science class , Logan gets paired with Wallace and Dick gets paired with Angie Dahl ( Kayla Ewell ) . Logan and Wallace perform their experiment half @-@ heartedly , and afterwards , they decide to continue working with each other . In the end , they receive a passing grade . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Am God " was written by Diane Ruggiero and Cathy Belben and directed by Martha Mitchell , marking Ruggiero 's eleventh writing credit for the series , Belben 's third and final writing credit ( after " Blast from the Past " and " Ahoy , <unk> ! " ) and Mitchell 's first and only directing credit for the show . Despite being credited , Duncan ( Teddy Dunn ) , Weevil ( Francis Capra ) , and Jackie ( Tessa Thompson ) do not appear in the episode . During the filming of " I Am God " , UPN and Warner Bros. set up a " Veronica Mars Press Day " , on which several members of the press visited the show 's set and wrote about their visit . Bloggers had been important to press coverage of Veronica Mars ; because of this , Joanna Massey , UPN 's senior vice president for media relations , decided to set up this event as a public relations project . On organizing the event , Massey elaborated : 
 Once we sent out the invitations , there was instantly a lot of ( Internet ) chatter about why we invited certain people . Then there was chatter leading up to the trip , and there was chatter when everyone got back . And they instantly posted all of their photos , which I love . And then they will blog again when the episode runs . With the traditional media , when do you get that kind of coverage ? 
 Series creator Rob Thomas also appreciated bloggers ' contributions to Veronica Mars , stating " Sometimes I think bloggers are our journalists . [ … ] I feel like the bloggers made the show . In a way , a day like ( the press day ) is preaching to the choir , but I don 't know that we 'd exist without them . ” This was the first time that non @-@ cast or crew members visited the set . After reaching Kearny Mesa , San Diego , where the show primarily films , the bloggers toured the set and talked with cast and crew members . One press member expressed that Ryan Hansen , Thomas , and Kristen Bell were especially kind and receptive to the visitors . 
 On his role in the episode , Jason Dohring , who plays Logan , elaborated , " I think what 's funny is that he always gets what 's coming to him . Like a terrible thing happens to him , but he 's like that to other people . So it 's like in real life … what goes around comes around . " The episode features a guest @-@ starring appearance by Kayla Ewell , who would eventually become most known for her role on The Vampire Diaries . The episode also features a guest appearance by James Jordan , as Lucky , the janitor . In season 3 , Jordan would become the first actor to have two different roles on Veronica Mars when he was cast as Tim Foyle , a teaching assistant . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " I Am God " was watched by 1 @.@ 76 million viewers , ranking 111th of 116 in the weekly rankings . This marked a sharp decrease in 1 @.@ 09 million viewers from the previous episode , " Plan B " , which received 2 @.@ 85 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club was very positive towards the episode , writing " ' I Am God ' is probably the strangest episode since ' Nobody Puts Baby in a Corner ' , but unlike that one 's somewhat random focus , ' I Am God ' is intently pointed at one thing : the bus crash . " While hoping that it had come earlier in the season , the reviewer wrote that " its intense style and emotional stakes put it on the shortlist of best Veronica Mars episodes . " Price Peterson of TV.com praised the dream sequences for their beauty , but criticized them for their complexity . " Man , I just could not get enough of the dream @-@ flashbacks in which Veronica talked to the dead students . So beautiful and well @-@ done . On the other hand , my poor brain is starting to have a hard time keeping all the facts straight . " 
 Others were more negative towards the episode . Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B " , criticizing Paula Marshall 's reappearance , declaring her a " show killer . " BuzzFeed ranked the episode as the second @-@ worst episode of Veronica Mars , writing that the dream sequences " [ looked ] like Bonnie Tyler videos and bad erotic movies from the ' 80s . " Reviewer Alan Sepinwall gave a mixed review , praising Logan and Wallace 's interactions and Kristen Bell 's performance , but criticizing the fact that the episode came so late in the season . " Had this been the season 's fourth or fifth episode , it would have been fine . As the fifth @-@ to @-@ last episode , it felt like exactly what it was : a belated correction for a season @-@ long problem . " He also felt that " Keith 's subplot was missing a scene or two . " 
 = June 1941 uprising in eastern Herzegovina = 
 In June 1941 , Serbs in eastern Herzegovina rebelled against the authorities of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) , an Axis puppet state established during World War II on the territory of the defeated Kingdom of Yugoslavia . As the NDH imposed its authority , members of the fascist Ustaše ruling party began a campaign of persecution against Serbs throughout the country . In eastern Herzegovina , the Ustaše perpetrated a series of massacres and attacks against the majority Serb population commencing in the first week of June . Between 3 and 22 June 1941 , spontaneous clashes occurred between NDH authorities and groups of Serbs in the region . 
 The German invasion of the Soviet Union began on 22 June . Over the next two days , the sporadic revolts by Serbs against the NDH in eastern Herzegovina erupted into mass rebellion , triggered by Ustaše persecution , Serb solidarity with the Russian people , hatred and fear of the NDH authorities , and other factors . Serb rebels , under the leadership of both local Serbs and Montenegrins , attacked police , gendarmerie , Ustaše and Croatian Home Guard forces in the region . In the first few days , the rebels captured gendarmerie posts in several villages , set up roadblocks on the major roads and ambushed several military vehicles . On the night of 26 June , the rebels mounted a sustained attack on the town of Nevesinje in an attempt to capture it , but the garrison held out until the morning of 28 June when NDH troops broke through the rebel roadblocks . 
 On 28 June , the rebels ambushed a truckload of Italian soldiers , prompting the Italian Army commander in the NDH to warn the NDH government that he would take unilateral action to secure communication routes . A further gendarmerie post was destroyed by the rebels , and in the evening the rebels captured the village of Avtovac , looting and burning it , and killing dozens of non @-@ Serb civilians . The following day an Italian column cleared the rebels from Avtovac and relieved the hard @-@ pressed NDH garrison in the town of Gacko . From 3 July , an NDH force of over 2 @,@ 000 fanned out from Nevesinje , clearing towns , villages and routes of rebels . The rebel forces did not put up any significant opposition to the clearing operation , and either retreated into nearby Montenegro , or hid their weapons in the mountains and went home . By 7 July , NDH forces had regained full control of all towns and major transport routes in eastern Herzegovina . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) was founded on 10 April 1941 , during the invasion of Yugoslavia by the Axis powers . The NDH consisted of most of modern @-@ day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina , together with some parts of modern @-@ day Serbia . It was essentially an Italo – German quasi @-@ protectorate , as it owed its existence to the Axis powers , who maintained occupation forces within the puppet state throughout its existence . In the immediate aftermath of the Yugoslav surrender on 17 April , former Royal Yugoslav Army troops returned to their homes in eastern Herzegovina with their weapons . This was a significant security concern for the fledgling NDH government due to the proximity of the border with Montenegro , the close relationship between the people of eastern Herzegovina and Montenegro , and widespread banditry in the region . On the day after the surrender , the commander of the NDH armed forces , <unk> ( Marshal ) Slavko Kvaternik issued a proclamation demanding the surrender of all weapons to NDH authorities by 24 April . 
 On 24 April , the NDH created five military command areas , including Bosnia Command and Adriatic Command , both of which were initially headquartered in Sarajevo . Each of the five military commands included several district commands . Adriatic Command included the districts of Knin and Sinj in the Dalmatian hinterland , and Mostar and Trebinje in eastern Herzegovina . The NDH began to mobilise soldiers for the Home Guard , with six battalions identified to join Adriatic Command . The battalions were mobilised from areas outside of eastern Herzegovina , and were to be ready by 20 May . The aggressive actions of the Ustaše fifth column during the Axis invasion made Serb civilian leaders in eastern Herzegovina apprehensive about the NDH , and they attempted to obtain Italian protection , and urged the Italians to annex eastern Herzegovina to the neighboring Italian @-@ occupied territory of Montenegro . A collaborationist " Interim Advisory Committee " of Montenegrin separatists was advocating the establishment of an " independent " Montenegrin state , and a similar committee of separatist Serbs was formed in eastern Herzegovina . A delegation from that committee arrived in Cetinje in Montenegro on 6 May to ask for Italian protection . Similarly , a delegation of Muslims from eastern Herzegovina travelled to Sarajevo , the historic Bosnian capital , to urge the NDH authorities to link eastern Herzegovina to that city . 
 Due to the poor response to the demand for the surrender of weapons , the deadline was extended several times until a date of 8 July was fixed . On 17 May , courts @-@ martial were established to try those that were arrested in possession of weapons , and those found guilty were immediately executed by firing squad . The precedent for this brutal repressive measure against Serbs had already been established by the Germans . It was clear from the outset that the NDH weapons laws were not being enforced as strictly against Croats as they were against Serbs . Securing the border between eastern Herzegovina and Montenegro was considered a high priority due to concerns that the Montenegrin Federalist Party had revived Montenegrin claims to parts of the NDH that had been promised to the Kingdom of Montenegro in the 1915 Treaty of London . 
 The Italians handed over the administration of eastern Herzegovina to the NDH government on 20 May 1941 , following the signing of the Treaties of Rome , which ceded formerly Yugoslav territory along the Adriatic coast to Italy . The Italians did not immediately withdraw all their troops from the region . The NDH moved quickly to establish its authority in the towns and districts of eastern Herzegovina , which included appointing mayors and prefects , the creation of local units of the Ustaše Militia , and deploying hundreds of gendarmes , Croatian Home Guards and Ustaše Militia units from outside eastern Herzegovina . These forces were brought in to maintain order . The academic Professor Alija Šuljak was appointed the Ustaše commissioner for eastern Herzegovina . 
 On 20 May , the recently formed Home Guard battalions began to deploy into the Adriatic Command area . On 27 May , 6 officers and 300 gendarmes of the Sarajevo @-@ based 4th Gendarmerie Regiment were deployed into parts of eastern Herzegovina . They established platoon strength posts in Nevesinje , Trebinje , Gacko and Bileća , with their headquarters also in Bileća . The Dubrovnik @-@ based 2nd Gendarmerie Regiment established posts in Stolac and Berkovići . The headquarters of Adriatic Command was transferred to Mostar in late May , and General Ivan Prpić was appointed as its commander . 
 By 29 May , the battalions of Adriatic Command were in their garrison locations : the 6th Battalion at Mostar , the 7th Battalion at Trebinje , and the 10th Battalion in the Dubrovnik area . The other two Adriatic Command battalions were deployed to Knin and Sinj far to the west . The 18th Battalion was allocated as a reserve and was garrisoned in Mostar . Main Ustaše Headquarters was tasked to recruit one battalion for duties within the Adriatic Command area . Home Guard battalions had a standard structure , consisting of a headquarters company , three infantry companies , a machine gun platoon and a communications section , while battalions of the Ustaše Militia consisted of a headquarters , three companies and a motorised section . Even after the establishment of NDH authorities in eastern Herzegovina , Italian forces maintained their presence in the region . The 55th Regiment of the 32nd Infantry Division Marche remained garrisoned in Trebinje , with the 56th Regiment based in Mostar . The 49th <unk> Legion ( Blackshirts ) were also stationed in Bileća . The Italians maintained a troop presence in Nevesinje until 17 June , and conducted almost daily motorised patrols throughout eastern Herzegovina . 
 The NDH authorities established new administrative sub @-@ divisions , organising the state into counties ( Croatian : <unk> župe ) and then districts ( Croatian : kotar ) . Eastern Herzegovina was covered by the counties of Hum and Dubrava . Hum County included the districts of Mostar and Nevesinje , and Dubrava County included the districts of Bileća , Gacko , Stolac , Ravno and Trebinje . The Župan ( county prefect ) of Hum was Josip <unk> with his seat in Mostar , and the Župan of Dubrava was Ante <unk> , based in Dubrovnik . 
 According to the Yugoslav census of 1931 , the population of eastern Herzegovina comprised 4 per cent Croats , 28 per cent Muslims , and 68 per cent Serbs . According to Professor Jozo Tomasevich , the estimated population of the districts of Bileća , Gacko and Nevesinje was only around 1 @.@ 1 per cent Croat , so in those areas nearly all the NDH government appointments and local Ustaše units were staffed by Muslims , an ethnic group that made up about 23 @.@ 7 per cent of the local population . The poor Muslim peasants of eastern Herzegovina largely sided with the Ustaše . The NDH government immediately tried to strengthen their position by vilifying the Serbs , who , according to Tomasevich , comprised around 75 per cent of the population . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Ustaše began to impose the new laws on the Serb population of the NDH . On 28 May , a group of ten young Ustaše students from the University of Zagreb arrived in Trebinje and began removing signs written in the Cyrillic script used by Serbs . On 1 June , in several towns and villages in eastern Herzegovina , Serbs were shot and businesses belonging to Serb merchants and others were seized . On that day , the Ustaše students in Trebinje shot nine Serbs and arrested another fifteen , apparently due to their links to the inter @-@ war Chetnik Association . Differences began to appear between the brutal treatment of Serbs by the Ustaše and the more careful approach of the other NDH authorities such as the Home Guard , who were aware of the potential danger created by Ustaše methods . In early June , the NDH authorities began operations to confiscate weapons from the population , meeting with immediate resistance . On 1 June , the residents of the village of Donji Drežanj , near Nevesinje , refused to co @-@ operate with weapons collectors . In response , the Ustaše killed a number of Serbs and burned their homes . 
 On 3 June , there were several incidents in which armed villagers spontaneously retaliated against the local authorities . That afternoon , 20 Ustaše were entering Donji Drežanj to confiscate firearms when they were attacked by a group of armed villagers . The villagers withdrew after a short firefight , with one of their number being captured . Reinforcements from the Home Guard and gendarmerie soon arrived , along with more Ustaše who burned another 20 houses and shot a woman . On the night of 4 / 5 June , a group under the control of the Ustaše commissioner for the Gacko district , Herman Tonogal , killed 140 Serbs in the village of Korita , near Bileća , and threw their bodies into a nearby sinkhole . Another 27 Serbs from the village were killed between this massacre and 9 June , and over 5 @,@ 000 head of livestock were stolen and distributed to Muslim villages in the Gacko area for the exclusive use of the Ustaše . The estimated number of Serbs killed at Korita vary from 133 to 180 . 
 In the immediate aftermath , Serbs and Montenegrins from the local area attacked villages , and Adriatic Command sent the 2nd Company of the 7th Battalion from Bileća to reinforce the Ustaše . After a brief clash near Korita , during which the Ustaše and gendarmerie lost one killed and several wounded , the rebels withdrew across the nearby border into Montenegro . The 2nd Company of the 7th Battalion spent the night in the village of Stepen before establishing itself as the Avtovac garrison the following day . Due to its exposure to fire from rebels overlooking their location , the gendarmes were unable to re @-@ occupy their post in Stepen , which meant that the Stepen – Korita road was no longer secure . On 8 June , the district office in Gacko reported to Adriatic Command that they had taken 200 Serbs as hostages and issued a proclamation to the population to cease fighting and surrender their weapons . As this proclamation met with no response , on 10 June the Ustaše Commissioner for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Jure Francetić , had 19 hostages shot ( one escaped ) . On 12 June , the gendarmerie in Ravno shot four people on the orders of the Ustaše commissioner for Ljubinje . Such actions led to Serb peasants leaving their villages to seek safety in more remote areas , and Muslim villagers became increasingly nervous about their Serb neighbours . 
 In mid @-@ June , the commander of the 2nd Company of the 7th Battalion at Bileća wrote to Adriatic Command complaining about the activities of the Ustaše , referring to them as " armed scum and animals " who were dishonouring " honest Croats " . When the Italians heard that the Ustaše had burned two villages across the border in Montenegro , they sent an intelligence officer to Gacko to investigate the unrest . He did not accept the explanation of the gendarmerie commander in Gacko , who claimed that the violence was caused by " personal hatred and revenge " , and met with rebels . The rebels did not attack him or his security escort , and told him that the reason behind the rebellion was that " Croats and Turks are beating us and throwing us into a pit " . He concluded that the cause of the unrest was the attempt to disarm the Serb community . 
 On 17 and 18 June , Tonogal and Lieutenant Colonel Aganović , gendarmerie commander for eastern Herzegovina , made an attempt to calm the situation by visiting villages east of the Gacko – Avtovac road to re @-@ establish peace in the area . They received a written message from four villages that they did not acknowledge the NDH authorities , and wanted the message to be passed on to the Italians . The residents of the villages of <unk> and <unk> were willing to talk and return to work , but they asked that the gendarmerie not visit their villages , as this would tempt the Montenegrins to attack . Aganović assessed that while this was probably true , their request was insincere . The gendarmerie commander in Bileća believed that the reason for the rebellion was that the local Serbs were wedded to the idea of Greater Serbia , and did not accept that their villages were part of the NDH . This approach essentially meant that local Serbs wanted the NDH authorities to leave them alone and not impose on their lives . According to the historian Davor Marijan , this was a poor choice that gave the Ustaše an excuse to take radical action . 
 The response of the NDH authorities to resistance had been to burn down the villages where this had occurred , and there were mass shootings of Serbs , which escalated the level of violence even further . In late May and June , 173 Serbs had been rounded up , tortured and killed in Nevesinje , and in early June , another 140 Serbs had been killed at Ljubinje . In response , Serbs attacked Ustaše officials and facilities , and conducted raids themselves , killing Muslim villagers . 
 = = Uprising = = 
 The NDH authorities only had weak forces in eastern Herzegovina at the time the mass uprising occurred , roughly equal to two Croatian Home Guard battalions , as well as gendarmerie posts in some towns . This was barely adequate to guard important locations , and was insufficient for offensive action . Deployed forces consisted of one company of the 10th Battalion in Trebinje , the headquarters and a reinforced company of the 7th Battalion in Bileća ( the balance of the battalion being divided between Gacko and Avtovac ) , and a company of the 6th Battalion in Nevesinje . The remainder of the 10th Battalion was deploying to Trebinje at the time the rebellion broke out . 
 = = = 23 – 24 June = = = 
 The first indication that the situation had changed significantly was on 23 June , when a group of 200 Ustaše clashed with a group of rebels they estimated to number between 600 and 1 @,@ 000 . After an extended firefight near the village of Stepen , 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) north of Korita , during which they suffered several casualties , the Ustaše also burned down four villages . They then entered two Muslim @-@ majority villages in the area and arrested 13 Serbs who had not been involved in the earlier fighting . The arrested Serbs were transported north to Avtovac and shot . That night , all adult Serbs above the age of 16 in Gacko , 4 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) northwest of Avtovac , were arrested , and 26 were immediately shot . The rest were transported 50 km ( 31 mi ) west to a camp in Nevesinje . Over the period 23 – 25 June , 150 Serbs from the village of Ravno , 30 km ( 19 mi ) southwest of Ljubinje , were arrested and killed at the gendarmerie post , and the remainder of the population fled to the hills . 
 On 23 and 24 June , spontaneous mass gatherings occurred at several villages in the Gacko and Nevesinje districts . These rallies were prompted by the news of the German invasion of the Soviet Union , and those attending them voted to fight against the Ustaše . Professor Marko Attila Hoare states that the full @-@ scale uprising resulted from the Ustaše retaliation against attempts of the Serbs of eastern Herzegovina to defend themselves , combined with the launching of the German invasion on 22 June . At dawn on 24 June , the area of Nevesinje descended into full @-@ scale revolt , with around 400 armed rebels engaging the Home Guard garrison . By 24 June , the uprising had reached a massive scale across eastern Herzegovina , with between 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 000 armed rebels in total , including some Montenegrins . 
 = = = 25 June = = = 
 On the morning of 25 June , the company of the 6th Battalion at Nevesinje reported that rebels were gathering to attack the town ; Nevesinje 's Ustaše commissioner claimed that the rebel force numbered 5 @,@ 000 , and were led by a former Yugoslav Army colonel . About 10 : 00 , the town was attacked from the south and southwest . In response , the Home Guard despatched two more companies of the 6th Battalion from Mostar to Nevesinje . That morning , reports also arrived from Bileća and Stolac that rebels were approaching the village of Berkovići from the north , and had captured the gendarmerie post at Gornji <unk> . About 11 : 30 , the Ustaše commissioner for Stolac reported that 3 @,@ 000 Montenegrins had gathered between Nevesinje and Stolac , and he requested the immediate supply of 150 rifles for his men . A rebel attack on the gendarmerie post in the village of <unk> near Bileća was repulsed around midday . A platoon of Home Guard reinforcements and weapons for the Ustaše arrived at Stolac in the afternoon , and Bileća was held throughout the day . 
 Reports of the uprising reached Kvaternik during 25 June , but he dismissed them and the reports of 5 @,@ 000 rebels , cancelling Adriatic Command 's redeployment of the 21st Battalion from Slavonski Brod as well as a request to the Italians for air reconnaissance support . He stated that the suppression of the uprising could be handled by local forces . Loss of communication with Nevesinje resulted in rumours that the town had fallen to the rebels . The gendarmerie post at Fojnica ( near Gacko ) was captured on the afternoon of 25 June , with the survivors escaping to Gacko . Newspapers reported rumours that Gacko and Avtovac had fallen to the rebels . Having already despatched a reinforced company towards Nevesinje from Sarajevo earlier in the day , Adriatic Command ordered the rest of the battalion to follow . The initial company group had already reached Kalinovik some 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) from Nevesinje , and the rest of the battalion was expected to spend the night of 25 / 26 June there before arriving in Nevesinje around noon on 26 June . Kvaternik received an updated report on the situation in eastern Herzegovina during the night , and Prpić travelled from Sarajevo to Mostar to take control of operations , to find that information about the situation in eastern Herzegovina was unclear , but suggested that NDH forces could be facing serious difficulties . 
 = = = 26 June = = = 
 On the morning of 26 June , the company of the 6th Battalion that had been sent from Mostar continued towards Nevesinje , but almost immediately came under fire from a rebel group . With the assistance of Ustaše , the Home Guard were able to hold their ground , but they were unable to break through to Nevesinje . That afternoon , two aircraft of the Air Force of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Zrakoplovstvo Nezavisne Države Hrvatske , ZNDH ) from Sarajevo conducted an armed reconnaissance over eastern Herzegovina , and discovered that NDH forces still held Nevesinje . They observed barricades across the Mostar – Nevesinje road , and strafed a group of 50 rebels north of Nevesinje near the village of Kifino Selo . Prpić bolstered the force on the Mostar – Nevesinje road with the 17th Battalion , recently arrived from Sarajevo , and sent his deputy , Colonel Antun Prohaska to command it . The 17th Battalion joined that force at 20 : 00 . About 17 : 00 , the company of the 11th Battalion reached Nevesinje from Kalinovik , and a further company of the battalion was despatched from Sarajevo , along with the battalion commander . 
 In the southern part of the area of operations around Stolac , the situation was significantly calmer than around Nevesinje , although a group of 200 Ustaše at Berkovići were falsely claiming that they were being surrounded by rebels at night . Despite this claim , they had suffered no casualties . Regardless , Prpić sent them ammunition and a platoon of the 18th Battalion . At 19 : 00 on 26 June , Francetić arrived at Prpić 's headquarters in Mostar to be briefed on the situation . He resolved that he would travel to Berkovići the following day and take personal command of the Ustaše unit there . 
 Around Gacko and Avtovac in the north , the day had been quiet . When the commander of the 2nd Company of the 7th Battalion at Gacko reported rebels gathering near the town , Prpić sent a truck @-@ mounted platoon with an ammunition resupply . The platoon was ambushed en route , with 14 Home Guardsmen being captured . Gacko was reinforced later in the day from troops in Avtovac . On the night of 26 June , the Nevesinje garrison was subjected to a sustained attack by the rebels , but held out . 
 The NDH authorities in Trebinje heard rumours that the Serbs could start an uprising there on 28 June , the feast day of Saint Vitus , and warned NDH forces in the region to be prepared for a revolt . As a result of these reports , the Poglavnik ( leader ) of the NDH , Ante Pavelić , issued orders threatening that anyone who spread these rumours would be court @-@ martialled . On the eve of the feast day , both the gendarmerie and Ustaše took several hostages in case the rumours were true . Later , the gendarmerie released their hostages , but the 19 hostages held by the Ustaše were killed . In contrast to the actions of the Ustaše , the Home Guard units in the area tried to calm the situation down . 
 = = = 27 – 28 June = = = 
 On the morning of 27 June , Prpić launched a three @-@ pronged assault to clear the routes to Nevesinje . Prohaska commanded the push east along the Mostar – Nevesinje road by a force close to two battalions , Francetić led his unit of Ustaše north from Berkovići through the mountains via Odžak to approach Nevesinje from the south , and two companies of the 11th Battalion thrust southwest along the road from Plužine . Once this task was complete , the NDH forces were to vigorously pursue the rebels and destroy them . 
 The Prohaska group deployed with one company on the road , and elements of the 17th Battalion and 70 Ustaše on the left flank . Their attack commenced about 10 : 00 , and although they faced strong resistance from the rebels , aided by strafing and bombing by ZNDH aircraft , they reached villages on the outskirts of Nevesinje after fighting that lasted until dawn on 28 June . One Home Guard battalion halted and took up a defensive stance , and the commander was threatened with dismissal by Prpić before he resumed the attack . Francetić 's Ustaše unit also faced heavy fighting , and had to call for ammunition resupply on two occasions . One of the resupply vehicles was ambushed by rebels between Stolac and Berkovići , and some ammunition was finally delivered by passenger car during the night . Elsewhere , rebels attacked Gacko and Avtovac , and one ZNDH aircraft was shot down by rebel machine gun fire near Avtovac . That night , Prpić telephoned Kvaternik and advised him that the imposition of martial law was necessary to restore order to Herzegovina . Army Chief of Staff General Vladimir Laxa was immediately appointed by Pavelić to control both Hum and Dubrava counties , which incorporated much of eastern Herzegovina . 
 On 28 June , Laxa became the overall commander of all NDH authorities in Hum and Dubrava counties , which included Ustaše , Home Guard , civil administration , gendarmerie and police . Military courts were established to deal with those resisting the NDH authorities . Armed guards were posted at the entrance to towns and villages , and any armed civilians were to be disarmed and brought to military authorities . Laxa issued an order that gave the rebels until 2 July to submit to the authorities . On that day , after the Prohaska group broke through to Nevesinje from Mostar , Prohaska sent a company of the 6th Battalion to Kifino Selo to meet the two companies of the 11th Battalion advancing from Plužine . Despite ZNDH air support , the company of the 6th Battalion was attacked by rebels near the entrance to Kifino Selo and the majority broke and ran . Prohaska had to send reserves to block the road between Nevesinje and Kifino Selo , and the companies from the 11th Battalion began to reconnoitre the rebel positions towards Odžak . 
 Also on that morning , the 200 Home Guard troops and about 50 armed locals in Avtovac were attacked from three directions by rebels . They recovered from their initial surprise and held the town during the day , but in the evening a renewed assault caused them to withdraw from Avtovac and retreat to the villages of <unk> and Ključ . Upon capturing Avtovac , the rebels looted the village , burned down a large number of Muslim homes and killed 32 Muslim civilians , mostly women , children and the elderly . Gacko was also attacked by the rebels , with eight soldiers killed , and one officer and 12 soldiers wounded . Also on 28 June , two Italian Army trucks driving from Bileća to Avtovac were ambushed by rebels , who killed three soldiers and wounded 17 . Around 18 : 00 , the Italian command advised Kvaternik that they would be clearing the route from Bileća via Gacko to Nevesinje on an unspecified future date . During the fighting around Gacko , several ZNDH aircraft were forced to land due to pilot casualties and engine trouble . ZNDH air support operations were suspended due to lack of fuel and spares for the aircraft . 
 There was no improvement in the situation around Stolac , and an Ustaše unit made up of armed civilians proved to be of such low combat value that Laxa spoke to Francetić and criticised its performance . South of Bileća , rebels destroyed the gendarmerie post in a village , killing seven gendarmes . Dozens of gendarmes were sent from Trebinje to assist them , but they were stopped by rebels and withdrew into a village schoolhouse . In the afternoon a platoon of the 10th Home Guard Battalion was sent north from Trebinje to support the gendarmes , but they were attacked near the village of <unk> , and withdrew into a defensive position . They were reinforced by a second platoon during the night , and were given orders to clear the road from Trebinje to Bileća on the following morning ahead of the Italians . 
 = = = 29 – 30 June = = = 
 At dawn on 29 June , the rebels attacked the Ustaše in a village on the Mostar – Nevesinje road . Prohaska demanded help from Mostar , and planned to send a force from Nevesinje to assist . From Mostar , a company of the 21st Battalion was despatched to relieve the Ustaše , who had managed to hold off the rebels . The Home Guard company then took over the post from the Ustaše . The same day , two new battalions arrived in Mostar , the 23rd Battalion from Osijek and the 15th Battalion from Travnik . These reinforcements arrived just as Prpić received confirmation that Avtovac had been captured by the rebels . The remaining small garrison in Gacko , consisting of only 20 gendarmes and 30 Ustaše , were holding out but expecting more attacks by the rebels . In the morning , the attack by elements of the 10th Battalion stalled until the battalion commander , Lieutenant Colonel Julije <unk> , personally took command of the operation , clearing the way for the Italians . The promised Italian intervention commenced about midday , and about 100 trucks of Italian soldiers arrived in Gacko about 17 : 00 . As they had passed through Avtovac , the rebels had left the town and withdrawn to villages to the east . About 18 : 00 , the 10th Battalion relieved the besieged gendarmes in the village schoolhouse . ZNDH aircraft from Mostar airfield flew reconnaissance sorties over the area and dropped leaflets over Stolac , Stepen , Avtovac , Gacko and Plužine . 
 After the garrison of Nevesinje had been relieved , Laxa directed his main effort towards the Gacko and Avtovac districts . Sensitive to the fact that the Italians had not respected the territorial borders of the NDH when they sent their column to Gacko , he considered it very important that Croatian military and political prestige be restored , otherwise the Italians might decide to remain in the area rather than withdraw to their garrison near the Adriatic coast . He planned to follow this consolidation by clearing the border areas with Montenegro then clearing the hinterland of any remaining rebels . For this last task he intended to deploy a yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ formed special unit to be led by Lieutenant Colonel Josip Metzger . The task of re @-@ asserting NDH authority in the Gacko and Avtovac districts was allocated to Prohaska 's group , consisting of the 6th Battalion , one company of the 18th Battalion , two companies of the 17th Battalion , and the recently arrived 15th and 21st Battalions , which were to be sent to Nevesinje from Mostar . Prohaska was to act in concert with the 11th Battalion who were already in the vicinity of Plužine , just to the north of the Nevesinje – Gacko road . In preparation , the 15th Battalion was trucked to Nevesinje , and a company of the 17th Battalion conducted a coordinated attack with the 11th Battalion on rebel positions near Kifino Selo . This attack was defeated by the rebels , and a battalion commander was killed . 
 During the remainder of the day , the Italians collected the bodies of their dead from the rebel ambush on 28 June , and rescued some Home Guard troops that had escaped Avtovac , but then returned to Plana , just north of Bileća . The value of further operations in the Gacko and Avtovac areas was brought into question when the Italians reported that both towns had been burned to the ground , and all the inhabitants had been massacred . The Italians blamed Montenegrins attached to the rebels for the destruction and killings in the two towns . The Italian estimate of rebel strength was around 3 @,@ 000 armed with machine guns , artillery and anti @-@ aircraft guns . A German intelligence officer from Sarajevo arrived at Prpić 's headquarters in Mostar to receive a briefing on the situation . The small garrison of Gacko was anticipating an attack by rebels during the night , but in the afternoon 180 Home Guardsmen that had withdrawn from Avtovac arrived to bolster their position , and the night passed without incident . 
 = = = 1 – 7 July = = = 
 On 1 July , an Italian armoured unit arrived in Gacko to reinforce the garrison . An Ustaše operation to clear the insurgents from the Stolac district began on 3 July , meeting with success and opening of the road from <unk> north to Odžak . The Ustaše did not go closer to Nevesinje as they were not in uniform , and were concerned that the Home Guards would mistake them for rebels . During this operation , three Ustaše were killed , including their commander , and the Ustaše fighters killed ten rebels and captured two . In the belongings of one of the captured rebels , the Ustaše located a report by the " National Movement for the Liberation of Nevesinje " ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Narodni pokret za <unk> <unk> ) , which was apparently how the rebels referred to themselves . The report made it clear that the rebels were using military tactics and organisation , and hinted at co @-@ operation with the Italians . According to information gathered by the police , the local rebel leadership included former Mostar merchant Čedo Milić , the <unk> brothers from Avtovac , the Orthodox priest Father <unk> from <unk> , and a Captain Radović from Avtovac . Montenegrins involved in the leadership of the uprising included Colonel Bajo Stanišić , Major <unk> Višnjić , and <unk> <unk> from Nikšić . 
 Following the Italian intervention , Prpić was able to proceed with the task of clearing the wider area of Nevesinje from 3 July , ensuring NDH control of population centres and roads . On 5 July , he replaced his deputy Prohaska with Colonel Franjo Šimić , and assigned him a force consisting of the 6th , 11th , 15th and 17th Battalions , a company of the 18th Battalion and a troop of artillery . The force numbered 62 officers and 2 @,@ 062 men , with heavy weapons including four 100 mm Skoda houfnice vz 14 mountain howitzers , six heavy machine guns and twenty @-@ seven light machine guns . Šimić seized the crossroads near Kifino Selo and Plužine , securing it with one company of the 11th Battalion , then sent the 15th Battalion to Gacko and the 17th Battalion to Berkovići . A half company of the 21st Battalion secured the Mostar – Nevesinje road . Once this was completed , the major roads in eastern Herzegovina were secured . These operations proceeded without significant fighting , as some of the rebels retreated over the border with Montenegro , and others hid their weapons in the mountains and returned to their homes . By 7 July , NDH forces had regained full control over all the towns and transport routes in eastern Herzegovina . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Tomasevich states that the uprising was a " spontaneous , unorganised outburst " that was doomed to failure , and involved neither the Chetniks of Draža Mihailović nor the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Komunistička partija Jugoslavije , KPJ ) . He contends that the uprising was the result of several factors , including the Ustaše persecutions , fear and hatred of the NDH authorities , a local tradition of rebellion against the Ottoman Empire , the poor economic conditions in eastern Herzegovina , and news of the launching of Operation Barbarossa against the Soviet Union . Hoare concurs with Tomasevich that the uprising was in the tradition of the Herzegovinian rebellions against the Ottoman Empire during the 19th century , such as the uprisings in 1875 – 77 . Edmund Glaise @-@ Horstenau , the German Plenipotentiary General in the NDH , believed that the Italians might have deliberately avoided interfering in the uprising . General Renzo Dalmazzo , the commander of the Italian 6th Army Corps , blamed the Ustaše and Muslims for stoking the revolt . 
 In eastern Herzegovina , the KPJ had little impact until mid @-@ August 1941 , well after the initial revolt had been suppressed . During the lead @-@ up to the mass uprising , the KPJ organisation in Herzegovina would not commit itself , as it was waiting for orders from the provincial organisation in Sarajevo , which was expecting direction from the KPJ Central Committee to launch a general uprising across Yugoslavia . Once they became aware of the German attack on the Soviet Union , the KPJ in Herzegovina voted to join the mass uprising , but this only occurred on 24 June , when the uprising was already in full swing . According to Milazzo , the rebels remained a threat throughout eastern Herzegovina well into July , although the uprising in Herzegovina did not advance until the Bosnia @-@ wide revolt occurred at the end of July , by which time the KPJ was ready for active involvement in the fighting . 
 = Katori @-@ class battleship = 
 The Katori class ( <unk> , Katori @-@ gata senkan ) was a two @-@ ship class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the early 1900s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships itself , they were designed and built in the UK . They were the last battleships to be built for Japan at overseas shipyards , and the last to be equipped with a ram . The ships were delivered after the end of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . They saw no action during World War I , although both were present when Japan joined the Siberian Intervention in 1918 . They were disarmed and scrapped in 1923 – 25 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Katori @-@ class ships were ordered under the 1903 Third Fleet Extension Program . As with the earlier battleships , Japan lacked the technology and capability to construct its own battleships , and turned again to the United Kingdom , placing orders with Armstrong and Vickers in January 1904 . The next class of battleships , the Satsuma class , were built in Japan . 
 The design of the Katori class was a modified and improved version of the King Edward VII @-@ class battleships of the Royal Navy . The Vickers @-@ built Katori was slightly smaller than her sister ship , Kashima . They had an overall length of 456 @.@ 25 – 470 @.@ 6 feet ( 139 @.@ 1 – 143 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 78 – 78 @.@ 16 feet ( 23 @.@ 8 – 23 @.@ 8 m ) , and a normal draught of 26 @.@ 6 – 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 2 m ) . They displaced 15 @,@ 950 – 16 @,@ 383 long tons ( 16 @,@ 206 – 16 @,@ 646 t ) at normal load . The crew consisted of 864 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ships were powered by a pair of four @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , using steam generated by 20 Niclausse boilers using a mixture of coal and fuel oil . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 600 – 16 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 600 – 12 @,@ 400 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) although they proved to be faster during their sea trials . Kashima reached a top speed of 19 @.@ 24 knots ( 35 @.@ 63 km / h ; 22 @.@ 14 mph ) using 17 @,@ 280 ihp ( 12 @,@ 890 kW ) and Katori made 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) from 18 @,@ 500 ihp ( 13 @,@ 800 kW ) . The ships carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 150 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 120 long tons ) of coal and 377 – 750 long tons ( 383 – 762 t ) of fuel oil which allowed them to steam for 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Katori class were equipped with four 45 @-@ calibre Elswick Ordnance Company 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Type 41 guns mounted in twin @-@ gun barbettes fore and aft of the superstructure that had armoured hoods to protect the guns and were usually called gun turrets . The barbettes were positioned fore and aft of the superstructure . These were more powerful than the 40 @-@ calibre guns on Mikasa and earlier Japanese battleships . They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ( 850 m / s ) . 
 The King Edward VII class introduced an intermediate calibre of 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) guns between the primary 12 @-@ inch guns and the secondary six @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns and the Japanese upgraded these to 45 @-@ calibre 10 @-@ inch Type 41 guns in four single barbettes mounted at the corners of the superstructure . The guns had a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 707 ft / s ( 825 m / s ) when firing 500 @-@ pound ( 227 kg ) shells . The Japanese added an additional pair of quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 40 @-@ caliber six @-@ inch Type 41 guns , making a total of 12 guns , compared to the 10 of the King Edward VIIs . Ten of these guns were mounted in the hull and the remaining two were placed in the superstructure between the 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) gun turrets . Their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells had a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) when fired by the Type 41 guns . 
 Protection against torpedo boat attacks was provided by 12 to 16 QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and three 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) QF three @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . The 12 @-@ pounders fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 359 ft / s ( 719 m / s ) . The ships were also equipped with five submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two on each broadside and one in the stern . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The waterline main belt of the Katori @-@ class vessels consisted of Krupp cemented armour 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) high , of which 2 feet 6 inches ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) was above the waterline at normal load . It had a maximum thickness of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) amidships . It was only 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) inches thick at the ends of the ship and was surmounted by a six @-@ inch , 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) strake of armour that ran between the main gun barbettes and protected most of the secondary guns . The barbettes for the main guns were 5 – 12 inches ( 130 – 300 mm ) thick and those for the intermediate turrets were protected by six inches of armour . The armour of the main gun barbette hoods had a maximum thickness of nine inches and those of the intermediate barbettes were 6 – 8 inches ( 150 – 200 mm ) thick . The sides of the superstructure between the intermediate barbettes had 4 inches ( 102 mm ) of armour . 
 The flat portion of the deck armour was 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick and 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick amidships where it sloped down to the bottom of the armour belt . This significantly improved the ships ' protection as any shell that penetrated their vertical armour also had to penetrate the sloping deck before it could reach the machinery compartments or magazines . Outside the central armoured citadel , the sloped deck had a thickness of 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) . The conning tower was protected by nine inches of armour . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Whilst conducting gunnery training in Hiroshima Bay on 16 September 1907 , brown powder propellant in Kashima 's starboard rear 10 @-@ inch gun mount ignited when it came in contact with burning residue from the previous shot . The fire killed seven officers and 27 enlisted men ; wounding two officers and six enlisted men . When World War I began , Kashima was refitting while Katori was assigned to the 1st Battleship Squadron . The former was assigned to the 2nd Battleship Squadron when her refit was completed in 1915 and became the squadron 's flagship in 1916 . Katori began a refit in 1914 that lasted until late 1916 and was assigned to the 5th Battleship Squadron upon its completion . Kashima joined her sister in the 5th Battleship Squadron as its flagship in 1918 and both ships covered the landing of Japanese troops in Siberia in August of that year as Japan decided to intervene in the Russian Civil War . 
 In 1921 , Katori , escorted by Kashima , carried Crown Prince Hirohito on his tour of Europe where he met King George V. Both ships were disarmed in 1923 and later scrapped to comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 = Sonnet 86 = 
 Sonnet 86 is one of 154 sonnets written by the English playwright and poet William Shakespeare . It is the final poem of the Rival Poet subsection of the Fair Youth sonnets in which Shakespeare writes about an unnamed young man and a rival poet competing for the youth 's attention . While the exact date of its composition is unknown , scholars generally agree that the Rival Poet series was written between 1598 and 1600 and published along with the rest of the sonnets in the 1609 Quarto . 
 Within the sonnet , the speaker contemplates his inability to articulate his admiration for the Fair Youth , a fault he attributes to his jealousy of the Fair Youth 's appearance in the poems of the speaker 's Rival Poet . Sonnet 86 is notable within the Rival Poet subsection of sonnets because it allegedly provides important clues as to the historical identity of this Rival Poet . The sonnet is written in the typical Shakespearean sonnet form , containing 14 lines of iambic pentameter and ending in a rhymed couplet . 
 = = Paraphrase = = 
 The poem , in which the speaker rhetorically asks why he has lost his ability to write poetry , uses boating references while staying closely connected to the poetic structure of a sonnet . 
 Below is a paraphrase , written in contemporary English and in prose . 
 Was it his ambitious poetry , which was written to win you , that stopped my ability to think ? Did it cause all of my ideas to die as soon as they were born ? Was it his heaven given ability , writing which was blessed by the gods , that stopped me in my tracks ? Neither he nor his companions who helped him were able to stop my poetic ability . Neither he nor the Muse which aids him each night can claim to have silenced me . For I am not afraid . However , when your beauty was gifted to him then I was lost and destroyed . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Shakespeare 's sonnets follow the fourteen line rhyme scheme of the ' English ' or ' <unk> ' sonnet form ( abab cdcd efef gg ) . A sonnet originally referred to any short lyric . In 1573 , George Gascoigne tried to define the word sonnet . This definition , stated below , delineates the structure within which Shakespeare often wrote . 
 I can best <unk> to call those Sonnets which are of <unk> lynes , every line <unk> <unk> syllables . The first twelve do <unk> in staves of foure lines by crosse metre , and the last <unk> <unk> together do conclude the whole . 
 While conventional English sonnet form described by Gascoigne is seen in Sonnet 86 , the Petrarchan sonnet form , which requires a pause between the first eight lines and the last six lines is also evident . At the end of line eight Shakespeare uses a period to bring the sonnet to a stop , changing the sonnet 's direction by moving away from rhetorical questions to a more decisive tone within the sestet , which seems to answer the distress of the octave . 
 The Shakespearean sonnet is composed in iambic pentameter , a type of poetic metre based on five pairs of metrically weak / strong syllabic positions . The 6th line exemplifies a regular iambic pentameter : 
 × / × / × / × / × / 
 Above a mortal pitch , that struck me dead ? ( 86 @.@ 6 ) 
 / 
 = ictus , a metrically strong syllabic position . × = 
 nonictus . 
 Line two exhibits the first of a large number of necessary or potential initial reversals : 
 / × × / × / × / × / 
 Bound for the prize of all @-@ too @-@ precious you , ( 86 @.@ 2 ) 
 Initial reversals also occur in lines four and eight . Potential initial reversal occur in lines one , five , seven , nine , and twelve ; while potential mid @-@ line reversals occur in lines three , seven , and thirteen . 
 The meter demands that in the fifth line , the first " spirit " count as one syllable ( possibly pronounced as spear 't , sprite , <unk> , or spurt ) , while the second " spirits " counts as two . Line eight 's " <unk> " is pronounced with four syllables . 
 = = Context = = 
 Sonnet 86 is well known as the final sonnet of The Rival Poet sonnets , in Shakespeares 1609 edition of sonnets . The rival poet series , Sonnets 78 @-@ 86 , is generally thought to be written around the years of 1598 – 1600 , based on vocabulary evidence and similarities found with the plays that were also written during this time period . There is no exact answer as to who this rival poet is since nearly every well @-@ known poet contemporary with Shakespeare has , at some time , been suggested as the " rival poet " . Among the poets considered to be the rival poet , George Chapman and Christopher Marlowe , colleagues and literary competitors to Shakespeare , are generally considered to be two of the most likely contenders . 
 Many of these potential identifications have been made using alleged clues found in Sonnet 86 . The second and third quatrains in particular have garnered much attention in this regard . The description of a poet " by spirits taught to write " has led several critics , including Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones and William Minto , to name George Chapman as the likeliest candidate . This is due to his supposed spiritual inspiration by the ghost of Homer . Another scholar , Richard Levin , connects the line " Above a mortal pitch , that struck me dead ? " to Christopher Marlowe 's play <unk> , saying that the reactions described in both are similar to each other . 
 In a different reading , Shakespearean scholar Eric Sams has interpreted this reference to spiritual communion as an allusion to <unk> Barnes , a notorious English occultist and poet , while others contend that the significance of the spirit is simply an allusion to poetic genius and that it contains no reference to an actual personage . 
 = = Exegesis = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 While scholarly debate abounds as to the identities of the persons contemplated in the sonnet , there is general consensus as to Sonnet 86 's role within the Rival Poet subsection of the Fair Youth sonnets . As Joseph <unk> notes , " Sonnet 86 is written in the past tense , as distinct from the present tense of the eight previous sonnets , to signal the end of the episode , " that is , the Rival Poet series of sonnets . As the final sonnet in the series , it is also the sonnet in which Shakespeare claims his ultimate victory over the rival poet , the situation " resolved in Shakespeare 's favor " as he relentlessly mocks his opponent . Though he admits to having experienced a poetic hesitation , Shakespeare maintains that it was not the Rival Poet who caused it . Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones writes : " Undaunted by the splendour of his rival 's verses , the speaker quails only at [ his rival 's ] appropriation of the young man 's favour . " 
 = = = Quatrain 1 = = = 
 The sonnet begins with the speaker rhetorically asking whether it was the " great verse " of his rival poet that had prevented the speaker from expressing his own " ripe thoughts . " According to Duncan @-@ Jones , " the speaker claims to be unable to voice his thoughts of love ; they are ready for utterance ( ripe ) , but remain buried ( in @-@ <unk> ) in his brain because he is intimidated by his rival . " However , as Harold Bloom contends , this intimidation is apparently not caused by the artistic skill of his rival . In the opening lines of the sonnet , " [ Shakespeare ] charmingly suggests an inhibition through jealousy , not of superior poetic powers , but of encountering the Fair Young Man 's portrait in a rival 's verses . " The significance behind the apparent flattery of this rival 's art seems open to interpretation . Kenneth Muir writes : " Whether " the proud full sail of his great verse " is sincere admiration or a hint that it is bombastic is still debated , " though contemporary scholars tend to gravitate toward the latter , more sarcastic interpretation . <unk> , amongst others , asserts that this verse is a derogatory <unk> to the ostentatious craft of his opponent , belittling the rival 's delusions of grandeur . 
 = = = Quatrain 2 = = = 
 As noted above , many of the alleged clues as to the identity of the rival poet have been discovered within this quatrain . While Duncan @-@ Jones and Minto interpret references of the poet " by spirits taught to write " as allusions to George Chapman , other scholars have posited poets from Marlowe to Gervase Markham as contenders . Eric Sams , for one , relies heavily on these descriptions of spiritual communication to reinforce his argument for Barnes as the Rival Poet , noting Barnes ' scandalous occultism in 16th century England . In addition to these claims ( which assume the existence of a historical counterpart ) , there are also scholars who argue that the significance of the spirit is overstated and that it simply refers to poetic inspiration . As these diverse interpretations attest , a definitive identification of the Rival remains far from determined . Bloom writes , " Nearly every contemporary with Shakespeare has been put forward , including Christopher Marlowe , Ben Jonson , Samuel Daniel , and Edmund Spenser " . Structurally , this quatrain both extends and answers the question previously advanced by the sonnet 's speaker . He again asks whether it was the spirit of his rival that extinguished the speaker 's inspiration , then responds that it was certainly not . Within this response , Shakespeare simultaneously attacks the merit of the Rival 's output , " underscoring his " spiritual " composition , not to say his quackery , " while thoroughly rejecting its influence on the speaker 's own poetry . An accurate reading of the eighth line ( " Giving him aid , my verse astonished . " ) must take note that the word " astonished " is herein found with its earliest definition : " bereft of sensation ; stunned , <unk> , " in describing the status of the speaker 's " verse . " 
 = = = Quatrain 3 = = = 
 In the third quatrain , after again questioning the integrity of his rival 's work , Shakespeare continues to affirm his fearlessness in the face of his rival 's poetry . Lines nine and ten lend themselves to the same ambiguous interpretation found in the previous quatrain , with many scholars reading them as a reference to a specific poet . Of the " affable familiar ghost " found in line nine , Duncan @-@ Jones writes : " The phrase seems to carry an allusion to some well @-@ known relationship between a poet and his Muse or inspiring genius , such as Chapman 's with the spirit of Homer . " Shakespeare , however , mocks this relationship , stating that the Rival has been " <unk> " by whatever spirit he may be communicating with and even this creative alliance is unable to claim the victory of the speaker 's silence . The final line of the quatrain ( " I was not sick of any fear from thence . " ) sets the stage for the couplet , alluding to the fact that , while his fear did not come from " thence , " i.e. , the rival poet , there is indeed a fear that has disrupted his poetic output . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The couplet of Sonnet 86 finally allows the reader a glimpse of the speaker 's true vulnerability . It is here that he sets aside his attack on the Rival Poet in order to admit the true cause of his work 's impediment . <unk> writes " Shakespeare finishes the episode by acknowledging what had long been evident , that the focus and cause of the contention was centered on the youth , not on literary laurels . " Bloom calls this couplet " a climactic , if dispiriting , close for the speaker , " as it demonstrates that while the speaker may have defeated the Rival Poet on the grounds of artistry , there is still competition between the two for the favor of the Fair Youth . In terms of the Rival Poet 's identity , Sams uses the penultimate verse to strengthen his argument for Barnes , reading line 13 as a reference to Barne 's 1593 work <unk> and <unk> . Sams writes : " One phrase in Sonnet 86 echoes Barnes , namely " when your countenance filled up his line . " Barnes 's sonnet to Henry Wriothesley , 3rd Earl of Southampton includes the actual words " your countenance . " Thus Southampton 's favour is solicited for the love − lyrics of <unk> and <unk> , so " that with your countenance graced they may withstand " envy and criticism . The word " countenance " has indeed " filled up " Barnes 's line — to overflowing , since it adds an extra syllable . " Shakespeare 's verse , on the other hand , conforms to a traditional iambic scansion . This interpretation also reads this line as a final blow against the Rival Poet , demonstrating Shakespeare 's superior mastery of the sonnet form . 
 = New York State Route 47 = 
 New York State Route 47 ( NY 47 ) was a 19 @.@ 34 @-@ mile ( 31 @.@ 12 km ) long state highway around Rochester in New York , in the United States . It formed a semicircle through the inner suburbs of Rochester , following expressways west and east of the city and surface streets south of Rochester . The western terminus of the route was at an interchange with NY 104 west of the city limits in Greece . The eastern terminus was at an intersection with Culver Road in Irondequoit mere yards from Lake Ontario . In between its western and eastern extents , NY 47 met Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) twice . The limited @-@ access highway portions of the route were known as the Rochester Outer Loop ( or Outer Loop ) in contrast to the Inner Loop around downtown Rochester . 
 NY 47 was originally routed along surface streets through the city when it was assigned c . 1937 . It began at NY 31 in Gates and followed Howard Road and Brooks Avenue southeast into Rochester , where it continued eastward on Genesee Park Boulevard and Elmwood Avenue . NY 47 remained on the latter through Brighton to an area known as Twelve Corners . At this point , the route turned north onto Winton Road and followed that street through the eastern fringe of the city to Irondequoit , where NY 47 ended at a junction with U.S. Route 104 ( US 104 , now NY 404 ) . The Outer Loop was constructed in stages , beginning with the portion of the Sea Breeze Expressway north of Ridge Road in the early 1950s . From that point on , construction progressed in a generally clockwise fashion around the city . 
 By the late 1960s and early 1970s , the Outer Loop was complete from NY 383 to US 104 west of the city and from modern I @-@ 590 exit 1 to the lakeshore east of Rochester . NY 47 followed the loop from US 104 south to NY 383 and from Elmwood Avenue north to modern NY 590 exit 8 ; north of that point , the expressway was part of US 104 and NY 18 . NY 47 was extended northward along the remainder of the Sea Breeze Expressway in 1970 . On March 18 , 1980 , the NY 47 designation was removed and replaced with several others , primarily I @-@ 390 , I @-@ 590 , NY 390 , and NY 590 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 47 followed a half @-@ circle routing around the city of Rochester , beginning northwest of downtown in the town of Greece and proceeding generally counterclockwise around the city before ending northeast of downtown at the Lake Ontario shoreline in Irondequoit . The limited @-@ access highway portions of NY 47 were named the " Rochester Outer Loop " ( or " Outer Loop " ) in contrast to the Inner Loop around downtown Rochester . This moniker remains in use to this day , now referring to the designations that have since replaced NY 47 along the loop . Conceptually , NY 104 completes the Outer Loop along the north side of the city . However , only the section east of the Genesee River is expressway , leaving NY 104 from modern NY 390 to the Veterans Memorial Bridge as the only at @-@ grade portion of the loop . The at @-@ grade portion of NY 47 along Scottsville Road and Elmwood Avenue was known as the " Rochester Bypass " prior to the completion of the Outer Loop . The alignment described within this section is of NY 47 upon its removal in 1980 . 
 = = = Western expressway = = = 
 NY 47 began at an interchange with NY 104 ( now the interchange between NY 390 and NY 104 ) in Greece one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the Rochester city limits . Although , at the time , the freeway terminated just north of the interchange , the interchange itself was roughly complete , with only ramps to and from future NY 390 north of the interchange missing . NY 47 followed the modern NY 390 alignment south to I @-@ 490 , where NY 47 continued onto what is now I @-@ 390 . The routings of NY 47 and current I @-@ 390 were identical to NY 383 ( Scottsville Road ) in Chili , where NY 47 was forced to grade level via a partially constructed interchange , as modern I @-@ 390 had yet to be constructed in the area southeast of NY 383 . 
 = = = At @-@ grade = = = 
 Off the expressway and now at @-@ grade , NY 47 turned north onto NY 383 , forming a short concurrency with NY 383 into Rochester . At Elmwood Avenue , NY 47 and NY 383 departed Scottsville Road and proceeded eastward on Elmwood Avenue . Two blocks to the east , at an intersection with South Plymouth Avenue , NY 383 split from NY 47 , following Plymouth Avenue into downtown Rochester . NY 47 remained routed on Elmwood Avenue , crossing the Genesee River and passing north of Strong Memorial Hospital prior to intersecting NY 15 ( Mount Hope Avenue ) in the shadow of Mount Hope Cemetery . East of NY 15 , NY 47 progressed along Elmwood Avenue , intersecting several local streets before entering Brighton . 
 Within Brighton , NY 47 continued on Elmwood Avenue through " Twelve Corners " , intersecting NY 31 ( Monroe Avenue ) at the location , to what is now I @-@ 590 . At the northbound entrance ramp of the modern interchange between I @-@ 590 and Elmwood Avenue , NY 47 separated from the latter , entering the freeway . While what is now I @-@ 590 was constructed and open from Winton Road to I @-@ 490 , it had no signed designation between Winton and Elmwood . 
 = = = Eastern expressway = = = 
 NY 47 followed modern I @-@ 590 northward through Brighton to the Can of Worms , where NY 47 met I @-@ 490 for the second time . Due to the way the interchange was designed at the time , traffic continuing on NY 47 across I @-@ 490 had to merge with I @-@ 490 traffic for roughly 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) before exiting I @-@ 490 onto the other portion of NY 47 . North of I @-@ 490 , NY 47 followed the length of what is now NY 590 through Brighton , Rochester , and Irondequoit to Culver Road at the Lake Ontario shoreline . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original alignment = = = 
 When NY 47 was first commissioned in the Rochester area c . 1937 , it was routed along previously unnumbered roadways , with its northwest terminus located at the intersection of NY 31 ( Lyell Avenue ) and Howard Road in Gates . NY 47 took Howard Road south , passing through Gates Center and intersecting NY 33 before crossing the then @-@ New York Central Railroad main line ( now the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision ) at @-@ grade . The route remained on Howard Road until the intersection of Howard Road and Chili Avenue ( NY 33A ) , which also included Brooks Avenue at this juncture of time . NY 47 turned east onto Brooks Avenue and proceeded toward the Greater Rochester International Airport , joining the current routing of NY 204 at Beahan Road ( now Old Beahan Road ) . 
 NY 47 followed the entire alignment of NY 204 to what is now I @-@ 390 and continued on Brooks Avenue into Rochester to Genesee Park Boulevard . Route 47 turned south onto the street , which circles around the southwestern quadrant of the city , and followed its length to Genesee Street , where it turned south for a short distance before resuming its eastward alignment on Elmwood Avenue . The route remained on Elmwood Avenue into Brighton , where it turned north onto South Winton Road at Twelve Corners . At Highland Avenue , NY 47 reentered Rochester and became North Winton Road at East Avenue ( NY 96 ) . The route remained on Winton through Rochester and Irondequoit before terminating at Empire Boulevard ( then US 104 , now NY 404 ) just west of Irondequoit Bay . 
 = = = Expressway realignments = = = 
 = = = = East of Rochester = = = = 
 In the early 1950s , construction began on the Sea Breeze Expressway , a mostly limited @-@ access highway linking the Lake Ontario shoreline to the proposed I @-@ 490 east of Rochester . The first portion of the road , a divided highway extending from East Ridge Road in Irondequoit to Culver Road just west of the Irondequoit Bay Outlet , was opened to traffic by 1954 as a realignment of NY 18 . Construction on a limited @-@ access extension south to Empire Boulevard ( three blocks west of NY 47 's western terminus ) began at some point between 1956 and 1958 and was completed by 1960 as a realignment of US 104 . Another extension of the highway south to the partially complete I @-@ 490 in Brighton was completed c . 1961 and largely became part of a rerouted NY 47 by the following year . At the time , NY 47 left the expressway at Blossom Road and followed it west to Winton Road , where it rejoined its original routing . 
 By 1964 , construction was underway on a new expressway leading south from I @-@ 490 at the Can of Worms to Elmwood Avenue east of Twelve Corners . The highway was completed c . 1965 , at which time NY 47 was realigned to follow the Sea Breeze Expressway and the new expressway south through the Can of Worms to its end at a partial interchange with Elmwood Avenue ( now I @-@ 590 exit 3 ) . It continued west on Elmwood Avenue to Twelve Corners , where it reconnected to its old alignment at Winton Road . 
 = = = = West of Rochester = = = = 
 The first realignment of NY 47 west of the city occurred c . 1962 when it was rerouted between Chili and Elmwood Avenues to bypass the then @-@ Rochester – Monroe County Airport to the south . Instead of turning east onto Brooks Avenue as it did prior to 1962 , the route continued south on Beahan Road to Scottsville Road ( NY 383 ) , where it turned to overlap NY 383 north to Elmwood Avenue . At the time , Beahan Road connected directly to Scottsville Road ( via modern Old Beahan Road ) as the primary runway southwest of the airport had yet to be extended to its present length . By 1962 , construction was underway on a new limited @-@ access highway paralleling NY 47 ( Howard Road ) to the east between NY 31 and NY 33 . Within two years , work had begun on an extension of the highway south along the Erie Canal to Scottsville Road . Farther east , construction was underway on a new highway leading south from I @-@ 490 to Elmwood Avenue east of Twelve Corners . 
 All of the limited @-@ access highway between NY 31 and NY 383 opened to traffic c . 1965 . NY 47 was reconfigured to begin a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to the east of Howard Road at modern NY 390 exit 21 and follow the new highway southeastward to its temporary end at what is now I @-@ 390 exit 17 east of the airport . At this point , NY 47 joined its pre @-@ 1965 routing and followed NY 383 northeastward into the city limits . By 1968 , construction was underway on a northward extension of the expressway to US 104 in Greece . It was completed and opened to traffic by 1971 . 
 = = = Extensions and deletion = = = 
 NY 47 was officially extended on both ends on January 1 , 1970 , to terminate at Lake Ontario on opposite sides of Rochester . In Greece , the designation officially followed what is now NY 390 north to the Lake Ontario State Parkway ; however , the portion between US 104 and the parkway had yet to be constructed . To the east in Irondequoit , NY 47 was stretched northward along the Sea Breeze Expressway to Culver Road , resulting in overlaps with both US 104 and NY 18 . At the time , the overlap with US 104 existed only between Empire Boulevard and the Keeler Street Expressway , which became the new alignment of the route through Irondequoit after its completion in 1969 . The overlap with US 104 was eliminated entirely the following year when that route was realigned onto a new expressway alignment between NY 47 and Webster that traversed Irondequoit Bay via the newly built Irondequoit Bay Bridge . The overlap with NY 18 was eliminated c . 1973 when NY 18 was truncated to its current eastern terminus in Kodak Park . 
 On March 18 , 1980 , the NY 47 designation was eliminated and split into four other routes . From NY 104 in Greece to I @-@ 490 , NY 47 became NY 390 . The section from I @-@ 490 south to NY 383 was designated as part of I @-@ 390 ; however , it would not connect to the existing portion of I @-@ 390 south of Rochester until 1981 , when the interchange between I @-@ 390 and I @-@ 590 was completed . The segment of NY 47 from Elmwood Avenue north to the Can of Worms became part of I @-@ 590 , which continued southwest along the freeway to Winton Road . From the Can of Worms to Lake Ontario , NY 47 was redesignated NY 590 . 
 Off the expressways , the former alignments of NY 47 now carry several designations . Howard Road , bypassed by the 1960s realignment in Gates , is still maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation as NY 940L , an unsigned reference route 2 @.@ 37 miles ( 3 @.@ 81 km ) in length . Beahan Road , also bypassed by the same 1960s rerouting , was reconfigured into its current alignment by 1971 due to an expansion by the airport . The section of Beahan Road that carried NY 47 is currently maintained by Monroe County as part of County Route 164 ( CR 164 ) , the county 's unsigned designation for all of Beahan Road . The portion of NY 47 on Elmwood Avenue from the Rochester city line to I @-@ 590 is also maintained by Monroe County as part of CR 87 . Lastly , the segments of Winton Road outside of the Rochester city limits are now part of CR 98 . The remainder of c . 1980 NY 47 and the former alignments of the route are currently locally maintained . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Monroe County . 
 = Battle of Nanking = 
 The Battle of Nanking ( or Nanjing ) was fought in early December 1937 during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War between the National Revolutionary Army of China and the Imperial Japanese Army for control of Nanking ( Nanjing ) , the capital of the Republic of China . 
 Following the outbreak of war between Japan and China in July 1937 the Japanese government at first attempting to contain the fighting and sought a negotiated settlement to the war . However , after victory in the Battle of Shanghai expansionists prevailed within the Japanese military and on December 1 a campaign to capture Nanking was officially authorized . The task of occupying Nanking was given to General Iwane Matsui , the commander of Japan 's Central China Area Army , who believed that the capture of Nanking would force China to surrender and thus end the war . Chinese leader Chiang Kai @-@ shek ultimately decided to defend the city and appointed Tang Shengzhi to command the Nanking Garrison Force , a hastily assembled army of local conscripts and the remnants of the Chinese units who had fought in Shanghai . 
 Japanese soldiers marched from Shanghai to Nanking at a breakneck pace , rapidly defeating pockets of Chinese resistance . By December 9 they had reached the last line of defense , the Fukuo Line , behind which lay Nanking 's fortified walls . On December 10 Matsui ordered an all @-@ out attack on Nanking , and after less than two days of intense fighting Chiang decided to abandon the city . Before fleeing , Tang ordered his men to launch a concerted breakout of the Japanese siege , but by this time Nanking was largely surrounded and its defenses were at the breaking point . Most of Tang 's units simply collapsed , their soldiers often casting off their weapons and uniforms in the streets in the hopes of hiding among the city 's civilian population . 
 Following the capture of the city Japanese soldiers massacred Chinese prisoners of war , murdered civilians , and committed acts of looting and rape in an event known as the Nanking Massacre . Though Japan 's military victory excited and emboldened them , the subsequent massacre tarnished their reputation in the eyes of the world . Contrary to Matsui 's expectations , China did not surrender and the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War continued for another eight years . 
 = = Prelude to the battle = = 
 = = = Japan 's decision to capture Nanking = = = 
 The conflict which would become known as Second Sino @-@ Japanese War started on July 7 , 1937 with a skirmish at Marco Polo Bridge which escalated rapidly into a full @-@ scale war in northern China between the armies of China and Japan . China , however , wanted to avoid a decisive confrontation in the north and so instead opened a second front by attacking Japanese units in Shanghai in central China . The Japanese responded by dispatching the Shanghai Expeditionary Army ( SEA ) , commanded by General Iwane Matsui , to drive the Chinese Army from Shanghai . Intense fighting in Shanghai forced Japan 's Army General Staff , which was in charge of military operations , to repeatedly reinforce the SEA , and finally on November 9 an entirely new army , the 10th Army commanded by Lieutenant General Heisuke Yanagawa , was also landed at Hangzhou Bay just south of Shanghai . 
 Although the arrival of the 10th Army succeeded at forcing the Chinese Army to retreat from Shanghai , the Japanese Army General Staff had decided to adopt a policy of non @-@ expansion of hostilities with the aim of ending the war . On November 7 its de facto leader Deputy Chief of Staff Hayao Tada laid down an " operation restriction line " preventing its forces from leaving the vicinity of Shanghai , or more specifically from going west of the Chinese cites of Suzhou and Jiaxing . The city of Nanking is 300 kilometers ( 186 miles ) west of Shanghai . 
 However , a major rift of opinion existed between the Japanese government and its two field armies , the SEA and 10th Army , which as of November were both nominally under the control of the Central China Area Army led by SEA commander Matsui . Matsui made clear to his superiors even before he left for Shanghai that he wanted to march on Nanking . He was convinced that the conquest of the Chinese capital city of Nanking would provoke the fall of the entire Nationalist Government of China and thus hand Japan a quick and complete victory in its war on China . Yanagawa was likewise eager to conquer Nanking and both men chafed under the operation restriction line that had been imposed on them by the Army General Staff . 
 On November 19 Yanagawa ordered his 10th Army to pursue retreating Chinese forces across the operation restriction line to Nanking , a flagrant act of insubordination . When Tada discovered this the next day he ordered Yanagawa to stop immediately , but was ignored . Matsui made some effort to restrain Yanagawa , but also told him that he could send some advance units beyond the line . In fact , Matsui was highly sympathetic with Yanagawa 's actions and a few days later on November 22 Matsui issued an urgent telegram to the Army General Staff insisting that " To resolve this crisis in a prompt manner we need to take advantage of the enemy 's present declining fortunes and conquer Nanking ... By staying behind the operation restriction line at this point we are not only letting our chance to advance slip by , but it is also having the effect of encouraging the enemy to replenish their fighting strength and recover their fighting spirit and there is a risk that it will become harder to completely break their will to make war . " 
 Meanwhile , as more and more Japanese units continued to slip past the operation restriction line , Tada was also coming under pressure from within the Army General Staff . Many of Tada 's colleagues and subordinates , including the powerful Chief of the General Staff Operations Division <unk> Shimomura , had come around to Matsui 's viewpoint and wanted Tada to approve an attack on Nanking . On November 24 Tada finally relented and abolished the operation restriction line " owing to circumstances beyond our control " , and then several days later he reluctantly approved the operation to capture Nanking . Tada flew to Shanghai in person on December 1 to deliver the order , though by then his own armies in the field were already well on their way to Nanking . 
 = = = China 's decision to defend Nanking = = = 
 On November 15 , near the end of the Battle of Shanghai , Chiang Kai @-@ shek convened a meeting of the Military Affairs Commission 's Supreme National Defense Council to undertake strategic planning , including a decision on what to do in case of a Japanese attack on Nanking . Here Chiang insisted fervently on mounting a sustained defense of Nanking . Chiang argued , just as he had during the Battle of Shanghai , that China would be more likely to receive aid from the great powers , possibly at the ongoing Nine Power Treaty Conference , if it could prove on the battlefield its will and capacity to resist the Japanese . He also noted that holding onto Nanking would strengthen China 's hand in peace talks which he wanted the German ambassador Oskar Trautmann to mediate . 
 Chiang ran into stiff opposition from his officers , including the powerful Chief of Staff of the Military Affairs Commission He <unk> , the Deputy Chief of Staff Bai <unk> , the head of the Fifth War Zone Li Zongren , and his German advisor Alexander von Falkenhausen . They argued that the Chinese Army needed more time to recover from its losses at Shanghai , and pointed out that Nanking was highly indefensible topographically . The mostly gently sloping terrain in front of Nanking would make it easy for the attackers to advance on the city , while the Yangtze River behind Nanking would cut off the defenders ' retreat . 
 Chiang , however , had become increasingly agitated over the course of the Battle of Shanghai , even angrily declaring that he would stay behind in Nanking alone and command its defense personally . But just when Chiang believed himself completely isolated , General Tang Shengzhi , an ambitious senior member of the Military Affairs Commission , spoke out in defense of Chiang 's position , although accounts vary on whether Tang vociferously jumped to Chiang 's aid or only reluctantly did so . Seizing the opportunity Tang had given him , Chiang responded by organizing the Nanking Garrison Force on November 20 and officially making Tang its commander on November 25 . The orders Tang received from Chiang on November 30 were to " defend the established defense lines at any cost and destroy the enemy ’ s besieging force " . 
 Though both men publicly declared that they would defend Nanking " to the last man " , they were aware of their precarious situation . On the same day that the Garrison Force was established Chiang officially moved the capital of China from Nanking to Chongqing deep in China 's interior . Further , both Chiang and Tang would at times give contradictory instructions to their subordinates on whether their mission was to defend Nanking to the death or merely delay the Japanese advance . 
 = = The road to Nanking = = 
 = = = China 's defense preparations = = = 
 On November 20 the Chinese Army and teams of conscripted laborers began to hurriedly bolster Nanking 's defenses both inside and outside the city . Nanking itself was surrounded by formidable stone walls stretching almost fifty kilometers ( 31 miles ) around the entire city . The walls , which had been constructed hundreds of years earlier during the Ming Dynasty , rose up to twenty meters ( 65 feet ) in height , were nine meters ( 30 feet ) thick , and had been studded with machine gun emplacements . By December 6 all the gates into the city had been closed and then barricaded with an additional layer of sandbags and concrete six meters ( 20 feet ) thick . 
 Outside the walls a series of semicircular defense lines were constructed in the path of the Japanese advance , most notably an outer one about sixteen kilometers ( 10 miles ) from the city and an inner one directly outside the city known as the Fukuo Line , or multiple positions line . The Fukuo Line , a sprawling network of trenches , moats , barbed wire , mine fields , gun emplacements , and pillboxes , was to be the final defense line outside Nanking 's city walls . There were also two key high points of land on the Fukuo Line , the peaks of Zijinshan to the northeast and the plateau of Yuhuatai to the south , where fortification was especially dense . In order to deny the Japanese invaders any shelter or supplies in this area , Tang adopted a strategy of scorched earth on December 7 , ordering all homes and structures in the path of the Japanese within one to two kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) of the city to be incinerated , as well as all homes and structures near roadways within sixteen kilometers ( 10 miles ) of the city . 
 The defending army , the Nanking Garrison Force , was on paper a formidable army of thirteen divisions , including three elite German @-@ trained divisions plus the super @-@ elite Training Brigade , but in reality most of these units had trickled back to Nanking severely mauled from the fighting in Shanghai . By the time they reached Nanking they were physically exhausted , low on equipment , and badly depleted in total troop strength . In order to replenish some of these units , 16 @,@ 000 young men and teenagers from Nanking and the rural villages surrounding it were speedily pressed into service as new recruits . An additional 14 @,@ 000 fresh soldiers were brought in from Hankou to fill the ranks of the 2nd Army . However , due the unexpected rapidity of the Japanese advance , most of the new conscripts received only rudimentary training on how to fire their guns on their way to or upon their arrival at the frontlines . No definitive statistics exist on how many soldiers the Nanking Garrison Force had managed to cobble together by the time of the battle , but among leading estimates are those of David Askew who says 73 @,@ 790 to 81 @,@ 500 , those of Ikuhiko Hata who estimates 100 @,@ 000 , and those of Tokushi Kasahara who argues in favor of about 150 @,@ 000 . 
 But during this period Japan 's Navy Air Service was launching frequent air raids on the city , eventually totaling 50 raids according to the Navy 's own records . The Navy Air Service had struck Nanking for the first time on August 15 , and after winning air supremacy over the city on September 19 it began bombing the city night and day with impunity , hitting both military and civilian targets . In the face of Japanese bombs and the ongoing advance of the Japanese Army , the large majority of Nanking 's citizens fled the city . By early December Nanking 's population had dropped from its former total of more than one million to less than 500 @,@ 000 , a figure which included Chinese refugees from rural villages burned down by their own government 's scorched earth policies . Most of those still in the city were very poor and had nowhere else to go . Foreign residents of Nanking were also repeatedly asked to leave the city which was becoming more and more chaotic under the strain of bombings , fires , looting by criminals , and electrical outages , but those few foreigners brave enough to stay behind strived to find a way to help the Chinese civilians who had been unable to leave . In late @-@ November a group of them led by German citizen John Rabe established the Nanking Safety Zone in the center of the city , a self @-@ proclaimed demilitarized zone where civilian refugees could congregate in order to hopefully escape the fighting . The safety zone was recognized by the Chinese government , and on December 8 Tang Shengzhi demanded that all civilians evacuate there . 
 Among those Chinese who did manage to escape Nanking were Chiang Kai @-@ shek and his wife Soong Mei @-@ ling , who had flown out of Nanking on a private plane just before the crack of dawn on December 7 . The mayor of Nanking and most of the municipal government left the same day , entrusting management of the city to the Nanking Garrison Force . 
 = = = Japan 's march on Nanking = = = 
 By the start of December Japan 's Central China Area Army had swollen in strength to over 160 @,@ 000 men , though only about 50 @,@ 000 of these would ultimately participate in the fighting . The plan of attack against Nanking was a pincer movement which the Japanese called " encirclement and annihilation " . The two prongs of the Central China Area Army 's pincer were the Shanghai Expeditionary Army ( SEA ) advancing on Nanking from its eastern side and the 10th Army advancing from its southern side . To the north and west of Nanking lay the Yangtze River , but the Japanese planned to plug this possible escape route as well both by dispatching a squadron of ships up the river and by deploying two special detachments to circle around behind the city . The Kunisaki Detachment was to cross the Yangtze in the south with the ultimate aim of occupying <unk> on the river bank west of Nanking while the Yamada Detachment was to be sent on the far north route with the ultimate aim of taking Mufushan just north of Nanking . 
 General Matsui , along with the Army General Staff , envisaged making a slow and steady march on Nanking , but his subordinates refused to play along and instead raced eagerly with each other to be the first to get to the city . Soon all units were roaring to Nanking at the breakneck pace of up to forty kilometers ( 25 miles ) per day . For instance , the 10th Army captured the key town of <unk> on November 30 three days before it was even supposed to start its planned advance , and the SEA captured <unk> on December 2 more than five days ahead of schedule . In order to achieve such speeds , the Japanese soldiers carried little with them except weaponry and ammunition . Because they were marching well ahead of most of their supply lines they had to purchase or loot their food from Chinese civilians along the way . 
 During their advance the Japanese overcame initially light resistance from the already battered Chinese forces who were being pursued by the Japanese from Shanghai in a " running battle " . Here the Japanese were aided by their complete air supremacy , their abundance of tanks , the improvised and hastily constructed nature of the Chinese defenses , and also by the Chinese strategy of concentrating their defending forces on small patches of relatively high ground which made them easy to outflank and surround . 
 On December 5 , Chiang Kai @-@ shek paid a visit to a defensive encampment near Jurong to heckle his men to keep up the fight , but he was forced to beat a hasty retreat when the Japanese Army burst onto the battlefield guns blazing . On that day the rapidly moving forward contingents of the SEA occupied Jurong and then arrived at <unk> , a key point of Nanking 's outer line of defense which would put Japanese artillery in range of the city . Here China 's 51st Division flung its main force into the fighting and repeatedly repulsed Japanese attacks before cracking on December 8 when the main force of the SEA arrived . The SEA also took the fortress at Zhenjiang and the spa town of <unk> on that day . Meanwhile , on the south side of the same defense line , armored vehicles of Japan 's 10th Army charged the Chinese position at <unk> and <unk> defended by China 's 58th Division . Valiant Chinese soldiers armed with hammers jumped onto the vehicles and banged repeatedly on their roofs shouting " Get out of there ! " , but after darkness fell on the battlefield the 58th Division was finally overwhelmed on December 9 after suffering , according to its own records , 800 casualties . 
 By December 9 Japan 's forces had reached Nanking 's last line of defense , the daunting Fukuo Line . At this point General Matsui had a " summons to surrender " drawn up which implored the Chinese to send military envoys to Nanking 's Zhongshan Gate to discuss terms for the peaceful occupation of the city , and he then had a Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 21 scatter thousands of copies of the message over the city . On December 10 a group of Matsui 's senior staff officers waited to see if the gate would be opened , but Tang Shengzhi had no intention of responding . 
 Later that day Tang proclaimed to his men that , " Our army has entered into the final battle to defend Nanking on the Fukuo Line . Each unit shall firmly defend its post with the resolve to either live or die with it . You 're not allowed to retreat on your own , causing defense to collapse . " The American journalist F. Tillman Durdin , who was reporting on site during the battle , saw one small group of Chinese soldiers set up a barricade , assemble in a solemn semicircle , and promise each other that they would die together where they stood . 
 = = Final battle for Nanking = = 
 At 1 : 00 pm on December 10 General Matsui ordered all units to launch a full @-@ scale attack on Nanking . That day the SEA assaulted China 's super @-@ elite Training Brigade on the peaks of Zijinshan , which dominate Nanking 's northeast horizon . <unk> up the ridges of the mountain , the men of the SEA had to painstakingly wrest control of each Chinese encampment one by one in bloody infantry charges . Advancing along the south side of Zijinshan was no easier as General Matsui had forbidden his men from using artillery there due to his deep conviction that no damage should come to its two famous historical sites , Sun Yat @-@ sen Mausoleum and Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum . 
 Also on Nanking 's eastern side but further south , other units of the SEA faced the difficult task of fording the large moat standing between them and three of the city gates , Zhongshan Gate , Guanghua Gate , and <unk> Gate , though the speed of Japan 's earlier advance played in their favor as key Chinese units slated to be deployed here were not yet in position . That evening Japanese engineers and artillerymen closing in on Guanghua Gate managed to blow a hole in the wall . A Japanese battalion launched a daring attack through the gap and planted a Japanese flag on a portion of the gate , but was immediately pinned down by a series of determined Chinese counterattacks . The Chinese brought up reinforcements , including tanks , and they poured down grenades and even flaming , gasoline @-@ soaked lumber onto the Japanese battalion , which was only saved from annihilation by timely bursts of concentrated artillery fire from the rest of their division . The battalion succeeded in holding its position for the rest of the battle despite losing eighty of its eighty @-@ eight men . 
 At the same time Japan 's 10th Army was storming Yuhuatai , a rugged plateau situated directly in front of Zhonghua Gate on Nanking 's southern side . The 10th Army 's progress was slow and casualties were heavy as Yuhuatai was built like a fortress of interlocking pillboxes and trenches manned by three Chinese divisions , including the German @-@ trained 88th Division , though the Chinese were also apt to counterattack and some Japanese units were forced to spend more time defending than attacking . Close to every single man that the 88th Division had deployed on Yuhuatai was killed in action , including four of its three regimental commanders and both of its brigade commanders , but in the process the Japanese were made to suffer 2 @,@ 240 casualties including 566 dead . Yuhuatai was finally overrun at noon on December 12 . 
 Behind Yuhuatai the 88th Division had stationed its barely trained new recruits atop Nanking 's Zhonghua Gate . The Japanese had already tried the previous night to infiltrate a " suicide squadron " bearing explosive picric acid up to this gate to blow a hole in it , but it got lost in the morning fog and failed to reach the wall . At noon on December 12 a team of just six Japanese soldiers made it across the moat in a small boat and succeeded in scaling the wall at Zhonghua Gate on a shaky bamboo ladder and raising the Japanese flag there . Five of them were killed by gunfire but the last man grabbed a Chinese machine gun and held the position singlehandedly . Soon after another Japanese team set a fire in front of the gate to create a smokescreen . By 5 : 00 pm more and more Japanese troops were crossing the moat and swarming Zhonghua Gate by fording makeshift bridges so rickety their engineers had to hold them aloft with their own bodies , and with the help of some well aimed Japanese artillery fire from atop Yuhuatai parts of the wall finally crumbled . Meanwhile , just west of Zhonghua Gate , other soldiers also of Japan 's 10th Army had punched a hole through Chinese lines in the wetlands south of <unk> Gate and were launching a violent drive on that gate with the support of a fleet of tanks . 
 At the height of the battle Tang Shengzhi complained to Chiang that , " Our casualties are naturally heavy and we are fighting against metal with merely flesh and blood " , but what the Chinese lacked in equipment they made up for in the sheer ferocity with which they fought , though this was partially due to strict orders that no man or unit was to retreat one step without permission . Over the course of the battle roughly 1 @,@ 000 Chinese soldiers were shot dead by other members of their own army for attempting to retreat , and on Yuhuatai Japanese soldiers noticed that many Chinese pillboxes were chained from the outside to prevent their occupants from fleeing . 
 Nonetheless , the Japanese were gaining the upper hand over the hard @-@ pressed and surrounded Chinese defenders . On December 12 the SEA captured Peak # 2 of Zijinshan and from this vantage point unleashed a torrent of artillery fire at Zhongshan Gate where a large portion of the wall suddenly gave way . After sunset the fires that blazed out of control on Zijinshan were visible even from Zhonghua Gate in the south which was completely occupied by Japan 's 10th Army on the night of December 12 to 13 . 
 = = = Collapse of the Nanking Garrison Force = = = 
 Unbeknownst to the Japanese however , Chiang had already ordered Tang to abandon the defense . In spite of his earlier talk about holding out in Nanking to the bitter end , Chiang telegraphed an order to Tang on December 11 to abandon the city . Tang prepared to do so the next day on December 12 , but startled by Japan 's intensified onslaught he made a frantic last @-@ minute bid to conclude a temporary ceasefire with the Japanese through German citizens John Rabe and Eduard Sperling . Only when it became clear that the negotiations could not be completed in time did Tang finally finish drawing up a plan calling for all his units to launch a coordinated breakout of the Japanese encirclement . They were to commence the breakout under cover of darkness at 11 : 00 pm that night and then muster in Anhui . Just after 5 : 00 pm on December 12 Tang arranged for this plan to be transmitted to all units , and then he crossed the Yangtze River , escaping through the city of <unk> on the opposite bank of the river less than twenty @-@ four hours before it was occupied by Japan 's Kunisaki Detachment . 
 By the time Tang slipped out of the city , however , the entire Nanking Garrison Force was rapidly disintegrating with some units in open flight . Furthermore , contact had already been lost with many units who thus never received Tang 's message and continued to hold their positions as ordered , though even those that did receive it had little luck at slipping through the Japanese lines . China 's 66th and 83rd Corps made a bid to evade the Japanese as planned through a gap to the east but immediately ran into their own minefield . After that they were attacked in flight by Japanese units and lost two divisional chiefs of staff in combat . Though the two corps had started the battle at least 11 @,@ 000 men strong , only 600 of them escaped Nanking . Near dawn on December 13 a portion of China 's 74th Corps was also annihilated in a bid to break through Japanese lines along the Yangtze River south of Nanking . 
 One of the few units that did manage to get out of Nanking was China 's 2nd Army led by Xu <unk> situated just north of Nanking . Though Xu never received Tang 's order to abandon the defense , on the night of December 12 he had heard that Nanking had been captured and so decided to withdraw on his own accord . During the night he managed to evacuate most of his unit across the Yangtze River just before Japanese naval units blockaded the river . 
 By contrast , a massive crowd of thousands of Chinese soldiers and civilians from the south side of Nanking , who were fleeing in panic and disarray from the advance of Japan 's 10th Army on the same night , were prevented from reaching the harbor at <unk> by Chinese barrier troops who fired on the crowd for retreating without permission and managed to hold it back . At 9 : 00 pm a fleeing Chinese tank unit , which had also not received Tang 's parting message , charged the barrier troops and burst through their blockade , only for the crowd to then find that there were hardly any boats remaining in the harbor . The crowd fought to clamber aboard what few craft were available , but these soon became so overloaded that they sank midway . The rest of the Chinese soldiers took to the Yangtze 's rough and frigid waters en masse while clinging to logs and pieces of scrap lumber , though most were quickly swallowed up by the river . Furthermore , by this point the Japanese encirclement of Nanking was virtually complete and many who were attempting to brave the Yangtze soon found themselves being fired upon from both sides of the river . Others who saw this turned back to the city in despair . 
 Many of these tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers who could not escape the city responded by casting off their uniforms and weaponry , switching to civilian clothes often by stealing them from passersby , and then desperately seeking sanctuary in the Nanking Safety Zone by mingling with civilians . The American journalist F. Tillman Durdin " witnessed the wholesale undressing of an army that was almost comic . " " Arms were discarded along with uniforms , and the streets became covered with guns , grenades , swords , knapsacks , coats , shoes and helmets ... In front of the Ministry of Communications and for two blocks further on , trucks , artillery , busses , staff cars , wagons , machine @-@ guns , and small arms became piled up as in a junk yard . " 
 = = Mopping @-@ up operations and the Nanking Massacre = = 
 The fighting in Nanking did not end entirely on the night of December 12 – 13 when the Japanese Army took the remaining gates and entered the city . During their mopping @-@ up operations in the city the Japanese continued for several more days to beat back sporadic resistance from Chinese stragglers . Though Mufushan , just north of Nanking , was taken by Japan 's Yamada Detachment without much bloodshed on the morning of December 14 , pockets of resistance outside Nanking persisted for several more days . 
 Meanwhile , the Japanese units on mopping @-@ up duty in Nanking had decided that the former Chinese soldiers hiding in the city were a possible security risk and therefore carried out a thorough search of every building in Nanking and made frequent incursions into the Nanking Safety Zone in search of them . Japanese units attempted to distinguish former soldiers from civilians by checking if they had marks on their shoulders from wearing a backpack or carrying a rifle . However , the criteria used were often arbitrary as was the case with one Japanese company which apprehended all men with " shoe sores , <unk> on the face , extremely good posture , and / or sharp @-@ looking eyes " and for this reason many civilians were taken at the same time . What happened to the Chinese soldiers and civilians who were captured varied greatly from unit to unit , though many were summarily executed in an event that came to be known as the Nanking Massacre , which the foreign residents and journalists in Nanking made known internationally within days of the city 's fall . Though the Japanese also committed random acts of murder , rape , looting , and arson during their occupation of Nanking , military historian Masahiro Yamamoto notes that very few of the corpses buried in and around Nanking after the fall of the city were women or children , suggesting that the large majority of the victims of the massacre were adult Chinese men taken by the Japanese as former soldiers and massacred . Estimates for the total death toll of the Nanking Massacre vary widely . 
 The Japanese Army 's mopping @-@ up operations and the large @-@ scale massacres that accompanied them were over by the afternoon of December 17 when General Matsui entered Nanking for the victory parade . By the end of December most Japanese soldiers had left Nanking , though units of the Shanghai Expeditionary Army stayed on to occupy the city . The Nanking Self @-@ Government Committee , a new municipal authority formed from local Chinese collaborators , was inaugurated on January 1 , 1938 , but it was not until February 25 that all restrictions on the free movement of civilians into and out of the city were lifted . 
 = = Aftermath and assessment = = 
 News of the massacre was tightly censored in Japan , where Nanking 's capture provoked a frenzy of excitement among the citizenry . Mass celebrations of every sort , either spontaneous or government @-@ sponsored , took place throughout the country , including a number of resplendent lantern parades which were still vividly remembered by onlookers several decades later . F. Tillman Durdin noted even before Nanking had fallen that " Events in the field have renewed the belief of the Japanese people in the invincibility of their arms . " 
 The conquest of Nanking had been quicker and easier than the Japanese had foreseen ; they lost only 1 @,@ 953 soldiers in battle , plus 4 @,@ 994 wounded . Japan 's casualties were undoubtedly dwarfed by those of China , though no precise figures exist on how many Chinese were killed in action . The Japanese claimed to have killed 84 @,@ 000 enemy during the campaign whereas a contemporary Chinese source claimed that their army suffered 20 @,@ 000 casualties , but Masahiro Yamamoto notes that the Japanese usually inflated their opponent 's body counts while the Chinese had reason to downplay the scale of their loss . Ikuhiko Hata estimates that 50 @,@ 000 Chinese soldiers were killed in combat during the entire battle whereas Jay Taylor puts the number at 70 @,@ 000 and states that proportionate to the size of the force committed , such losses were greater than those suffered in the devastating Battle of Shanghai . On the other hand , Chinese scholar Sun <unk> estimates Chinese combat losses at 6 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 men . 
 An official report of the Nationalist Government argued that an excess of untrained and inexperienced troops was a major cause of the defeat , but at the time Tang Shengzhi was made to bear much of the blame and later historians have also criticized him . Japanese historian Tokushi Kasahara , for instance , has characterized his battlefield leadership as incompetent , arguing that an orderly withdrawal from Nanking may have been possible if Tang had carried it out on December 11 or if he had not fled his post well in advance of most of his beleaguered units . However , Chiang 's very decision to defend Nanking is also controversial . Masahiro Yamamoto believes that Chiang chose " almost entirely out of emotion " to fight a battle he knew he could only lose , and fellow historian Frederick Fu Liu concurs that the decision is often regarded as one of " the greatest strategical mistakes of the Sino @-@ Japanese war " . Still , the historian Jay Taylor notes that Chiang was convinced that to run from his capital city " without a serious fight ... would forever be regarded as a cowardly decision . " 
 In spite of its military accomplishment , Japan 's international reputation was blackened by the Nanking Massacre , as well as by a series of international incidents that occurred during and after the battle . Most notable among them were the shelling by Japanese artillery of the British steamship Ladybird on the Yangtze River on December 12 , and the sinking by Japanese aircraft of the American gunboat Panay not far downstream on the same day . The Allison Incident , the slapping of an American consul by a Japanese soldier , further increased tensions with the United States . 
 Furthermore , the loss of Nanking did not force China to capitulate as Japan 's leaders had predicted . Even so , buoyed by their victory , the Japanese government replaced the lenient terms for peace which they had relayed to the mediator Ambassador Trautmann prior to the battle with an extremely harsh set of demands that were ultimately rejected by China . On December 17 in a fiery speech entitled , " A Message to the People Upon Our Withdrawal from Nanking " , Chiang Kai @-@ shek defiantly declared that , 
 The outcome of this war will not be decided at Nanking or in any other big city ; it will be decided in the countryside of our vast country and by the inflexible will of our people ... In the end we will wear the enemy down . In time the enemy 's military might will count for nothing . I can assure you that the final victory will be ours . 
 The Second Sino @-@ Japanese War was to drag on for another eight years and ultimately end with Japan 's defeat in 1945 . 
 = Eagle Boys = 
 Eagle Boys is an Australian fast food chain specialising in Italian American cuisine , in particular pizza . With more than 160 stores throughout Australia , it is the third largest pizza chain in Australia , with 12 % of the share of the country 's pizza market recorded in June 2015 . 
 Eagle Boys was founded in Albury , New South Wales by businessman Tom Potter in 1987 . Since 1992 , Eagle Boys national headquarters have been located in Annerley , Queensland . In 2007 NBC Capital , a Queensland @-@ based venture capital group , bought Eagle Boys from Potter . At the chain 's peak , in 2013 , more than 340 Eagle Boys stores were operating across Australia . Outlet numbers fell drastically between the end of 2013 and the end of 2014 to around 170 . In July 2016 , administrators were bought in to identify restructuring options ahead of a potential sale of the business , although the move did not extend to franchisee @-@ operated outlets . 
 = = Major Competitors = = 
 Eagle Boys ' major competitors are Pizza Hut , Domino 's Pizza Enterprises , ( trading as Dominoes Australia ) , Pizza Capers and Crust Gourmet Pizza Bar ( referred to simply as Crust ) 
 = = Stores = = 
 More than 340 Eagle Boys stores were operating across Australia at the pizza chain 's peak , in 2013 . Outlet numbers fell drastically between the end of 2013 and the end of 2014 to around 170 . At July 2014 , Eagle Boys was the third largest pizza chain in Australia , with 12 % share of Australia 's pizza market . 
 As at April 2016 , Eagle Boys stores could be found in New South Wales , Northern Territory , Queensland , Victoria , South Australia and Western Australia . The stores have a strong regional emphasis with most outlets located in non @-@ metropolitan areas , including Bathurst , Shepparton and Mareeba . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1987 – 2007 : the first 20 years = = = 
 The first Eagles Boys store opened in Albury , New South Wales in 1987 , a venture spearheaded by businessman Tom Potter in partnership with his mother , Barbara Potter , who guaranteed a $ 70 @,@ 000 loan to enable him to open the store . The store was initially called " Beagle Boys " after the Disney Beagle Boys , but Potter dropped the ' B ' after a few months in operation , worrying that the naming may have been a copyright infringement . Potter went on to build the business and become CEO of the chain . 
 In 1989 Potter started recruiting franchisees . Eagle Boys ' national headquarters were opened in 1992 in the Brisbane suburb of Annerley . 
 Eagle Boys set up in New Zealand in 1996 when Stallone 's Pizza owner Gavin Cook agreed to merge with Eagle Boys to provide an established base in the South Island . Rapid expansion saw the Eagle Boys chain grow to 54 national outlets in the country by early April 2000 . In 2000 , all New Zealand stores were sold to Restaurant Brands for NZ $ 28m and converted to Pizza Hut outlets . 
 The company developed an express system " Eaglexpress " between 1999 and 2002 , to serve two minute " express " pizzas ( limited range of four ) between 5 : 30 and 8 : 00 pm , which was achieved by constantly remaking their four most popular pizzas and keeping them in a warmer for sale . Unsold pizzas were discarded after 30 minutes . Between 2002 , when the Eaglexpress concept was launched , and 2003 , sales at the chain rose by around 40 % . The chain came to see the Eaglexpress two @-@ minute pizza service and the its drive @-@ through services as a " beachhead " to compete with its biggest fast @-@ food competitors including Hungry Jack 's and KFC . 
 = = = 2007 : handover to NBC Capital = = = 
 In March 2007 , Tom Potter handed his control of Eagle Boys on to NBC Capital , a Queensland @-@ based venture capital group . He retained some shares in the company , and worked in a consultancy role advising the chain on operations for 12 months . By 2008 , Potter retained less than 10 % of the vote for corporate decision making and was no longer involved in operations . 
 In late 2007 , Eagle Boys began trialing an online ordering system and announced plans to enable customers to order online from all of its stores by February 2008 . By the end of 2008 , the system was fully implemented . 
 = = = 2008 – 2013 : five years of fast growth = = = 
 In July 2008 , Eagle Boys entered into a deal to acquire the Pizza Haven chain across Australia . The deal saw Eagle Boys move into Sydney and South Australia for the first time . Between July 2008 and June 2009 , Eagle Boys opened 56 stores — the fastest growth the chain had experienced in its history . 
 In February 2010 , Eagle Boys was named in BRW Magazine 's Fast Franchise list for the first time . By March 2011 , Eagle Boys had more than 25 stores in Sydney . It had also overtaken Pizza Hut to become the second largest pizza maker in Australia . However , Pizza Hut regained second position by July 2014 . 
 CEO Todd Clayton departed Eagle Boys in 2012 , he had been in the role since NBC Capital acquired a majority stake in 2007 . At the time , the founder of NBC Bruce Scott stepped in as CEO . 
 In July 2013 , Eagle Boys commenced operations in Papua New Guinea . Worldwide , stores numbered over 330 by September 2013 . 
 = = = 2014 : media reports franchising issues = = = 
 On 3 October 2014 the Sydney Morning Herald reported that former franchisees asserted that the current franchisor , NBC Capital , had stopped print and media advertising since purchasing the business . The number of stores was reported to have halved from 340 locations . Franchise owners told media they were concerned at changes to the advertising mix , including the reduction of offline advertising activities . 
 = = = 2015 – 16 : plans for new growth = = = 
 To capitalise on the benefits of cloud computing , Eagle Boys shifted its ordering system to Microsoft Azure in 2015 . Through providing improved website performance and <unk> and providing more sophisticated performance metrics , the new hosting system should support more online orders , which the Eagle Boys IT chief says are worth 1 @.@ 5 times the orders which are made in @-@ store or by telephone . 
 In May 2015 , Eagle Boys announced it was aiming to expand with a plan for 50 outlets in India by the end of 2015 . The same month a franchisee opened an Eagle Boys store in Suva , Fiji . 
 Eagle Boys appointed Nick Vincent as the new CEO in October 2015 , replacing Bruce Scott . Vincent had previously been the company 's general manager of retail , since April 2014 . 
 = = = Administrators appointed in 2016 = = = 
 On 15 July 2016 Eagle Boys Pizza appointed administrators to identify restructuring options ahead of a potential sale of the business . The administrators , SV Partners , took control of the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the business , and will attempt to find potential buyers and negotiate a sale . Eagle Boys announced that trade would continue as normal at franchisee @-@ operated outlets during the administration . 
 Fairfax Media outlets tipped Domino 's and Retail Food Group ( the owner of Pizza Capers and Crust ) as possible buyers . However , Retail Food Group confirmed it was not in discussions with the owners or administrators of the Eagle Boys franchise system in a statement on 19 July 2016 . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 In 1992 , Eagle Boys registered its " pink glow " — the pink look of its logo — with IP Australia , the Australian Government intellectual property office . A customer survey in support of the company 's application found people strongly associated the pink glow with Eagle Boys stores . The distinctive colour scheme was designed to create a fun and upbeat feel . 
 In 2007 , Eagle Boys launched the " Vote 1 Full Size Large Pizza " campaign bringing to task its competitors for selling smaller pizzas . Domino 's had reduced the size of their large pizzas in mid @-@ 2007 and Pizza Hut had changed their sizing in late 2006 . The campaign produced a sales uplift of over 27 % . 
 In 2009 , the pizza chain announced a $ 7 million advertising campaign , called the " Real " campaign , that reinforced its " Bigger , Better " slogan . The campaign involved the VW " Real Mobile " driving around Australia offering Eagle Boys pizza and recording testimonials for a TV commercial . Later in the year , Eagle Boys launched another campaign comparing its pizzas to those of its competitors , this time built around the " blind taste test " which found almost half of test subjects preferred Eagle Boys pizzas to those of pizzas from Domino 's and Pizza Hut combined . 
 In 2010 , Eagle Boys launched a multimillion @-@ dollar campaign " 31 New Menu Items – Each One Delicious ” . The campaign was the first to use Eagle Boys ' new phone name 1300 EAGLE <unk> . New pastas were among the 31 new menu offerings , Desserts were also included , among them a chocolate fudge mousse that received a Gold Medal at the 2010 Royal Queensland Food and Wine Show . The menu was tested over a 12 @-@ month period ahead of the launch . Eagle Boys told media it expected a 15 % spike in sales on the back of the launch . A gluten " friendly " base was also on the menu for the first time , with an Eagle Boys spokesperson claiming it was more transparent than claiming it could offer a gluten @-@ free base — only food prepared in a gluten @-@ free kitchen can make the claim that it is truly offering a gluten free range . The chain also announced it would scale back its social media spend . 
 In 2011 , the chain released advertising " Our large pizzas are bigger than theirs " in another attempt to demonstrate their large pizza offered effectively an extra slice of pizza to their closest rival , Domino 's . Domino 's chief executive , in response , told media that " value is not in the size of a pizza . " Eagle Boys recorded a 20 % jump in sales in the first week of the campaign compared to the previous week . The pizza chain also announced it would be supporting the Cerebral Palsy Alliance , with a plan to donate more than $ 200 @,@ 000 over three years to the charity , starting with $ 1 from every dessert sold during Cerebral Palsy week in August 2011 . In July 2011 , Eagle Boys received Halal accreditation for its Bexley store . 
 <unk> in 2013 as part of the " making pizza happy " campaign involved introducing a new logo along with new pizza boxes and uniforms . The iconic eagle was dropped from the logo at time , with management citing pressure its client base to drop to eagle . The company introduced a " happy bell " to ring when customers were having a good time — aiming for a happier feeling for the in @-@ store experience . The campaign was rolled out in stages , beginning in Far North Queensland , a decision an Eagle Boys spokesperson said was designed to pay homage to the chain 's regional heritage . 
 By 2014 , around one @-@ third of the pizza chain 's marketing budget was directed to digital spend . That year , the chain released a campaign leveraging off the release of Australian film Fat Pizza vs. <unk> . It also announced a partnership with streaming company Quickflix , offering customers an exclusive deal on a one DVD and streaming bundle package . In 2014 the chain also donated more than <unk> of potatoes to food rescue charity <unk> . 
 2015 saw Eagle Boys launch the first " store of the future " in Bundaberg . The concept store , with a design including exposed brickwork and recycled timber , was developed based on research carried out on customer preferences and behaviours . 
 In March 2016 , Eagle Boys launched a trial of " Virtual <unk> " at several of their stores in the Townsville area . The technology enables customers to order their pizzas online , drive to the store and alert store team members that they have arrived by pushing a button so that staff can deliver their order to their customers ' cars . 
 = Wood thrush = 
 The wood thrush ( Hylocichla mustelina ) is a North American passerine bird . It is closely related to other thrushes such as the American robin and is widely distributed across North America , wintering in Central America and southern Mexico . The wood thrush is the official bird of the District of Columbia . 
 The wood thrush is a medium @-@ sized thrush , with brown upper parts with mottled brown and white underparts . The male and female are similar in appearance . The song of the male is often cited as being the most beautiful in North America . 
 The wood thrush is an omnivore , and feeds preferentially on soil invertebrates and larvae , but will also eat fruits . In the summer , it feeds on insects continuously in order to meet daily metabolic needs . It is solitary , but sometimes forms mixed @-@ species flocks . The wood thrush defends a territory that ranges in size from 800 to 28 @,@ 000 m2 ( 960 to 33 @,@ 490 sq yd ) . The wood thrush is monogamous , and its breeding season begins in the spring ; about 50 % of all mated pairs are able to raise two broods , ranging in size from two to four chicks . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The only member of the genus Hylocichla , the wood thrush was described by German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789 . The generic name is a direct translation of its common name , derived from the Greek words <unk> / <unk> " woodland " and <unk> / <unk> " thrush " or " fieldfare " . The specific name comes from the Latin <unk> " weasel " . It is closely related to the other typical American thrushes of the genus Catharus , and is sometimes merged into that genus . It has been considered close to the long @-@ distance migrant species of that genus , as opposed to the generally resident nightingale @-@ thrushes , but this appears to be erroneous . The wood thrush also appears to be fairly closely related to the large Turdus thrushes , such as the American robin . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult wood thrush is 18 to 21 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 to 8 @.@ 5 in ) long , with a wingspan of 30 to 40 cm ( 12 to 16 in ) and a body mass of 48 to 72 g ( 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 5 oz ) . Among standard measurements , the wing chord is 9 @.@ 6 to 11 @.@ 6 cm ( 3 @.@ 8 to 4 @.@ 6 in ) , the bill is 1 @.@ 6 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 63 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) and the tarsus is 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) . It is distinctly larger than the Catharus thrushes with which the species is often sympatric but slightly smaller than the common American robin . The longest known lifespan for a wood thrush in the wild is 8 years , 11 months . The crown , nape , and upper back are cinnamon @-@ brown , while the back wings , and tail are a slightly duller brown . The breast and belly are white with large dark brown spots on the breast , sides , and flanks . It has white eye rings and pink legs . Other brownish thrushes have finer spotting on the breast . The juvenile looks similar to adults , but has additional spots on the back , neck , and wing coverts . The male and female are similar in size and plumage . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The wood thrush has been reported to have one of the most beautiful songs of North American birds . American naturalist Henry David Thoreau wrote : 
 Whenever a man hears it he is young , and Nature is in her spring ; wherever he hears it , it is a new world and a free country , and the gates of Heaven are not shut against him . 
 While the female is not known to sing , the male has a unique song that has three parts . The first subsong component is often inaudible unless the listener is close , and consists of two to six short , low @-@ pitched notes such as bup , bup , bup . The middle part is a loud phrase often written ee @-@ oh @-@ lay , and the third part is a <unk> , trill @-@ like phrase of non @-@ harmonic pairs of notes given rapidly and simultaneously . 
 The male is able to sing two notes at once , which gives its song an ethereal , flute @-@ like quality . Each individual bird has its own repertoire based on combinations of variations of the three parts . Songs are often repeated in order . The bup , bup , bup phrase is also sometimes used as a call , which is louder and at a greater frequency when the bird is agitated . The wood thrush also use a tut , tut to signal agitation . The nocturnal flight call is an emphatic buzzing <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The wood thrush 's breeding range extends from Manitoba , Ontario and Nova Scotia in southern Canada to northern Florida and from the Atlantic coast to the Missouri River and the eastern Great Plains . It migrates to southern Mexico through to Panama in Central America in the winter , mostly in the lowlands along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts . It generally arrives on the U.S. Gulf Coast during the first week of April . Fall migration usually begins in mid @-@ August and continues through mid @-@ September . Migration takes place at night , allowing them to find their direction from the stars and orient themselves by detecting the Earth 's magnetic field . 
 The wood thrush prefers deciduous and mixed forests for breeding . It prefers late @-@ successional , upland mesic forests with a moderately @-@ dense shrub layer . Robert I. Bertin ( 1977 ) found that this thrush favors areas with running water , moist ground , and high understorey cover . The breeding habitat generally includes trees taller than 16 m ( 52 ft ) , a fairly open forest floor , moist soil , and leaf litter , with substrate moisture more important than either canopy cover or access to running water . The wood thrush can breed in habitat patches as small as 0 @.@ 4 hectares ( 0 @.@ 99 acres ) , but it runs the risk of higher predation and nest parasitism . The wood thrush 's breeding range has expanded northward , displacing the <unk> and hermit thrush in some locations . In recent times , as a result of fragmentation of forests , it has been increasingly exposed to nest parasitism by brown @-@ headed cowbirds , as well as loss of habitat in the winter range . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 The wood thrush has become a symbol of the decline of Neotropical songbirds of eastern North America , having declined by approximately 50 % since 1966 . Along with many other species , this thrush faces threats both to its North American breeding grounds and Central American wintering grounds . Forest fragmentation in North American forests has resulted in both increased nest predation and increased cowbird parasitism , significantly reducing their reproductive success . A study by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology was the first large @-@ scale analysis that linked acid rain to this thrush 's decline . Continued destruction of primary forest in Central America eliminated preferred wood thrush wintering habitats , likely forcing the birds to choose secondary habitats where mortality rates are higher . In spite of this , the wood thrush is still considered to be of least concern . 
 = = = Vagrancy = = = 
 The wood thrush has been recorded twice as a vagrant in Europe , in Iceland at <unk> in <unk> East <unk> by Björnsson <unk> on 23 October 1967 and on <unk> Down , St Agnes , Isles of Scilly , England on 7 October 1987 . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The wood thrush is primarily solitary , but occasionally forms mixed @-@ species flocks in the winter . Its breeding territory ranges from 800 to 8 @,@ 000 m2 ( 960 to 9 @,@ 570 sq yd ) in size , and are used for nesting , gathering nest materials , and foraging . Some wood thrushes also defend a feeding territory in the winter . Territorial interactions are usually settled without physical contact , but in high @-@ intensity encounters or nest defense , physical interactions with the feet or bill have been observed . Defense behaviors in response to nest predators include wing flicks , tail flicks , and raising the crest , sometimes escalating to dives and strikes . 
 This species has also been observed displaying a behavior known as " anting . " Anting occurs when a bird picks up a single ant or group of ants and rubs them on its feathers . The purpose of this behavior is unknown , but it is thought that the birds may be able to acquire defensive secretions from the ants possibly used for some medicinal purposes , or that it simply supplements the birds ' own preen oil . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Soil invertebrates and larvae make up most of the wood thrush 's omnivorous diet , but it will also eat fruits in the late summer , fall , and late winter . It occasionally feeds on arboreal insects , snails , and small salamanders . The young are fed insects and some fruit . After breeding and before migration , the wood thrush will switch from insects to fruits with high lipid levels . In the summer , low fruit consumption and lipid reserves require the bird to feed on insects continuously in order to meet its metabolic needs . 
 The wood thrush forages mainly on the forest floor , flipping leaves over with their bills to reveal insects . It can be observed hopping around in leaf litter and on semi @-@ bare ground under the forest canopy . Fruits are swallowed whole . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 Eggs and chicks are vulnerable to chipmunks , raccoons , blue jays , American crows , black rat snakes , brown @-@ headed cowbirds , common grackles , southern flying squirrels , gray squirrels , least weasels , white @-@ footed mice , domestic cats , great horned owls , and sharp @-@ shinned hawks . Adults are primarily taken by hawks and owls . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Wood thrushes are monogamous . Breeding pairs form in mid @-@ April to early @-@ May , and usually last throughout the breeding season . Most thrushes find a new mate each year , and mate guarding and extra @-@ pair copulations have not been observed in this species . 
 Some male wood thrushes arrive at the breeding grounds several days before the earliest females while other males arrive at the same time as the females , establishing territories ranging in size from 0 @.@ 08 to 0 @.@ 8 hectares ( one @-@ fifth of an acre to two acres ) . The female typically leads silent circular flights 1 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) from the ground , with the male chasing . Six or more flights generally take place in succession . The pairs will perch together and feed each other in between flights . The male begins to sing at dawn and dusk a few days after arriving at breeding grounds . Early in the breeding season , the male sings from high perches in the tallest trees , but as the season progresses , it sings somewhat shorter and less elaborate songs from lower perches . Each day 's singing begins and is most intense just before sunrise . The male may sing throughout the day but especially at dusk . The song season is usually over by the end of July . 
 Typically , the female chooses the nest site and builds the nest . However , there has been some indication that the male is able to influence the selection of the nest site by perching nearby and singing . Usually , though , the female chooses whether or not to accept or reject the nest site suggested by the male . The nest is usually sited in a dense patch of vegetation in a tree or shrub that provides concealment and shade . It is usually made of dead grasses , stems , and leaves , and lined with mud , and placed in a fork at a horizontal branch . The nest is not reused . Usually , two broods are attempted , although three to four separate nests may be built before a pair succeeds . Two to four pale blue eggs are laid at the rate of one per day . The eggs are incubated by the female only for 11 to 14 days , with the average being 13 days . Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial at hatching , mostly naked with closed eyes . The female broods the chicks during the first four days after hatching . Both parents feed the nestlings and remove fecal sacs from the nest . The chicks fledge 12 – 15 days after hatching , but the parents continue to feed them until they become independent and leave the parents ' territory at 21 – 31 days old . 
 The young wood thrush is able to begin breeding the next summer . Most females lay their first eggs in mid @-@ May , but older females may begin laying sooner . Pairs usually attempt to rear a second brood no later than late July , with the last of the young fledging around mid @-@ August . About half of all wood thrush pairs successfully raise two broods . 
 = Kristen Bell = 
 Kristen Anne Bell ( born July 18 , 1980 ) is an American actress and singer . She began her acting career starring in stage productions and attended the Tisch School of Arts in New York . In 2001 , she made her Broadway debut as Becky Thatcher in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and starred in the Broadway revival of The Crucible the following year . In 2004 , she had a supporting role in the film Spartan and received praise for her first leading performance in Gracie 's Choice . 
 Bell gained critical acclaim for her first major role as the title character in the teen noir drama television series Veronica Mars ( 2004 – 07 ) . For her performance she awarded a Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television . She reprised the eponymous role in the 2014 film continuation of the series . During her time on Veronica Mars , Bell appeared as Mary Lane in the 2005 film Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical , a reprise of the role she had played in the New York musical upon which the film was based . In 2007 , Bell joined the cast of the sci @-@ fi series Heroes , playing the character Elle Bishop , for which she was nominated for a Saturn Award . 
 In 2008 , she had her breakout film role as the title character in Forgetting Sarah Marshall . She has since appeared in a number of comedy films , such as Couples Retreat ( 2009 ) , When in Rome ( 2010 ) , and You Again ( 2010 ) . Bell garnered further recognition for voicing Princess Anna in the 2013 Disney film Frozen and the 2015 short film Frozen Fever . She also starred as the female lead on the Showtime series House of Lies . Bell married actor Dax Shepard in 2013 , with whom she has two daughters . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Kristen Anne Bell was born on July 18 , 1980 and was raised in Huntington Woods , Michigan , a suburb of Detroit . Her mother , Lorelei ( née <unk> ) , is a registered nurse , and her father , Tom Bell , works as the television news director for CBS Television in Sacramento . Her parents divorced when she was two years old , and she has two half @-@ sisters , Sara and Jody , from her father 's second marriage . Bell is of Scottish , Polish , German and Irish descent . 
 Bell stated that she did not like her first name at the age of four . Bell 's mother convinced her to go by her middle name of Anne instead ; she used the name Annie until high school . Bell once broke both her wrists at the same time playing street hockey with friends . 
 Just before her freshman year of high school , Bell 's parents decided to pull her from the public school system . She then attended Shrine Catholic High School in nearby Royal Oak , where she took part in the drama and music club . During her time at the school , she won the starring role in the school 's 1997 production of The Wizard of Oz , as Dorothy Gale and also appeared in productions of Fiddler on the Roof ( 1995 ) , Lady Be Good ( 1996 ) , and Li 'l Abner ( 1998 ) . In 1998 , the year she graduated , Bell was named the yearbook 's " Best Looking Girl " by senior class vote . 
 Shortly after her high school graduation , Bell moved to New York City to attend New York University 's Tisch School of the Arts , majoring in musical theater . In 2001 , during her senior year , Bell left a few credits shy of graduating to take a role in the Broadway musical version of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1992 – 2003 : Early work = = = 
 In 1992 , Bell went to her first audition and won a dual role as a banana and a tree in a suburban Detroit theater 's production of Raggedy Ann and Andy . Her mother had established her with an agent before Bell was 13 , which allowed her to appear in newspaper advertisements for several Detroit retailers and television commercials . She also began private acting lessons . In 1998 , she appeared with an uncredited role in the locally filmed film Polish Wedding . 
 In 2001 , Bell left New York University to play a role as Becky Thatcher in the short @-@ lived Broadway musical of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . That same year , she made her credited film debut in <unk> Tang . Her one line in the film was cut and her appearance exists only as a scene shown during the credit sequence . Additionally , she auditioned for the television series Smallville for the role of Chloe Sullivan , a part eventually won by Allison Mack . In 2002 , she appeared in the Broadway revival of The Crucible with Liam Neeson , Angela Bettis and Laura Linney . Bell then moved to Los Angeles , California in 2002 because of her friendship with writers Kevin Murphy and Dan <unk> , and appeared in a handful of television shows as a special guest , finding trouble gaining a recurring role in a television series . Bell had " tested like eight times and booked nothing and every show [ she ] tested for got picked up , " including auditions for Skin and a Norm Macdonald series . 
 = = = 2004 – 06 : Veronica Mars and other roles = = = 
 In 2004 , Bell appeared in the Lifetime television film Gracie 's Choice , which received one of the network 's highest ratings . She made her debut in a theatrically released film , with David Mamet 's Spartan , as Laura Newton , the kidnapped daughter of the U.S. President , acting alongside Val Kilmer . Bell also guest @-@ starred on the HBO drama Deadwood in a two @-@ episode story arc ( " Bullock Returns to the Camp " and " Suffer the Little Children " ) . 
 At 24 , she won the role of the title character in UPN 's drama Veronica Mars , which was launched in the fall of 2004 . Created by Rob Thomas , the series starred Bell as the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old anti @-@ establishment high school student / detective . Bell drew on the parallels between the character of Veronica and her own life , since Bell 's parents had divorced and her best friend had also died . The series earned acclaim from television critics , as did Bell 's performance . Some critics asserted that her performance was overlooked , and deserved consideration for an Emmy Award . 
 Aside from working on Veronica Mars , Bell starred in Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical , reprising the role she played in the short @-@ lived 2001 off @-@ broadway musical . The musical was a spoof of the 1936 exploitation film of the same name . Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical debuted on the Showtime network on April 16 , 2005 . Also in April , Bell starred as Gracie in Fifty Pills , an entry for the Tribeca Film Festival . She appeared in a short independent film called The Receipt and the horror film Roman , which was directed by her The Crucible co @-@ star Angela Bettis . Released on August 11 , 2006 , Pulse starred Bell as the lead Mattie . A remake of the Japanese horror film Kairo , the film grossed US $ 27 @.@ 9 million worldwide , ; however it garnered negative response from critics . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter commented , " despite the starring presence of Kristen Bell , [ the ] young actress has far less interesting material to work with here than she does as [ the character ] " Veronica Mars . " " 
 = = = 2007 – 2011 : Film breakthrough = = = 
 Veronica Mars continued on UPN for a second season ; for the third season , the show was renewed and appeared on the newly created The CW . On January 19 , 2007 , CW Entertainment President Dawn Ostroff announced that while she was pleased with the gradual improvement of Veronica Mars 's ratings , the series would be put on hiatus after February sweeps to air a new reality series , Pussycat Dolls Present . On May 17 , 2007 Ostroff announced the cancellation of the series . A two @-@ hour series finale aired in the United States on May 22 , 2007 , and on June 11 , 2007 Thomas officially announced in an email to TV Guide 's Michael Ausiello that Veronica Mars had been canceled by the CW . A Veronica Mars feature film and comic book series continuation had been discussed , and for a short time there was talk of another collaboration between Bell and creator Thomas that would be unrelated to the Veronica Mars series . 
 Following the cancellation of Veronica Mars , Bell voiced interest in appearing on Heroes because she was a fan . On July 29 , 2007 , during a train ride back to Los Angeles from the San Diego Comic @-@ Con with Heroes actors Zachary Quinto and Masi Oka , and writers from the series , the writers had mentioned that if she " ever want [ ed ] to come on Heroes , give us [ writers ] a call , " to which Bell said she would " love to . " Meanwhile , there were discussions about a role on Lost , but Bell turned down the role of Charlotte Staples Lewis . Bell portrayed Elle Bishop on Heroes , a " mysterious young lady " with an " awesome power " . She did not have to audition for the role of Elle , who made her first appearance in an October 2007 episode , and appeared in at least thirteen episodes during the run of the series . The casting of Bell , Heroes creator Tim Kring explained , " was not easy to pull off " , but because of the large ensemble cast of the series and multiple story arcs , " we found a way to jump into a small window in [ Bell 's ] schedule . " . Bell lent her voice to the CW series Gossip Girl : she voiced the title character in every episode of the series , appearing in person only for a surprise cameo in the final episode , portraying herself . 
 Shortly after the cancellation of Veronica Mars in early 2007 , Bell filmed on location in Hawaii for a starring role as the title character in the Judd Apatow comedy Forgetting Sarah Marshall . She regarded the improvisational comedy in the film as " a lovely experience " . The film , written by and also starring Jason Segel , was released theatrically on April 18 , 2008 , and is considered to be Bell 's star @-@ making role . Bell lent her voice and likeness to the video game Assassin 's Creed which was released on November 13 , 2007 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 and April 8 , 2008 for the PC . Bell reprised her role of Lucy in Assassin 's Creed II released on November 17 , 2009 , and again in Assassin 's Creed : Brotherhood , released on November 16 , 2010 . In the spring of 2006 , she finished filming the Star Wars @-@ themed comedy Fanboys , which had its release date pushed to January 14 , 2008 . This was due to additional funding given to director Kyle Newman to shoot new scenes , however , the busy schedules of the actors only allowed for filming in September 2007 , thus moving the release date to accommodate that . Bell also starred in the 2009 comedies Serious Moonlight , alongside Meg Ryan , and Couples Retreat , which chronicles four couples who partake in therapy sessions at a tropical island resort . Jason Bateman played her husband . She also provided the voice for Cora in Astro Boy . On March 31 , 2008 , Bell began shooting the Mark Steven Johnson @-@ written Disney film When in Rome in locations in Rome and New York ; the film was released in 2010 . Bell reprised her role as Sarah Marshall for a cameo appearance in the film Get Him to the Greek , a spin @-@ off sequel from Forgetting Sarah Marshall , released June 4 , 2010 . 
 She co @-@ starred with singers Christina Aguilera and Cher in the film musical Burlesque which was released on Thanksgiving in 2010 . Bell had a cameo in the slasher horror film , Scream 4 , which was released on April 15 , 2011 . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Frozen and future projects = = = 
 In 2012 , Bell starred in the family drama film Big Miracle . She has also appeared in the music video for " Madder Red " by Brooklyn experimental rock band Yeasayer . Bell portrayed " Mary Magdalene " in The Truth & Life <unk> Audio New Testament Bible , a 22 @-@ hour , celebrity @-@ voiced , dramatized audio New Testament which uses the RSV @-@ CE translation . 
 Bell stars as Jeannie van der Hooven , the female lead on the Showtime series House of Lies , which premiered on January 8 , 2012 . Bell starred in The Lifeguard , written and directed by Liz W. Garcia , which began filming in July 2012 , and was released in August 2013 . She also voiced Anna in Frozen , which was released on November 22 , 2013 . In 2013 , for multiple episodes , Bell played Ingrid de Forest , an Eagleton City Councilwoman , on Parks and Recreation . 
 On March 13 , 2013 , it was confirmed that a Veronica Mars film would finally be coming to fruition . Bell and series creator Rob Thomas , launched a fundraising campaign to produce the film through Kickstarter and attained the $ 2 million goal in less than ten hours . The main cast members of the series all reprised their roles in the feature film . Production of the film took place during summer 2013 , and it was released theatrically and on video @-@ on @-@ demand on March 14 , 2014 . 
 In September 2014 , Bell starred with her husband , Dax Shephard , in a commercial for the Samsung Galaxy Tab S. It was so popular ( with over 20 million YouTube views ) that they did another for the holiday season . The ad agency McKinney was behind both . In 2016 , Bell voiced the sloth Priscilla in the animated comedy film Zootopia and starred as Claire in the comedy film The Boss . She will appear in the 2016 comedy film Bad Moms , and the 2017 action comedy CHiPs . Bell will also star as the main character , Eleanor , in the NBC comedy series The Good Place , which is set to premiere in the fall of 2016 . 
 = = In the media = = 
 In 2006 and again in 2013 , Bell was selected " World 's Sexiest Vegetarian " on PETA 's yearly poll . She was placed No. 68 on Maxim 's 2005 " Hot 100 " list , No. 11 in Maxim 's 2006 " Hot 100 " list , and No. 46 in Maxim 's 2007 " Hot 100 " list in which she was stated to have " single @-@ handedly saved the CW from becoming the worst network ever . " In 2006 , Maxim also placed Bell at the top of the " Fall TV 's Criminally Sexy Investigators " List . In 2008 , she was featured at No. 59 on Ask Men 's Top 99 Women of 2008 List . Reflecting on her admitted popularity with " geeks " , Bell was voted the fourth sexiest woman on TV by the staff at Wizard magazine . 
 Bell stated she never thought of herself as womanly because " I always play and look and act 10 years younger than I am , " however , she said , " Something magical happened when I turned 25 — I looked in the mirror and was like , You might not get carded for an R @-@ rated movie anymore . Like I didn 't have a little stick figure anymore . " Bell has said that many of her characters are tomboys because she was " not homely enough to play the nerdy girl and not nearly pretty enough to play the pretty girl " . 
 Bell has been associated with the idea that " nerdy is the new cool " , and she explained , " what was previously perceived as nerdy is now viewed as original . What I like about nerdiness , geekiness , is it doesn 't really matter what you 're into — it just means you 're not a follower . " She has also said , " I love nerds . Comic @-@ Con junkies are the tastemakers of tomorrow . Isn 't that funny ? The tables have turned . " Vanessa Juarez of Entertainment Weekly commented that Bell 's roles on Veronica Mars , Heroes and as a Star Wars fanatic in Fanboys have " <unk> [ ied ] her placement at the center of the geek universe " , while Rodney Rothman stated , " I guess she 's cornered the market on losers . " Bell 's work is often compared to Sarah Michelle Gellar 's portrayal of the title character on the cult television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter stated that Bell was " arguably the television successor [ to Gellar 's portrayal of Buffy ] when it comes to fighting bad guys . " Bell is sometimes confused with Lauren Conrad from the show The Hills . " Yeah , sometimes fans yell , ' Hey , Lauren ' to me , but usually from a distance , " said Kristen . 
 Despite " new celebrity " status , Bell claimed that she was not concerned because " no one ever recognizes me anyway " . As Bell explained , " I hang out with Hayden quite a bit — they never take pictures of me . I just step to the side , and I push myself in front of her when she wants to get out of it , or put her in the car . " Bell was a recurring guest on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson , appearing in interviews as well as sketches . On The Late Late Show , she shows a humorous hostility towards Craig 's robot skeleton sidekick Geoff Peterson , claiming that she had wanted to be Craig 's sidekick on his show and taking it upon herself to cut Geoff down every chance she gets . Both Bell and Geoff Peterson appeared with Ferguson during the five Late Late Shows filmed in France . 
 In January 2011 , it was announced that Bell would be the new face of Neutrogena . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships and family = = = 
 In 2007 , Bell ended a five @-@ year relationship with former fiancé Kevin Mann . She later told Complex magazine that dating " makes me want to vomit . And not out of grossness — OK , a little bit out of grossness , but just nerves ... I 've always been a serial monogamist . " 
 Bell began dating actor Dax Shepard in late 2007 . The couple announced their engagement in January 2010 . They decided to delay marriage until the state of California passed legislation legalizing same @-@ sex marriage . They co @-@ starred in the 2010 film When In Rome and in the 2012 film Hit and Run . After section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act fell on June 26 , 2013 , Bell asked Shepard to marry her through Twitter , which he accepted . They were married at the Beverly Hills County Clerk 's Office on October 17 , 2013 . They have two daughters : Lincoln Bell Shepard ( born March 28 , 2013 ) and Delta Bell Shepard ( born December 19 , 2014 ) . 
 = = = Beliefs , interests and charity work = = = 
 At age 11 , Bell became a vegetarian . In an interview with PETA , Bell stated , " I have always been an animal lover . I had a hard time disassociating the animals I <unk> with — dogs and cats , for example — from the animals on my plate , and I never really cared for the taste of meat . I always loved my Brussels sprouts ! " By 2012 Bell became vegan with her husband after watching the documentary Forks Over Knives . During her time in Michigan , Bell fostered animals from Michigan Humane Society and she now supports the San Diego @-@ based Helen Woodward Animal Center . Bell often attends fund raisers for the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and other non @-@ profit organizations dedicated to protecting animals . She has a Welsh Corgi @-@ Chow Chow mix named Lola , a Welsh Corgi @-@ Chihuahua mix named Shakey , and a black Labrador Retriever named Sadie , who was 11 years old when she was rescued from Hurricane Katrina and adopted by Bell in 2005 . 
 Bell has also become a strong advocate of vaccination . Though initially skeptical she has since stated " I think it 's really important to acknowledge that we have something called the herd immunity , where there are people that cannot get immunizations because of autoimmune diseases or cancer treatments , " and that " If we don ’ t get the vaccinations to keep them safe , then they 're screwed . " Citing scientific research , she shares her belief that it is her duty to not only protect her children , but other children , too - especially those who may suffer from autoimmune diseases or cancer . 
 She and many of those who worked on Veronica Mars , including personal friend Ryan Hansen , are involved with the charity organization Invisible Children , Inc . The goal of the organization is to create awareness regarding the plight of Northern Ugandans who are caught in the midst of a civil war between the government and Joseph Kony 's Lord 's Resistance Army . Bell has also done a public service announcement for Do Something 's Healthy Living Campaign . In 2014 , Bell launched a <unk> campaign offering fans a chance to win a date with her in return for donating to Invisible Children . 
 Bell supported and campaigned for Barack Obama during the 2008 United States presidential election . Along with Rashida Jones , she visited college campuses in Missouri to discuss the candidates and encourage voter registration . Bell showed support for the Writers Guild of America in the writer 's strike , appearing in the picket lines in December 2007 stating , " the writers are just looking for some fairness . " 
 Bell also has a strong liking of Tommy Wiseau 's 2003 cult film The Room . She hosts parties at her house for The Room , attended cinema screenings of it , and has said that " there is a magic about that film that is indescribable . " 
 = = = Depression and anxiety = = = 
 In May 2016 , Bell revealed that she has struggled with and received help for depression and anxiety . She said , " It ’ s important for me to be candid about this so people in a similar situation can realize that they are not worthless and that they do have something to offer . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Web series = = = 
 = = Theatre = = 
 = = Soundtrack appearances = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Ratatouille ( film ) = 
 Ratatouille ( / <unk> / ; French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ] ) is a 2007 American computer @-@ animated comedy film produced by Pixar and released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution . It is the eighth film produced by Pixar , and was co @-@ written and directed by Brad Bird , who took over from Jan Pinkava in 2005 . The title refers to a French dish , " ratatouille " , which is served at the end of the film , and is also a play on words about the species of the main character . The film stars the voices of Patton Oswalt as Remy , an anthropomorphic rat who is interested in cooking ; Lou Romano as Linguini , a young garbage boy who befriends Remy ; Ian Holm as Skinner , the head chef of Auguste Gusteau 's restaurant ; Janeane Garofalo as Colette , a rôtisseur at Gusteau 's restaurant ; Peter O 'Toole as Anton Ego , a restaurant critic ; Brian Dennehy as Django , Remy 's father and leader of his clan ; Peter Sohn as Emile , Remy 's older brother ; and Brad Garrett as Auguste Gusteau , a recently deceased chef . The plot follows Remy , who dreams of becoming a chef and tries to achieve his goal by forming an alliance with a Parisian restaurant 's garbage boy . 
 Development of Ratatouille began in 2000 when Pinkava wrote the original concepts of the film . In 2005 , Bird was approached to direct the film and revise the story . Bird and some of the film 's crew members also visited Paris for inspiration . To create the food animation used in the film , the crew consulted chefs from both France and the United States . Bird also interned at Thomas Keller 's French Laundry restaurant , where Keller developed the confit <unk> , a dish used in the film . 
 Ratatouille premiered on June 22 , 2007 , at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles , California , with its general release June 29 , 2007 , in the United States . The film grossed $ 623 @.@ 7 million at the box office and received positive reviews . The film later won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , among other honors . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Remy is an idealistic and ambitious young rat , gifted with highly developed senses of taste and smell . Inspired by his idol , the recently deceased chef Auguste Gusteau , Remy dreams of becoming a cook himself . When an old woman armed with a shotgun sees his clan , they are forced to abandon their home ; the gunshots cause Remy to be separated from his family . He ends up in the sewers of Paris and eventually finds himself at a skylight overlooking the kitchen of Gusteau 's restaurant . 
 As Remy watches , a young man named Alfredo Linguini , is hired as a garbage boy by Skinner , the restaurant 's devious current owner and Gusteau 's former sous @-@ chef . When Linguini spills a pot of soup and attempts to recreate it with disastrous results , Remy falls into the kitchen and uses other ingredients to complement the soup to perfection . Linguini catches Remy and is confronted by Skinner . As Skinner argues with Linguini , the soup is accidentally served and proves to be a success . Colette <unk> , the staff 's only female chef , convinces Skinner to retain Linguini , who is assumed to be the soup 's creator . After Skinner catches Remy in the act of escaping , he orders Linguini to take the rat far away and kill it . Linguini then discovers Remy 's intelligence and passion for food , so he keeps him . 
 On Linguini 's first day as a chef , he and Remy find a way to communicate ; Remy guides Linguini like a marionette by pulling on his hair while hidden under Linguini 's toque blanche , while Skinner assigns Colette to train his new cook . 
 Suspicious , Skinner learns that the boy is Gusteau 's illegitimate son and the rightful heir to the restaurant , which threatens his use of the restaurant 's reputation to establish a packaged food franchise he started after Gusteau died . Remy discovers the evidence of Linguini 's inheritance and , after eluding Skinner , gives it to Linguini , who deposes Skinner as owner . The restaurant continues to thrive , and Linguini and Colette develop a budding romance , leaving Remy feeling left out . Meanwhile , Remy reunites with his father , Django , and his brother , Emile , who take him back to their new lair . Though thrilled that his family and clan are safe , he tells him that he cannot stay . In an attempt to rid his son from his like of humans , Django shows Remy a window display of dead rats , poison , and traps , but Remy leaves . 
 France 's top restaurant critic Anton Ego , whose previous review cost Gusteau 's one of its stars , announces he will be re @-@ reviewing the restaurant the following evening . After an argument with Linguini , Remy leads his clan in a raid on the restaurant 's pantries . Linguini catches them and throws them out . Now aware of Remy 's skills , Skinner captures him in an attempt to use him to create a new line of frozen foods . However , Remy is freed by Django and Emile . He returns to the restaurant , only to find Linguini is unable to cook without him . Linguini apologizes and reveals the truth to the staff , but they leave , believing that Linguini has lost his mind . Colette later returns after recalling Gusteau 's motto , " Anyone can cook . " 
 Django arrives with the rest of the clan , offering to help after seeing his son 's determination . Remy has the rats cook , while Linguini serves as waiter . For Ego ( and Skinner ) , Remy and Colette create a variation of ratatouille , which brings back an astonished Ego memories of his mother 's cooking . During the service , the rats are forced to tie up Skinner and a health inspector to prevent them from revealing their involvement in the cooking . When Ego requests to see the chef , Linguini and Colette make him wait until the rest of the diners have left before introducing Remy . Ego is stunned and leaves the restaurant , deep in thought . He writes a positive and thoughtful review for the newspaper the next day , stating that Gusteau 's chef ( Remy ) is " nothing less than the finest chef in France . " 
 Despite the positive review , Gusteau 's is shut down , since Linguini and Remy had to release Skinner and the health inspector . Ego loses credibility as a critic but funds a popular new bistro , " La Ratatouille " , created and run by Remy , Linguini , and Colette ; Ego frequents the bistro for Remy 's cooking . The rats settle in their new home in the bistro 's roof . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Patton Oswalt as Remy . Director Brad Bird chose Oswalt after hearing his food @-@ related comedy routine . 
 Lou Romano as Alfredo Linguini , the son of Auguste Gusteau and Renata Linguini . 
 Janeane Garofalo as Colette <unk> , Gusteau 's rôtisseur , inspired by French chef Hélène <unk> . 
 Ian Holm as Skinner , a diminutive chef and owner of Auguste Gusteau 's restaurant . Since Gusteau 's death , Skinner has used the Gusteau name to market a line of cheap <unk> meals . Skinner 's behavior , diminutive size , and body language are loosely based on Louis de <unk> . 
 Brian Dennehy as Django , Remy and Emile 's father and the leader of the rats . 
 Peter O 'Toole as Anton Ego , a restaurant critic . His appearance was modeled after Louis Jouvet . 
 Brad Garrett as Auguste Gusteau ( whose first and last names are anagrams of each other ) . Many reviewers believe that Gusteau is inspired by real @-@ life chef Bernard Loiseau , who committed suicide after media speculation that his flagship restaurant , La Côte d 'Or , was going to be downgraded from three Michelin stars to two . La Côte d 'Or was one of the restaurants visited by Brad Bird and others in France . 
 Peter Sohn as Emile , Remy 's older brother . 
 Will Arnett as Horst , Skinner 's German sous chef . 
 Julius Callahan as Lalo , Gusteau 's saucier and <unk> . Callahan also voices François , Skinner 's advertising executive . 
 James Remar as Larousse , Gusteau 's garde manger . 
 John Ratzenberger as Mustafa , Gusteau 's head waiter . 
 Teddy Newton as Talon <unk> , Skinner 's lawyer . 
 Tony Fucile as Pompidou , Gusteau 's <unk> . Fucile also voices Nadar Lessard , a health inspector employed by Skinner . 
 Jake Steinfeld as Git , a former lab rat and member of Django 's colony . 
 Brad Bird as Ambrister Minion , Anton Ego 's butler . 
 Stéphane Roux as the narrator of the cooking channel . 
 Thomas Keller as a dining patron who asks " what 's new " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jan Pinkava came up with the concept in 2000 , creating the original design , sets and characters and core storyline , but he was never formally named the director of the film . Lacking confidence in Pinkava 's story development , Pixar management replaced him with Bird in 2005 . Bird was attracted to the film because of the outlandishness of the concept and the conflict that drove it : that rats feared kitchens , yet a rat wanted to work in one . Bird was also delighted that the film could be made a highly physical comedy , with the character of Linguini providing endless fun for the animators . Bird rewrote the story , with a change in emphasis . He killed off Gusteau , gave larger roles to Skinner and Colette , and also changed the appearance of the rats to be less anthropomorphic . 
 Because Ratatouille is intended to be a romantic , lush vision of Paris , giving it an identity distinct from previous Pixar films , director Brad Bird , producer Brad Lewis and some of the crew spent a week in the city to properly understand its environment , taking a motorcycle tour and eating at five top restaurants . There are also many water @-@ based sequences in the film , one of which is set in the sewers and is more complex than the blue whale scene in Finding Nemo . One scene has Linguini wet after jumping into the Seine to fetch Remy . A Pixar employee ( Shade / Paint department coordinator <unk> Migdal ) jumped into Pixar 's swimming pool wearing a chef 's uniform and apron to see which parts of the suit stuck to his body and which became translucent from water absorption . 
 Ratatouille was originally going to be released in 2006 , however , in December 2004 , the date was changed to 2007 . The release date change was the same day Disney / Pixar changed the release date of Cars , from November 2005 to June 2006 , thus pushing Ratatouille to 2007 . 
 A challenge for the filmmakers was creating computer @-@ generated images of food that would appear delicious . Gourmet chefs in both the U.S. and France were consulted and animators attended cooking classes at San Francisco @-@ area culinary schools to understand the workings of a commercial kitchen . Sets / Layout department manager Michael <unk> , a culinary @-@ academy trained professional chef before working at Pixar , helped teach and consult animators as they worked . He also prepared dishes used by the Art , Shade / Paint , Effects and Sets Modeling departments . Renowned chef Thomas Keller allowed producer Brad Lewis to intern in his French Laundry kitchen . For the film 's climax , Keller designed a fancy , layered version of the title dish for the rat characters to cook , which he called " confit <unk> " in honor of the original Turkish name . The same sub @-@ surface light scattering technique that was used on skin in The Incredibles was used on fruits and vegetables , while new programs gave an organic texture and movement to the food . Completing the illusion were music , dialogue , and abstract imagery representing the characters ' mental sensations while appreciating food . The visual flavor metaphors were created by animator Michel Gagné inspired by the work of Oscar Fischinger and Norman McLaren . To create a realistic compost pile , the Art Department photographed fifteen different kinds of produce , such as apples , berries , bananas , mushrooms , oranges , broccoli , and lettuce , in the process of rotting . 
 According to Pixar designer Jason Deamer , " Most of the characters were designed while Jan [ Pinkava ] was still directing ... He has a real eye for sculpture . " For example , according to Pinkava , the critic Anton Ego was designed to resemble a vulture . Rat expert Debbie <unk> ( a.k.a. the " Rat Lady " ) was consulted on rat habits and characteristics . A vivarium containing pet rats sat in a hallway for more than a year so animators could study the movement of the animals ' fur , noses , ears , paws , and tails as they ran . The cast members strove to make their French accents authentic yet understandable . John Ratzenberger notes that he often segued into an Italian accent . To save time , human characters were designed and animated without toes . 
 Promotional material for Intel credits their platform for a 30 percent performance improvement in rendering software . They used Remy in some of their marketing materials . 
 = = Music = = 
 Brad Bird reteamed with Michael Giacchino on the score for Ratatouille since they got along well during the scoring of The Incredibles . Giacchino had written two themes for Remy , one about his thief self and the other about his hopes and dreams . He also wrote a buddy theme for both Remy and Linguini that plays when they 're together . In addition to the score , Giacchino wrote the main theme song , " Le Festin " , about Remy and his wishes to be a chef . Camille was hired to perform " Le Festin " after Giacchino listened to her music and realized she was perfect for the song ; as a result , the song is sung in French in all versions of the film . 
 The music for Ratatouille gave Giacchino his first Academy Award nomination for Best Original Score as well as his first Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album . Giacchino returned to Pixar to score their 2009 blockbuster Up . 
 = = Release = = 
 Ratatouille 's world premiere was on June 22 , 2007 , at Los Angeles ' Kodak Theater . The commercial release was one week later , with the short film Lifted preceding Ratatouille in theaters . Earlier in the year , it had received an Academy Award nomination . A test screening of the film was shown at the Harkins Cine Capri Theater in Scottsdale , Arizona on June 16 , 2007 , at which a Pixar representative was present to collect viewer feedback . Disney CEO Bob Iger announced an upcoming theatrical re @-@ release of the film in 3D at the Disney shareholders meeting in March 2014 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The trailer for Ratatouille debuted with the release of its immediate predecessor , Cars . It depicts an original scene where Remy is caught on the cheese trolley in the restaurant 's dining area sampling the cheese and barely escaping the establishment , intercut with separate scenes of the rat explaining directly to the audience why he is taking such risks . Similar to most of Pixar 's teaser trailers , the scene was not present in the final film release . 
 A second trailer was released on March 23 , 2007 . The Ratatouille Big Cheese Tour began on May 11 , 2007 , with cooking demonstrations and a film preview . Voice actor Lou Romano attended the San Francisco leg of the tour for autograph signings . 
 Disney and Pixar were working to bring a French @-@ produced Ratatouille @-@ branded wine to Costco stores in August 2007 , but abandoned plans because of complaints from the California Wine Institute , citing standards in labeling that restrict the use of cartoon characters to avoid attracting under @-@ age drinkers . 
 In the United Kingdom , in place of releasing a theatrical trailer , a theatrical commercial featuring Remy and Emile was released in cinemas before its release to discourage obtaining unlicensed copies of films . Also in the United Kingdom , the main characters were used for a theatrical commercial for the Nissan Note , with Remy and Emile watching an original commercial for it made for the " Surprisingly <unk> " ad campaign and also parodying it respectively . 
 Disney / Pixar were concerned that audiences , particularly children , would not be familiar with the word " ratatouille " and its pronunciation . The title was therefore also spelled phonetically within trailers and on posters . For similar reasons , in the American release of the film , on @-@ screen text in French was printed in English , such as the title of Gusteau 's cookbook and the sign telling kitchen staff to wash their hands , though in the British English release , these are rendered in French . In Canada , the film was released theatrically with text in English , but on DVD , the majority of the text ( including Gusteau 's will ) was in French . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Disney released Ratatouille on high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD in North America on November 6 , 2007 . A new animated short film featuring Remy and Emile entitled Your Friend the Rat was included as a special feature , in which the two rats attempt to entreat the viewer , a human , to welcome rats as their friends , demonstrating the benefits and misconceptions of rats towards humanity through several historical examples . The eleven @-@ minute short uses 3D animation , 2D animation , live action and even stop motion animation , a first for Pixar . 
 The disc also includes a CG short entitled Lifted , which screened before the film during its theatrical run . It depicts an adolescent extraterrestrial attempting to abduct a sleeping human . Throughout the sequence , he is graded by an adult extraterrestrial in a manner reminiscent of a driver 's licensing exam road test . The entire short contains no dialogue , which is typical of Pixar Shorts not based on existing properties . Also included among the special features are deleted scenes , a featurette featuring Brad Bird discussing filmmaking and chef Thomas Keller discussing culinary creativity entitled " Fine Food and Film " , and four easter eggs . Although the Region 1 Blu @-@ ray edition has a French audio track , the Region 1 DVD does not , except for some copies marked as for sale only in Canada . 
 It was released on DVD on November 6 , 2007 , and earned 4 @,@ 919 @,@ 574 units ( equivalent to $ 73 @,@ 744 @,@ 414 ) on its first week ( Nov. 6 – 11 , 2007 ) during which it topped the DVD charts . In total it sold 12 @,@ 531 @,@ 266 units ( $ 189 @,@ 212 @,@ 532 ) becoming the second best @-@ selling animated DVD of 2007 , both in units sold and sales revenue , behind Happy Feet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 96 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 @.@ 4 / 10 based on 241 reviews . The site 's consensus reads : " Fast @-@ paced and stunningly animated , Ratatouille adds another delightfully entertaining entry -- and a rather unlikely hero -- to the Pixar canon . " Another review aggregation website Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 96 out of 100 based on 37 reviews , the highest of any Pixar film and the eighth @-@ highest rated film on the site . 
 A. O. Scott of The New York Times called Ratatouille " a nearly flawless piece of popular art , as well as one of the most persuasive portraits of an artist ever committed to film " ; echoing the character Anton Ego in the film , he ended his review with a simple " thank you " to the creators of the film . Wally Hammond of Time Out gave the film five out of five stars , saying " A test for tiny tots , a mite nostalgic and as male @-@ dominated as a modern kitchen it may be , but these are mere quibbles about this delightful addition to the Pixar pantheon . " Andrea Gronvall of the Chicago Reader gave the film a positive review , saying " Brad Bird 's second collaboration with Pixar is more ambitious and meditative than his Oscar @-@ winning The Incredibles . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B , saying " Ratatouille has the Pixar technical magic without , somehow , the full Pixar flavor . It 's Brad Bird 's genial dessert , not so much incredible as merely sweetly edible . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " What makes Ratatouille such a hilarious and heartfelt wonder is the way Bird contrives to let it sneak up on you . And get a load of that score from Michael Giacchino , a perfect compliment to a delicious meal . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three out of four stars , saying " For parents looking to spend time in a theater with their kids or adults who want something lighter and less testosterone @-@ oriented than the usual summer fare , Ratatouille offers a savory main course . " Christy Lemire of the Associated Press gave the film a positive review , saying " Ratatouille is free of the kind of gratuitous pop @-@ culture references that plague so many movies of the genre ; it tells a story , it 's very much of our world but it never goes for the cheap , easy gag . " Justin Chang of Variety gave the film a positive review , saying " The master chefs at Pixar have blended all the right ingredients -- abundant verbal and visual wit , genius slapstick timing , a <unk> of Gallic sophistication -- to produce a warm and irresistible concoction . " 
 Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars , saying " The film may be animated , and largely taken up with rats , but its pulse is gratifyingly human . And you have never seen a computer @-@ animated feature with this sort of visual panache and detail . " Rafer Guzman of Newsday gave the film three out of four stars , saying " So many computer @-@ animated movies are brash , loud and popping with pop @-@ culture comedy , but Ratatouille has the warm glow of a favorite book . The characters are more than the sum of their gigabyte @-@ consuming parts -- they feel handcrafted . " Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel gave the film three out of five stars , saying " Has Pixar lost its magic recipe ? Ratatouille is filled with fairly generic animated imagery , a few modest chases , a couple of good gags , not a lot of laughs . " Scott Foundas of LA Weekly gave the film a positive review , saying " Bird has taken the raw ingredients of an anthropomorphic @-@ animal kiddie matinee and whipped them into a heady brew about nothing less than the principles of artistic creation . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film four out of four stars , saying " It 's not just the computer animation that is vibrantly three @-@ dimensional . It 's also the well @-@ rounded characters ... I defy you to name another animated film so overflowing with superfluous beauty . " Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " With Ratatouille , Bird once again delivers not just a great , witty story , but dazzling visuals as well . " Bill Muller of The Arizona Republic gave the film four and a half stars out of five , saying " Like the burbling soup that plays a key part in Ratatouille , the movie is a delectable blend of ingredients that tickles the palette and leaves you hungry for more . " 
 Rene Rodriguez of the Miami Herald gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Ratatouille is the most straightforward and formulaic picture to date from Pixar Animation Studios , but it is also among the most enchanting and touching . " Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News gave the film four out of four stars , saying " The Pixar magic continues with Brad Bird 's Ratatouille , a gorgeous , wonderfully inventive computer @-@ animated comedy . " Stephen Whitty of the Newark Star @-@ Ledger gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Fresh family fun . Although there are those slightly noxious images of rodents scampering around a kitchen , the movie doesn 't stoop to kid @-@ pandering jokes based on back talk and bodily gases . " David Ansen of Newsweek gave the film a positive review , saying " A film as rich as a sauce <unk> , as refreshing as a raspberry sorbet , and a lot less predictable than the damn food metaphors and adjectives all us critics will churn out to describe it . OK , one more and then I 'll be done : it 's yummy . " Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film four out of four stars , saying " Ratatouille never overwhelms , even though it 's stocked with action , romance , historical content , family drama and serious statements about the creation of art . " Richard Corliss of Time gave the film a positive review , saying " From the moment Remy enters , crashing , to the final happy fadeout , Ratatouille parades the brio and depth that set Pixar apart from and above other animation studios . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film four out of four stars , saying " A lot of animated movies have inspired sequels , notably Shrek , but Brad Bird 's Ratatouille is the first one that made me positively desire one . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film four out of four stars , saying " Had Bird gone the safe route , he would have robbed us of a great new cartoon figure in Remy , who like the rest of the film is rendered with animation that is at once fanciful and life @-@ like . It 's also my pick for Pixar 's best . " 
 Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal gave the film a positive review , saying " The characters are irresistible , the animation is astonishing and the film , a fantasy version of a foodie rhapsody , sustains a level of joyous invention that hasn 't been seen in family entertainment since The Incredibles . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film four and a half stars out of five , saying " Brad Bird 's Ratatouille is so audacious you have to fall in love with its unlikely hero . " Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Ratatouille is delicious fun sure to be savored by audiences of all ages for its sumptuous visuals , clever wit and irresistibly inspiring tale . " Miriam Di Nunzio of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Ratatouille will make you wonder why animation needs to hide behind the mantle of ' it 's for children , but grownups will like it , too . ' This one 's for Mom and Dad , and yep , the kids will like it , too . " Michael Booth of The Denver Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Writer and director Brad Bird keeps Ratatouille moving without resorting to the cute animal jokes or pop @-@ culture wisecracking that ruined so many other recent animated films . " Tom Long of The Detroit News gave the film an A , saying " Ratatouille has the technical genius , emotional core and storytelling audacity to lift it into the ranks of [ the best ] Pixar films , the crème de la crème of modern animation . " Liam Lacey of The Globe and Mail gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " No sketchy backgrounds here -- Ratatouille 's scenes feels like deep @-@ focus camera shots . The textures , from the gleam of copper pans to the cobblestone streets , are almost palpable . " Desson Thomson of The Washington Post gave the film a positive review , saying " Ratatouille doesn 't center on the over @-@ familiar surfaces of contemporary life . It harks back to Disney 's older era , when cartoons seemed part of a more elegant world with less edgy characters . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In its opening weekend in North America , Ratatouille opened in 3 @,@ 940 theaters and debuted at number one with $ 47 million , the lowest Pixar opening since A Bug 's Life . However , in France , where the film is set , the film broke the record for the biggest debut for an animated film . In the UK , the film debuted at number one with sales over £ 4 million . The film has grossed $ 206 @,@ 445 @,@ 654 in the United States and Canada and a total of $ 623 @,@ 722 @,@ 818 worldwide , currently making it the sixth highest grossing Pixar film , just behind Toy Story 3 , Finding Nemo , Monsters University , Up , and The Incredibles . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Ratatouille was nominated for five Oscars including Best Original Score , Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , Best Original Screenplay and Best Animated Film , which it lost to Atonement , The Bourne Ultimatum ( for both Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing ) and Juno , respectively , winning only the last one . At the time , the film held the record for the greatest number of Oscar nominations for a computer animated feature film , breaking the previous record held by Monsters , Inc . , Finding Nemo and The Incredibles at four nominations , but tied with Aladdin for any animated film . In 2008 , WALL @-@ E surpassed that record with 6 nominations . As of 2013 , Ratatouille is tied with Up and Toy Story 3 for animated film with the second greatest number of Oscar nominations . Beauty and the Beast still holds the record for most Oscar nominations ( also 6 ) for an animated feature film . 
 Furthermore , Ratatouille was nominated for 13 Annie Awards including twice in the Best Animated Effects , where it lost to Surf 's Up , and three times in the Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature Production for Janeane Garofalo , Ian Holm , and Patton Oswalt , where Ian Holm won the award . It won the Best Animated Feature Award from multiple associations including the Chicago Film Critics , the National Board of Review , the Annie Awards , the Broadcast Film Critics , the British Academy of Film and Television ( BAFTA ) , and the Golden Globes . 
 = = <unk> film = = 
 If magazine described <unk> , a 2007 Brazilian computer graphics cartoon by <unk> <unk> , as a " ripoff " of Ratatouille . Marco Aurélio Canônico of Folha de S. Paulo described <unk> as a derivative of Ratatouille . Canônico discussed whether lawsuits from Pixar would appear . The Brazilian Ministry of Culture posted Marco Aurélio Canônico 's article on its website . In the end , Pixar reportedly did not seek legal action . Video <unk> films with concepts blatantly plagiarized from films by Pixar , Disney , DreamWorks Animation and other major studios in other countries . 
 = = Video game = = 
 A video game adaptation of the film was released for all major consoles and handhelds in 2007 . A Nintendo DS exclusive game , titled Ratatouille : Food Frenzy , was released in October 2007 . Ratatouille is also among the films represented in Kinect Rush : A Disney @-@ Pixar Adventure , released in March 2012 for Xbox 360 . 
 = = Theme park attraction = = 
 A Disney theme park attraction based on the film has been constructed in Walt Disney Studios Park , Disneyland Paris . Ratatouille : L <unk> <unk> <unk> de Rémy is based upon scenes from the film and uses trackless ride technology . In the attraction , riders " shrink down to the size of a rat " . 
 = Jon Hamm = 
 Jonathan Daniel " Jon " Hamm ( born March 10 , 1971 ) is an American actor , director , and television producer best known for playing advertising executive Don Draper in the AMC drama series , Mad Men ( 2007 – 2015 ) . 
 For much of the mid @-@ 1990s , Hamm lived in Los Angeles , making appearances in television series Providence , The Division , What About Brian , and Related . In 2000 , he made his feature film debut in the space adventure film Space Cowboys . The following year , he had a minor role in the independent comedy , Kissing Jessica Stein ( 2001 ) . 
 Hamm gained wide recognition when Mad Men began airing in July 2007 . His performance earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series – Drama in 2008 and 2016 and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series in 2015 . He also directed two episodes of the show . In 2008 , Hamm appeared in a remake of the science fiction film The Day The Earth Stood Still . His first leading film role was in the 2010 independent thriller Stolen . He also had supporting roles in The Town ( 2010 ) , Sucker Punch ( 2011 ) , and Bridesmaids ( 2011 ) . Hamm has received 16 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his performances in Mad Men , 30 Rock ( 2006 – 2013 ) , and Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt ( 2015 – present ) . 
 His other television credits include starring in the Sky Arts series A Young Doctor 's Notebook and guest roles in Parks and Recreation and Wet Hot American Summer : First Day of Camp . He provided his voice to the animated film Shrek Forever After in 2010 , and in 2015 , he starred in the animated film Minions . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hamm was born in St. Louis , Missouri , the son of Deborah and Daniel Hamm . His father ran a family trucking company , and his mother was a secretary . He is of German , English , and Irish descent ; his surname originates with German immigrants . Hamm 's parents divorced when he was two years old , and he lived in <unk> Coeur with his mother until her death from colon cancer , when he was 10 . Hamm then moved in with his father . 
 Hamm 's first acting role was as Winnie the Pooh in first grade . At 16 , he was cast as Judas in Godspell , and enjoyed the experience , though he did not take acting seriously . 
 Hamm attended the private John Burroughs School in Ladue , where he was a member of the football , baseball , and swim teams . During this time , he dated future actress Sarah Clarke . His father died when he was 20 . 
 Following graduation in 1989 , Hamm enrolled at the University of Texas , where he was a member of the Upsilon Chapter of Sigma Nu fraternity . There , Hamm was arrested for participating in a violent hazing incident that occurred in November 1990 , involving another student , Mark Sanders . Sanders was beaten with a paddle and a broom , while Hamm was leading him around the fraternity house with the claw of a hammer beneath Sanders ' genitals , and Sanders ' clothes were set on fire . The incident led to the fraternity 's being shut down on campus . Hamm completed the terms of a deferred adjudication , and the charges were dismissed in August 1995 . 
 Hamm enrolled at the University of Missouri . At Missouri he answered an advertisement from a theater company looking for players in a production of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , auditioned , and was cast in the production . Other roles followed , such as Leon Czolgosz in Assassins . 
 After graduating in 1993 with a Bachelor of Arts in English , Hamm returned to his high school to teach eighth @-@ grade acting . One of his students was Ellie Kemper , who later became an actress and would go on to star in the Netflix original series Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt , in which Hamm has a recurring role ; another was Beau Willimon , who became a screenwriter . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Hamm has known actor Paul Rudd for many years , and visited him in Hollywood in 1992 . Not wishing to stay in a " normal career " , Hamm moved to Los Angeles permanently in 1995 with an automobile and $ 150 . He moved into a house with four other aspiring actors and began working as a waiter while attending auditions . He acted in theatre , including as Flavius in a production of Shakespeare 's Timon of Athens with the Sacred Fools Theater Company . 
 Finding employment as an actor was difficult , despite representation by the William Morris Agency , because unlike other actors his age , he could not be cast in youth @-@ oriented productions like Dawson 's Creek due to his older appearance . In 1998 , having failed to obtain any acting jobs after three years , he was dropped by William Morris . Hamm continued working as a waiter and , briefly , as a set designer for a softcore pornography film . After repeatedly failing to obtain promising roles , he set his 30th birthday as a deadline to succeed in Hollywood , stating : 
 You either suck that up and find another agent , or you go home and say you gave it a shot , but that 's the end of that . The last thing I wanted to be out here was one of those actors who 's 45 years old , with a tenuous grasp of their own reality , and not really working much . So I gave myself five years . I said , if I can 't get it going by the time I 'm 30 , I 'm in the wrong place . And as soon as I said that , it 's like I started working right away . 
 In 2000 , Hamm obtained the role of romantic firefighter Burt Ridley on NBC 's drama series Providence . His one @-@ episode contract grew to 19 , and led him to quit waiting tables . Hamm made his feature film debut with one line in Clint Eastwood 's space adventure Space Cowboys ( 2000 ) ; more substantial roles followed in the independent comedy Kissing Jessica Stein ( 2001 ) and the war film We Were Soldiers ( 2002 ) , during filming of which he turned 30 . His career was further bolstered when he played the recurring role of police inspector Nate Basso on Lifetime 's television series The Division , from 2002 to 2004 . Other minor roles followed on the television series What About Brian , CSI : Miami , Related , Numb3rs , The Unit , and The Sarah Silverman Program . Hamm 's Mad Men castmate Eric Ladin had said that one of the reasons he looks up to Jon is that while he " made it " later than most actors , Hamm never gave up on acting . 
 = = = International recognition = = = 
 Hamm received his breakthrough role in 2007 , when he was cast from more than 80 candidates as the protagonist character Don Draper , in AMC 's drama series Mad Men . In the series , set in a fictional 1960s advertising agency , he plays a suave advertising executive with an obscure past . 
 Hamm recalled , " I read the script for Mad Men and I loved it . [ ... ] I never thought they 'd cast me — I mean , I thought they 'd go with one of the five guys who look like me but are movie stars " , and that an actor with a " proven track record " would likely have been chosen if another network had aired the show . He went through numerous auditions and explained each time to the casting directors what he could bring to the character , if given the part . Alan Taylor and Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner initially thought Hamm was too handsome for the role but ultimately decided , " it was perfect to cast sort of the perfect male in this part " ; Weiner also sensed that the actor had not been raised by his parents , similar to Draper 's backstory . 
 Hamm used memories of his father to portray Draper , a well @-@ dressed , influential figure in business and society hiding great inner turmoil and facing changes in the world beyond his control . 
 Mad Men debuted on July 19 , 2007 , with almost 1 @.@ 4 million viewers . It quickly developed a loyal audience , with Hamm receiving strong reviews . 
 Robert Bianco of USA Today was complimentary of Hamm , noting that his interpretation of Draper was a " <unk> performance " . The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert called Hamm a " brilliant lead " . 
 For his work , Hamm won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series – Drama in 2008 . Also in 2008 , he was nominated for both the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series . In 2009 , Hamm was again nominated for the Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award in the same category , and received another Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series . In 2010 , Hamm received his third Golden Globe Award nomination . Mad Men concluded its seven @-@ season run on May 17 , 2015 . Hamm received his first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series on September 20 , 2015 after receiving 12 Emmy nominations for acting on and producing the series . 
 Hamm 's next film role was in the 2008 science fiction film The Day the Earth Stood Still , a remake of the 1951 film of the same name . Although the film received mixed reviews , it was financially successful , earning $ 230 million worldwide at the box office . 
 Hamm hosted Saturday Night Live , season 34 , episode 6 , on October 25 , 2008 , and played various roles , including Don Draper in two sketches . He returned to host again on January 30 and October 30 , 2010 . 
 In 2009 , Hamm guest starred in three episodes of the NBC situation comedy show 30 Rock , as Drew Baird , a doctor who is a neighbor and love interest of Liz Lemon 's ( Tina Fey ) . For these performances , he received three nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 Hamm 's film projects post @-@ 2009 include the independent mystery thriller Stolen ( 2009 ) and his first leading role , in which he plays a man trying to demystify the circumstances surrounding his son 's kidnapping . The Hollywood Reporter 's Frank Scheck stated that the feature never came together , and that Hamm was unable to do much with his " underwritten role " . 
 Hamm had a voice cameo in the animated feature Shrek Forever After ( released in May 2010 ) , as an ogre leader named Brogan . Also that year , he appeared as an FBI agent in The Town ( 2010 ) , with Ben Affleck ; after receiving " about 40 scripts that were all set in the 60s , or had me playing advertising guys " , Hamm was pleased that the film offered a role " the opposite to Don Draper " . The feature received generally favorable reviews and earned $ 144 million worldwide . 
 His next acting role was as defense attorney Jake Ehrlich in the independent drama Howl , based on Allen Ginsberg 's eponymous 1956 poem . On December 12 , 2010 , Hamm made a guest appearance as an FBI supervisor on Fox 's animated series The Simpsons . 
 Returning to film , he appeared in Zack Snyder 's action @-@ fantasy movie Sucker Punch ( 2011 ) , as the character High Roller , and the doctor . He also had a supporting role in the comedy Bridesmaids as Kristen Wiig 's " rude and arrogant sex buddy " . Hamm was next seen in the independent feature Friends with Kids ( 2011 ) , which he produced alongside his then @-@ partner Jennifer Westfeldt ; the story centers around a group of friends whose lives are changed as the couples in the group begin to have children . 
 He has a recurring role in the sitcom The Increasingly Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret , as the servant of sociopathic billionaire Dave Mountford ( Blake Harrison ) . The role is later revealed to , in fact , be a fictionalized version of Hamm complaining that being made into Dave 's servant has required him to be written out of four episodes of Mad Men . 
 Hamm hosted the 21st <unk> Awards on July 17 , 2013 and played sports agent J.B. Bernstein in Disney 's sports drama Million Dollar Arm the following year . 
 Hamm starred alongside Daniel Radcliffe in the Ovation television dark comedy A Young Doctor 's Notebook , playing an older version of Radcliffe 's character , from December 2012 to December 2013 . He had a number of roles in 2015 , in the comedy shows Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt and Wet Hot American Summer : First Day of Camp , as well as the animated comedy Minions , as the voice of Herb Overkill . Minions was a major box office success ; despite mixed reviews , it grossed a total of over $ 1 billion worldwide . 
 Hamm filmed the upcoming action comedy Keeping Up with the Joneses in the spring of 2015 , which also stars Zach Galifianakis and Gal Gadot and will be released in October 2016 after being pushed back seven months . His other upcoming film roles include the drama Aardvark , science fiction film Marjorie Prime ( both 2016 ) , and Edgar Wright 's comedy crime film Baby Driver in 2017 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1997 , Hamm began a relationship with actress and screenwriter Jennifer Westfeldt . They jointly own homes in Los Angeles and the Upper West Side in New York . In an interview discussion about his relationship with Westfeldt , Hamm said : " We may not have a piece of paper that says we 're husband and wife , but after 10 years , Jennifer is more than just a girlfriend . What we have is much deeper and we both know that . To me , people [ should ] get married when they 're ready to have kids , which I 'm not ruling out . " Along with Westfeldt , Hamm has appeared in Gap @-@ related campaign advertisements . In April 2009 , Hamm and Westfeldt formed their own production company , Points West Pictures . Hamm and Westfeldt are advocates of animal rescue and have adopted a mixed breed dog named Cora from the Much Love Animal Shelter in California . In September 2015 , Hamm and Westfeldt announced they were ending their relationship . 
 Although his role as Don Draper required Hamm to smoke , he gave up smoking when he was 24 . On set he does not smoke actual cigarettes , but rather herbal cigarettes that do not contain tobacco or nicotine . 
 In March 2015 , Hamm 's representative confirmed that Hamm had recently completed inpatient treatment for alcoholism . Additionally , Hamm reported developing vitiligo throughout the filming of Mad Men . 
 Hamm identifies as a Democrat . 
 = = = Sports and related endorsements = = = 
 Hamm is an avid golfer and tennis player , and a devoted fan of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) team the St. Louis Blues ' ; he 's even appeared in two television spots advertising for the team . He is also a fan of the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team the St. Louis Cardinals ' , and narrated the official highlight film for the 2011 World Series , which the Cardinals won . He is a cricket fan , too , having been introduced to the sport by Daniel Radcliffe when filming A Young Doctor 's Notebook . 
 = = = Other product endorsements = = = 
 In March 2010 , Mercedes @-@ Benz hired Hamm ( replacing actor Richard Thomas ) as their new voice actor for the <unk> Hybrid campaign . In 2013 , American Airlines debuted a commercial titled " Change is in the Air " , featuring Hamm 's voice @-@ over . Hamm is an American Airlines frequent flier , and his Mad Men character Don Draper often spoke of aspiring to win such accounts as American Airlines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Internationally viewed as a sex symbol , Hamm was named one of Salon.com 's Sexiest Man Living in 2007 and one of People magazine 's Sexiest Men Alive in 2008 . In November 2008 , Entertainment Weekly named him one of their Entertainers of the Year . He again was named one of the magazine 's Entertainers of the Year in 2010 . Hamm also won GQ 's " International Man " award in September 2010 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = USS Yancey ( AKA @-@ 93 ) = 
 USS Yancey ( AKA @-@ 93 / LKA @-@ 93 ) was an Andromeda @-@ class attack cargo ship built by the Moore Dry Dock Company of Oakland , California for the United States Navy during World War II . The ship was named in honor of Yancey County , North Carolina . 
 Yancey 's keel was laid in May 1944 , and the ship was launched in July , and commissioned in October . The ship operated in the Pacific during the war and was a participant in the amphibious landings at Iwo Jima in February 1945 and Okinawa in April . After Japan 's surrender in August , Yancey was in Tokyo Bay during the signing of the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on 2 September . The ship made voyages delivering troops for the occupation of Japan before returning to the United States in January 1946 . After spending most of the next year on the east coast , Yancey was ordered back into the Pacific in November , and took part in Operation Highjump , a Navy expedition to Antarctica in January 1947 ; Yancey Glacier was named in the ship 's honor . 
 After spending most of the next decade in duties in the Western Pacific , Yancey was decommissioned in March 1958 and placed in reserve at Olympia , Washington . Yancey was reactivated in the aftermath of the Berlin Crisis of 1961 and recommissioned in November . During the October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis she sailed in support of the U.S. blockade of Cuba , and during the April 1965 U.S. intervention in the Dominican Republic she carried almost a quarter of all of the evacuees from Santo Domingo . In January 1970 , Yancey was blown by a storm into the Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel which closed the structure for several weeks . 
 The ship was decommissioned for the final time in January 1971 , and struck from the Naval Vessel Register in January 1977 . After being stripped of salvageable materials , the ship was sunk as an artificial reef off the North Carolina coast in 1990 . The ship is intact and rests on her starboard side at a depth of 160 feet ( 49 m ) . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Yancey was laid down under a Maritime Commission contract ( MC hull 1193 ) on 22 May 1944 by the Moore Dry Dock Company at Oakland , California . The ship was launched on 8 July 1944 and was sponsored by Miss Beverly Bartlett . As built , Yancey was just over 459 feet ( 140 m ) long and 63 feet ( 19 m ) abeam . When fully loaded she had a displacement of 13 @,@ 910 long tons ( 14 @,@ 130 t ) and drew a little more than 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . She was powered by a single steam turbine capable of generating 6 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 4 @,@ 500 kW ) , and attained a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ) during her trials . 
 Yancey was equipped to carry eight LCMs ( " Landing Craft Mechanized " ) , which were designed to land vehicles in amphibious landings ; one LCP ( L ) ( " Landing Craft , Personnel ( Large ) " ) ; and fifteen LCVPs ( " Landing Craft , Vehicle , Personnel " ) , or Higgins boats . Yancey was outfitted with primarily defensive weapons : one 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) / 38 caliber dual @-@ purpose gun mount , ; four twin 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun mounts ; and sixteen 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) AA gun mounts . 
 = = World War II = = 
 The ship was commissioned as USS Yancey ( AKA @-@ 93 ) on 11 October 1944 under the command of Commander Edward R. Rice , <unk> . After fitting out at San Francisco , California , Yancey received her boat group of 26 landing craft and conducted a shakedown cruise out of San Pedro , California . After post @-@ shakedown alterations and repairs at San Diego , California , she sailed for San Francisco to load cargo from 18 to 24 November . Yancey sailed for Pearl Harbor the next day , and was assigned to Transport Division ( TransDiv ) 47 , Transport Squadron ( TransRon ) 16 upon her arrival on 2 December . 
 = = = Iwo Jima = = = 
 After remaining at Pearl Harbor until 27 January 1945 , Yancey departed for the Marianas with elements and cargo of the 5th Marine Division as part of Task Group ( TG ) 51 @.@ 12 in support of the invasion of Iwo Jima . After stops for fuel and supplies at Eniwetok and invasion rehearsals at Tinian , the ship arrived off Iwo Jima at 06 : 24 on 19 February , D @-@ day for the initial landing . During almost continuous operations for the first four days of the battle , Yancey only lost two landing craft ( LCVPs ) : one to enemy mortar fire , and another to heavy surf . Yancey received minor damage when she collided with Pensacola while transferring 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) ammunition to the heavy cruiser . 
 On 29 February , after the tactical situation ashore had improved sufficiently , Yancey anchored off " Red " beach to unload her general cargo . During this time the ship was hit by one long @-@ range mortar shell , but suffered no casualties among her crew . Slowed by nightly air raids , and high surf that required cargo to be offloaded to LSTs , LSMs , and LCTs , Yancey completed her unloading on 2 March . The cargo ship sailed with three other transports and a pair of screening destroyers to Saipan and then to Espiritu Santo , where she rejoined her TransRon 16 squadron mates in embarking the 27th Infantry Division . 
 = = = Okinawa = = = 
 Yancey sailed on 25 March as a part of TG 51 @.@ 3 , the designated " mobile reserve " for the invasion of Okinawa . As the group headed for a planned stop in the Carolines , Yancey took a disabled LSM under tow and delivered the vessel to Ulithi . TransDiv 47 was detached from TG 51 @.@ 3 and arrived off Kerama Retto on 9 April , eight days after the battle had commenced . After receiving her orders , Yancey anchored off the Hagushi beaches on the 12th . During her four days of unloading , the crew was hampered by Japanese air raids and delayed — according to the ship 's commander — over 15 hours because of the attacks . Yancey 's number four 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) mount claimed a " sure assist " on a Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 " Oscar " fighter that crashed 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) from the ship . Despite delays caused by the air attacks , Yancey was the first attack cargo ship of her group to finish unloading , and sailed independently for the Marianas on the 16th . During her stay off the Okinawa beaches , the ship lost none of her boats and suffered three casualties : two men were wounded by shrapnel , and another broke an arm . 
 After a short rest @-@ and @-@ recreation stop at Guam , Yancey rejoined her squadron at <unk> and underwent boiler repairs and intensive antiaircraft training ; her crew won numerous five @-@ case " beer prizes " for shooting down target sleeves . Getting underway again on 8 May , Yancey spent the next two months shuttling men and materiel from rear area bases , calling at Manus in the Admiralty Islands ; Finschhafen , New Guinea ; Tulagi ; Hollandia , Dutch New Guinea ; and finally Guiuan , on the island of Samar , in the Philippines . She rejoined TransDiv 47 , TransRon 16 , at San Pedro Bay , Leyte Gulf , on 16 July and sailed with the rest of the division to Iloilo , on the island of Panay , to conduct amphibious training exercises with the United States Army 's 43rd Infantry Division . 
 Yancey was in the Philippines when word of the Japanese surrender came in on 15 August . TransDiv 47 took on provisions at Iloilo after training exercises for the planned invasion of Japan were cancelled ; after arriving at Batangas , Luzon , Philippines , she embarked elements of the 1st Cavalry Division slated for the occupation of Japan . 
 After completing the loading process on 23 August , Yancey weighed anchor on the 25th as a member of Task Force ( TF ) 33 . However , the ships had to turn back because of a tropical storm in the vicinity . The typhoon delayed the task force for only a day , as the ships weathered the fringes of the storm at Subic Bay before again getting underway soon thereafter . Yancey entered Tokyo Bay on the morning of 2 September , the day Japan signed the formal articles of surrender on the deck of the battleship Missouri anchored there . Shortly after the conclusion of those ceremonies , the attack cargo ship headed into Yokohama harbor , the third ship in her squadron to enter that port and the first to start unloading . The ship completed her unloading in 19 hours and then proceeded to an anchorage off Yokohama . 
 During her World War II service , Yancey was awarded two battle stars . 
 = = Post war = = 
 Yancey 's squadron departed on 4 September 1945 and steamed via Leyte Gulf to Zamboanga . There , they commenced loading elements of the Army 's 41st Infantry Division from 16 to 18 September . Yancey and her sisters shifted soon thereafter to <unk> , Mindanao , where she picked up Army LCMs . After TG 54 @.@ 28 had assembled in Leyte Gulf on 21 September , the group — which included Yancey — sailed for Japan 's Inland Sea . 
 Due to minesweeping difficulties , however , the landings scheduled for the Kure – Hiroshima area were postponed ; and the task group sailed instead for Buckner Bay , Okinawa . On 28 September , the ship put to sea to evade another typhoon . On 1 October , she returned and anchored in Buckner Bay . Two days later , Yancey again headed for Japanese waters and entered Bungo Suido on the 5th , beginning the long , difficult passage up the Inland Sea along the channel swept through the minefields . The next morning — after spending the night anchored in the cleared channel — Yancey headed for Hiro Wan , where the landings were made . The ship completed her unloading in 48 hours . On 9 October , she was detached from TransRon 16 and reported to <unk> for assignment . The following day , Yancey rode out a third typhoon with 130 fathoms ( 240 m ) of chain on deck , a second anchor ready to go , and steam at the throttle . 
 The attack cargo ship , remaining behind when the rest of her squadron was sent back to the United States on 11 October , headed instead to Haiphong , French Indochina to embark Chinese troops . After an 11 @-@ day delay , 1 @,@ 027 officers and men of the 471st Regiment , 62nd Chinese Army — and one interpreter — boarded the American vessel for passage to Takao , Formosa . After arrival , the Chinese troops had all been offloaded by 17 : 00 on 17 November . After sailing to Manila , Yancey received orders to proceed to the United States on 25 November , one year to the day she had sailed from San Francisco . Yancey took on a capacity load of Army and Navy men returning to the United States for discharge and departed Manila harbor on 27 November . During the voyage , she flew a 310 @-@ foot ( 94 m ) " homeward @-@ bound pennant " adorned with 27 stars . 
 After a stop at Pearl Harbor for boiler repairs and to offload her Army passengers , Yancey sailed for Balboa , Panama Canal Zone , reaching there on the last day of the year ; she was the last ship to transit the Panama Canal in 1945 . On 6 January 1946 , Yancey cleared Cristobal , Canal Zone , bound for Louisiana . After a brief stop at New Orleans , the attack cargo ship proceeded on , via Jacksonville , Florida , to Norfolk , where she arrived on 29 January . Less than a month later , on 27 February , Yancey sailed farther north and reached the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard the following day . 
 Over the next few months , Yancey underwent a regular overhaul there and then operated off the eastern seaboard and into the western Atlantic . During that time , she called at Bayonne , New Jersey ; Bermuda ; San Juan , Puerto Rico ; Guantanamo Bay , Cuba ; Balboa , Canal Zone ; Jacksonville , Florida ; and made return calls at Norfolk , Bayonne , and Bermuda . In addition , the ship visited the New York Naval Shipyard and Davisville , Rhode Island , before being assigned tentatively to TF 68 effective on 9 November . 
 = = Operation Highjump = = 
 In compliance with her new orders , Yancey proceeded back to the west coast , sailing via Cristobal and the Panama Canal . After arriving at San Pedro , California , Yancey reported for duty with TF 68 and was reassigned to the Pacific Fleets Service Force and homeported at San Francisco , on 11 November . The next day , she shifted to Port Hueneme , California , where she began loading cargo for Operation Highjump , the U.S. Navy expedition to Antarctica . 
 Departing Port Hueneme on 2 December , Yancey pressed southward , headed for Antarctica , and spent Christmas at sea . Two days later , she saw her first icebergs — visible evidence that she was entering the polar latitudes . She sighted the northern limit of the Antarctic pack ice on the 28th and spent the next two days investigating ice conditions . She fueled from USS Canisteo 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) south of Scott Island , Antarctica , purportedly becoming the first ship to conduct an underway refueling below the Antarctic Circle . 
 After threading her way through the pack ice over the ensuing weeks , Yancey finally arrived at Bay of Whales , Antarctica , mooring at the shelf ice on 18 January 1947 . Subsequently departing that " port " on 6 February for the area to the north of the ice floes , the attack cargo ship entered the pack ice on the 9th . Over the next three days , she pressed through the floes that extended for a width of almost 275 nautical miles ( 509 km ) . 
 On 13 February , Yancey joined TU 68 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 which also included the Coast Guard icebreaker , Northwind , towing the attack cargo ship Merrick . Within a week , the ships were riding out a fierce storm that justified — at least to Yancey sailors — the Antarctic 's title as " The World 's <unk> Sea " . Yancey reached Port Chalmers , New Zealand , on 22 February and departed that port on 5 March , bound for Samoa . 
 Subsequently departing Pago Pago on 27 March bound for Hawaii with YTL @-@ 153 in tow , the attack cargo ship arrived at Pearl Harbor on 14 April . She soon got underway for the west coast of the United States and reached Port Hueneme on 2 May 1947 . There , Yancey disembarked a unit of a construction battalion ( " Seabees " ) and discharged TF 68 cargo . Her duty with TF 68 thus completed on 15 May , Yancey reported for duty with Service Division ( <unk> ) 12 . Shortly thereafter , Yancey shifted to San Pedro before heading to Terminal Island , California , for restricted availability on 20 May . After that period of repairs and alterations , Yancey returned to Port Hueneme to load cargo earmarked for shipment to Pearl Harbor and Guam . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 Over the next decade , Yancey operated between west coast ports and advanced bases in the Western Pacific ( <unk> ) , including ports in Japan , Korea , and the Philippines . During that period , she also supported United Nations ( UN ) actions in Korea , operating in support of the initial attempts to fight the North Korean advance ; in the first UN counteroffensives in early 1951 ; and in the final phases of activity that preceded the armistice in the summer of 1953 . Yancey was awarded three battle stars for her Korean War service . 
 In December 1957 , after having served continuously since 1944 , Yancey was deactivated at San Francisco . She was placed out of commission in March 1958 , and entered the Reserve Fleet at Olympia , Washington , on 11 October 1960 . 
 = = Recommissioning = = 
 In the aftermath of the Berlin Crisis of 1961 , Yancey was reactivated as part of President John F. Kennedy 's bid to build up the U.S. Navy . On 17 November 1961 , Yancey was recommissioned at Portland , Oregon , with Captain Gordon R. Keating in command . The ship departed from San Diego on 12 January 1962 and reached Norfolk , her new assigned home port , on 2 February , there becoming the newest member of Amphibious Squadron ( <unk> ) 12 . Over the next months , Yancey took part in a variety of exercises and maneuvers . 
 Yancey participated in Operation <unk> in the spring of 1962 , operating off Roosevelt Roads and Vieques , Puerto Rico . She later paid a port call at Charlotte Amalie , St. Thomas , Virgin Islands , before she returned to Roosevelt Roads and reloaded equipment and embarked Marines slated to return to Morehead City , North Carolina . Subsequently returning to Norfolk on 2 May , Yancey touched briefly at Charleston , South Carolina , to take on additional landing craft before returning to the Tidewater region to spend the remainder of May . 
 Subsequently visiting Boston , and Rockland , Maine , Yancey participated in amphibious boat exercises at Provincetown , Massachusetts , before she got underway on 24 July for Davisville , Rhode Island . There , she loaded a Seabee unit and their equipment and headed eastward , bound for Rota , Spain . Offloading one Seabee unit and <unk> another , Yancey then paused briefly at Gibraltar before touching at Lisbon on the return leg of her voyage to the United States . Disembarking the <unk> and unloading their equipment at Davisville , Yancey headed back to Norfolk , reaching her homeport on 18 August 1962 . 
 On 17 October , Yancey again sailed from Norfolk and proceeded to Morehead City , to load marines and equipment for Operation <unk> ( Amphibious Brigade Exercises ) slated for Vieques , Puerto Rico . Upon arrival , the attack cargo ship loaded immediately and set out to join the rest of the ships in the squadron . She soon was fighting her way through Hurricane Ella which caused her to alter her course to avoid the most severe part of the storm . 
 = = Cuban Missile Crisis and Dominican Republic operations = = 
 On 23 October 1962 , President Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in response to the presence of Soviet missiles on the soil of that island nation . Yancey sortied in support of the American operations in the Caribbean , and remained on station until the missiles were removed and tensions were relaxed . Over the next few years , Yancey made regular deployments to the Mediterranean to take part in joint exercises with NATO forces . 
 In April 1965 , Yancey was ordered to the Dominican Republic to support Operation Power Pack , the code name for the United States ' intervention in the Dominican Republic . The attack cargo ship arrived at Santo Domingo , the capital city , on 30 April . Yancey loaded nearly 600 evacuees from 21 nations . Among those on board the ship were the daughter of William Tapley Bennett Jr . , the United States Ambassador to the Dominican Republic ; the Belgian Ambassador to the Dominican Republic ; sixteen nuns from the Dominican Order ; and several large families . Yancey 's officers and crew vacated their quarters to allow room for female passengers and children , and many slept on the decks of the ship during the passage to San Juan , Puerto Rico . One of the passengers gave birth during the short trip , and gave her son the middle name of Yancey in honor of the ship . 
 After debarking her passengers at San Juan on 1 May , the ship took on supplies needed by the American ground forces in Santo Domingo : gasoline , oil , and ammunition . She docked in Santo Domingo on 2 May and exchanged her cargo for 450 more evacuees to be taken to San Juan . In all , Yancey carried almost a quarter of those fleeing the Dominican Republic . She returned to Norfolk soon thereafter , and resumed her role of training and cruising off the eastern seaboard and into the Caribbean basin . On 1 January 1969 , Yancey was redesignated as LKA @-@ 93 . 
 = = Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel incident = = 
 Toward the end of her career , Yancey made headlines . Yancey was at anchor near one stretch of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel near Norfolk on 21 January 1970 . Driven by the winds in a snowy gale that gusted up to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) , Yancey dragged her anchors and hit the bridge , knocking it out of service for several weeks . The Navy started a free shuttle service for commuters that normally used the route , using helicopters and <unk> . Fortunately , there were no vehicles on the bridge at the time of the collision , and no one was injured . Sources do not report on any damage to Yancey from the incident , but any damages suffered must have been easily repaired , because the ship deployed to the Mediterranean a few months later . 
 After a return to the United States in mid @-@ 1970 , Yancey entered inactive status at Norfolk on 1 October of that year . The ship was decommissioned at Norfolk on 20 January 1971 , and entered the James River berthing area of the National Defense Reserve Fleet . Yancey was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 January 1977 . The vessel remained in the James River fleet until 16 August 1984 when she was withdrawn to be stripped of useful equipment by the U.S. Navy . She re @-@ entered the fleet one year later , on 28 August 1985 , but was withdrawn for the final time on 15 December 1989 to be prepared for sinking as an artificial reef . 
 In 1990 , the former Yancey was sunk as an artificial reef off Morehead City , North Carolina , and rests on her starboard side at a depth of 160 feet ( 49 m ) . 
 = Leopard 2E = 
 The Leopard 2E or Leopard <unk> ( E stands for España , Spanish for Spain ) is a variant of the German Leopard 2 main battle tank , tailored to the requirements of the Spanish army , which acquired it as part of an armament modernization program named Programa Coraza , or Program <unk> . The acquisition program for the Leopard 2E began in 1994 , five years after the cancellation of the Lince tank program that culminated in an agreement to transfer 108 Leopard 2A4s to the Spanish army in 1998 and started the local production of the Leopard 2E in December 2003 . Despite postponement of production owing to the 2003 merger between Santa Bárbara Sistemas and General Dynamics , and continued fabrication issues between 2006 and 2007 , 219 Leopard 2Es have been delivered to the Spanish army . 
 The Leopard 2E is a major improvement over the M60 Patton tank , which it replaced in Spain 's mechanized and armored units . Its development represented a total of 2 @.@ 6 million man @-@ hours worth of work , 9 @,@ 600 of them in Germany , at a total cost of 2 @.@ 4 billion euros . This makes it one of the most expensive Leopard 2s built . Indigenous production amounted to 60 % and the vehicles were assembled locally at Sevilla by Santa Bárbara Sistemas . It has thicker armor on the turret and glacis plate than the German Leopard 2A6 , and uses a Spanish @-@ designed tank command and control system , similar to the one fitted in German Leopard 2s . The Leopard 2E is expected to remain in service until 2025 . 
 = = Spanish armor programs 1987 – 93 = = 
 By 1987 , the Spanish army was equipped with 299 French @-@ designed AMX @-@ 30Es , assembled by Santa Bárbara Sistemas , and 552 American M47 and M48 Patton tanks . The AMX @-@ 30Es were put into service in 1970 , while the latter went into service in the mid @-@ 1950s . Although Spain 's M47s and M48s were modernized to <unk> and <unk> , bringing them to near equivalence with the M60 Patton tank , the Spanish army considered them antiquated . In 1984 , when deciding to replace its Patton tanks , the Spanish government declared its intention to produce a whole new main battle tank locally , since known as the Lince . Five companies expressed interest in bidding , including Krauss @-@ Maffei in a partnership with Santa Bárbara Sistemas , GIAT with what became the Leclerc , General Dynamics with the M1 Abrams and Vickers with the Valiant . While the M1 Abrams and Valiant bids were not accepted , the bidding continued until 1989 when it was officially canceled . 
 Instead , the Spanish government opted to replace its older Patton tanks with American M60 Patton tanks retired from Central Europe in accordance with the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe . Although the Spanish army was originally to receive 532 M60 and M60A1 tanks , only 260 <unk> were ultimately delivered , of which 244 were put into active service in the army . In the late 1980s the Spanish Ministry of Defense approved a modernization program for 150 of its AMX @-@ 30Es and a reconstruction program for the remaining 149 vehicles of this type , restoring them to their original condition . However , neither the M60s nor the AMX @-@ 30s were a considerable improvement over Spain 's fleet of M47 and M48 Patton tanks . 
 Since the existing tank fleet did not meet the Spanish army 's needs , Spain opened talks with Germany and Krauss @-@ Maffei over the possibility of future collaboration in regards to Spain 's future tank , and sent a military delegation to Germany in 1994 . Although the Germans offered Spain surplus Leopard 1 tanks and Soviet equipment incorporated into the German army after the reunification of Germany , the Spanish government declined these offers and pressed for the Leopard 2 . 
 = = Programa Coraza = = 
 In March 1994 , the Spanish Ministry of Defense created Programa Coraza 2000 ( Program <unk> 2000 ) , which focused on the procurement and integration of new armament for the Spanish army 's modernization . The program included the Leopard 2E and the Pizarro infantry combat vehicle , as well as the Eurocopter Tiger attack helicopter . The program 's scope extended to the integration of 108 Leopard 2A4s , which were leased to Spain in late 1995 . Apart from procurement , Programa Coraza was meant to prepare the Spanish army logistically for the introduction of new matériel . 
 = = = Leopard 2A4 = = = 
 A memorandum of understanding was signed on 9 June 1995 between the German and Spanish governments , setting the foundations for an acquisition of up to 308 brand @-@ new Leopard 2Es . These were to be assembled in Spain by Santa Bárbara Sistemas , with 60 – 70 percent of the components manufactured by Spanish companies , and production taking place between 1998 and 2003 . Furthermore , the German government agreed to lend the Spanish army 108 Leopard 2A4s for training purposes for a period of five years . These vehicles were delivered between November 1995 and June 1996 . In 1998 , Spain agreed to procure the ceded Leopard 2A4s and reduce production of the brand @-@ new Leopard 2E to 219 vehicles . In 2005 it was declared that the 108 Leopard 2A4s were to cost Spain just € <unk> , to be paid by 2016 . 
 The Leopard 2A4s equipped X and XI Mechanized Infantry Brigade , which at the time formed part of Eurocorps . As production of the Leopard 2E began and these units received Leopard 2Es , their Leopard 2A4s re @-@ equipped the Alcántara Armored Cavalry Regiment , based in Melilla . 
 Spain 's Leopard 2E is based on the Leopard 2A6 , and incorporates the add @-@ on wedge armor of the Leopard <unk> on the turret . This armor maximizes the armor depth that a kinetic energy penetrator must travel through to enter the internal volume of the turret . Like the Swedish Leopard 2S ( <unk> 122 ) , the Leopard 2E has increased armor thickness on the hull 's glacis plate , the turret frontal arc and the turret roof , bringing the vehicle 's weight close to 63 tonnes ( 69 @.@ 4 tons ) . The vehicle 's protection is augmented by the added armor that is built into the tank during the manufacturing process , as opposed to being added on after assembly as is the case for German Leopard <unk> and <unk> . As a consequence , the Leopard 2E is one of the best @-@ protected Leopard 2s in service . 
 The tank is armed with Rheinmetall 's 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 55 tank @-@ gun , and is capable of adopting a 140 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) gun . Both the tank commander and gunner have identical second generation thermal viewers , derived from those of the TOW 2B Light Launcher System . These are integrated into the tank by Indra and Rheinmetall Defense Electronics . Indra provides the tank 's command and control system , called the Leopard Information and Command Equipment ( <unk> ) , based on the Swedish and German <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) . Other differences between the Spanish Leopard 2E and other Leopard <unk> include an auxiliary power unit , manufactured by <unk> , an air conditioning system and new rubber pads for the vehicle 's tracks to increase their lifespan on the irregular Spanish terrain . About 60 % of each Leopard 2E was manufactured in Spain , as opposed to 30 % for the Swedish Leopard 2S , for example . 
 Although the final contract for the production of Spanish Leopard 2Es was signed in 1998 , calling for a production rate of four tanks per month , the first Leopard 2Es were not manufactured until late 2003 . This was largely due to the merging of Santa Bárbara Sistemas with General Dynamics , and Krauss @-@ Maffei 's reservations regarding the sharing of the Leopard 2 's technology with a rival company manufacturer of the M1 Abrams . Krauss @-@ Maffei delivered 30 Leopard 2Es between 2003 and 2006 . Production by Santa Bárbara Sistemas was delayed after assembly had begun ; between January and November 2007 , for example , only three of the 43 Leopard 2Es to be delivered to the Spanish army were actually delivered — with 15 more being delivered before the end of the year to make up for the earlier production problems . By 1 July 2006 the Spanish army had received 48 Leopard 2Es and nine <unk> armored recovery vehicles , which was only a quarter of those contracted . Production of the Leopard 2E was planned to end by 2007 but was extended into 2008 . 
 The Leopard 2E replaced the Leopard 2A4 in Spanish mechanized units , which in turn replaced M60s in cavalry units . Both versions of the Leopard 2 are expected to remain in service with the Spanish army until 2025 . In terms of industrial scale , the production and development of the Leopard 2E represents a total of 2 @.@ 6 million man @-@ hours of work , including 9 @,@ 600 in Germany . It is one of the most expensive Leopard 2s built ; the original contract was worth € <unk> but the final cost was € <unk> . 
 = = = Comparison with other tanks in Spanish service = = = 
 The Spanish army replaced its M60 Patton tanks and AMX @-@ 30s with the Leopard 2 between 1995 and 2008 , a considerable improvement in capability . Previously , the Spanish army was equipped with M47 and M48 Patton tanks , which were upgraded to near M60 equivalency during the late 1970s and during the 1980s . Both the Leopard 2A4 and Leopard 2E sport a much more powerful gun than the AMX @-@ 30 and M60 tanks . The Leopard 2 's 1 @,@ 500 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 110 kW ) engine provides greater power than the M60A3 's 750 horsepower ( 559 @.@ 27 kW ) and the AMX @-@ 30EM2 's 850 horsepower ( 633 @.@ 84 kW ) engines . On the other hand , the Leopard 2 carries fewer , but larger rounds than the M60A3 . 
 = Indian Ocean raid ( 1944 ) = 
 In March 1944 , a force of three Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) heavy cruisers raided Allied shipping in the Indian Ocean . The cruisers departed Japanese @-@ held territory on 1 March with the support of other IJN vessels and aircraft . On 9 March , they encountered and sank the British steamer Behar , with the heavy cruiser Tone picking up over 100 survivors . Fearing detection , the Japanese force subsequently returned to the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) , arriving on 16 March . Two days later , most of Behar 's crew and passengers were murdered on board Tone . Following the war the commander of the raid , Rear Admiral Naomasa Sakonju , was executed for this war crime and Tone 's captain Haruo Mayuzumi ( ja : <unk> ) was sentenced to seven years imprisonment . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 1944 , the Japanese Combined Fleet withdrew from its base at Truk in the Central Pacific to Palau and Singapore . The appearance of a powerful Japanese naval force at Singapore concerned the Allies , as it was feared that these ships could potentially conduct raids in the Indian Ocean and against Western Australia . In response , the Allies strengthened their naval and air forces in the area by transferring two British light cruisers from the Atlantic and Mediterranean as well as several U.S. Navy warships from the Pacific . The number of air units in Ceylon and the Bay of Bengal region was also increased . Admiral James Somerville , the commander of the British Eastern Fleet , feared that the Japanese would repeat their devastating Indian Ocean raid of early 1942 , and on 25 February requested permission to withdraw his fleet from its base at Trincomalee so that it was not at risk from the larger Japanese force . The Admiralty rejected this request , and directed that the fleet should remain at Trincomalee unless it was threatened by a superior Japanese force as its withdrawal would affect morale and harm Britain 's prestige in the region . It was agreed , however , that the Eastern Fleet should not engage superior Japanese forces and could withdraw if Somerville judged this necessary . 
 In late February , Vice @-@ Admiral Shiro Takasu — the Commander in Chief , Southwest Area Fleet — ordered the heavy cruisers Aoba , Chikuma , and Tone to raid Allied shipping on the main route between Aden and Fremantle . This force was commanded by Vice Admiral Naomasa Sakonju on board Aoba . In his instructions to Sakonju , Vice Admiral Takasu directed that if the force captured Allied merchant seamen all prisoners , other than radio operators and other personnel who might possess useful information , were to be killed . Sakonju did not question this order . The Japanese cruisers embarked specialised boarding parties for this operation as it was hoped that they could capture merchant ships to alleviate Japan 's shipping shortage . 
 = = Raid = = 
 The three Japanese heavy cruisers departed from the Combined Fleet 's anchorage in the Lingga Islands on 27 February . The light cruisers Kinu and Ōi and three destroyers escorted the force through the Sunda Strait on 1 March . The raiders were supported by 10 medium bombers and three or four seaplanes based in Sumatra and west Java which conducted patrols in the direction of Ceylon . Three or four submarines from the 8th Flotilla also monitored Allied shipping movements near Ceylon , the Maldive Islands and Chagos Archipelago . The Allies did not detect the Japanese force 's departure , but reinforced their forces in Western Australia after an American submarine encountered Kinu and Ōi operating near the Lombok Strait on 6 March . The presence of these ships was taken to indicate that a hostile force had possibly been dispatched into the Indian Ocean . On 8 March , Somerville directed all Allied ships travelling between 80 and 100 ° east to divert to the south or west . 
 After leaving the Sunda Strait , the Japanese heavy cruisers sailed south @-@ west for the main route between Aden and Fremantle . The ships were spread 50 km ( 27 nmi ; 50 km ) by day and 20 km ( 11 nmi ; 12 mi ) by night and maintained radio silence . On the morning of 9 March , they encountered the 6 @,@ 100 long tons ( 6 @,@ 200 t ) British steamer Behar at 20 ° 32 ′ S 87 ° 10 ′ E , about midway between Fremantle and Colombo . The ship was travelling from Fremantle to Bombay as part of a voyage between Newcastle , New South Wales and the United Kingdom carrying a cargo of zinc . 
 Upon sighting the Japanese ships , Behar 's master , Captain Maurice Symons , ordered that his radio operator transmit the " RRR " code in order to notify other ships and Allied bases that the merchant ship was being attacked by surface raiders . Tone 's signals room picked up this message , and the cruiser opened fire on Behar . The Japanese cruiser did not attempt to capture the steamer , as it was judged too risky to sail her back to Japanese territory . Tone 's gunners scored hits on Behar 's prow and stern which killed three of her crew . Five minutes after the sighting , Behar 's crew and passengers abandoned ship . The steamer sank shortly afterwards and either 104 or 108 survivors were rescued by Tone . ( I ) 
 The Behar survivors were maltreated by members of Tone 's crew . Japanese sailors forced the survivors to hand over all their personal belongings of any value , and then used ropes to tie the survivors in painful positions which caused them to have difficultly breathing . The merchant ship 's chief officer was beaten after he complained that treating civilians in such a way violated the Geneva Convention . However , the female survivors later had their ropes removed . When the survivors were taken below decks to be imprisoned they were badly beaten by Japanese sailors . 
 Following the attack , Sakonju judged that it was too dangerous to continue the raid as Behar 's distress message may have alerted the Allies to his force 's presence . Accordingly , the Japanese turned back for the NEI that day . The heavy cruisers were again escorted through the Sunda Strait by Kinu , Ōi and five destroyers , and arrived back at the NEI on 15 March . During this time , the Behar survivors were held in a small and extremely hot store room on board Tone , and were given little access to food and water , sanitary facilities and exercise . 
 Despite Sakonju 's fears , the Allies were not immediately aware of the attack on Behar . Her distress signal had been picked up by only a single Allied merchant ship , which did not report it until she arrived at Fremantle on 17 March . In the meantime , Somerville had decided on 16 March that surface raiders no longer posed a threat to shipping in the Indian Ocean and allowed Allied vessels to resume their normal routing . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 Shortly after the Behar survivors were rescued , Sakonju sent a radio message to Tone 's commanding officer , Captain Haruo Mayuzumi , reprimanding him for taking non @-@ essential personnel prisoner and not capturing the merchant ship . In this message Sakonju ordered that the survivors be killed . Mayuzumi was unwilling to so , however , as he felt that this would violate his Christian religious beliefs . His executive officer , Commander <unk> Mii , also opposed killing the prisoners . Mayuzumi radioed a request to Sakonju that the prisoners be put ashore , but this was rejected . The captain then visited Aoba to argue his case , but Sakonju remained unmoved and told Mayuzumi to " obey my orders " . Despite his misgivings , Mayuzumi decided to kill the prisoners . 
 On 15 March the three heavy cruisers anchored at Tanjung Priok near Java . Following this , either 15 or 36 survivors were transferred to Aoba . ( II ) The party sent to Aoba included Symonds , the Behar 's chief officer and several of the senior officers as well as both of the ship 's female passengers . All of this group were later landed at Tanjung Priok . 
 The three cruisers sailed from Tanjung Priok bound for Singapore on 18 March . That night , all the prisoners on board Tone were beheaded by several of the cruiser 's officers . Mayuzumi watched the killings from the ship 's bridge but Mii refused to take part . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Aoba , Chikuma and Tone arrived at Singapore on 25 March . The Indian Ocean raid was the last operation conducted by Axis surface raiders during World War II . As a result , Behar was the final Allied merchant ship to be sunk by surface raiders during the war . The raid is notable chiefly for the Behar massacre ; it achieved little militarily . The raid failed to disrupt Allied traffic in the region as the diversions ordered by Somerville on 8 March were rescinded by the 16th . The only tangible result was the sinking of one ship , the Behar ; by contrast Axis submarines sank three ships in the Indian Ocean during the same period . The raid was also less successful than comparable raids by surface ships in the region , such as that of the Admiral Scheer in 1941 . The Japanese made no attempt to capitalize on their numerical superiority in the region and by the end of the month it had vanished ; reinforcements to the Eastern Fleet enabled Somerville to start a series of carrier raids , commencing with the attack on Sabang on 19 April 1944 . 
 The party of Behar survivors who had been landed at Tanjung Priok were initially interred in prisoner of war camps in Java ; the male prisoners were sent to a camp near Batavia and the women were held in a female camp nearby . After all the members of the group had been interrogated , the survivors were separated and sent to other camps in Java or to work as slave labourers in Japan . All the survivors were freed after the end of the war in August 1945 . 
 Following the war , the Allies prosecuted the officers responsible for the murders on board Tone . Vice Admiral Takasu had died from disease in September 1944 , but Sakonju was tried by the British in 1947 at Hong Kong and sentenced to death . Mayuzumi was also convicted for his role in the killings and sentenced to seven years imprisonment . 
 = Geneforge = 
 Geneforge is the first video game in the Geneforge series of role @-@ playing video games created by Spiderweb Software . 
 Players assume the role of an apprentice Shaper , a sect of mages who can create living creatures through force of will . The apprentice is cast away on Sucia , an island abandoned by the sect 200 years prior . The island contains groups of the Shapers ' creations , who have formed their own ideologies regarding their creators in the intervening years . The primary motivation of the player is to escape the island and , in the process , deal with the forces working to steal the Shaper secrets abandoned on Sucia Isle . 
 The game 's setting stemmed from the idea of players being able to create and control a group of obedient creatures . The Shapers and the world of Geneforge were the result of Vogel imagining how would a being possess such power and how would they use it . The game 's setting , a mixture of science fiction and fantasy , differs from the pure science fiction setting the game had been envisioned as . Vogel had difficulties balancing gameplay with the powerful directed @-@ energy weapons players would expect to use in a science fiction game . Sales exceeded the developer 's expectations , despite fears that the departure from Spiderweb 's Avernum series would deter players . Geneforge received a positive reception from reviewers , despite the quality of the graphics being rated as poor and the game containing one piece of music , the title theme . The plot and setting were praised by reviewers for uniqueness and detail . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players create a character and travel around Sucia Island , a location Barred to the members of the player character 's sect . Whilst searching for a way off the island , the game 's ultimate goal , players can form alliances with the island 's inhabitants and complete quests through combat or other means . Geneforge is played in 45 ° axonometric perspective , movement through the game 's environs is real @-@ time but switches to turn @-@ based combat in the game 's playing field . The game world is divided up into 77 areas accessible through a world map . The first two areas serve as the game 's tutorial ; introducing players to navigation , controls and shaping creations . Clearing areas by defeating guardians or successfully traversing the terrain allows players to bypass those areas via the world map , reducing travelling time . The game has an always @-@ visible auto @-@ map , which begins each area completely darkened , and is revealed as the player explores . As the player 's party performs tasks or defeats enemies they receive experience , leading to increased levels and additional skill points . The player character 's skill points can be used to increase their statistics or to improve their aptitude in one of the fifteen available skills . <unk> which increase skills or add new abilities are scattered throughout the game . 
 Before starting the game , players choose from three basic character classes , each of which has a particular playing style . Guardians are fighters who excel in standard combat skills , especially hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . They are capable of shaping creations , but have little affinity for magic . Agents excel in spell casting and are capable of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , but have poor shaping skills . The Shaper is a summoner , capable of creating living creatures by using their own life essence . Shapers rely on their creations for protection . Every character class is referred to as " Shaper " in @-@ game . Most objectives in the game must be completed via combat or diplomacy , but players can also use subterfuge to pass obstacles . All three character classes can use different methods , depending on which skills they are adept in . Some areas are difficult to pass , and some tasks are difficult to complete , unless the player character is a certain class . Each character class has a different combat style , the combat skills they are associated with cost fewer skill points to increase . 
 Essence is used for both creating creatures and casting spells ; the number , type and strength of creations is limited by the player 's essence capacity . For instance , if a character with 70 maximum essence summons a creature which costs 20 essence , their maximum essence is reduced to 50 until the creation is destroyed , either through combat or being absorbed by the Shaper to regain essence . A total of 18 different creations are featured in the game , with larger and more powerful creatures costing more essence to create . The types and strengths of creations can be altered depending on the player 's combat style . Creations accompanying the player receive a percentage of the experience points received for completing quests or defeating foes , levelling up and receiving skill points in the same manner as the player character . These skill points can be spent to increase creations ' statistics , but every statistic increase costs more essence and reduces the amount of essence available to summon other creations or cast spells . Essence and health are regained from Shaper @-@ designed pools or by entering a friendly town . 
 Combat is turn @-@ based , with each character in the player 's party receiving action points at the beginning of the player 's turn . The number received is dependent on the items the player character has equipped and the skills the character or creations possess . Each action uses a specific number of points , for example , moving one square takes a single point and attacks or spells take five . Attacking or spellcasting with fewer than ten action points immediately ends the character 's turn , otherwise a character can continue to act until they run out of points . Most enemies will attack the player on sight , retreating in terror if they reach a certain threshold of damage without being killed . Other specialized behaviors are also present , including creatures which call for help , or creatures which act as sentries and retreat to an ambush location when threatened . Creations made by the player character can also be controlled by a similar artificial intelligence , or the player can invest more essence in the creation 's intelligence and control them manually . 
 Geneforge 's dialogue is delivered through on @-@ screen text . Encounters with intelligent creations or humans result in the player being given a series of pre @-@ determined questions or responses . Conversation options and the outcome of those conversations change according to the player 's previous <unk> as well as which quests have been completed ; which items the player has ; which group the player belongs to and the player 's leadership skill . The player can collect items from defeated enemies and the game environments to improve their own equipment . Non @-@ player characters can trade with the player , buying most items regardless of type . The shopkeeper has a fixed amount of gold at the start of the game which does not replenish itself . It is possible for the player to drain all shopkeepers of their gold reserves , making it impossible to sell further items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The player begins as an initiate of a powerful sect of magicians , the Shapers . Members of the sect create living beings from the magical essence within themselves . Apprentices are sent to academies to learn the art of shaping and the player 's character has been accepted to do so . The player departs on a voyage to the academy aboard a specially modified <unk> , a dragon @-@ like Shaper Creation . During the journey , the Shaper passes a group of islands , one of which is recognized as the Barred Sucia Island . Locations Barred by the Shapers are closed to both the sect and outsiders alike , meaning a catastrophe has occurred or something very valuable is located there . As the Shaper examines Sucia , lost in thought , the craft is attacked and mortally wounded by an unidentified sailing ship . After igniting the vessel 's sails with a fireball , the craft deposits the Shaper on an abandoned dockside before dying . The player is now stranded on Sucia Island and must find a way to leave . 
 Exploration of the docks reveals a strange canister filled with swirling liquid . Thinking the canister contains healing or energizing properties , the Shaper breaks the seal and absorbs the contents . Instead the contents absorb into the Shaper 's body , strengthening and changing it . The changes become visibly apparent , the player character 's skin <unk> and glows slightly . The canisters also affect the user 's mental state , causing a more violent and arrogant temperament . Serviles remain on the island , having been abandoned when the island was Barred . They are intelligent creations of Shapers , designed to serve them without question or hesitation . These Serviles have had no contact with Shapers for two centuries , and have separated into three groups with differing philosophies regarding their creators . The <unk> are still faithful to the Shapers , the Awakened believe that they should be treated as equals . The Takers have rejected Shapers completely and view the sect as oppressors to be fought . 
 After encountering the three servile groups , the player begins to learn of a group of foreigners known as Sholai , explorers who have been shipwrecked on the island . It was the Sholai , led by a man named Trajkov , who attacked the player with their last remaining ship . Trajkov controls a device called the Geneforge , created by the Shapers , which can rewrite the user 's DNA and make them incredibly powerful . This is the cause of the island 's Barred status , the device was deemed too dangerous in the wrong hands . Trajkov and his followers have allied themselves with the Takers , absorbing the contents of canisters and trying to claim Shaper powers as their own . The group have been unable to activate the Geneforge itself due to a Shaper being needed to activate the device . A Shaper named Goettsch was kidnapped for this purpose , in the same manner as the player @-@ character . Goettsch fled and stole the shaping gloves needed to safely use the Geneforge , causing Trajkov to attempt to kidnap the player as a replacement . During these events , some Sholai have escaped from their increasingly violent and unpredictable leader . 
 The player is free to join any one of the servile groups and share common goals , or remain unaligned . Geneforge can be completed without joining any group . Trajkov can be killed through combat or tricked into killing himself by using the Geneforge . He can also be aided in activating the device , if the player steals the shaper gloves from Goettsch . Goettsch offers the player fake shaper gauntlets , which do not protect Trajkov from the Geneforge 's energy should he be convinced they are genuine shaping gloves . The player can complete the game by using the last boat on Sucia Island . The small vessel is moored in a guarded dock on the far side of the island . Finishing the game unlocks one of more than a dozen game endings , dependent on the player 's actions during the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Work on Geneforge began during the development of Avernum 2 , initially little information was revealed . In an interview published by <unk> Vogel compared the game 's movement system to Fallout and revealed that a new game engine was being implemented . The project had initially been intended as pure science fiction but this was soon abandoned in favor of a mixed fantasy and science fiction setting . In an interview published on website RPG Codex , Vogel stated this was due difficulties maintaining game balance with futuristic weaponry which " should be devastating " . He added " I found it to be too difficult to model the weapons in a way that simultaneously felt sensible and maintained balance . " 
 Geneforge stemmed from the idea of creating a horde of creatures and the ability to care for those creatures or send them to their deaths . The choice was to be made by the player . From this point , Vogel considered who would be able to gain such powers , how they would control them and how these creatures would be treated . The game was developed with the intention of giving players choices ; which factions to side with , how non @-@ Shaper human outsiders are treated and whether to pursue goals through combat or diplomacy . Unlike most role @-@ playing games , Geneforge was designed so that it would be possible to complete the game without using violence . Vogel cited Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn , Planescape : Torment , Deus Ex and EverQuest as influences . 
 The game marked a departure from the Avernum series and its predecessor the Exile series , Vogel expressed a need to work on other projects - " every few years , I need to do something cool and weird . It keeps me interested . " He stated that the differences in Geneforge meant the game might struggle to find an audience , however sales exceeded his expectations . 
