 = = = Genetics and variations = = = 
 Traditionally , three distinct subspecies have been recognised : the Queensland koala ( P. c. adustus , Thomas 1923 ) , the New South Wales koala ( P. c. cinereus , Goldfuss 1817 ) , and the Victorian koala ( P. c. victor , Troughton 1835 ) . These forms are distinguished by pelage colour and thickness , body size , and skull shape . The Queensland koala is the smallest of the three , with shorter , silver fur and a shorter skull . The Victorian koala is the largest , with shaggier , brown fur and a wider skull . The boundaries of these variations are based on state borders , and their status as subspecies is disputed . A 1999 genetic study suggests that the variations represent differentiated populations with limited gene flow between them , and that the three subspecies comprise a single evolutionarily significant unit . Other studies have found that koala populations have high levels of inbreeding and low genetic variation . Such low genetic diversity may have been a characteristic of koala populations since the late Pleistocene . Rivers and roads have been shown to limit gene flow and contribute to the genetic differentiation of southeast Queensland populations . In April 2013 , scientists from the Australian Museum and Queensland University of Technology announced they had fully sequenced the koala genome . 
 = = Description = = 
 The koala is a stocky animal with a large head and vestigial or non @-@ existent tail . It has a body length of 60 – 85 cm ( 24 – 33 in ) and a weight of 4 – 15 kg ( 9 – 33 lb ) , making it among the largest arboreal marsupials . Koalas from Victoria are twice as heavy as those from Queensland . The species is sexually dimorphic , with males 50 % larger than females . Males are further distinguished from females by their more curved noses and the presence of chest glands , which are visible as hairless patches . As in most marsupials , the male koala has a bifurcated penis , and the female has two lateral vaginas and two separate uteri . The male 's penile sheath contains naturally occurring bacteria that play an important role in fertilisation . The female 's pouch opening is tightened by a sphincter that keeps the young from falling out . 
 The pelage of the koala is thicker and longer on the back , and shorter on the belly . The ears have thick fur on both the inside and outside . The back fur colour varies from light grey to chocolate brown . The belly fur is whitish ; on the rump it is dappled whitish , and darker at the back . The koala has the most effective insulating back fur of any marsupial and is highly resilient to wind and rain , while the belly fur can reflect solar radiation . The koala 's curved , sharp claws are well adapted for climbing trees . The large forepaws have two opposable digits ( the first and second , which are opposable to the other three ) that allow them to grasp small branches . On the hindpaws , the second and third digits are fused , a typical condition for members of the <unk> , and the attached claws ( which are still separate ) are used for grooming . As in humans and other primates , koalas have friction ridges on their paws . The animal has a sturdy skeleton and a short , muscular upper body with proportionately long upper limbs that contribute to its climbing and grasping abilities . Additional climbing strength is achieved with thigh muscles that attach to the shinbone lower than other animals . The koala has a cartilaginous pad at the end of the spine that may make it more comfortable when it perches in the fork of a tree . 
 The koala has one of the smallest brains in proportion to body weight of any mammal , being 60 % smaller than that of a typical <unk> , weighing only 19 @.@ 2 g ( 0 @.@ 68 oz ) . The brain 's surface is fairly smooth , typical for a " primitive " animal . It occupies only 61 % of the cranial cavity and is pressed against the inside surface by cerebrospinal fluid . The function of this relatively large amount of fluid is not known , although one possibility is that it acts as a shock absorber , cushioning the brain if the animal falls from a tree . The koala 's small brain size may be an adaptation to the energy restrictions imposed by its diet , which is insufficient to sustain a larger brain . Because of its small brain , the koala has a limited ability to perform complex , unfamiliar behaviours . For example , when presented with plucked leaves on a flat surface , the animal cannot adapt to the change in its normal feeding routine and will not eat the leaves . The koala 's olfactory senses are normal , and it is known to sniff the oils of individual branchlets to assess their edibility . Its nose is fairly large and covered in leathery skin . Its round ears provide it with good hearing , and it has a well @-@ developed middle ear . A koala 's vision is not well developed , and its relatively small eyes are unusual among marsupials in that the pupils have vertical slits . Koalas make use of a novel vocal organ to produce low @-@ pitched sounds ( see social spacing , below ) . Unlike typical mammalian vocal cords , which are folds in the larynx , these organs are placed in the velum ( soft palate ) and are called velar vocal cords . 
 The koala has several adaptations for its eucalypt diet , which is of low nutritive value , of high toxicity , and high in dietary fibre . The animal 's dentition consists of the incisors and cheek teeth ( a single premolar and four molars on each jaw ) , which are separated by a large gap ( a characteristic feature of herbivorous mammals ) . The incisors are used for grasping leaves , which are then passed to the premolars to be snipped at the petiole before being passed to the highly cusped molars , where they are shredded into small pieces . Koalas may also store food in their cheek pouches before it is ready to be chewed . The partially worn molars of middle @-@ aged koalas are optimal for breaking the leaves into small particles , resulting in more efficient stomach digestion and nutrient absorption in the small intestine , which digests the eucalyptus leaves to provide most of the animal 's energy . A koala sometimes regurgitates the food into the mouth to be chewed a second time . 
 Unlike kangaroos and eucalyptus @-@ eating possums , koalas are hindgut fermenters , and their digestive retention can last for up to 100 hours in the wild , or up to 200 hours in captivity . This is made possible by the extraordinary length of their caecum — 200 cm ( 80 in ) long and 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter — the largest proportionally of any animal . Koalas can select which food particles to retain for longer fermentation and which to pass through . Large particles typically pass through more quickly , as they would take more time to digest . While the hindgut is proportionally larger in the koala than in other herbivores , only 10 % of the animal 's energy is obtained from fermentation . Since the koala gains a low amount of energy from its diet , its metabolic rate is half that of a typical mammal , although this can vary between seasons and sexes . The koala conserves water by passing relatively dry faecal pellets high in undigested fibre , and by storing water in the caecum . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The koala 's geographic range covers roughly 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 390 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , and 30 ecoregions . It extends throughout eastern and southeastern Australia , encompassing northeastern , central and southeastern Queensland , eastern New South Wales , Victoria , and southeastern South Australia . The koala was introduced near Adelaide and on several islands , including Kangaroo Island and French Island . The population on Magnetic Island represents the northern limit of its range . Fossil evidence shows that the koala 's range stretched as far west as southwestern Western Australia during the late Pleistocene . They were likely driven to extinction in these areas by environmental changes and hunting by indigenous Australians . 
 In Queensland , koalas are unevenly distributed and uncommon except in the southeast , where they are numerous . In New South Wales , they are abundant only in <unk> , while in Victoria they are common nearly everywhere . In South Australia , koalas were extirpated by 1920 and subsequently reintroduced . Koalas can be found in habitats ranging from relatively open forests to woodlands , and in climates ranging from tropical to cool temperate . In semi @-@ arid climates , they prefer riparian habitats , where nearby streams and creeks provide refuge during times of drought and extreme heat . 
 = = = Foraging and activities = = = 
 Koalas are herbivorous , and while most of their diet consists of eucalypt leaves , they can be found in trees of other genera , such as Acacia , Allocasuarina , Callitris , Leptospermum , and Melaleuca . Although the foliage of over 600 species of Eucalyptus is available , the koala shows a strong preference for around 30 . They tend to choose species that have a high protein content and low proportions of fibre and lignin . The most favoured species are Eucalyptus <unk> , E. tereticornis , and E. camaldulensis , which , on average , make up more than 20 % of their diet . Despite its reputation as a fussy eater , the koala is more generalist than some other marsupial species , such as the greater glider . Since eucalypt leaves have a high water content , the koala does not need to drink often ; its daily water turnover rate ranges from 71 to 91 ml / kg of body weight . Although females can meet their water requirements from eating leaves , larger males require additional water found on the ground or in tree hollows . When feeding , a koala holds onto a branch with hindpaws and one forepaw while the other forepaw grasps foliage . Small koalas can move close to the end of a branch , but larger ones stay near the thicker bases . Koalas consume up to 400 grams ( 14 oz ) of leaves a day , spread over four to six feeding sessions . Despite their adaptations to a low @-@ energy lifestyle , they have meagre fat reserves and need to feed often . 
 Because they get so little energy from their diet , koalas must limit their energy use and sleep 20 hours a day ; only 4 hours a day are spent in active movement . They are predominantly active at night and spend most of their waking hours feeding . They typically eat and sleep in the same tree , possibly for as long as a day . On very hot days , a koala may climb down to the coolest part of the tree which is cooler than the surrounding air . The koala hugs the tree to lose heat without panting . On warm days , a koala may rest with its back against a branch or lie on its stomach or back with its limbs dangling . During cold , wet periods , it curls itself into a tight ball to conserve energy . On windy days , a koala finds a lower , thicker branch on which to rest . While it spends most of the time in the tree , the animal descends to the ground to move to another tree , walking on all fours . The koala usually grooms itself with its hindpaws , but sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth . 
 = = = Social spacing = = = 
 Koalas are asocial animals and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours . In Victoria , home ranges are small and have extensive overlap , while in central Queensland they are larger and overlap less . Koala society appears to consist of " residents " and " transients " , the former being mostly adult females and the latter males . Resident males appear to be territorial and dominate others with their larger body size . Alpha males tend to establish their territories close to breeding females , while younger males are subordinate until they mature and reach full size . Adult males occasionally venture outside their home ranges ; when they do so , dominant ones retain their status . When a male enters a new tree , he marks it by rubbing his chest gland against the trunk or a branch ; males have occasionally been observed to dribble urine on the trunk . This scent @-@ marking behaviour probably serves as communication , and individuals are known to sniff the base of a tree before climbing . Scent marking is common during aggressive encounters . Chest gland secretions are complex chemical mixtures — about 40 compounds were identified in one analysis — that vary in composition and concentration with the season and the age of the individual . 
 Adult males communicate with loud bellows — low pitched sounds that consist of snore @-@ like inhalations and resonant exhalations that sound like growls . These sounds are thought to be generated by unique vocal organs found in koalas . Because of their low frequency , these bellows can travel far through air and vegetation . Koalas may bellow at any time of the year , particularly during the breeding season , when it serves to attract females and possibly intimidate other males . They also bellow to advertise their presence to their neighbours when they enter a new tree . These sounds signal the male 's actual body size , as well as exaggerate it ; females pay more attention to bellows that originate from larger males . Female koalas bellow , though more softly , in addition to making snarls , wails , and screams . These calls are produced when in distress and when making defensive threats . Young koalas squeak when in distress . As they get older , the squeak develops into a " squawk " produced both when in distress and to show aggression . When another individual climbs over it , a koala makes a low grunt with its mouth closed . Koalas make numerous facial expressions . When snarling , wailing , or squawking , the animal curls the upper lip and points its ears forward . During screams , the lips retract and the ears are drawn back . Females bring their lips forward and raise their ears when agitated . 
 Agonistic behaviour typically consists of squabbles between individuals climbing over or passing each other . This occasionally involves biting . Males that are strangers may wrestle , chase , and bite each other . In extreme situations , a male may try to displace a smaller rival from a tree . This involves the larger aggressor climbing up and attempting to corner the victim , which tries either to rush past him and climb down or to move to the end of a branch . The aggressor attacks by grasping the target by the shoulders and repeatedly biting him . Once the weaker individual is driven away , the victor bellows and marks the tree . Pregnant and lactating females are particularly aggressive and attack individuals that come too close . In general , however , koalas tend to avoid energy @-@ wasting aggressive behaviour . 
 = = = Reproduction and development = = = 
 Koalas are seasonal breeders , and births take place from the middle of spring through the summer to early autumn , from October to May . Females in oestrus tend to hold their heads further back than usual and commonly display tremors and spasms . However , males do not appear to recognise these signs , and have been observed to mount non @-@ oestrous females . Because of his much larger size , a male can usually force himself on a female , mounting her from behind , and in extreme cases , the male may pull the female out of the tree . A female may scream and vigorously fight off her suitors , but will submit to one that is dominant or is more familiar . The bellows and screams that accompany matings can attract other males to the scene , obliging the incumbent to delay mating and fight off the intruders . These fights may allow the female to assess which is dominant . Older males usually have accumulated scratches , scars , and cuts on the exposed parts of their noses and on their eyelids . 
 The koala 's gestation period lasts 33 – 35 days , and a female gives birth to a single joey ( although twins occur on occasion ) . As with all marsupials , the young are born while at the embryonic stage , weighing only 0 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 02 oz ) . However , they have relatively well @-@ developed lips , forelimbs , and shoulders , as well as functioning respiratory , digestive , and urinary systems . The joey crawls into its mother 's pouch to continue the rest of its development . Unlike most other marsupials , the koala does not clean her pouch . 
 A female koala has two teats ; the joey attaches itself to one of them and suckles for the rest of its pouch life . The koala has one of the lowest milk energy production rates in relation to body size of any mammal . The female makes up for this by lactating for as long as 12 months . At seven weeks of age , the joey 's head grows longer and becomes proportionally large , pigmentation begins to develop , and its sex can be determined ( the scrotum appears in males and the pouch begins to develop in females ) . At 13 weeks , the joey weighs around 50 g ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) and its head has doubled in size . The eyes begin to open and fine fur grows on the forehead , nape , shoulders , and arms . At 26 weeks , the fully furred animal resembles an adult , and begins to poke its head out of the pouch . 
 As the young koala approaches six months , the mother begins to prepare it for its eucalyptus diet by <unk> the leaves , producing a faecal pap that the joey eats from her <unk> . The pap is quite different in composition from regular faeces , resembling instead the contents of the caecum , which has a high concentration of bacteria . Eaten for about a month , the pap provides a supplementary source of protein at a transition time from a milk to a leaf diet . The joey fully emerges from the pouch for the first time at six or seven months of age , when it weighs 300 – 500 g ( 11 – 18 oz ) . It explores its new surroundings cautiously , clinging to its mother for support . By nine months , it weighs over 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) and develops its adult fur colour . Having permanently left the pouch , it rides on its mother 's back for transportation , learning to climb by grasping branches . Gradually , it spends more time away from its mother , and at 12 months it is fully weaned , weighing around 2 @.@ 5 kg ( 5 @.@ 5 lb ) . When the mother becomes pregnant again , her bond with her previous offspring is permanently severed . Newly weaned young are encouraged to disperse by their mothers ' aggressive behaviour towards them . 
 Females become sexually mature at about three years of age and can then become pregnant ; in comparison , males reach sexual maturity when they are about four years old , although they can produce sperm as early as two years . While the chest glands can be functional as early as 18 months of age , males do not begin scent @-@ marking behaviours until they reach sexual maturity . Because the offspring have a long dependent period , female koalas usually breed in alternate years . Favourable environmental factors , such as a plentiful supply of high @-@ quality food trees , allow them to reproduce every year . 
 = = = Health and mortality = = = 
 Koalas may live from 13 to 18 years in the wild . While female koalas usually live this long , males may die sooner because of their more hazardous lives . Koalas usually survive falls from trees and immediately climb back up , but injuries and deaths from falls do occur , particularly in inexperienced young and fighting males . Around six years of age , the koala 's chewing teeth begin to wear down and their chewing efficiency decreases . Eventually , the cusps disappear completely and the animal will die of starvation . 
 Koalas have few predators ; dingos and large pythons may prey on them , while birds of prey ( such as powerful owls and wedge @-@ tailed eagles ) are threats to young . They are generally not subject to external parasites , other than ticks in coastal areas . Koalas may also suffer mange from the mite Sarcoptes scabiei , and skin ulcers from the bacterium Mycobacterium <unk> , but neither is common . Internal parasites are few and largely harmless . These include the tapeworm <unk> <unk> , commonly found in the intestine , and the nematodes <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , which are infrequently found in the lungs . In a three @-@ year study of almost 600 koalas admitted to the Australian Zoo Wildlife Hospital in Queensland , 73 @.@ 8 % of the animals were infected with at least one species of the parasitic <unk> genus Trypanosoma , the most common of which was T. <unk> . 
 Koalas can be subject to pathogens such as <unk> bacteria , which can cause keratoconjunctivitis , urinary tract infection , and reproductive tract infection . Such infections are widespread on the mainland , but absent in some island populations . The koala retrovirus ( <unk> ) may cause koala immune deficiency syndrome ( KIDS ) which is similar to AIDS in humans . Prevalence of <unk> in koala populations suggests a trend spreading from the north to the south of Australia . Northern populations are completely infected , while some southern populations ( including Kangaroo Island ) are free . 
 The animals are vulnerable to bushfires due to their slow movements and the flammability of eucalypt trees . The koala instinctively seeks refuge in the higher branches , where it is vulnerable to intense heat and flames . Bushfires also fragment the animal 's habitat , which restricts their movement and leads to population decline and loss of genetic diversity . Dehydration and overheating can also prove fatal . Consequently , the koala is vulnerable to the effects of climate change . Models of climate change in Australia predict warmer and drier climates , suggesting that the koala 's range will shrink in the east and south to more mesic habitats . Droughts also affect the koala 's well @-@ being . For example , a severe drought in 1980 caused many Eucalyptus trees to lose their leaves . Subsequently , 63 % of the population in southwestern Queensland died , especially young animals that were excluded from prime feeding sites by older , dominant koalas , and recovery of the population was slow . Later , this population declined from an estimated mean population of 59 @,@ 000 in 1995 to 11 @,@ 600 in 2009 , a reduction attributed largely to hotter and drier conditions resulting from droughts in most years between 2002 and 2007 . Another predicted negative outcome of climate change is the effect of elevations in atmospheric CO2 levels on the koala 's food supply : increases in CO2 cause Eucalyptus trees to reduce protein and increase tannin concentrations in their leaves , reducing the quality of the food source . 
 = = Human relations = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The first written reference of the koala was recorded by John Price , servant of John Hunter , the Governor of New South Wales . Price encountered the " <unk> " on 26 January 1798 , during an expedition to the Blue Mountains , although his account was not published until nearly a century later in Historical Records of Australia . In 1802 , French @-@ born explorer Francis Louis Barrallier encountered the animal when his two Aboriginal guides , returning from a hunt , brought back two koala feet they were intending to eat . Barrallier preserved the appendages and sent them and his notes to Hunter 's successor , Philip Gidley King , who forwarded them to Joseph Banks . Similar to Price , Barrallier 's notes were not published until 1897 . Reports of the first capture of a live " <unk> " appeared in The Sydney Gazette in August 1803 . Within a few weeks Flinders ' astronomer , James Inman , purchased a specimen pair for live shipment to Joseph Banks in England . They were described as ' somewhat larger than the <unk> ( Wombat ) ' . These encounters helped provide the impetus for King to commission the artist John Lewin to paint watercolours of the animal . Lewin painted three pictures , one of which was subsequently made into a print that was reproduced in Georges Cuvier 's The Animal Kingdom ( first published in 1827 ) and several European works on natural history . 
 Botanist Robert Brown was the first to write a detailed scientific description of the koala in 1814 , based on a female specimen captured near what is now Mount Kembla in the Illawarra region of New South Wales . Austrian botanical illustrator Ferdinand Bauer drew the animal 's skull , throat , feet , and paws . Brown 's work remained unpublished and largely unnoticed , however , as his field books and notes remained in his possession until his death , when they were bequeathed to the British Museum ( Natural History ) in London . They were not identified until 1994 , while Bauer 's koala watercolours were not published until 1989 . British surgeon Everard Home included details of the koala based on eyewitness accounts of William Paterson , who had befriended Brown and Bauer during their stay in New South Wales . Home , who in 1808 published his report in the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , gave the animal the scientific name Didelphis <unk> . 
 The first published image of the koala appeared in George Perry 's ( 1810 ) natural history work Arcana . Perry called it the " New Holland Sloth " on account of its perceived similarities to the Central and South American tree @-@ living mammals of genus Bradypus . His disdain for the koala , evident in his description of the animal , was typical of the prevailing early 19th @-@ century British attitude about the primitiveness and oddity of Australian fauna : 
 " ... the eye is placed like that of the Sloth , very close to the mouth and nose , which gives it a clumsy awkward appearance , and void of elegance in the combination ... they have little either in their character or appearance to interest the Naturalist or Philosopher . As Nature however provides nothing in vain , we may suppose that even these torpid , senseless creatures are wisely intended to fill up one of the great links of the chain of animated nature ... " . 
 Naturalist and popular artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala in his three @-@ volume work The Mammals of Australia ( 1845 – 63 ) and introduced the species , as well as other members of Australia 's little @-@ known faunal community , to the general British public . Comparative anatomist Richard Owen , in a series of publications on the physiology and anatomy of Australian mammals , presented a paper on the anatomy of the koala to the Zoological Society of London . In this widely cited publication , he provided the first careful description of its internal anatomy , and noted its general structural similarity to the wombat . English naturalist George Robert Waterhouse , curator of the Zoological Society of London , was the first to correctly classify the koala as a marsupial in the 1840s . He identified similarities between it and its fossil relatives <unk> and <unk> , which had been discovered just a few years before . Similarly , Gerard <unk> , curator of the Australian Museum in Sydney , noted evolutionary mechanisms at work when comparing the koala to its ancestral relatives in his 1871 The Mammals of Australia . 
 The first living koala in Britain arrived in 1881 , purchased by the Zoological Society of London . As related by prosecutor to the society , William Alexander Forbes , the animal suffered an accidental demise when the heavy lid of a washstand fell on it and it was unable to free itself . Forbes used the opportunity to dissect the fresh female specimen , thus was able to provide explicit anatomical details on the female reproductive system , the brain , and the liver — parts not previously described by Owen , who had access only to preserved specimens . Scottish embryologist William Caldwell — well known in scientific circles for determining the reproductive mechanism of the platypus — described the uterine development of the koala in 1884 , and used the new information to convincingly place the koala and the monotremes into an evolutionary time frame . 
 Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester , visited the Koala Park Sanctuary in Sydney in 1934 and was " intensely interested in the bears " . His photograph , with Noel Burnet , the founder of the park , and a koala , appeared in The Sydney Morning Herald . After World War II , when tourism to Australia increased and the animals were exported to zoos overseas , the koala 's international popularity rose . Several political leaders and members of royal families had their pictures taken with koalas , including Queen Elizabeth II , Prince Harry , Crown Prince Naruhito , Crown Princess Masako , Pope John Paul II , US President Bill Clinton , Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev , South African President Nelson Mandela , Prime Minister Tony Abbott , and Russian President Vladimir Putin . 
 = = = Cultural significance = = = 
 The koala is well known worldwide and is a major draw for Australian zoos and wildlife parks . It has been featured in advertisements , games , cartoons , and as soft toys . It benefited the national tourism industry by over an estimated billion Australian dollars in 1998 , a figure that has since grown . In 1997 , half of visitors to Australia , especially those from Korea , Japan , and Taiwan , sought out zoos and wildlife parks ; about 75 % of European and Japanese tourists placed the koala at the top of their list of animals to see . According to biologist Stephen Jackson : " If you were to take a straw poll of the animal most closely associated with Australia , it 's a fair bet that the koala would come out marginally in front of the kangaroo " . Factors that contribute to the koala 's enduring popularity include its childlike body proportions and teddy bear @-@ like face . 
 The koala is featured in the Dreamtime stories and mythology of indigenous Australians . The Tharawal people believed that the animal helped row the boat that brought them to the continent . Another myth tells of how a tribe killed a koala and used its long intestines to create a bridge for people from other parts of the world . This narrative highlights the koala 's status as a game animal and the length of its intestines . Several stories tell of how the koala lost its tail . In one , a kangaroo cuts it off to punish the koala for being lazy and greedy . Tribes in both Queensland and Victoria regarded the koala as a wise animal and sought its advice . <unk> @-@ speaking people credited the koala for turning barren lands into lush forests . The animal is also depicted in rock carvings , though not as much as some other species . 
 Early European settlers in Australia considered the koala to be a prowling sloth @-@ like animal with a " fierce and menacing look " . At the beginning of the 20th century , the koala 's reputation took a more positive turn , largely due to its growing popularity and depiction in several widely circulated children 's stories . It is featured in Ethel Pedley 's 1899 book Dot and the Kangaroo , in which it is portrayed as the " funny native bear " . Artist Norman Lindsay depicted a more anthropomorphic koala in The Bulletin cartoons , starting in 1904 . This character also appeared as <unk> <unk> in Lindsay 's 1918 book The Magic Pudding . Perhaps the most famous fictional koala is Blinky Bill . Created by Dorothy Wall in 1933 , the character appeared in several books and has been the subject of films , TV series , merchandise , and a 1986 environmental song by John Williamson . The first Australian stamp featuring a koala was issued by the Commonwealth in 1930 . A television ad campaign for Australia 's national airline Qantas , starting in 1967 and running for several decades , featured a live koala ( voiced by Howard Morris ) , who complained that too many tourists were coming to Australia and concluded " I hate Qantas " . The series has been ranked among the greatest commercials of all time . 
 The song " Ode to a Koala Bear " appears on the B @-@ side of the 1983 Paul McCartney / Michael Jackson duet album Say Say Say . A koala is the main character in Hanna @-@ Barbera 's The <unk> Koala Show and Nippon Animation 's <unk> , both of which were animated cartoons of the early 1980s . Food products shaped like the koala include the <unk> Koala chocolate bar and the bite @-@ sized cookie snack Koala 's March . <unk> Bridge in Victoria features a tourist complex shaped like a giant koala , and the Queensland Reds rugby team has a koala as its mascot . The Platinum Koala coin features the animal on the reverse and Elizabeth II on the obverse . 
 = = = Conservation issues = = = 
 In 2008 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature listed the koala under Least Concern for the following reasons : " Its wide distribution , presumed large population , and because it is unlikely to be declining at nearly the rate required to qualify for listing in a threatened category " . Australian policy makers declined a 2009 proposal to include the koala in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . In 2012 , the Australian government listed koala populations in Queensland and New South Wales as Vulnerable , because of a 40 % population decline in the former and a 33 % decline in the latter . Populations in Victoria and South Australia appear to be abundant ; however , the Australian Koala Foundation argues that the exclusion of Victorian populations from protective measures is based on a misconception that the total koala population is 200 @,@ 000 , whereas they believe it is probably less than 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Koalas were hunted for food by Aboriginals . A common technique used to capture the animals was to attach a loop of ropey bark to the end of a long , thin pole , so as to form a noose . This would be used to snare an animal high in a tree , beyond the reach of a climbing hunter ; an animal brought down this way would then be killed with a stone hand axe or hunting stick ( <unk> ) . According to the customs of some tribes , it was considered taboo to skin the animal , while other tribes thought the animal 's head had a special status , and saved them for burial . 
 The koala was heavily hunted by European settlers in the early 20th century , largely for its thick , soft fur . More than two million pelts are estimated to have left Australia by 1924 . <unk> were in demand for use in rugs , coat linings , muffs , and as trimming on women 's garments . Extensive cullings occurred in Queensland in 1915 , 1917 , and again in 1919 , when over one million koalas were killed with guns , poisons , and nooses . The public outcry over these cullings was probably the first wide @-@ scale environmental issue that rallied Australians . Novelist and social critic Vance Palmer , writing in a letter to the The Courier @-@ Mail , expressed the popular sentiment : 
 " The shooting of our harmless and lovable native bear is nothing less than barbarous ... No one has ever accused him of spoiling the farmer 's wheat , eating the squatter 's grass , or even the spreading of the prickly pear . There is no social vice that can be put down to his account ... He affords no sport to the gun @-@ man ... And he has been almost blotted out already from some areas . " 
 Despite the growing movement to protect native species , the poverty brought about by the drought of 1926 – 28 led to the killing of another 600 @,@ 000 koalas during a one @-@ month open season in August 1927 . In 1934 , Frederick Lewis , the Chief Inspector of Game in Victoria , said that the once @-@ abundant animal had been brought to near extinction in that state , suggesting that only 500 – 1000 remained . 
 The first successful efforts at conserving the species were initiated by the establishment of Brisbane 's Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary and Sydney 's Koala Park Sanctuary in the 1920s and 1930s . The owner of the latter park , Noel Burnet , became the first to successfully breed koalas and earned a reputation as the foremost contemporary authority on the marsupial . In 1934 , David Fleay , curator of Australian mammals at the Melbourne Zoo , established the first Australian faunal enclosure at an Australian zoo , and featured the koala . This arrangement allowed him to undertake a detailed study of its diet in captivity . Fleay later continued his conservation efforts at Healesville Sanctuary and the David Fleay Wildlife Park . 
 Since 1870 , koalas have been introduced to several coastal and offshore islands , including Kangaroo Island and French Island . Their numbers have significantly increased , and since the islands are not large enough to sustain such high koala numbers , overbrowsing has become a problem . In the 1920s , Lewis initiated a program of large @-@ scale relocation and rehabilitation programs to transfer koalas whose habitat had become fragmented or reduced to new regions , with the intent of eventually returning them to their former range . For example , in 1930 – 31 , 165 koalas were translocated to Quail Island . After a period of population growth , and subsequent overbrowsing of gum trees on the island , about 1 @,@ 300 animals were released into mainland areas in 1944 . The practice of <unk> koalas became commonplace ; Victorian State manager Peter <unk> estimated that from 1923 to 2006 , about 25 @,@ 000 animals were translocated to more than 250 release sites across Victoria . Since the 1990s , government agencies have tried to control their numbers by culling , but public and international outcry has forced the use of translocation and sterilisation , instead . 
 One of the biggest anthropogenic threats to the koala is habitat destruction and fragmentation . In coastal areas , the main cause of this is urbanisation , while in rural areas , habitat is cleared for agriculture . Native forest trees are also taken down to be made into wood products . In 2000 , Australia ranked fifth in the world by deforestation rates , having cleared 564 @,@ 800 hectares ( 1 @,@ 396 @,@ 000 acres ) . The distribution of the koala has shrunk by more than 50 % since European arrival , largely due to fragmentation of habitat in Queensland . The koala 's " vulnerable " status in Queensland and New South Wales means that developers in these states must consider the impacts on this species when making building applications . In addition , koalas live in many protected areas . 
 While urbanisation can pose a threat to koala populations , the animals can survive in urban areas provided enough trees are present . Urban populations have distinct vulnerabilities : collisions with vehicles and attacks by domestic dogs kill about 4 @,@ 000 animals every year . Injured koalas are often taken to wildlife hospitals and rehabilitation centres . In a 30 @-@ year retrospective study performed at a New South Wales koala rehabilitation centre , trauma ( usually resulting from a motor vehicle accident or dog attack ) was found to be the most frequent cause of admission , followed by symptoms of Chlamydia infection . Wildlife caretakers are issued special permits , but must release the animals back into the wild when they are either well enough or , in the case of joeys , old enough . As with most native animals , the koala cannot legally be kept as a pet in Australia or anywhere else . 
 = = = Urban myth = = = 
 The drop bear is an imaginary creature in contemporary Australian folklore featuring a predatory , carnivorous version of the koala . This hoax animal is commonly spoken about in tall tales designed to scare tourists . While koalas are typically docile herbivores , drop bears are described as unusually large and vicious marsupials that inhabit treetops and attack unsuspecting people ( or other prey ) that walk beneath them by dropping onto their heads from above . 
 = Millie Knight = 
 Millie Knight ( born 15 January 1999 ) is a Paralympic athlete and student who competes at international level for ParalympicsGB in alpine skiing in the slalom and giant slalom events with a sighted guide , currently Jennifer Kehoe . When Knight was one year old , she contracted toxocariasis , diagnosed at age three , and which resulted in the loss of most of her vision by the age of six . She joined the Great Britain paralympic skiing team in 2012 , and progressed to compete at international @-@ level events . Knight and Ferrier have competed together since February 2013 , winning several times . Knight was the flagbearer at the 2014 Winter Paralympics opening ceremony , her debut Paralympics , in Sochi where , at the age of 15 , she was the youngest person ever to compete for ParalympicsGB at the Winter Paralympic games . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Knight was born on 15 January 1999 in Canterbury , Kent . She lived on a farm with many animals , and at the age of one , she contracted the disease toxocariasis . When Knight was three , doctors <unk> her eyes noticed scars on her right retina . A few trips to Great Ormond Street resulted in a diagnosis of toxocariasis , a condition developed when humans , most often young children , inadvertently consume the eggs of Toxocara , a roundworm parasite found in cat and dog faeces , which can in turn contaminate soil . The parasites , in rare circumstances such as Knight 's , migrate into the eyes , leading to vision problems . Her retina was treated with steroids and regular antibiotics . The disease was dormant until she was six , when she lost much of her vision , resulting in her being only partially sighted ; in her left eye she has 10 @-@ 20 % peripheral vision , and in her right eye she has 5 % . 
 As of 2014 Knight is studying for her GCSEs in tandem with her sporting career . She is enrolled at King 's School in Canterbury ; her first year studying there was 2013 @-@ 14 . The school allowed Knight two months away to compete at the Sochi Paralympics . 
 = = Skiing career = = 
 In 2006 at the age of seven , shortly before Knight lost the majority of her sight , she had been to France on a skiing holiday and was encouraged to try the sport by her mother . Her mother was Knight 's first sighted guide until late January 2013 for financial reasons . The pair competed together in visually impaired ( VI ) races . 
 In November 2012 , at age 13 , Knight began training with Great Britain 's Paralympic development squad . She raced at the Europa Cup in slalom and giant <unk> in spring 2013 . Her sighted guide at the Games , Rachael Ferrier , joined Knight in 2013 . Ferrier , who was 18 when she competed at Sochi , was a Glasgow Ski Instructor and racer who had been skiing since the age of seven prior to meeting Knight . Together the pair won two silver medals that year in the International Paralympic Committee Alpine Ski races at <unk> . In December 2013 , the pair won a medal at <unk> , and then went on to win two gold medals at the annual International Paralympic Committee Alpine Skiing event , the <unk> in Innsbruck , Austria , in January 2014 . 
 Knight competes in class B2 due to her lack of complete vision , a classification between being blind and visually impaired . She has been coached by Euan Bennet since 2011 , but is also assisted by national coach Tony McAllister . Knight is sponsored by <unk> , and featured in their " I Will " advertising campaign . 
 = = = 2014 Paralympics = = = 
 Knight 's debut Paralympics was the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi ; competing at the age of 15 made her the youngest ParalympicsGB competitor at any Winter Paralympics . She was the flag bearer at the opening ceremony for ParalympicsGB , <unk> the flag at the <unk> Olympic Stadium , an honour Knight described as " a surprise " . She competed for ParalympicsGB in the slalom on 14 March , completing both of her runs , and finishing fifth , and competed in the giant slalom on 16 March , again finishing fifth . There was not any significant expectation on Knight at the 2014 Paralympics , as her target is the 2018 Winter Paralympics in Pyeongchang . 
 Following the Sochi games , it was announced in April 2014 that Knight would participate in the Queen 's Baton Relay on 5 June 2014 , carrying the Baton in Kent . 
 The following year Knight travelled to Canada to compete at the 2015 IPC Alpine Skiing World Championships in Panorama Mountain Village in British Columbia . Her sighted guide from Sochi , Ferrier , had by this time enrolled at university and had left the sport allowing Knight to be reunited with her previous guide Jennifer Kehoe . Prior to the Championships Knight had won two gold medals on the World Cup tour and hopes were high that she may medal in the absence of British Paralympic champion Kelly Gallagher . At Panorama Knight took part in the two technical events , the slalom and giant slalom , as she was still too young to compete in the speed events . In her first event , the giant slalom , Knight took the lead in the first run with a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 90 , but despite bettering this time in her second run with 1 : 11 @.@ 49 , she was beaten into silver medal place by a third of a second by Russia 's Aleksandra <unk> . Two days later Knight took part in the slalom , winning bronze , Britain 's only two medals of the games . 
 = Louis Lipsett = 
 Major General Louis James Lipsett CB , CMG ( 14 June 1874 – 14 October 1918 ) , was a senior officer in the British Army and Canadian Expeditionary Force during the First World War . He commanded the 3rd Canadian Division during some of the bitterest battles of the war , taking over in 1915 after his predecessor was killed . He himself was killed in action less than a month before the end of the war during a reconnaissance mission observing German positions along the River Selle . 
 A highly experienced officer , Lipsett had previously seen action in the Tirah Campaign and the Second Boer War with the British Army , serving as an officer with the Royal Irish Regiment . He was later instrumental in developing military training and education throughout Canada and expanding the shore defences of British Columbia in response to the threat of the German East Asian Cruiser Squadron under von Spee . An experienced and capable officer , Lipsett was popular with both his men and his superiors and his death was considered " a deplorable loss to the Division " . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 Born in Ballyshannon , County Donegal , Ireland , to Richard and Etty Lipsett in June 1874 , Lipsett was raised in Merthyr Tydfil , Wales , and Bedford , England , following his father 's death in 1887 . He was educated at Bedford School and took the Sandhurst entrance examination against the wishes of his tutors , entering the college and graduating 35th from his class of 120 . In 1894 , Lipsett was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Royal Irish Regiment , and took ship to India where he served for the next five years on the Northwest Frontier , participating in the Tirah Campaign against the Afridi . During these campaigns he conducted himself with distinction , being promoted to lieutenant but also contracting a near @-@ fatal bout of cholera . 
 In 1899 he and his regiment were ordered to South Africa for service in the Second Boer War . Although he did not serve in any significant actions Lipsett performed his duties well , in 1901 was promoted to captain and on his return to England in 1903 was recommended to the Staff College , Camberley . In 1905 he returned to South Africa as a staff officer ( Deputy @-@ Assistant Adjutant and Quartermaster @-@ General ) , to aid in the reconstitution of colonial government , a task he performed until 1907 , when he was posted back to his regiment . Based at Aldershot , Lipsett conducted both regimental business and operated as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the commander of the 2nd Division , Theodore Edward Stephenson . 
 In 1911 , Lipsett responded to the call from the Colonial Office for young staff officers to operate in colonial military academies , as military education had been standardised throughout the British Empire in 1909 . Lipsett was sent to Canada and promoted to major ( in 1913 ) , working hard to improve training in the Dominion . He instigated numerous new training courses and special schools , establishing close ties with the Canadian military establishment and personally training most of the next generation of Canadian staff officers and generals . 
 = = First World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War Lipsett was dispatched to British Columbia , the Pacific coastline of which was largely undefended and was believed to be at risk from the German East Asian Cruiser Squadron under Maximilian von Spee , which had embarked on a raiding campaign in the Pacific Ocean that would culminate in the Battle of Coronel and the Battle of the Falkland Islands . Lipsett recognised that there was no immediate threat to the Canadian coast and calmed fears whilst simultaneously organising the local militia forces and deploying the two submarines purchased by provincial Premier Richard McBride . His task completed in British Columbia , Lipsett took over command and training of the 8th Battalion of the Canadian Expeditionary Force . A friend recalled that as a commanding officer he was " always accessible and charming in manner , yet there was that about him which made him respected and no one ever presumed on his kindness , except the few old soldiers , who with their war ribbons up , and uncanny intuition , never failed to touch a soft spot in his heart . " 
 In 1915 the 8th Battalion joined the British Army in France as part of the 3rd Canadian Division . At the Second Battle of Ypres his troops faced the brunt of the German assault , involving the first use of poison gas in modern warfare . Lipsett is credited with issuing the first order to counteract the effects of poison gas , when he ordered his men to urinate on strips of cloth and tie them to their faces to neutralise the chlorine . Lipsett 's battalion was instrumental in holding the line during the action and he was consequently rewarded by being made a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George , promoted to acting brigadier @-@ general and given command of the Canadian 2nd Brigade , which he trained during the spring of 1916 to conduct major trench raids on German lines . 
 = = = 3rd Canadian Division = = = 
 On 2 June 1916 , Lipsett 's commanding officer Malcolm Mercer was killed by enemy shellfire at Mount Sorrel in Belgium and Lipsett was given an acting promotion to replace him in command of the 3rd Canadian Division , and a brevet promotion to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel . The Canadian Minister of Militia and Defence Minister Sir Sam Hughes attempted to have him removed from the division in favour of Hughes ' son Garnet , but Lipsett was so highly regarded in the Canadian military establishment that General Byng overruled Hughes . Lipsett led his division through the worst of the campaigns in 1916 , including extensive operations during the Battle of the Somme . He received promotion to substantive Lieutenant @-@ Colonel in February 1917 , and in April 1917 Lipsett 's division was instrumental in the Canadian success at the Battle of Vimy Ridge . The following September however the division took heavy casualties in bitter fighting at the Battle of Passchendaele . After each of these battles , Lipsett was forced to reconstitute and retrain his units with fresh drafts , so severe were the casualties the division took . In August , 1918 he was involved in the planning and execution of an assault on German positions by the entire Canadian Corps which is known as the Battle of Amiens which was completely successful and for which he was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath . Through the rest of the month he was engaged in combat with the division , but at the start of September Arthur Currie and Douglas Haig arranged his transfer to the command of the British 4th Division in order that the Canadian Corps be entirely officered by Canadians . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Although Lipsett was unhappy about the transfer , he acquiesced and took energetic command of the division during the Hundred Days Offensive . On 14 October 1918 , whilst planning an assault at <unk> in France he was crawling along a bank overlooking the River Selle with several officers of his own staff and some of the 49th Division , when at about 3 : 15 in the afternoon the party was spotted and a German machine gun opened fire from across the river . The party went to ground but a single bullet struck Lipsett in the face . He was able to stagger back to his own lines but there collapsed from massive blood loss and never regained consciousness . He was the last British general to be killed during the First World War . Lipsett was buried the following day in Quéant Communal Cemetery at a funeral attended by dozens of officers from the British and Canadian armies in France . The burial party was provided by the 8th Battalion , <unk> and amongst the mourners was the Prince of Wales . After the war he was posthumously awarded the Croix d <unk> de la Legion d 'honneur and the Croix de Guerre by the French government . 
 Lipsett is remembered in the Dictionary of Canadian Biography as " arguably the best " Canadian officer of the Great War , " a shrewd and thoughtful tactician whose pre @-@ war professional dedication paid off under fire from Ypres to Amiens " and who " set an example of fearlessness and disregard of danger to those under him at all times and in all places ; in fact to lead and not to follow was the ideal which he set for himself and lived up to the end . " 
 = Attachment theory = 
 Attachment theory is a psychological model that attempts to describe the dynamics of long @-@ term and short @-@ term interpersonal relationships between humans . However , " attachment theory is not formulated as a general theory of relationships . It addresses only a specific facet " ( Waters et al . 2005 : 81 ) : how human beings respond within relationships when hurt , separated from loved ones , or perceiving a threat . Essentially all infants become attached if provided any caregiver , but there are individual differences in the quality of the relationships . In infants , attachment as a motivational and behavioral system directs the child to seek proximity with a familiar caregiver when they are alarmed , with the expectation that they will receive protection and emotional support . John Bowlby believed that the tendency for primate infants to develop attachments to familiar caregivers was the result of evolutionary pressures , since attachment behavior would facilitate the infant 's survival in the face of dangers such as predation or exposure to the elements . 
 The most important tenet of attachment theory is that an infant needs to develop a relationship with at least one primary caregiver for the child 's successful social and emotional development , and in particular for learning how to effectively regulate their feelings . Fathers or any other individuals , are equally likely to become principal attachment figures if they provide most of the child care and related social interaction . In the presence of a sensitive and responsive caregiver , the infant will use the caregiver as a " safe base " from which to explore . It should be recognized that " even sensitive caregivers get it right only about 50 percent of the time . Their communications are either out of synch , or mismatched . There are times when parents feel tired or distracted . The telephone rings or there is breakfast to prepare . In other words , attuned interactions rupture quite frequently . But the hallmark of a sensitive caregiver is that the ruptures are managed and repaired . " 
 Attachments between infants and caregivers form even if this caregiver is not sensitive and responsive in social interactions with them . This has important implications . Infants cannot exit unpredictable or insensitive caregiving relationships . Instead they must manage themselves as best they can within such relationships . Based on her established Strange Situation Protocol , research by developmental psychologist Mary Ainsworth in the 1960s and 1970s found that children will have different patterns of attachment depending primarily on how they experienced their early caregiving environment . Early patterns of attachment , in turn , shape — but do not determine — the individual 's expectations in later relationships . Four different attachment classifications have been identified in children : secure attachment , anxious @-@ ambivalent attachment , anxious @-@ avoidant attachment , and disorganized attachment . Attachment theory has become the dominant theory used today in the study of infant and toddler behavior and in the fields of infant mental health , treatment of children , and related fields . Secure attachment is when children feel they can rely on their caregivers to attend to their needs of proximity , emotional support and protection . It is considered to be the best attachment style . Separation anxiety is what infants feel when they are separated from their caregivers . Anxious @-@ ambivalent attachment is when the infant feels separation anxiety when separated from the caregiver and does not feel reassured when the caregiver returns to the infant . Anxious @-@ avoidant attachment is when the infant avoids their parents . Disorganized attachment is when there is a lack of attachment behavior . In the 1980s , the theory was extended to attachment in adults . Attachment applies to adults when adults feel close attachment to their parents and their romantic partners . 
 = = Infant attachment = = 
 Within attachment theory , attachment means " a biological instinct in which proximity to an attachment figure is sought when the child senses or perceives threat or discomfort . Attachment behaviour anticipates a response by the attachment figure which will remove threat or discomfort " . Such bonds may be reciprocal between two adults , but between a child and a caregiver these bonds are based on the child 's need for safety , security and protection , paramount in infancy and childhood . John Bowlby begins by noting that organisms at different levels of the phylogenetic scale regulate instinctive behavior in distinct ways , ranging from primitive reflex @-@ like " fixed action patterns " to complex plan hierarchies with <unk> and strong learning components . In the most complex organisms , instinctive behaviors may be " goal @-@ corrected " with continual on @-@ course adjustments ( such as a bird of prey adjusting its flight to the movements of the prey ) . The concept of cybernetically controlled behavioral systems organized as plan hierarchies ( Miller , Galanter , and Pribram , 1960 ) thus came to replace Freud 's concept of drive and instinct . Such systems regulate behaviors in ways that need not be rigidly innate , but — depending on the organism — can adapt in greater or lesser degrees to changes in environmental circumstances , provided that these do not deviate too much from the organism 's environment of evolutionary <unk> . Such flexible organisms pay a price , however , because adaptable behavioral systems can more easily be subverted from their optimal path of development . For humans , Bowlby speculates , the environment of evolutionary <unk> probably resembles that of present @-@ day hunter @-@ gatherer societies for the purpose of survival , and , ultimately , genetic replication . Attachment theory is not an exhaustive description of human relationships , nor is it synonymous with love and affection , although these may indicate that bonds exist . Some infants direct attachment behaviour ( proximity seeking ) toward more than one attachment figure almost as soon as they start to show discrimination between caregivers ; most come to do so during their second year . These figures are arranged hierarchically , with the principal attachment figure at the top . The set @-@ goal of the attachment behavioural system is to maintain the accessibility and availability of the attachment figure . " Alarm " is the term used for activation of the attachment behavioural system caused by fear of danger . " Anxiety " is the anticipation or fear of being cut off from the attachment figure . If the figure is unavailable or unresponsive , separation distress occurs . In infants , physical separation can cause anxiety and anger , followed by sadness and despair . By age three or four , physical separation is no longer such a threat to the child 's bond with the attachment figure . Threats to security in older children and adults arise from prolonged absence , breakdowns in communication , emotional unavailability , or signs of rejection or abandonment . 
 = = = Behaviours = = = 
 The attachment behavioural system serves to achieve or maintain proximity to the attachment figure . Pre @-@ attachment behaviours occur in the first six months of life . During the first phase ( the first eight weeks ) , infants smile , babble , and cry to attract the attention of potential caregivers . Although infants of this age learn to discriminate between caregivers , these behaviours are directed at anyone in the vicinity . During the second phase ( two to six months ) , the infant increasingly discriminates between familiar and unfamiliar adults , becoming more responsive toward the caregiver ; following and clinging are added to the range of behaviours . Clear @-@ cut attachment develops in the third phase , between the ages of six months and two years . The infant 's behaviour toward the caregiver becomes organized on a goal @-@ directed basis to achieve the conditions that make it feel secure . By the end of the first year , the infant is able to display a range of attachment behaviours designed to maintain proximity . These manifest as protesting the caregiver 's departure , greeting the caregiver 's return , clinging when frightened , and following when able . With the development of locomotion , the infant begins to use the caregiver or caregivers as a " safe base " from which to explore . Infant exploration is greater when the caregiver is present because the infant 's attachment system is relaxed and it is free to explore . If the caregiver is inaccessible or unresponsive , attachment behaviour is more strongly exhibited . Anxiety , fear , illness , and fatigue will cause a child to increase attachment behaviours . 
 After the second year , as the child begins to see the caregiver as an independent person , a more complex and goal @-@ corrected partnership is formed . Children begin to notice others ' goals and feelings and plan their actions accordingly . For example , whereas babies cry because of pain , two @-@ year @-@ olds cry to summon their caregiver , and if that does not work , cry louder , shout , or follow . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Common attachment behaviours and emotions , displayed in most social primates including humans , are adaptive . The long @-@ term evolution of these species has involved selection for social behaviors that make individual or group survival more likely . The commonly observed attachment behaviour of toddlers staying near familiar people would have had safety advantages in the environment of early adaptation , and has similar advantages today . Bowlby saw the environment of early adaptation as similar to current hunter @-@ gatherer societies . There is a survival advantage in the capacity to sense possibly dangerous conditions such as unfamiliarity , being alone , or rapid approach . According to Bowlby , proximity @-@ seeking to the attachment figure in the face of threat is the " set @-@ goal " of the attachment behavioural system . 
 Bowlby 's original account of a sensitivity period during which attachments can form of between six months and two to three years has been modified by later researchers . These researchers have shown that there is indeed a sensitive period during which attachments will form if possible , but the time frame is broader and the effect less fixed and irreversible than first proposed . With further research , authors discussing attachment theory have come to appreciate that social development is affected by later as well as earlier relationships . Early steps in attachment take place most easily if the infant has one caregiver , or the occasional care of a small number of other people . According to Bowlby , almost from the first many children have more than one figure toward whom they direct attachment behaviour . These figures are not treated alike ; there is a strong bias for a child to direct attachment behaviour mainly toward one particular person . Bowlby used the term " <unk> " to describe this bias . Researchers and theorists have abandoned this concept insofar as it may be taken to mean that the relationship with the special figure differs qualitatively from that of other figures . Rather , current thinking postulates definite hierarchies of relationships . 
 Early experiences with caregivers gradually give rise to a system of thoughts , memories , beliefs , expectations , emotions , and behaviours about the self and others . This system , called the " internal working model of social relationships " , continues to develop with time and experience . Internal models regulate , interpret , and predict attachment @-@ related behaviour in the self and the attachment figure . As they develop in line with environmental and developmental changes , they incorporate the capacity to reflect and communicate about past and future attachment relationships . They enable the child to handle new types of social interactions ; knowing , for example , that an infant should be treated differently from an older child , or that interactions with teachers and parents share characteristics . This internal working model continues to develop through adulthood , helping cope with friendships , marriage , and parenthood , all of which involve different behaviours and feelings . The development of attachment is a transactional process . Specific attachment behaviours begin with predictable , apparently innate , behaviours in infancy . They change with age in ways that are determined partly by experiences and partly by situational factors . As attachment behaviours change with age , they do so in ways shaped by relationships . A child 's behaviour when reunited with a caregiver is determined not only by how the caregiver has treated the child before , but on the history of effects the child has had on the caregiver . 
 = = Attachment classification in children : The Strange Situation Protocol = = 
 The most common and empirically supported method for assessing attachment in infants ( 11 months @-@ 17 months ) is the Strange Situation Protocol , developed by Mary Ainsworth as a result of her careful in @-@ depth observations of infants with their mothers in Baltimore , USA ( see below ) . The Strange Situation Protocol is a research tool that was not intended for diagnostic purposes . While the procedure may be used to supplement clinical impressions , the resulting classifications should not be confused with the psychiatric diagnosis ' Reactive Attachment Disorder ( RAD ) ' . The clinical concept of RAD differs in a number of fundamental ways from the theory and research driven attachment classifications based on the Strange Situation Procedure . The idea that insecure attachments are synonymous with RAD is , in fact , not accurate and leads to ambiguity when formally discussing attachment theory as it has evolved in the research literature . This is not to suggest that the concept of RAD is without merit , but rather that the clinical and research conceptualizations of insecure attachment and attachment disorder are not synonymous . 
 The ' Strange Situation ' is a laboratory procedure used to assess infants ' pattern of attachment to their caregiver by introducing an unexpected threat , two brief separations from the mother followed by reunion . In the procedure , the mother and infant are placed in an unfamiliar playroom equipped with toys while a researcher films the procedure through a one @-@ way mirror . The procedure consists of eight sequential episodes in which the infant experiences both separation from and reunion with the mother as well as the presence of an unfamiliar person ( the Stranger ) . The protocol is conducted in the following format unless modifications are otherwise noted by a particular researcher : 
 Episode 1 : Mother ( or other familiar caregiver ) , Baby , Experimenter ( 30 seconds ) 
 Episode 2 : Mother , Baby ( 3 mins ) 
 Episode 3 : Mother , Baby , Stranger ( 3 mins ) 
 Episode 4 : Stranger , Baby ( 3 mins or less ) 
 Episode 5 : Mother , Baby ( 3 mins ) 
 Episode 6 : Baby Alone ( 3 mins or less ) 
 Episode 7 : Stranger , Baby ( 3 mins or less ) 
 Episode 8 : Mother , Baby ( 3 mins ) 
 Mainly on the basis of their reunion behaviour ( although other behaviors are taken into account ) in the Strange Situation Paradigm ( Ainsworth et al . , 1978 ; see below ) , infants can be categorized into three ' organized ' attachment categories : Group B ( later called ' secure ' ) , Group A ( later called ' anxious avoidant ' ) , and Group C ( later called ' anxious ambivalent ' ) . There are <unk> for each group ( see below ) . 
 Beginning in 1970 , a series of expansions were added to Ainsworth ’ s original patterns . They include the following : B4 ( 1970 ) , A / C ( 1985 ) D / disorganized ( 1986 ) , B5 ( 1988 , 1992 ) A + , C + , & Depressed ( 1992 , 2010 ) . At later ages , additional categories have been described . Each of these patterns reflects a different kind of attachment relationship of the infant with the mother / caregiver . An infant may have a different pattern of attachment to each parent as well as to alternate caregivers . Pattern of attachment is thus not a part of the infant , but is characteristic of the protective and comforting quality of a specific relationship . These attachment patterns are associated with behavioral patterns and can help further predict a child 's future personality . 
 = = Attachment patterns = = 
 " The strength of a child 's attachment behaviour in a given circumstance does not indicate the ' strength ' of the attachment bond . Some insecure children will routinely display very pronounced attachment behaviours , while many secure children find that there is no great need to engage in either intense or frequent shows of attachment behaviour . " 
 = = = Secure attachment = = = 
 A toddler who is securely attached to his or her parent ( or other familiar caregiver ) will explore freely while the caregiver is present , typically engages with strangers , is often visibly upset when the caregiver departs , and is generally happy to see the caregiver return . The extent of exploration and of distress are affected , however , by the child 's temperamental make @-@ up and by situational factors as well as by attachment status . A child 's attachment is largely influenced by their primary caregiver 's sensitivity to their needs . Parents who consistently ( or almost always ) respond to their child 's needs will create securely attached children . Such children are certain that their parents will be responsive to their needs and communications . 
 In the traditional Ainsworth et al . ( 1978 ) coding of the Strange Situation , secure infants are denoted as " Group B " infants and they are further <unk> as B1 , B2 , B3 , and B4 . Although these <unk> refer to different stylistic responses to the comings and goings of the caregiver , they were not given specific labels by Ainsworth and colleagues , although their descriptive behaviors led others ( including students of Ainsworth ) to devise a relatively ' loose ' terminology for these subgroups . B1 's have been referred to as ' secure @-@ reserved ' , B2 's as ' secure @-@ inhibited ' , B3 's as ' secure @-@ balanced ' , and B4 's as ' secure @-@ reactive ' . In academic publications however , the classification of infants ( if subgroups are denoted ) is typically simply " B1 " or " B2 " although more theoretical and review @-@ oriented papers surrounding attachment theory may use the above terminology . 
 Securely attached children are best able to explore when they have the knowledge of a secure base ( their caregiver ) to return to in times of need . When assistance is given , this bolsters the sense of security and also , assuming the parent 's assistance is helpful , educates the child in how to cope with the same problem in the future . Therefore , secure attachment can be seen as the most adaptive attachment style . According to some psychological researchers , a child becomes securely attached when the parent is available and able to meet the needs of the child in a responsive and appropriate manner . At infancy and early childhood , if parents are caring and attentive towards their children , those children will be more prone to secure attachment . 
 = = = Anxious @-@ ambivalent attachment = = = 
 Anxious @-@ ambivalent attachment is also misnamed as ' resistant attachment ' . In general , a child with an anxious @-@ ambivalent pattern of attachment will typically explore little ( in the Strange Situation ) and is often wary of strangers , even when the parent is present . When the mother departs , the child is often highly distressed . The child is generally ambivalent when she returns . The anxious @-@ ambivalent strategy is a response to unpredictably responsive caregiving , and the displays of anger ( ambivalent resistant ) or helplessness ( ambivalent passive ) towards the caregiver on reunion can be regarded as a conditional strategy for maintaining the availability of the caregiver by preemptively taking control of the interaction . 
 The C1 ( ambivalent resistant ) subtype is coded when : 
 " ... resistant behavior is particularly conspicuous . The mixture of seeking and yet resisting contact and interaction has an unmistakably angry quality and indeed an angry tone may characterize behavior in the <unk> episodes ... " 
 The C2 ( ambivalent passive ) subtype is coded when : 
 " Perhaps the most conspicuous characteristic of C2 infants is their passivity . Their exploratory behavior is limited throughout the SS and their interactive behaviors are relatively lacking in active initiation . Nevertheless , in the reunion episodes they obviously want proximity to and contact with their mothers , even though they tend to use signalling rather than active approach , and protest against being put down rather than actively resisting release ... In general the C2 baby is not as conspicuously angry as the C1 baby . " 
 Research done by McCarthy and Taylor ( 1999 ) , found that children with abusive childhood experiences were more likely to develop ambivalent attachments . The study also found that children with ambivalent attachments were more likely to experience difficulties in maintaining intimate relationships as adults . 
 = = = Anxious @-@ avoidant attachment = = = 
 An infant with an anxious @-@ avoidant pattern of attachment will avoid or ignore the caregiver — showing little emotion when the caregiver departs or returns . The infant will not explore very much regardless of who is there . Infants classified as anxious @-@ avoidant ( A ) represented a puzzle in the early 1970s . They did not exhibit distress on separation , and either ignored the caregiver on their return ( A1 subtype ) or showed some tendency to approach together with some tendency to ignore or turn away from the caregiver ( A2 subtype ) . Ainsworth and Bell theorised that the apparently unruffled behaviour of the avoidant infants was in fact a mask for distress , a hypothesis later evidenced through studies of the heart @-@ rate of avoidant infants . 
 Infants are depicted as anxious @-@ avoidant when there is : 
 " ... conspicuous avoidance of the mother in the reunion episodes which is likely to consist of ignoring her altogether , although there may be some pointed looking away , turning away , or moving away ... If there is a greeting when the mother enters , it tends to be a mere look or a smile ... Either the baby does not approach his mother upon reunion , or they approach in ' abortive ' fashions with the baby going past the mother , or it tends to only occur after much coaxing ... If picked up , the baby shows little or no contact @-@ maintaining behavior ; he tends not to cuddle in ; he looks away and he may squirm to get down . " 
 Ainsworth 's narrative records showed that infants avoided the caregiver in the stressful Strange Situation Procedure when they had a history of experiencing rebuff of attachment behaviour . The infant 's needs were frequently not met and the infant had come to believe that communication of emotional needs had no influence on the caregiver . Ainsworth 's student Mary Main theorised that avoidant behaviour in the Strange Situational Procedure should be regarded as " a conditional strategy , which paradoxically permits whatever proximity is possible under conditions of maternal rejection " by de @-@ emphasising attachment needs . Main proposed that avoidance has two functions for an infant whose caregiver is consistently unresponsive to their needs . Firstly , avoidant behaviour allows the infant to maintain a conditional proximity with the caregiver : close enough to maintain protection , but distant enough to avoid rebuff . Secondly , the cognitive processes organising avoidant behaviour could help direct attention away from the unfulfilled desire for closeness with the caregiver — avoiding a situation in which the child is overwhelmed with emotion ( ' disorganised distress ' ) , and therefore unable to maintain control of themselves and achieve even conditional proximity . 
 = = = Disorganized / disoriented attachment = = = 
 Ainsworth herself was the first to find difficulties in fitting all infant behaviour into the three classifications used in her Baltimore study . Ainsworth and colleagues sometimes observed " tense movements such as hunching the shoulders , putting the hands behind the neck and tensely cocking the head , and so on . It was our clear impression that such tension movements signified stress , both because they tended to occur chiefly in the separation episodes and because they tended to be prodromal to crying . Indeed , our hypothesis is that they occur when a child is attempting to control crying , for they tend to vanish if and when crying breaks through . " Such observations also appeared in the doctoral theses of Ainsworth 's students . Crittenden , for example , noted that one abused infant in her doctoral sample was classed as secure ( B ) by her undergraduate coders because her strange situation behavior was " without either avoidance or ambivalence , she did show stress @-@ related stereotypic <unk> throughout the strange situation . This pervasive behavior , however , was the only clue to the extent of her stress . " . Beginning in 1983 , Crittenden offered A / C and other new organized classifications ( see below ) . Drawing on records of behaviours discrepant with the A , B and C classifications , a fourth classification was added by Ainsworth 's colleague Mary Main . In the Strange Situation , the attachment system is expected to be activated by the departure and return of the caregiver . If the behaviour of the infant does not appear to the observer to be coordinated in a smooth way across episodes to achieve either proximity or some relative proximity with the caregiver , then it is considered ' disorganised ' as it indicates a disruption or flooding of the attachment system ( e.g. by fear ) . Infant behaviours in the Strange Situation Protocol coded as disorganised / disoriented include overt displays of fear ; contradictory behaviours or affects occurring simultaneously or sequentially ; stereotypic , asymmetric , misdirected or jerky movements ; or freezing and apparent dissociation . Lyons @-@ Ruth has urged , however , that it should be more widely " recognized that 52 % of disorganized infants continue to approach the caregiver , seek comfort , and cease their distress without clear ambivalent or avoidant behavior . " 
 There is rapidly growing interest in disorganized attachment from clinicians and policy @-@ makers as well as researchers . However , the disorganized / disoriented attachment ( D ) classification has been criticised by some for being too encompassing , including Ainsworth herself . In 1990 , Ainsworth put in print her blessing for the new ' D ' classification , though she urged that the addition be regarded as " open @-@ ended , in the sense that subcategories may be distinguished " , as she worried that too many different forms of behaviour might be treated as if they were the same thing . Indeed , the D classification puts together infants who use a somewhat disrupted secure ( B ) strategy with those who seem hopeless and show little attachment behaviour ; it also puts together infants who run to hide when they see their caregiver in the same classification as those who show an avoidant ( A ) strategy on the first reunion and then an ambivalent @-@ resistant ( C ) strategy on the second reunion . Perhaps responding to such concerns , George and Solomon have divided among indices of disorganized / disoriented attachment ( D ) in the Strange Situation , treating some of the behaviours as a ' strategy of desperation ' and others as evidence that the attachment system has been flooded ( e.g. by fear , or anger ) . Moreover , Crittenden argues that some behaviour classified as Disorganized / disoriented can be regarded as more ' emergency ' versions of the avoidant and / or ambivalent / resistant strategies , and function to maintain the protective availability of the caregiver to some degree . <unk> et al. have agreed that " even disorganised attachment behaviour ( simultaneous approach @-@ avoidance ; freezing , etc . ) enables a degree of proximity in the face of a frightening or unfathomable parent . " However , " the presumption that many indices of ' disorganisation ' are aspects of organised patterns does not preclude acceptance of the notion of disorganisation , especially in cases where the complexity and dangerousness of the threat are beyond children 's capacity for response . " For example , " Children placed in care , especially more than once , often have intrusions . In videos of the Strange Situation Procedure , they tend to occur when a rejected / neglected child approaches the stranger in an intrusion of desire for comfort , then loses muscular control and falls to the floor , overwhelmed by the intruding fear of the unknown , potentially dangerous , strange person . " 
 Main and Hesse found that most of the mothers of these children had suffered major losses or other trauma shortly before or after the birth of the infant and had reacted by becoming severely depressed . In fact , 56 % of mothers who had lost a parent by death before they completed high school subsequently had children with disorganized attachments . Subsequent studies , whilst emphasising the potential importance of unresolved loss , have qualified these findings . For example , Solomon and George found that unresolved loss in the mother tended to be associated with disorganised attachment in their infant primarily when they had also experienced an unresolved trauma in their life prior to the loss . 
 = = = Later patterns and the dynamic @-@ <unk> model = = = 
 Techniques have been developed to allow verbal ascertainment of the child 's state of mind with respect to attachment . An example is the " stem story " , in which a child is given the beginning of a story that raises attachment issues and asked to complete it . For older children , adolescents and adults , semi @-@ structured interviews are used in which the manner of relaying content may be as significant as the content itself . However , there are no substantially validated measures of attachment for middle childhood or early adolescence ( approximately 7 to 13 years of age ) . Some studies of older children have identified further attachment classifications . Main and Cassidy observed that disorganized behavior in infancy can develop into a child using caregiving @-@ controlling or punitive behaviour in order to manage a helpless or dangerously unpredictable caregiver . In these cases , the child 's behaviour is organised , but the behaviour is treated by researchers as a form of ' disorganization ' ( D ) since the hierarchy in the family is no longer organised according to parenting authority . 
 Patricia McKinsey Crittenden has elaborated classifications of further forms of avoidant and ambivalent attachment behaviour . These include the caregiving and punitive behaviours also identified by Main and Cassidy ( termed A3 and C3 respectively ) , but also other patterns such as compulsive compliance with the wishes of a threatening parent ( A4 ) . 
 Crittenden 's ideas developed from Bowlby 's proposal that " given certain adverse circumstances during childhood , the selective exclusion of information of certain sorts may be adaptive . Yet , when during adolescence and adulthood the situation changes , the persistent exclusion of the same forms of information may become maladaptive " . 
 Crittenden proposed that the basic components of human experience of danger are two kinds of information : 
 1 . ' Affective information ' – the emotions provoked by the potential for danger , such as anger or fear . Crittenden terms this " affective information " . In childhood this information would include emotions provoked by the unexplained absence of an attachment figure . Where an infant is faced with insensitive or rejecting parenting , one strategy for maintaining the availability of their attachment figure is to try to exclude from consciousness or from expressed behaviour any emotional information that might result in rejection . 
 2 . Causal or other sequentially @-@ ordered knowledge about the potential for safety or danger . In childhood this would include knowledge regarding the behaviours that indicate an attachment figure 's availability as a secure haven . If knowledge regarding the behaviours that indicate an attachment figure 's availability as a secure haven is subject to segregation , then the infant can try to keep the attention of their caregiver through clingy or aggressive behaviour , or alternating combinations of the two . Such behaviour may increase the availability of an attachment figure who otherwise displays inconsistent or misleading responses to the infant 's attachment behaviours , suggesting the unreliability of protection and safety . 
 Crittenden proposes that both kinds of information can be split off from consciousness or behavioural expression as a ' strategy ' to maintain the availability of an attachment figure ( See section above on Disorganized / disoriented attachment for distinction of " Types " ) : " Type A strategies were hypothesized to be based on reducing perception of threat to reduce the disposition to respond . Type C was hypothesized to be based on heightening perception of threat to increase the disposition to respond . " Type A strategies split off emotional information about feeling threatened and type C strategies split off temporally @-@ sequenced knowledge about how and why the attachment figure is available . By contrast , type B strategies effectively utilise both kinds of information without much distortion . For example : a toddler may have come to depend upon a type C strategy of tantrums in working to maintain the availability of an attachment figure whose inconsistent availability has led the child to distrust or distort causal information about their apparent behaviour . This may lead their attachment figure to get a clearer grasp on their needs and the appropriate response to their attachment behaviours . Experiencing more reliable and predictable information about the availability of their attachment figure , the toddler then no longer needs to use coercive behaviours with the goal of maintaining their caregiver 's availability and can develop a secure attachment to their caregiver since they trust that their needs and communications will be heeded . 
 = = = Significance of patterns = = = 
 Research based on data from longitudinal studies , such as the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care and the Minnesota Study of Risk and <unk> from Birth to Adulthood , and from cross @-@ sectional studies , consistently shows associations between early attachment classifications and peer relationships as to both quantity and quality . Lyons @-@ Ruth , for example , found that " for each additional withdrawing behavior displayed by mothers in relation to their infant 's attachment cues in the Strange Situation Procedure , the likelihood of clinical referral by service providers was increased by 50 % . " There is an extensive body of research demonstrating a significant association between attachment organizations and children 's functioning across multiple domains . Early insecure attachment does not necessarily predict difficulties , but it is a liability for the child , particularly if similar parental behaviours continue throughout childhood . Compared to that of securely attached children , the adjustment of insecure children in many spheres of life is not as soundly based , putting their future relationships in jeopardy . Although the link is not fully established by research and there are other influences besides attachment , secure infants are more likely to become socially competent than their insecure peers . Relationships formed with peers influence the acquisition of social skills , intellectual development and the formation of social identity . Classification of children 's peer status ( popular , neglected or rejected ) has been found to predict subsequent adjustment . Insecure children , particularly avoidant children , are especially vulnerable to family risk . Their social and behavioural problems increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in parenting . However , an early secure attachment appears to have a lasting protective function . As with attachment to parental figures , subsequent experiences may alter the course of development . Studies have suggested that infants with a high @-@ risk for Autism Spectrum Disorders ( ASD ) may express attachment security differently from infants with a low @-@ risk for ASD . Behavioral problems and social competence in insecure children increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in quality of parenting and the degree of risk in the family environment . Some authors have questioned the idea that a taxonomy of categories representing a qualitative difference in attachment relationships can be developed . Examination of data from 1 @,@ 139 15 @-@ month @-@ olds showed that variation in attachment patterns was continuous rather than grouped . This criticism introduces important questions for attachment typologies and the mechanisms behind apparent types . However , it has relatively little relevance for attachment theory itself , which " neither requires nor predicts discrete patterns of attachment . " There is some evidence that gender differences in attachment patterns of adaptive significance begin to emerge in middle childhood . Insecure attachment and early psychosocial stress indicate the presence of environmental risk ( for example poverty , mental illness , instability , minority status , violence ) . Environmental risk can cause insecure attachment , while also favouring the development of strategies for earlier reproduction . Different reproductive strategies have different adaptive values for males and females : Insecure males tend to adopt avoidant strategies , whereas insecure females tend to adopt anxious / ambivalent strategies , unless they are in a very high risk environment . Adrenarche is proposed as the endocrine mechanism underlying the reorganization of insecure attachment in middle childhood . 
 = = Changes in attachment during childhood and adolescence = = 
 Childhood and adolescence allows the development of an internal working model useful for forming attachments . This internal working model is related to the individual 's state of mind which develops with respect to attachment generally and explores how attachment functions in relationship dynamics based on childhood and adolescent experience . The organization of an internal working model is generally seen as leading to more stable attachments in those who develop such a model , rather than those who rely more on the individual 's state of mind alone in forming new attachments . 
 Age , cognitive growth , and continued social experience advance the development and complexity of the internal working model . Attachment @-@ related behaviours lose some characteristics typical of the infant @-@ toddler period and take on age @-@ related tendencies . The preschool period involves the use of negotiation and bargaining . For example , four @-@ year @-@ olds are not distressed by separation if they and their caregiver have already negotiated a shared plan for the separation and reunion . 
 Ideally , these social skills become incorporated into the internal working model to be used with other children and later with adult peers . As children move into the school years at about six years old , most develop a goal @-@ corrected partnership with parents , in which each partner is willing to compromise in order to maintain a gratifying relationship . By middle childhood , the goal of the attachment behavioural system has changed from proximity to the attachment figure to availability . Generally , a child is content with longer separations , provided contact — or the possibility of physically reuniting , if needed — is available . Attachment behaviours such as clinging and following decline and self @-@ reliance increases . By middle childhood ( ages 7 – 11 ) , there may be a shift toward mutual <unk> of secure @-@ base contact in which caregiver and child negotiate methods of maintaining communication and supervision as the child moves toward a greater degree of independence . 
 = = Attachment in adults = = 
 Attachment theory was extended to adult romantic relationships in the late 1980s by Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver . Four styles of attachment have been identified in adults : secure , anxious @-@ preoccupied , dismissive @-@ avoidant and fearful @-@ avoidant . These roughly correspond to infant classifications : secure , insecure @-@ ambivalent , insecure @-@ avoidant and disorganized / disoriented . 
 Securely attached adults tend to have positive views of themselves , their partners and their relationships . They feel comfortable with intimacy and independence , balancing the two . Anxious @-@ preoccupied adults seek high levels of intimacy , approval and responsiveness from partners , becoming overly dependent . They tend to be less trusting , have less positive views about themselves and their partners , and may exhibit high levels of emotional expressiveness , worry and impulsiveness in their relationships . <unk> @-@ avoidant adults desire a high level of independence , often appearing to avoid attachment altogether . They view themselves as self @-@ sufficient , invulnerable to attachment feelings and not needing close relationships . They tend to suppress their feelings , dealing with rejection by distancing themselves from partners of whom they often have a poor opinion . Fearful @-@ avoidant adults have mixed feelings about close relationships , both desiring and feeling uncomfortable with emotional closeness . They tend to mistrust their partners and view themselves as unworthy . Like dismissive @-@ avoidant adults , fearful @-@ avoidant adults tend to seek less intimacy , suppressing their feelings . 
 Two main aspects of adult attachment have been studied . The organization and stability of the mental working models that underlie the attachment styles is explored by social psychologists interested in romantic attachment . Developmental psychologists interested in the individual 's state of mind with respect to attachment generally explore how attachment functions in relationship dynamics and impacts relationship outcomes . The organisation of mental working models is more stable while the individual 's state of mind with respect to attachment fluctuates more . Some authors have suggested that adults do not hold a single set of working models . Instead , on one level they have a set of rules and assumptions about attachment relationships in general . On another level they hold information about specific relationships or relationship events . Information at different levels need not be consistent . Individuals can therefore hold different internal working models for different relationships . 
 There are a number of different measures of adult attachment , the most common being self @-@ report questionnaires and coded interviews based on the Adult Attachment Interview . The various measures were developed primarily as research tools , for different purposes and addressing different domains , for example romantic relationships , parental relationships or peer relationships . Some classify an adult 's state of mind with respect to attachment and attachment patterns by reference to childhood experiences , while others assess relationship behaviours and security regarding parents and peers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Maternal deprivation = = = 
 The early thinking of the object relations school of psychoanalysis , particularly Melanie Klein , influenced Bowlby . However , he profoundly disagreed with the prevalent psychoanalytic belief that infants ' responses relate to their internal fantasy life rather than real @-@ life events . As Bowlby formulated his concepts , he was influenced by case studies on disturbed and delinquent children , such as those of William Goldfarb published in 1943 and 1945 . 
 Bowlby 's contemporary René Spitz observed separated children 's grief , proposing that " <unk> " results were brought about by inappropriate experiences of early care . A strong influence was the work of social worker and psychoanalyst James Robertson who filmed the effects of separation on children in hospital . He and Bowlby collaborated in making the 1952 documentary film A Two @-@ Year Old Goes to the Hospital which was instrumental in a campaign to alter hospital restrictions on visits by parents . 
 In his 1951 monograph for the World Health Organisation , Maternal Care and Mental Health , Bowlby put forward the hypothesis that " the infant and young child should experience a warm , intimate , and continuous relationship with his mother in which both find satisfaction and enjoyment " , the lack of which may have significant and irreversible mental health consequences . This was also published as Child Care and the Growth of Love for public consumption . The central proposition was influential but highly controversial . At the time there was limited empirical data and no comprehensive theory to account for such a conclusion . Nevertheless , Bowlby 's theory sparked considerable interest in the nature of early relationships , giving a strong impetus to , ( in the words of Mary Ainsworth ) , a " great body of research " in an extremely difficult , complex area . Bowlby 's work ( and Robertson 's films ) caused a virtual revolution in hospital visiting by parents , hospital provision for children 's play , educational and social needs and the use of residential nurseries . Over time , orphanages were abandoned in favour of foster care or family @-@ style homes in most developed countries . 
 Following the publication of Maternal Care and Mental Health , Bowlby sought new understanding from the fields of evolutionary biology , ethology , developmental psychology , cognitive science and control systems theory . He formulated the innovative proposition that mechanisms underlying an infant 's emotional tie to the caregiver ( s ) emerged as a result of evolutionary pressure . He set out to develop a theory of motivation and behaviour control built on science rather than Freud 's psychic energy model . Bowlby argued that with attachment theory he had made good the " deficiencies of the data and the lack of theory to link alleged cause and effect " of Maternal Care and Mental Health . 
 = = = = Ethology = = = = 
 Bowlby 's attention was first drawn to ethology when he read Konrad Lorenz 's 1952 publication in draft form ( although Lorenz had published earlier work ) . Other important influences were ethologists Nikolaas Tinbergen and Robert Hinde . Bowlby subsequently collaborated with Hinde . In 1953 Bowlby stated " the time is ripe for a unification of psychoanalytic concepts with those of ethology , and to pursue the rich vein of research which this union suggests . " Konrad Lorenz had examined the phenomenon of " imprinting " , a behaviour characteristic of some birds and mammals which involves rapid learning of recognition by the young , of a conspecific or comparable object . After recognition comes a tendency to follow . 
 Certain types of learning are possible , respective to each applicable type of learning , only within a limited age range known as a critical period . Bowlby 's concepts included the idea that attachment involved learning from experience during a limited age period , influenced by adult behaviour . He did not apply the imprinting concept in its entirety to human attachment . However , he considered that attachment behaviour was best explained as instinctive , combined with the effect of experience , stressing the readiness the child brings to social interactions . Over time it became apparent there were more differences than similarities between attachment theory and imprinting so the analogy was dropped . Ethologists expressed concern about the adequacy of some research on which attachment theory was based , particularly the generalisation to humans from animal studies . Schur , discussing Bowlby 's use of ethological concepts ( pre @-@ 1960 ) commented that concepts used in attachment theory had not kept up with changes in ethology itself . Ethologists and others writing in the 1960s and 1970s questioned and expanded the types of behaviour used as indications of attachment . Observational studies of young children in natural settings provided other behaviours that might indicate attachment ; for example , staying within a predictable distance of the mother without effort on her part and picking up small objects , bringing them to the mother but not to others . Although ethologists tended to be in agreement with Bowlby , they pressed for more data , objecting to psychologists writing as if there were an " entity which is ' attachment ' , existing over and above the observable measures . " Robert Hinde considered " attachment behaviour system " to be an appropriate term which did not offer the same problems " because it refers to postulated control systems that determine the relations between different kinds of behaviour . " 
 = = = = Psychoanalysis = = = = 
 Psychoanalytic concepts influenced Bowlby 's view of attachment , in particular , the observations by Anna Freud and Dorothy Burlingham of young children separated from familiar caregivers during World War II . However , Bowlby rejected psychoanalytical explanations for early infant bonds including " drive theory " in which the motivation for attachment derives from gratification of hunger and libidinal drives . He called this the " cupboard @-@ love " theory of relationships . In his view it failed to see attachment as a psychological bond in its own right rather than an instinct derived from feeding or sexuality . Based on ideas of primary attachment and Neo @-@ Darwinism , Bowlby identified what he saw as fundamental flaws in psychoanalysis : the overemphasis of internal dangers rather than external threat , and the view of the development of personality via linear phases with regression to fixed points accounting for psychological distress . Bowlby instead posited that several lines of development were possible , the outcome of which depended on the interaction between the organism and the environment . In attachment this would mean that although a developing child has a propensity to form attachments , the nature of those attachments depends on the environment to which the child is exposed . 
 From early in the development of attachment theory there was criticism of the theory 's lack of congruence with various branches of psychoanalysis . Bowlby 's decisions left him open to criticism from well @-@ established thinkers working on similar problems . 
 = = = = Internal working model = = = = 
 The philosopher Kenneth Craik had noted the ability of thought to predict events . He stressed the survival value of and natural selection for this ability . This internal working model allows a person to try out alternatives mentally , using knowledge of the past while responding to the present and future . Bowlby applied Craik 's ideas to attachment , when other psychologists were applying these concepts to adult perception and cognition . 
 An infant 's internal working model is developed in response to the infant 's experience of the outcomes of his or her proximity @-@ seeking behaviors . If the caregiver is accepting of these proximity @-@ seeking behaviors and grants access , the infant develops a secure organization ; if the caregiver consistently denies the infant access , an avoidant organization develops ; and if the caregiver inconsistently grants access , an ambivalent organization develops . 
 A parent 's internal working model that is operative in the attachment relationship with her infant can be accessed by examining the parent 's mental representations . Recent research has demonstrated that the quality of maternal attributions as markers of maternal mental representations can be associated with particular forms of maternal psychopathology and can be altered in a relative short time @-@ period by targeted psychotherapeutic intervention . 
 = = = = Developments = = = = 
 In the 1970s , problems with viewing attachment as a trait ( stable characteristic of an individual ) rather than as a type of behaviour with organising functions and outcomes , led some authors to the conclusion that attachment behaviours were best understood in terms of their functions in the child 's life . This way of thinking saw the secure base concept as central to attachment theory 's logic , coherence , and status as an organizational construct . Following this argument , the assumption that attachment is expressed identically in all humans cross @-@ culturally was examined . The research showed that though there were cultural differences , the three basic patterns , secure , avoidant and ambivalent , can be found in every culture in which studies have been undertaken , even where communal sleeping arrangements are the norm . 
 Selection of the secure pattern is found in the majority of children across cultures studied . This follows logically from the fact that attachment theory provides for infants to adapt to changes in the environment , selecting optimal behavioural strategies . How attachment is expressed shows cultural variations which need to be ascertained before studies can be undertaken ; for example <unk> infants are greeted with a handshake rather than a hug . Securely attached <unk> infants anticipate and seek this contact . There are also differences in the distribution of insecure patterns based on cultural differences in child @-@ rearing practices . The scholar Michael Rutter in 1974 studied the importance of distinguishing between the consequences of attachment deprivation upon intellectual retardation in children and lack of development in the emotional growth in children . Rutter 's conclusion was that a careful delineation of maternal attributes needed to be identified and differentiated for progress in the field to continue . 
 The biggest challenge to the notion of the universality of attachment theory came from studies conducted in Japan where the concept of <unk> plays a prominent role in describing family relationships . Arguments revolved around the appropriateness of the use of the Strange Situation procedure where <unk> is practiced . Ultimately research tended to confirm the universality hypothesis of attachment theory . Most recently a 2007 study conducted in Sapporo in Japan found attachment distributions consistent with global norms using the six @-@ year Main and Cassidy scoring system for attachment classification . 
 Critics in the 1990s such as J. R. Harris , Steven Pinker and Jerome Kagan were generally concerned with the concept of infant determinism ( nature versus nurture ) , stressing the effects of later experience on personality . Building on the work on temperament of Stella Chess , Kagan rejected almost every assumption on which attachment theory etiology was based . Kagan argued that heredity was far more important than the transient developmental effects of early environment . For example , a child with an inherently difficult temperament would not elicit sensitive behavioural responses from a caregiver . The debate spawned considerable research and analysis of data from the growing number of longitudinal studies . Subsequent research has not borne out Kagan 's argument , possibly suggesting that it is the caregiver 's behaviours that form the child 's attachment style , although how this style is expressed may differ with the child 's temperament . Harris and Pinker put forward the notion that the influence of parents had been much exaggerated , arguing that socialisation took place primarily in peer groups . H. Rudolph Schaffer concluded that parents and peers had different functions , fulfilling distinctive roles in children 's development . Psychoanalyst / psychologists Peter <unk> and Mary Target have attempted to bring attachment theory and psychoanalysis into a closer relationship through cognitive science as mentalization . <unk> , or theory of mind , is the capacity of human beings to guess with some accuracy what thoughts , emotions and intentions lie behind behaviours as subtle as facial expression . It has been speculated that this connection between theory of mind and the internal working model may open new areas of study , leading to alterations in attachment theory . Since the late 1980s , there has been a developing rapprochement between attachment theory and psychoanalysis , based on common ground as elaborated by attachment theorists and researchers , and a change in what psychoanalysts consider to be central to psychoanalysis . Object relations models which emphasise the autonomous need for a relationship have become dominant and are linked to a growing recognition within psychoanalysis of the importance of infant development in the context of relationships and internalised representations . Psychoanalysis has recognised the formative nature of a child 's early environment including the issue of childhood trauma . A <unk> based exploration of the attachment system and an accompanying clinical approach has emerged together with a recognition of the need for measurement of outcomes of interventions . 
 One focus of attachment research has been the difficulties of children whose attachment history was poor , including those with extensive non @-@ parental child care experiences . Concern with the effects of child care was intense during the so @-@ called " day care wars " of the late 20th century , during which some authors stressed the deleterious effects of day care . As a result of this controversy , training of child care professionals has come to stress attachment issues , including the need for relationship @-@ building by the assignment of a child to a specific care @-@ giver . Although only high @-@ quality child care settings are likely to provide this , more infants in child care receive attachment @-@ friendly care than in the past . A natural experiment permitted extensive study of attachment issues as researchers followed thousands of Romanian orphans adopted into Western families after the end of the Nicolae Ceauşescu regime . The English and Romanian <unk> Study Team , led by Michael Rutter , followed some of the children into their teens , attempting to unravel the effects of poor attachment , adoption , new relationships , physical problems and medical issues associated with their early lives . Studies of these <unk> , whose initial conditions were shocking , yielded reason for optimism as many of the children developed quite well . Researchers noted that separation from familiar people is only one of many factors that help to determine the quality of development . Although higher rates of atypical insecure attachment patterns were found compared to native @-@ born or early @-@ adopted samples , 70 % of later @-@ adopted children exhibited no marked or severe attachment disorder behaviours . 
 Authors considering attachment in non @-@ Western cultures have noted the connection of attachment theory with Western family and child care patterns characteristic of Bowlby 's time . As children 's experience of care changes , so may attachment @-@ related experiences . For example , changes in attitudes toward female sexuality have greatly increased the numbers of children living with their never @-@ married mothers or being cared for outside the home while the mothers work . This social change has made it more difficult for childless people to adopt infants in their own countries . There has been an increase in the number of older @-@ child adoptions and adoptions from third @-@ world sources in first @-@ world countries . <unk> and births to same @-@ sex couples have increased in number and gained legal protection , compared to their status in Bowlby 's time . Issues have been raised to the effect that the dyadic model characteristic of attachment theory cannot address the complexity of real @-@ life social experiences , as infants often have multiple relationships within the family and in child care settings . It is suggested these multiple relationships influence one another reciprocally , at least within a family . 
 Principles of attachment theory have been used to explain adult social behaviours , including mating , social dominance and hierarchical power structures , in @-@ group identification , group coalitions , and negotiation of reciprocity and justice . Those explanations have been used to design parental care training , and have been particularly successful in the design of child abuse prevention programmes . 
 While a wide variety of studies have upheld the basic tenets of attachment theory , research has been inconclusive as to whether self @-@ reported early attachment and later depression are demonstrably related . 
 = = Biology of attachment = = 
 In addition to longitudinal studies , there has been <unk> research on the biology of attachment . Research has begun to include neural development , behaviour genetics and temperament concepts . Generally , temperament and attachment constitute separate developmental domains , but aspects of both contribute to a range of interpersonal and <unk> developmental outcomes . Some types of temperament may make some individuals susceptible to the stress of unpredictable or hostile relationships with caregivers in the early years . In the absence of available and responsive caregivers it appears that some children are particularly vulnerable to developing attachment disorders . 
 In <unk> research on attachment , the two main areas studied have been autonomic responses , such as heart rate or respiration , and the activity of the hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenal axis . Infants ' physiological responses have been measured during the Strange Situation procedure looking at individual differences in infant temperament and the extent to which attachment acts as a moderator . There is some evidence that the quality of caregiving shapes the development of the neurological systems which regulate stress . 
 Another issue is the role of inherited genetic factors in shaping attachments : for example one type of polymorphism of the gene coding for the D2 dopamine receptor has been linked to anxious attachment and another in the gene for the 5 @-@ HT2A serotonin receptor with avoidant attachment . This suggests that the influence of maternal care on attachment security is not the same for all children . One theoretical basis for this is that it makes biological sense for children to vary in their susceptibility to rearing influence . 
 = = Practical applications = = 
 As a theory of <unk> development , attachment theory has implications and practical applications in social policy , decisions about the care and welfare of children and mental health . 
 = = = Child care policies = = = 
 Social policies concerning the care of children were the driving force in Bowlby 's development of attachment theory . The difficulty lies in applying attachment concepts to policy and practice . In 2008 C.H. Zeanah and colleagues stated , " Supporting early child @-@ parent relationships is an increasingly prominent goal of mental health practitioners , community @-@ based service providers and policy makers ... Attachment theory and research have generated important findings concerning early child development and spurred the creation of programs to support early child @-@ parent relationships . " 
 Historically , attachment theory had significant policy implications for hospitalised or institutionalised children , and those in poor quality daycare . Controversy remains over whether non @-@ maternal care , particularly in group settings , has deleterious effects on social development . It is plain from research that poor quality care carries risks but that those who experience good quality alternative care cope well although it is difficult to provide good quality , individualised care in group settings . 
 Attachment theory has implications in residence and contact disputes , and applications by foster parents to adopt foster children . In the past , particularly in North America , the main theoretical framework was psychoanalysis . Increasingly attachment theory has replaced it , thus focusing on the quality and continuity of caregiver relationships rather than economic well @-@ being or automatic precedence of any one party , such as the biological mother . Rutter noted that in the UK , since 1980 , family courts have shifted considerably to recognize the complications of attachment relationships . Children tend to have attachment relationships with both parents and often grandparents or other relatives . Judgements need to take this into account along with the impact of step @-@ families . Attachment theory has been crucial in highlighting the importance of social relationships in dynamic rather than fixed terms . 
 Attachment theory can also inform decisions made in social work , especially in humanistic social work ( Petru <unk> ) , and court processes about foster care or other placements . Considering the child 's attachment needs can help determine the level of risk posed by placement options . Within adoption , the shift from " closed " to " open " adoptions and the importance of the search for biological parents would be expected on the basis of attachment theory . Many researchers in the field were strongly influenced by it . 
 = = = Clinical practice in children = = = 
 Although attachment theory has become a major scientific theory of <unk> development with one of the widest research lines in modern psychology , it has , until recently , been less used in clinical practice . 
 This may be partly due to lack of attention paid to clinical application by Bowlby himself and partly due to broader meanings of the word ' attachment ' used amongst practitioners . It may also be partly due to the mistaken association of attachment theory with the pseudoscientific interventions misleadingly known as " attachment therapy " . 
 = = = = Prevention and treatment = = = = 
 In 1988 , Bowlby published a series of lectures indicating how attachment theory and research could be used in understanding and treating child and family disorders . His focus for bringing about change was the parents ' internal working models , parenting behaviours and the parents ' relationship with the therapeutic <unk> . Ongoing research has led to a number of individual treatments and prevention and intervention programmes . They range from individual therapy to public health programmes to interventions designed for foster caregivers . For infants and younger children , the focus is on increasing the responsiveness and sensitivity of the caregiver , or if that is not possible , placing the child with a different caregiver . An assessment of the attachment status or caregiving responses of the caregiver is invariably included , as attachment is a two @-@ way process involving attachment behaviour and caregiver response . Some programmes are aimed at foster carers because the attachment behaviours of infants or children with attachment difficulties often do not elicit appropriate caregiver responses . Modern prevention and intervention programmes have proven successful . 
 = = = = Reactive attachment disorder and attachment disorder = = = = 
 One atypical attachment pattern is considered to be an actual disorder , known as reactive attachment disorder or RAD , which is a recognised psychiatric diagnosis ( ICD @-@ 10 <unk> / 2 and DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR 313 @.@ 89 ) . Against common misconception , this is not the same as ' disorganised attachment ' . The essential feature of reactive attachment disorder is markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social relatedness in most contexts that begins before age five years , associated with gross pathological care . There are two subtypes , one reflecting a disinhibited attachment pattern , the other an inhibited pattern . RAD is not a description of insecure attachment styles , however problematic those styles may be ; instead , it denotes a lack of age @-@ appropriate attachment behaviours that may appear to resemble a clinical disorder . Although the term " reactive attachment disorder " is now popularly applied to perceived behavioural difficulties that fall outside the DSM or ICD criteria , particularly on the Web and in connection with the pseudo @-@ scientific attachment therapy , " true " RAD is thought to be rare . 
 " Attachment disorder " is an ambiguous term , which may be used to refer to reactive attachment disorder or to the more problematical insecure attachment styles ( although none of these are clinical disorders ) . It may also be used to refer to proposed new classification systems put forward by theorists in the field , and is used within attachment therapy as a form of unvalidated diagnosis . One of the proposed new classifications , " secure base distortion " has been found to be associated with caregiver <unk> . 
 = = = Clinical practice in adults and families = = = 
 As attachment theory offers a broad , far @-@ reaching view of human functioning , it can enrich a therapist 's understanding of patients and the therapeutic relationship rather than dictate a particular form of treatment . Some forms of psychoanalysis @-@ based therapy for adults — within relational psychoanalysis and other approaches — also incorporate attachment theory and patterns . In the first decade of the 21st century , key concepts of attachment were incorporated into existing models of behavioural couple therapy , multidimensional family therapy and couple and family therapy . Specifically attachment @-@ centred interventions have been developed , such as attachment @-@ based family therapy and emotionally focused therapy . 
 Attachment theory and research laid the foundation for the development of the understanding of " mentalization " or reflective functioning and its presence , absence or distortion in psychopathology . The dynamics of an individual 's attachment organization and their capacity for mentalization or conceptualization can play a crucial role in the capacity to be helped by treatment . 
 = Forensic chemistry = 
 Forensic chemistry is the application of chemistry and its subfield , forensic toxicology , in a legal setting . A forensic chemist can assist in the identification of unknown materials found at a crime scene . Forensic specialists in this field have a wide array of different methods and instruments to help identify unknown substances . Specific methods common to the field include high @-@ performance liquid chromatography , gas chromatography @-@ mass spectrometry , atomic absorption spectroscopy , Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy , and thin layer chromatography . The range of different methods is important due to the destructive nature of some instruments and the number of possible unknown substances that can be found at a scene . If possible , nondestructive methods should always be attempted first to preserve evidence and to determine the best protocol for when a destructive method is used . 
 Along with other forensic specialists , forensic chemists commonly testify in court as expert witnesses regarding their findings . The work performed by forensic chemists is bound by a set of standards that have been proposed by various agencies and governing bodies , including the Scientific Working Group on the Analysis of Seized Drugs . In addition to the standard operating procedures proposed by the group , specific agencies have their own standards regarding the quality assurance and quality control of their results and their instruments . In order to ensure the accuracy of what they are reporting , forensic chemists routinely check and verify that their instruments are working correctly and are still able to detect and measure various quantities of different substances . 
 = = Role in investigations = = 
 Forensic chemists ' investigations can provide directions for investigators to look in , and they can confirm or refute investigators ' suspicions . In cases where an unknown material is found at the scene , the identification of the substance can tell investigators what to look for during their search . For example , during fire investigations , forensic chemists can determine if an accelerant such as gasoline or kerosene was used ; if so , this suggests that the fire was intentionally set . Forensic chemists can also narrow down the suspect list to people who would have access to the substance used in a crime . For example , in explosive investigations , the identification of RDX or C @-@ 4 would indicate a military connection as those substances are military grade explosives . On the other hand , the identification of TNT would create a wider suspect list , since it is used in both the military and by demolition companies . During poisoning investigations , the detection of specific poisons can give detectives an idea of what to look for when they are interviewing potential suspects . For example , a death caused by ricin would tell investigators to look for the precursors to ricin , the seeds of the castor oil plant , while a death from strychnine would tell investigators to look for a strychnine tree or online purchases of the seeds . 
 Forensic chemists also help to confirm or refute investigators ' suspicions in drug or alcohol cases . Since the instruments used by forensic chemists can detect substances down to a very low level , the quantity of that substance is relevant to the investigation . This can be important in crimes such as driving under the influence as there is a specific blood alcohol content cutoff where penalties begin or increase . In suspected overdose cases , the quantity of the drug found in the person 's system can confirm or rule out overdose as the cause of death . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Throughout history , the availability of poisons allowed individuals to commit murder with relative ease . Arsenic , nightshade , hemlock , strychnine , and curare were all historically used poisons . With no method to accurately determine if a particular chemical was present , poisoners were frequently never punished for their crimes . It was not until the early 19th century that chemists were able to effectively detect poisons for the first time . In 1836 , one of the first major contributions to forensic chemistry was introduced by James Marsh . He created the Marsh test for arsenic detection which was subsequently used successfully in a murder trial . It was also during this time that forensic toxicology began to be recognized as a distinct field . Mathieu Orfila , the " father of toxicology " , made great advancements to the field during the early 19th century . He helped develop tests that could determine the presence of blood and was one of the first to use microscopy in the analysis of blood and semen . Orfila was also the first chemist to successfully classify different chemicals into categories such as corrosives , narcotics , and <unk> . 
 The next advancement in the detection of poisons came in 1850 when a valid method for detecting vegetable alkaloids in human tissue was created by chemist Jean Stas . Stas ' method was quickly adopted and used successfully in court to convict Count Hippolyte <unk> de <unk> of murdering his brother @-@ in @-@ law by nicotine poisoning . Stas was able to successfully isolate the alkaloid from the organs of the victim proving Count <unk> murdered his brother @-@ in @-@ law . Stas 's protocol was subsequently altered to incorporate tests for caffeine , quinine , morphine , strychnine , atropine , and opium . 
 The wide range of instrumentation for forensic chemical analysis also started during this time period . In 1859 , chemist Robert Bunsen and physicist Gustav Kirchhoff invented the first spectroscope . Their experiments with spectroscopy showed that specific substances created a unique spectrum when exposed to a specific wavelength of light . Using spectroscopy , the two scientists were able to identify substances based on their spectrum , providing a method of identification for unknown materials . Another crucial advancement in the field was invented in 1906 by botanist Mikhail <unk> : he developed paper chromatography , an early predecessor to thin layer chromatography , in order to separate and examine the plant proteins that make up chlorophyll . The ability to separate mixtures into their individual components allows forensic chemists to examine the parts of an unknown material against a database of known products . By matching the retention factors for the separated components with known values , materials can be identified . Over time , chromatography techniques have become more sophisticated with the introduction of liquid and gas chromatography . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 Modern forensic chemists rely on numerous instruments in order to identify unknown materials found at a crime scene . The 20th century saw many advancements in technology that allowed chemists to detect smaller amounts of material more accurately . The first major advancement in this century came during 1930s with the invention of a spectrometer that could measure the signal produced with infrared ( IR ) light . Early IR spectrometers used a <unk> and could only measure light absorption in a very narrow wavelength band . It was not until the coupling of an interferometer with an IR spectrometer in 1949 by Peter Fellgett that the complete infrared spectrum could be measured at once . Fellgett also used the Fourier transform , a mathematical method that can break down a signal into the individual frequencies that make it up , to make sense of the enormous amount of data received from the complete infrared analysis of a material . Since then , Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ( FTIR ) instruments have become critical in the forensic analysis of unknown material because they are nondestructive and extremely quick to use . Spectroscopy was further advanced in 1955 with the invention of the modern atomic absorption ( AA ) spectrophotometer by Alan Walsh . AA analysis can detect specific elements that make up a sample along with their concentrations , allowing for the easy detection of heavy metals such as arsenic and cadmium . 
 Advancements in the field of chromatography arrived in 1953 with the invention of the gas chromatograph by Anthony T. James and Archer John Porter Martin , allowing for the separation of volatile liquid mixtures with components which have similar boiling points . <unk> liquid mixtures could be separated with liquid chromatography ; however substances with similar retention times could not be resolved until the invention of high @-@ performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) by Csaba Horváth in 1970 . Modern HPLC instruments are capable of detecting and resolving substances whose concentrations are as low as parts per trillion . 
 One of the most important advancements in forensic chemistry came in 1955 with the invention of the gas chromatography @-@ mass spectrometry ( GC @-@ MS ) by Fred <unk> and Roland <unk> . The coupling of a gas chromatograph with a mass spectrometer allowed for the identification of a wide range of substances . GC @-@ MS analysis is widely considered the " gold standard " for forensic analysis due to its sensitivity and versatility along with its ability to quantify the amount of substance present . 
 = = Methods = = 
 Forensic chemists rely on a multitude of instruments in order to identify unknown substances found at a scene . Different methods can be used to determine the identity of the same substance , and it is up to the examiner to determine which method will produce the best results . Certain aspects that forensic chemists must be aware of when performing an examination are the length of time a specific instrument will take to examine a substance and the destructive nature of that instrument . If possible , nondestructive methods should always be attempted first in order to preserve the evidence for further examination . <unk> techniques can also be used to narrow down the possibilities , making it more likely that the correct method will be used the first time when a destructive method is used . 
 = = = Spectroscopy = = = 
 The two main standalone spectroscopy techniques for forensic chemistry are FTIR and AA spectroscopy . FTIR is a nondestructive process that uses infrared light to identify a substance . The attenuated total reflectance sampling technique eliminates the need for substances to be prepared before analysis . The combination of <unk> and zero preparation makes ATR FTIR analysis a quick and easy first step in the analysis of unknown substances . To facilitate the positive identification of the substance , FTIR instruments are loaded with databases that can be searched for known spectra that match the unknown 's spectra . However , FTIR analysis of mixtures , while not impossible , presents specific difficulties due to the cumulative nature of the response . When analyzing an unknown that contains more than one substance , the resulting spectra will be a combination of the individual spectra of each component . While common mixtures have known spectra on file , novel mixtures can be difficult to resolve , making FTIR an unacceptable means of identification . However , the instrument can be used to determine the general chemical structures present , allowing forensic chemists to determine the best method for analysis with other instruments . For example , a stretch of alkyl groups will result in a peak between 2 @,@ 950 and 2 @,@ 850 <unk> ( cm − 1 ) . 
 Atomic absorption spectroscopy ( AAS ) is a destructive technique that is able to determine the elements that make up the analyzed sample . AAS performs this analysis by subjecting the sample to an extremely high heat source , breaking the atomic bonds of the substance , leaving free atoms . Once atomized , radiation in the form of light is passed through the sample forcing the atoms to jump to a higher energy state . Forensic chemists can test for each element by using a corresponding wavelength of light that forces that element 's atoms to a higher energy state during the analysis . For this reason , and due to the destructive nature of this method , AAS should be used as a confirmatory technique after earlier , preliminary , tests have indicated the presence of a specific element in the sample . The concentration of the element in the sample is proportional to the amount of light absorbed when compared to a blank sample . AAS is useful in cases of suspected heavy metal poisoning such as with arsenic , lead , mercury , and cadmium . Determining the concentration of the substance in the sample can determine if heavy metals were the cause of death . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Spectroscopy techniques are useful when the sample being tested is pure , or a very common mixture . When an unknown mixture is being analyzed it must be broken down into its individual parts . <unk> techniques can be used to break apart mixtures into their components allowing for each part to be analyzed separately . Thin layer chromatography ( TLC ) is a quick alternative to more complex chromatography methods . TLC can be used to analyze inks and dyes by extracting the individual components . This can be used to investigate notes or fibers left at the scene since each company 's product is slightly different and those differences can be seen with TLC . The only limiting factor with TLC analysis is the necessity for the components to be soluble in whatever solution is used to carry the components up the analysis plate . This solution is called the mobile phase . The forensic chemist can compare unknowns with known standards by looking at the distance each component traveled . This distance , when compared to the starting point , is known as the retention factor ( Rf ) for each extracted component . If each Rf value matches a known sample , that is an indication of the unknown 's identity . 
 High @-@ performance liquid chromatography can be used to extract individual components from a mixture dissolved in a solution . HPLC is used for nonvolatile mixtures that would not be suitable for gas chromatography . This is useful in drug analysis where the pharmaceutical is a combination drug since the components would separate , or elute , at different times allowing for the verification of each component . The <unk> from the HPLC column are then fed into various detectors that can further analyze the substances . The most common type of detector is an ultraviolet @-@ visible spectrometer while the most discerning detector is a mass spectrometer . The choice of which detector a lab uses depends on its funding and the precision needed for the type of work it performs . 
 Gas chromatography ( GC ) performs the same function as liquid chromatography , but it is used for volatile mixtures . In forensic chemistry , the most common GC instruments use mass spectrometry as their detector . GC @-@ MS can be used in investigations of arson , poisoning , and explosions in order to determine exactly what was used . In theory , GC @-@ MS instruments can detect substances whose concentrations are in the <unk> ( 10 − 15 ) range . However , in practice , due to signal @-@ to @-@ noise ratios and other limiting factors , such as the age of the individual parts of the instrument , the practical detection limit for GC @-@ MS is in the picogram ( 10 − 12 ) range . GC @-@ MS is also capable of quantifying substances which can be used by forensic chemists to determine the effect the substance would have on an individual . GC @-@ MS instruments need around 1 @,@ 000 times more of the substance to quantify the amount than they need simply to detect it ; the limit of quantification is typically in the nanogram ( 10 − 9 ) range . 
 = = Forensic toxicology = = 
 Forensic toxicology is the study of the pharmacodynamics , or what a substance does to the body , and pharmacokinetics , or what the body does to the substance . In order to accurately determine the effect a particular drug has on the human body , forensic toxicologists must be aware of various levels of tolerance that an individual can build up as well as the therapeutic index for various pharmaceuticals . <unk> are tasked with determining whether any toxin found in a body was the cause of an incident , contributed to the incident , or was at too low a level to have had an effect . While the determination of the specific toxin can be time consuming due to the number of different substances that can cause injury or death , certain clues can narrow down the possibilities . For example , carbon monoxide poisoning would result in bright red blood while death from hydrogen sulfide would cause the brain to have a green hue . 
 <unk> are also aware of the different metabolites that a specific drug could break down into inside the body . For example , a toxicologist can confirm that a person took heroin by the presence in a sample of 6 @-@ <unk> , which only comes from the breakdown of heroin . The constant creation of new drugs , both legal and illicit , forces toxicologists to keep themselves apprised of new research and methods to test for these novel substances . The stream of new formulations means that a negative test result does not necessarily rule out drugs . In order to avoid detection , illicit drug manufacturers frequently change the chemicals ' structure slightly . These compounds still have the same effect on the body but are not picked up with an instrumentation database search . As new compounds are discovered , tests are created and entered into the instrument 's library . For this reason , toxicologists study the different symptoms specific drug classes can have on a person . Even if the test comes back negative , symptoms can present cause for a further search . Substances , and their residues , found during this search can be tested and compared to the original sample , creating a new method to be stored for later use . 
 = = Standards = = 
 In order to maintain a high level of professionalism within the forensic fields , guidelines have been set up by various governing bodies regarding the standards that should be followed by practicing forensic scientists . For forensic chemists , the Scientific Working Group for the Analysis of Seized Drugs ( SWGDRUG ) presents recommendations for the quality assurance and quality control of tested materials . In the identification of unknown samples , protocols have been grouped into three categories based on the possibility for a false positives . Instruments and protocols in category A are considered the best for uniquely identifying an unknown material , followed by categories B and then C. In order to ensure the accuracy of identifications SWGDRUG recommends that multiple tests using different instruments be performed on each sample , and that one category A technique and at least one other technique be used . If a category A technique is not available , or the forensic chemist decides not to use one , SWGDRUG recommends that at least three techniques be used , two of which must be from category B. Combination instruments , such as GC @-@ MS , are considered two separate tests as long as the results are compared to known values individually . For example , the GC elution times would be compared to known values along with the MS spectra . If both of those match a known substance , no further tests are needed . 
 Standards and controls are necessary in the quality control of the various instruments used to test samples . Due to the nature of their work in the legal system , chemists must ensure that their instruments are working accurately . To do this , known controls are tested consecutively with unknown samples . By comparing the readouts of the controls with their profiles the instrument can be confirmed to have been working properly at the time the unknowns were tested . Standards are also used to validate the instrument 's limit of detection and quantification for various common substances . Calculated quantities must fall within the range tested by the standards in order to be confirmed . If they fall outside of this range the instrument must be tested to ensure that it can accurately measure that quantity . 
 = William Beverley = 
 William Beverley ( 1696 – 1756 ) was an 18th century legislator , civil servant , planter and landowner in the Colony of Virginia . Born in Virginia , Beverley — the son of planter and historian Robert Beverley , Jr . ( c . 1667 – 1722 ) and his wife , Ursula Byrd Beverley ( 1681 – 1698 ) — was the scion of two prominent Virginia families . He was the nephew of Peter Beverley ( 1668 – 1728 ) , Speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses , and the grandson of wealthy Virginia planter William Byrd I ( 1652 – 1704 ) of Westover Plantation . Beverley 's mother died shortly before her 17th birthday ( when he was a toddler ) , and he was sent to England . 
 After his education in England he began a career in public service as the Clerk of Court for Essex County ( 1716 – 1745 ) and in the Virginia House of Burgesses , representing Orange ( 1736 – 1738 ) and Essex Counties ( 1742 – 1749 ) . Beverley also served on the Virginia Governor 's Council in 1750 . 
 He inherited a large estate after his father 's death in 1722 , amassing significant landholdings throughout Virginia from which he received revenue from tobacco production and rent from 119 tenants . His development of the 118 @,@ 941 @-@ acre ( 481 @.@ 34 km2 ) Beverley Manor tract in present @-@ day Augusta County encouraged further settlement west of the Blue Ridge Mountains . Beverley was commissioned by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , for an expedition with Peter Jefferson to establish the Fairfax Line of the Northern Neck Proprietary . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Beverley was born in 1696 , the only child of Robert Beverley , Jr . ( c . 1667 – 1722 ) and his wife , Ursula Byrd Beverley ( 1681 – 1698 ) . Robert Beverley , Jr . , of the Beverley Park plantation in King and Queen County , was a wealthy planter who participated in the Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition and was the first native @-@ born historian of colonial Virginia ; he wrote the History of the Present State of Virginia in 1705 , the first known history of Virginia . William Beverley 's uncle , Peter ( 1668 – 1728 ) , was Speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses . His mother , the daughter of William Byrd I ( 1652 – 1704 ) and Maria <unk> Byrd of Westover Plantation , was affectionately known as " Little Nutty " by her family . She died on October 31 , 1698 , shortly before her 17th birthday , and was buried in Jamestown . Through his paternal grandmother , Margaret Boyd Beverley , William Beverley was a great @-@ grandson of Scottish noble James Boyd , 9th Lord Boyd ( died 1654 ) . After his mother 's death Beverley was sent to England , where he was educated . 
 = = Political career = = 
 After his education was completed , Beverley returned to Virginia and began a career in public service . He was the Clerk of Court for Essex County for 29 years ( 1716 – 1745 ) , when the first Essex County courthouse was on Beverley 's Blandfield estate . Beverley was also an Essex County judge from 1720 to 1740 . He was a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses in Williamsburg , elected to represent Orange ( 1736 – 1738 ) and Essex Counties ( 1742 – 1749 ) . During his first term as Orange County burgess , Beverley served with Robert Green . He represented Essex County with James <unk> until 1747 , after which he served with William <unk> until 1749 . Beverley 's appointment as county lieutenant and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the militias of Augusta and Orange Counties in 1741 was confirmed in the Orange County Court on November 3 , 1741 . In 1750 he was appointed to the Virginia Governor 's Council , the upper house of Virginia 's colonial legislature , replacing John Custis IV ( father @-@ in @-@ law of Martha Dandridge Custis ) . Beverley 's appointment to the Governor 's Council fulfilled an ambition which his father was unable to achieve . 
 = = Agricultural pursuits and landholdings = = 
 Beverley inherited a large estate after his father 's death in 1722 , and continued speculating in land . He received income from tobacco production and rent from tenant farmers . Although by 1745 Beverley 's estate produced 57 hogsheads ( about 26 @,@ 000 kg ) of tobacco , the income from his 119 tenants in Caroline , Culpeper , Orange and King and Queen Counties was far more lucrative . 
 After his marriage to Elizabeth Bland about 1725 Beverley lived at Blandfield , a 3 @,@ 450 @-@ acre ( 14 @.@ 0 km2 ) estate along the Rappahannock River in Saint Anne 's Parish of Essex County which he named for his wife 's family . Blandfield was granted by patent to his grandfather , Robert Beverley , Sr. , in 1683 as part of a 100 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 400 km2 ) tract . Construction of Beverley 's first , Georgian @-@ style mansion at Blandfield ( which is no longer standing ) probably began around 1750 . Blandfield had wharves on the Rappahannock from which the plantation 's tobacco was shipped across the Atlantic . 
 In addition to agriculture and land tenancy , Beverley received additional revenue from land sales in western Virginia . The easing of restrictive land laws by the Virginia colonial government allowed him to establish his own terms with settlers on his lands , and he initially sold parcels in the Shenandoah Valley . On September 6 , 1736 , Beverley , John and Richard Randolph and John Robinson were deeded a land patent by Sir William Gooch , 1st Baronet on behalf of the crown for a 118 @,@ 941 @-@ acre ( 481 @.@ 34 km2 ) tract at the headwaters of the South Fork Shenandoah River in present @-@ day Augusta County . On September 16 the <unk> and Robinson transferred sole ownership of the tract to Beverley , who planned to survey and sell it ; the tract , which became known as Beverley Manor , encouraged further settlement west of the Blue Ridge Mountains . He commissioned James Patton , a ship captain from Ulster , to recruit Irish and Scotch @-@ Irish immigrants to purchase and settle his Augusta County land . On August 8 , 1737 , Beverley wrote to Patton , " I should be very glad if you could import families enough to take the whole off from our hands at a reasonable price and tho ' the order mentions families from <unk> [ sic ] , yet families from Ireland will do as well " . In 1738 he authorized John Lewis of northern Ireland , the father of Thomas Lewis , to show and sell his land in Augusta County and donated a lot in Staunton for the construction of the Augusta County Courthouse ten years later . 
 By 1743 Beverley wished to receive a land grant of 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) in the Northern Neck Proprietary on the Shenandoah and the South Branch Potomac rivers from Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , planning to raise horses and cattle and divide the Northern Neck land for tenants . He and others , including John Robinson and his father ( also named John ) , purchased 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 km2 ) on the Greenbrier River in 1745 for speculation and settlement . Beverley 's land sales totaled 42 @,@ 119 acres ( 170 @.@ 45 km2 ) by 1744 , and by his death in 1756 he had sold 80 @,@ 455 acres ( 325 @.@ 59 km2 ) and made a profit of £ 2 @,@ 647 . 
 According to his 1756 will , Beverley owned land in Essex , Isle of Wight , King and Queen and Prince William Counties ; 14 @,@ 174 acres ( 57 @.@ 36 km2 ) in Caroline County , including the <unk> and Beverley Chace properties and land lots in Port Royal ; a land tract of 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 km2 ) , known as <unk> , in Culpeper County , and lots in the towns of Falmouth and Fredericksburg . According to historian Turk McCleskey , the land grants to Beverley from the Governor 's Council on behalf of the crown " reflected the Council 's recognition both of his elite connections and of his demonstrated leadership abilities " . 
 = = Business pursuits = = 
 Beverley owned and operated a tavern at Caroline Court House in Caroline County , and participated in trade with the West Indies . He wrote to a Barbadian merchant in 1739 , " I am very conveniently situated for the sale of Negroes , rum , sugar & <unk> [ sic ] " . Beverley sold Barbadian salt in Virginia and shipped Virginia maize to Barbados . A partial inventory of his estate in 1745 listed 65 slaves on four plantations , cattle , hogs , sheep and horses . In 1763 Beverley 's son , Robert , reported that his father 's estate earned " about £ 1800 Currency , all plantation expenses deducted " . 
 = = Fairfax Line expedition = = 
 In 1746 Beverley was commissioned by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , to represent him in an expedition with Peter Jefferson ( father of Thomas Jefferson ) through western Virginia to mark the Fairfax Line of the Northern Neck Proprietary , supervising the work of Jefferson and the other surveyors . The following year , he and the other participants in the Fairfax Line expedition reconvened at Jefferson 's Tuckahoe plantation to draft a map ( which became known as the Fry @-@ Jefferson Map ) of the Northern Neck Proprietary . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Beverley married Elizabeth Bland ( born May 26 , 1706 ) around 1725 . Elizabeth was the daughter of Richard Bland and Elizabeth Randolph Bland of Jordan 's Point , and the sister of statesman Richard Bland . Beverley and his wife had four children : one son and three daughters — Robert Beverley ( 1740 – 1800 ) , Elizabeth Beverley Mills , Ursula Beverley Fitzhugh and Anna Beverley . Beverley took an active role in his children 's education , traveling to England in 1750 to enroll his son , his nephew Robert Munford III and another young man at Wakefield Grammar School . 
 Three of Beverley 's children married into prominent Virginia families . Robert married Maria Carter , daughter of Landon Carter and Maria Byrd Carter of Sabine Hall , Richmond County . Elizabeth married James Mills , a merchant in Hobbs Hole , and Ursula married William Fitzhugh . Anna was unmarried at Beverley 's death in 1756 . 
 Beverley , an Anglican , had a close relationship with Anglican minister and parson Robert Rose of Saint Anne 's Parish . Blandfield was in the parish , and his family attended Anglican ( and later Episcopal ) services at a church near the estate . On April 3 , 1750 Beverley provided a lot in Staunton for the Anglican Augusta Parish Church , which was completed in 1763 and succeeded by the present Trinity Episcopal Church . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After Beverley 's death in 1756 , his son Robert was his designated heir at law . His wife Elizabeth inherited his plantations in Essex County , including the Blandfield estate and his " slaves , cattle , horses , hogs , and sheep " on the plantations . Beverley divided a large part of his fortune among his children and their spouses , bequeathing £ 500 to his daughter Elizabeth and leaving her husband , James Mills , " Money & slaves " valued at £ 1 @,@ 000 . Ursula also received £ 500 and her husband , William Fitzhugh , £ 1 @,@ 000 . Anna was unmarried at the time of Beverley 's death ; his will instructed Robert to maintain his sister until her marriage or her twenty @-@ first birthday , when she would receive her inheritance . Robert inherited the remainder of the plantations and other lands , including the Beverley Manor tract in Augusta County and lots in the town of Staunton . Beverley Manor , an Augusta County magisterial district south of Staunton , is a namesake of the Beverley Manor patent . After his mother 's death Robert also inherited Beverley 's Essex County properties , including Blandfield ( where he built the present Georgian mansion on the site of his father 's residence between 1769 and 1773 ) . Blandfield was owned by Beverley 's descendants until its 1983 sale . 
 = Turtle Rock Studios = 
 Turtle Rock Studios is an American video game developer founded in March 2002 by Michael Booth . It was acquired by Valve Corporation in 2008 , but was re @-@ founded in 2011 as an independent company by Phil Robb and Chris Ashton . Turtle Rock Studios is involved in the creation of original titles as well as the provision of consulting services to the digital entertainment industry . 
 The company 's most notable games are the first Left 4 Dead , which was published by Valve , and Evolve , which was originally set to be published by THQ but was later published by 2K Games . The founder of the company had worked for Westwood Pacific , and assisted in the development of the Counter @-@ Strike series . The company expanded from six employees to more than seventy staff members in 2011 to 2014 , and opened a subsidiary company called Turtle Rock Garage in 2011 , which specialized in developing casual games . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prior to founding = = = 
 Turtle Rock Studios was initially founded by Michael Booth . Prior to the company 's establishment , Booth , Phil Robb and Chris Ashton worked for Westwood Pacific and participated in the development of real @-@ time strategy games like Command & Conquer : Red Alert . Ashton , who had also worked for Presto Studios , was impressed by Counter @-@ Strike , which was a popular mod of Half @-@ Life , and decided to join the mod team as a texture artist . Eventually , Seattle @-@ based Valve Corporation , the publisher of Half @-@ Life , purchased the mod , and Ashton left Westwood to join Valve . Robb and Booth remained at Westwood Studios and worked on Command & Conquer : Yuri 's Revenge and Command & Conquer : Generals , but left the company after it was acquired by Electronic Arts , as Robb considered EA 's acquisition of Westwood had resulted in the studio losing all its personality . 
 = = = Turtle Rock 1 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Turtle Rock Studios was officially founded in 2002 . The team of about six people had limited resources so set up work space in Booth 's garage . The name " Turtle Rock " derived from the name of a neighbourhood where Booth lived . The team eventually expanded the studio and rented an office , and continued the development of Condition Zero . The game was officially released in 2004 . Satisfied with the work done by Turtle Rock , Valve continued to contract them to work on the Xbox version of Counter @-@ Strike , as well as the next installment of the series , Counter @-@ Strike : Source , and Half @-@ Life 2 : Deathmatch . Upon the release of Source , the company wanted to work on a new game , and gained support from Valve . The team later chose to design a first @-@ person wizard combat game . 
 As the team had developed only competitive multiplayer games before , they wanted to design a game that encouraged and supported co @-@ operative gameplay between players ; a game that would allow family and friends to play together instead of against each other , citing Secret of Mana as an example . The team decided to use source code from Counter @-@ Strike to develop a mod called Terror @-@ Strike , which is a scenario where players fight against bots , which are equipped only with knives and act like zombies . They also changed the texture of the game to create a gritty , dark atmosphere . It was not conceived as a full @-@ budget project at that time . Meanwhile , the wizard combat game was scrapped as the team considered the project over @-@ complicated and " geeky " ; they decided to use the cancelled project as a prototype to work on the zombie game . The idea of developing a zombie game grew after the team watched 28 Days Later , a critically acclaimed zombie film . The film helped the team brainstorm ideas for their zombie game . After that , the team decided to remove all the Counter @-@ Strike content and started developing the zombie game , in which players have to plant zombie bait and kill all the zombies present in the level . The focus later shifted to evacuating and surviving in a zombie @-@ infested area . The project was later presented to Valve , which helped the game 's funding and publishing . The project 's name was Left 4 Dead , and its development began in 2005 . The title was officially announced on November 20 , 2006 , and was released in November 2008 for Microsoft Windows and the Xbox 360 . 
 = = = Valve South = = = 
 On January 10 , 2008 , before the release of Left 4 Dead , Valve Corporation announced that it had purchased Turtle Rock in an effort to expand the company 's console market . Gabe Newell , founder and president of Valve Corporation , added that it was an easy decision for the company to make , as they had high expectations for Left 4 Dead and considered themselves having a long @-@ term relationship with Turtle Rock . After being acquired by Valve , Turtle Rock served as Valve 's in @-@ house satellite development team , and was renamed Valve South . 
 With the establishment of Valve South , nine to eleven employees moved to work at Valve 's headquarters in Seattle . After their departure , Valve felt that the size of the team at Valve South was too small to allow it to operate as a triple A studio , and that coordination between the two studios was difficult as they were physically far apart from each other . Meanwhile , Turtle Rock felt that the team 's communication with Valve was lacking , and they were dissatisfied with " Valve Time " and the slow progression of projects . As a result , Newell proposed that Turtle Rock to be split from Valve , and that Valve South be shut down after the shipment of Left 4 Dead . Valve retained the rights to the Left 4 Dead franchise , while allowing the name " Turtle Rock " and its logo to be used again by the original team . This news was later confirmed by Doug Lombardi of Valve on June 3 , 2009 . 
 = = = Turtle Rock 2 @.@ 0 = = = 
 After being formally closed , the remaining team members including Ashton , and Robb decided to restart Turtle Rock as an independent company on March 17 , 2010 . On the same day , Turtle Rock Studios put up a new website announcing they had reformed and were once again working on video games . They released an iPhone automotive maintenance app named Garage Buddy and began hiring for a full @-@ scale project . Upon the company 's reestablishment , Booth left the company , and Robb and Ashton were requested to share the position of studio head . Ashton initially declined it , but eventually accepted and partnered with Robb to lead the studio . Both of them considered themselves developers not managers , and they found the task of running Turtle Rock a tough challenge . At that time , there were about 13 staff members in the studio . The team later rented a warehouse and re @-@ designed it to accommodate them . 
 Despite being shut down by Valve , Turtle Rock still maintained a relatively close working relationship with it . The studio was contracted by Valve to work on the post @-@ launch content for Left 4 Dead and its sequel Left 4 Dead 2 , which was developed in @-@ house by Valve , and worked on Counter @-@ Strike : Global Offensive during its early phase of development . Eventually , the studio decided to split away from the two franchises to work on something new . On June 2 , 2010 , Turtle Rock Studios announced the formation of a new division within Turtle Rock called Turtle Rock Garage , a small division based solely on casual games . On September 22 , 2010 , Digital Development Management announced they were representing Turtle Rock Studios to find publishers for their games . 
 The concept of their next project had begun prior to the development of Left 4 Dead . Inspired by the asymmetrical mode of Left 4 Dead , and hunting games like Cabela 's Big Game Hunter , the team wanted to create a game where prey could strike back at hunters . The concept eventually became Evolve , and was the company 's next full @-@ scale project . Turtle Rock pitched the game to multiple publishers including Valve . Most of them were not supportive of the idea of an asymmetrical multiplayer video game ; Valve was also not interested in the project . These companies thought that Turtle Rock was too small to handle a Triple @-@ A project . Publisher THQ decided to accept the game and help with its funding . THQ 's then president Danny Bilson , and Jason Rubin , were very enthusiastic about the idea of having an asymmetrical multiplayer game like Evolve . Rubin once hoped that Turtle Rock could develop a free @-@ to @-@ play business model for the game . This idea was later scrapped , and resulted in some significant changes in terms of the game 's gameplay and cast . On May 26 , 2011 , THQ officially announced they would be publishing Turtle Rock 's next major title . On June 10 , 2011 , THQ described Turtle Rock 's next title as " wild " . 
 At that time , THQ had already been in a financial crisis that had begun in 2010 , and eventually declared bankruptcy on December 19 , 2012 . Their game , Evolve , was listed , alongside other unannounced titles from : Relic Entertainment , Vigil Games , and THQ Studios Montreal in court documents filed by THQ . With THQ unable to continue its publishing and funding roles , an auction was held for other publishers to acquire these titles . Publishers interested in the game visited Turtle Rock Studio to see their " secret project " . The company 's founders felt frustrated , and Rubin later suggested that Turtle Rock bid $ 250 @,@ 000 for its own project , which Ashton described as " what [ they ] had in the bank " . However , they were outbid by Take @-@ Two Interactive , which paid $ 11 million to acquire the game and to secure the rights to the entire franchise . According to Turtle Rock , they were " super excited " to work with Take @-@ Two . The game was set to be published under Take @-@ Two 's publishing label 2K Games , and was formally introduced on January 7 , 2014 by gaming magazine Game Informer . During the game 's development , the team 's size expanded to 75 staff members . Originally the game was to be released in October 2014 , however 2K later delayed the release date to allow Turtle Rock to further polish the game . Evolve was eventually released worldwide on February 10 , 2015 , for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One platforms . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 In May 2016 , Turtle Rock announced that the company was working on a new intellectual property . The studio would also consider releasing titles via Steam 's early access program , which allows players to provide feedback on unfinished games or products as they are being developed . 
 = = List of games = = 
 Turtle Rock Studios is best known for their work on Valve Corporation 's Counter @-@ Strike and Left 4 Dead franchises . Works include : 
 = = = Left 4 Dead = = = 
 Left 4 Dead is a first @-@ person shooter survival horror video game released in November 2008 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 . Turtle Rock led the game 's development , with assistance provided by publisher Valve . It puts emphasis on co @-@ operative gameplay , in which players must fight against zombies in order to complete levels . In addition , the game features an asymmetrical multiplayer mode called Versus mode , in which players fight against a zombie which is controlled by another player . The game was built atop the most advanced version of the Source Engine available at the time and introduced version 2 of Turtle Rock 's AI technology , which had since been updated from the AI used for the bots in Condition Zero . The game was released on Microsoft Windows and the Xbox 360 in November 2008 . The game received critical acclaim . The PC version of the game received an 89 out of 100 from Metacritic , a review aggregator . The title was thought to have redefined co @-@ operative gameplay . The success of Left 4 Dead led Valve to develop Left 4 Dead 2 , the next installment in the series . Alongside its sequel , the franchise had collectively sold 12 million copies as of October 1 , 2012 . 
 = = = Evolve = = = 
 Evolve was Turtle Rock 's next major project after Left 4 Dead . Published by 2K Games and powered by CryEngine 3 , the title is an asymmetrical multiplayer game which pits four players , who play as hunters in a first @-@ person perspective , against a player who plays as a monster in a third @-@ person view . An alpha version of the game was released on January 15 , 2015 . The full version was released on February 10 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . While the game received generally positive reviews , its extensive list of downloadable content available at launch caused controversy . Nevertheless , the game shipped 2 @.@ 5 million copies as of May 18 , 2015 , and was considered as another " permanent IP " by owner Take @-@ Two Interactive . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 The team 's founders enjoy playing co @-@ operative multiplayer games and are passionate about them , as they allow players to play alongside each other instead of against each other . In addition , they found it more fun than the typical competitive multiplayer experience . However , they thought that this type of game was not well @-@ developed , and often encouraged players to complete objectives alone . As a result , the company decided to develop a game which tasks players to deploy strategy and work with other players , leading to the development of both Left 4 Dead and Evolve . 
 The company 's management and staff enjoy a close relationship . Any staff member can play a game , provide feedback , suggest improvements , and even criticize it , regardless of their position . The team thought that they were " open " with their games . As a result , instead of holding a press conference to explain the game to critics , they choose to invite people to play it in the studio . This practice allows them to see " people leaving with a smile " , enabling them to gauge the real reactions of players and to see whether the game is welcomed or not . They also hope that through early access , they can introduce their games to a wide audience , and share the experience with the community prior to the game 's official launch . 
 = Kill Switch ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Kill Switch " is the eleventh episode of the fifth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered in the United States on the Fox network on February 15 , 1998 . It was written by William Gibson and Tom Maddox and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Kill Switch " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 1 , being watched by 18 @.@ 04 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics , with several complimenting Mulder 's virtual experience . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully become targets of a rogue AI capable of the worst kind of torture while investigating the strange circumstances of the death of a reclusive computer genius rumored to have been researching artificial intelligence . 
 " Kill Switch " was co @-@ written by cyberpunk pioneers William Gibson and Tom Maddox . The two eventually wrote another episode for the show : season seven 's " First Person Shooter " . " Kill Switch " was written after Gibson and Maddox approached the series , offering to write an episode . Reminiscent of the " dark visions " of filmmaker David Cronenberg , the episode contained " many obvious pokes and prods at high @-@ end academic cyberculture . " In addition , " Kill Switch " contained several scenes featuring elaborate explosives and digital effects , including one wherein a computer @-@ animated Scully fights nurses in a virtual hospital . " Kill Switch " deals with various " Gibsonian " themes , including : alienation , paranoia , artificial intelligence , and transferring one 's consciousness into cyberspace , among others . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a diner in Washington , D.C. , a man tries to access files on a laptop computer , but is repeatedly denied . Meanwhile , several drug dealers receive anonymous phone calls about the whereabouts of their competitors ; they are told that they are at the same diner . Two U.S. Marshals receive a similar phone call about an escaped prisoner . The drug dealers arrive in pairs as the man attempts to gain access to the files . Just as he does , the two Marshals appear and order everyone onto the floor , causing a shootout . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) arrive and identify the bodies of the drug dealers . Mulder also identifies the man with the laptop as Donald Gelman , " a Silicon Valley folk hero " who aspired to create an artificial intelligence . Mulder takes Gelman 's laptop and finds a CD inside . When he puts it into the car stereo , it plays " Twilight Time " by The Platters . However , the agents take it to the Lone Gunmen , who discover that the disc contains a large quantity of encrypted data . The trio , however , are unable to decipher it . Upon Scully 's suggestion , they access Gelman 's e @-@ mail account and find a message sent by someone named Invisigoth , saying that someone named David is missing . 
 The message contains a BIC code for an intermodal shipping container , which Mulder and Scully locate . When they approach it , a woman attempts to flee but is captured by Scully . The container turns out to be full of state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art computer equipment . The woman , the " Invisigoth " ( Kristin Lehman ) they 've been looking for , warns the agents that a laser @-@ armed Defense Department satellite has pinpointed their location . They quickly leave the area as the container is destroyed . Invisigoth , whose real name turns out to be Esther Nairn , tells the agents that Gelman succeeded in creating an artificial intelligence . She reveals that once the AI locates an enemy , it destroys them using the satellite . According to Esther , Gelman was creating " Kill Switch " , a virus that could destroy the AI . However , the AI learned of Gelman 's plans and killed him by luring the drug dealers and the police to the diner . The only way to destroy the AI is to find the computer on which it is stored . It turns out that David is Esther 's friend , and also worked with Gelman . 
 Mulder uses a government source to find a secret T3 line in Fairfax County , Virginia , one that the AI uses to access the Internet . He also finds the trailer that is connected to the T3 line . Meanwhile , Esther forces Scully to drive to David 's house . However , they find that the house has been destroyed . Esther admits that she and David had been planning to transfer their consciousness into cyberspace to enter the AI . Gelman , however , thought the idea was too dangerous . Esther also admits that she and David were in love , and were having an affair behind Gelman 's back . Meanwhile , Mulder finds much computer hardware inside the trailer . He also finds David ’ s dead body , with a virtual reality helmet on his head . Suddenly , Mulder is constrained by moving cables and wires , and experiences a strange vision in which he is in a hospital where nurses threaten to amputate his limbs unless he reveals Kill Switch 's location . Meanwhile , the AI locates Scully and Esther driving near a swing bridge . They become trapped on the bridge after the AI manipulates its drawing mechanism , causing Scully to persuade Esther to throw the laptop into the water . Just as it hits the water it is destroyed by the defense satellite 's laser strike . 
 Scully and Esther find the trailer in which Mulder is trapped . Esther reveals that she still has the CD on which the Kill Switch is stored . Scully puts it into the drive into the AI , which then releases Mulder . She gets him out of the trailer , but Esther stays inside . She uses the satellite to locate the trailer 's position , causing the missile to destroy the trailer , killing her . Mulder tells Scully that Esther 's consciousness probably joined the AI . Later , the Lone Gunmen get a strange message on their computer reading , " Bite me " . Just before the credits , we see a trailer in North Platte , Nebraska similar to the one where the AI lived , with automatic security cameras monitoring a boy who approaches the trailer to retrieve a football . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by acclaimed cyberpunk novelist William Gibson , together with fellow science fiction author Tom Maddox . The authors and long @-@ time friends had discussed various collaborations before and approached the production company with an offer to write an episode . The result was " Kill Switch " , which first aired on February 15 , 1998 . The episode made frequent appearances in reruns and its success encouraged Gibson to continue working in television , resulting in his writing of a second episode " First Person Shooter " — again in collaboration with Maddox — which aired on FOX two years later on February 27 , 2000 . " Kill Switch " deals with recurrent Gibsonian themes : alienation , paranoia , the will to survive , emergent technology , the evolution of artificial intelligence , virtual reality , and transferring one 's consciousness into cyberspace . The Vancouver Sun author Alex Strachan later compared many of the episode 's themes to that of Gibson 's books , most notably in his novels Neuromancer , Mona Lisa Overdrive , and Virtual Light . 
 " Kill Switch " was written outside the mytharc of the series as a standalone story , which Gibson intended to be reminiscent of the " dark visions " of filmmaker David Cronenberg and to contain " many obvious pokes and prods at high @-@ end academic cyberculture . " Gibson 's initial idea for the episode eventually evolved into the episode 's final act . This was later combined with Maddox 's idea of a deserted house with shuttered windows , surrounded by a chain @-@ link fence . The episode involved the merging of human and artificial intelligence on the World Wide Web , a concept that had been floating around cyber @-@ futuristic circles at the time . The episode 's rewriting and revision process took a significant amount of time and it was over a year before the episode was completed due to other priorities that series creator Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz had . When they were finally available , they made some revisions to the script , including upping Esther 's attitude and Mulder and Scully 's reactions to her . A scene involving Scully trying on a fake nose ring was deleted from the script . Gibson originally started watching the series on the suggestion of his daughter , 15 years old at the time . During filming , Gibson spent a majority of his time on the set only " because [ his ] daughter insisted on being there . " 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz , " Kill Switch " was the single most expensive episode that was filmed in Vancouver . In addition , the episode took a total of 22 days to film . The episode 's bridge scenes were filmed at the Westham Island Bridge , which spans Canoe Pass , British Columbia . The location had been discovered by Carter during a technical survey for the prior fifth season episode " Schizogeny " . Because the bridge was the sole means to access part of the Fraser River farming community in the area , filming was heavily restricted . Logistical issues with the bridge itself , such as restrictions on how many people could stand on the bridge at a time , also posed troubles for filming . Permission to film the scene wherein Esther throws the laptop into the river and it is subsequently vaporized by a laser strike from an orbiting weapons platform satellite required thirty days to obtain . The abandoned house that Mulder discovers was filmed at a historical landmark known locally as " Read House " . 
 The episode contained several scenes featuring elaborate explosives . The scene featuring a missile destroying a shipping container was originally scheduled to be filmed at one of Vancouver 's waterfront facilities . After permission for detonating explosive had been cleared by the city , the port rescinded its permission , claiming that the shot was not in its " best interests " . The special effects crew for The X @-@ Files decided to ship in as many containers as they could to a recycling center in the adjacent city of Burnaby , where filming went off " without a hitch " . The destruction of the trailer was filmed adjacent to the Boundary Bay Airport . After the explosion , the series received several complaints from people living as far as ten miles away from " ground zero " , complaining about the explosion and shockwave . The robot that attacked Mulder was inspired by the NASA Mars Rover . It was battery powered and cost $ 23 @,@ 000 to create and operate . The producers contracted with SPOT , a French @-@ owned commercial satellite surveillance company to obtain the satellite photos of the Washington D.C. area used in the episode . 
 A freelance computer artist created a 3 @-@ D image of Scully for the scene where she is fighting the nurses in the virtual hospital . Gillian Anderson was very pleased with the scene . She later noted that " I happened to be in good shape at the time and was just <unk> [ sic ] to get in there and be taking those half @-@ naked nurses out with some karate chops . " David Duchovny was not as exuberant ; when showed the script and directed to " be impressed with [ Scully 's ] karate skills " , he responded that " But I have no arms . I 've lost my arms . Why would I care about Scully 's karate ? " Dean Haglund later called the sequence " one of the great fight scenes , ever " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Kill Switch " premiered on the Fox network on February 15 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 1 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 18 @.@ 04 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Kill Switch " received largely positive reviews from critics . Francis Dass of New Straits Times was positive toward the episode , calling it " excellent " . John Keegan of Critical Myth gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , and wrote " Overall , this episode puts Gibson ’ s genre credibility to good use by taking standard concepts of cyberpunk and applying them to the series . " He did note that there are " a few minor characterization issues " , and that " not all of the concepts are pulled together as tightly as they could be " , but other than those points , he concluded that it was " solid and [ ... ] enjoyable " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two wrote that its themes were " fresh and new " and that the plot had " real heart to it " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + and wrote that , while " William Gibson ’ s cyberpunk milieu wouldn ’ t necessarily seem to be the best fit for The X @-@ Files " , the episode " weirdly benefits from the lack of staff oversight . " He noted that it featured many elements to its plot , but was " a rare example of an X @-@ Files episode that works , [ despite the fact that ] it tries to do too much . " VanDerWerff was complimentary towards the story and called it " propulsive " ; he was particularly praise @-@ worthy of the fact that Scully was featured heavily in the episode . He cited the scene wherein a virtual Scully roundhouse kicks a group of nurses as one of the best shots in the episode , and called it a " hysterical moment " . Brett Love of TV Squad stated that it is his favorite episode of The X @-@ Files , considering it a " great story " and describing it as a " tough one to beat " . Paula Vitaris of Cinefantastique gave the episode a positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . Vitaris praised the episode 's directing and noted that the entry was " a great improvement over The X @-@ Files 's earlier A.I. episode , first season 's " Ghost in the Machine " . Vitaris cited " Mulder 's virtual experience " as the " highlight of the episode " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " Kill Switch " earned an Emmy Award by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences for Outstanding Picture Editing - Series . 
 = Patrice Chéreau = 
 Patrice Chéreau ( French : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 2 November 1944 – 7 October 2013 ) was a French opera and theatre director , filmmaker , actor and producer . In France he is best known for his work for the theatre , internationally for his films La Reine Margot and Intimacy , and for his staging of the Jahrhundertring , the centenary Ring Cycle at the Bayreuth Festival in 1976 . Winner of almost twenty movie awards , including the Cannes Jury Prize and the Golden Berlin Bear , Chéreau served as president of the jury at the 2003 Cannes festival . 
 From 1966 , he was artistic director of the Public @-@ Theatre in the Parisian suburb of Sartrouville , where in his team were stage designer Richard Peduzzi , costume designer Jacques Schmidt and lighting designer André Diot , with whom he collaborated in many later productions . From 1982 , he was director of " his own stage " at the Théâtre Nanterre @-@ Amandiers at Nanterre where he staged plays by Jean Racine , Marivaux and Shakespeare as well as works by Jean Genet , Heiner Müller and Bernard @-@ Marie Koltès . 
 He accepted selected opera productions , such as : the first performance of the three @-@ act version of Alban Berg 's Lulu , completed by Friedrich <unk> , at the Paris Opera in 1979 ; Berg 's Wozzeck at the Staatsoper Berlin in 1994 ; Wagner 's Tristan und Isolde at La Scala in 2007 ; Janáček 's From the House of the Dead , shown at several festivals and the Metropolitan Opera ; and , as his last staging , Elektra by Richard Strauss , first performed at the Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence Festival in July 2013 . He was awarded the Europe Theatre Prize in 2008 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Chéreau was born in <unk> , Maine @-@ et @-@ Loire . His father Jean @-@ Baptiste Chéreau was a painter , his mother Marguerite <unk> a graphic designer . He attended school in Paris . Early on he was taken to the Louvre and became interested in the arts , cinema , theatre and music . At age 12 , he designed stage sets for plays . He became well known to Parisian critics as director , actor , and stage manager of his high @-@ school theatre ( lycée Louis @-@ le @-@ Grand ) . At 15 , he was enthusiastically celebrated as a theatre prodigy . In 1964 , at the age of 19 , he began directing for the professional theatre . While studying at the Sorbonne , he professionally staged Victor Hugo 's L <unk> , and subsequently dropped out of the university . 
 = = = 1966 : Sartrouville = = = 
 In 1966 , Chéreau was appointed artistic director of the Public @-@ Theatre in the Parisian suburb of Sartrouville . With " idealism and inventiveness " , he made the theatre a " municipal commodity " , presenting not only theatre but also " cinema , concerts , poetry productions , lectures and debates about everything from politics to pot " . His theatrical team included costume designer Jacques Schmidt , stage designer Richard Peduzzi and lighting designer André Diot , with all of whom he collaborated in many later productions . 
 In 1968 , he directed The Soldiers by Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz at the Festival of Youth Theatre in Nancy . In 1969 , he staged his first opera production , Rossini 's L <unk> in Algeri for the Spoleto Festival , again with his Sartrouville team . The following year he established a close artistic relationship with the leadership of the Piccolo Teatro in Milan , Paolo Grassi and Giorgio <unk> . There , he staged Pablo Neruda 's " revolutionary oratorio " The Splendour and Death of Joaquin <unk> . In 1970 , he directed Shakespeare 's Richard II at the Théâtre de France . His first staging for the Paris Opera was in 1974 Offenbach 's Les contes d 'Hoffmann . He showed Hoffmann , sung by Nicolai Gedda , as a " sensitive poet for whom love is beyond reach , ... a drunken loser " . In 1975 , he worked in Germany for the first time directing Edward Bond 's Lear , set in an " industrial landscape strewn with piles of slag , with Lear as a Baron Krupp in evening dress and top hat " . He commented on the " macabre " production : " Just as some people feed on hope , I feed on despair . For me it is a spur to action . " Also in 1975 , his directorial debut film was the thriller La Chair de l <unk> , based on James Hadley Chase 's 1948 novel The Flesh of the Orchid , sequel to No Orchids for Miss Blandish ( 1939 ) . The film assembled a starry cast including Edwige <unk> , Simone Signoret , Alida Valli and Charlotte Rampling " in the [ Miss Blandish ] role giving a performance of extraordinary intensity . It was an almost operatic version of the misunderstood 1948 British film . " 
 = = = 1976 : Bayreuth = = = 
 In 1976 , Chéreau staged Wagner 's Der Ring des Nibelungen at the Bayreuth Festival to celebrate the festival 's centenary , termed the Jahrhundertring . The production , celebrating 100 years after Wagner 's work had been performed for the first time as a cycle at the first Bayreuth Festival , became known as the Jahrhundertring ( Centenary Ring ) . Chéreau collaborated with conductor Pierre Boulez , who had recommended him to the festival direction . The French team revolutionised the understanding of Wagner in Germany , as music critic Eleonore <unk> wrote in her obituary in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung . Chéreau set the scene in the time of the composition , with a critical view of the time 's capitalism , industrialism and spiritual background . As <unk> and others pointed out , the staging left a standard for productions of the Ring Cycle to follow . Gerhard R. Koch mentioned in his obituary that the unity of direction , scene and light was new for Bayreuth and suggested a critical view on capitalism heading towards fascism . 
 In 1977 , when <unk> René <unk> had broken his leg , <unk> acted the role of Siegfried on stage while <unk> sang from the wings . 
 The Ring production , filmed for television in 1980 , initially provoked controversy , but was celebrated after its final performance in 1980 with a 45 @-@ minute standing ovation . Chéreau disliked grand opera , but said : " After Bayreuth , I felt the need to work on a theatrical project of some breadth ... I have never put on little things . I am interested only in spectacles that rise above themselves " . He first considered Goethe 's Faust but then directed in 1981 Henrik Ibsen 's Peer Gynt for <unk> and Paris , aiming at " an incandescence of theatrical experience , a global spectacle " . 
 = = = 1979 : Paris = = = 
 Chéreau directed the first performance of the three @-@ act version of Alban Berg 's Lulu , completed by Friedrich <unk> , at the Paris Opera on 24 February 1979 , again conducted by Boulez and with sets by Peduzzi , with Teresa Stratas singing the title role . The scene is set in the time of the composition , around 1930 . Koch observes frequent topics of hunt , and love colder than death ( <unk> und <unk> , und Liebe ... <unk> als der Tod ) . Dr. Schön , a powerful newspaper manager , is reminiscent of supporters of Hitler . 
 = = = 1982 : Amandiers = = = 
 From 1982 , Chéreau was director of " his own stage " at the Théâtre Nanterre @-@ Amandiers at Nanterre . In 1981 already he staged there Ibsen 's Peer Gynt . He was the first to show several plays by Bernard @-@ Marie Koltès , including Combat de nègre et de <unk> and Quai Ouest ( 1985 ) , Dans la solitude des champs de coton ( 1986 ) and Le Retour au désert ( 1988 ) . He directed Marivaux ' La <unk> <unk> in 1985 and Shakespeare 's Hamlet in 1989 , also works by Jean Genet , Heiner Müller and Jean Racine . He staged Mozart 's Lucio Silla in 1984 , for Amandiers , but also for La Monnaie and La Scala . 
 At the Odéon he staged in 1992 Le Temps et la Chambre by <unk> Strauss . He directed Dans la solitude des champs de coton again in 1995 , shown at Ivry , the Wiener Festwochen and the Brooklyn Academy of Music . He staged in 2011 Jon Fosse 's Je suis le vent in an English version , I Am the Wind , by Simon Stephens at the Young Vic Theatre , with Tom Brooke and Jack Laskey . 
 = = = 1983 : more films = = = 
 In 1983 , Chéreau directed the film The Wounded Man ( L 'Homme <unk> ) , a more personal project for him . He and his co @-@ writer , Hervé Guibert , worked for six years on the scenario , which tells of a love affair between an older man involved in prostitution and a teenage boy , a dark view in the context of HIV / AIDS . His 1994 film was La Reine Margot , based on the 1845 historical novel of the same name by Alexandre Dumas . It won the Jury Prize and Best Actress Award ( Virna Lisi ) at Cannes , as well as five César Awards . Set in the 16th @-@ century , depicting the conflict between Catholics and Protestants in France , it shows battles and the St Bartholomew 's day massacre . A scene of the queen with the head of her lover is reminiscent of the opera Salome , uniting cult and obsession ( " Einheit von Kult und Obsession " ) , as Koch remarks . The film was Chéreau 's longest , most expensive production , and his greatest financial success . " [ I ] t was erotic and violent , and offers poured in from Hollywood , " but , he said , " I was always being offered films based in the Renaissance and involving a massacre . I even had an offer from the UK to do a film about Guy Fawkes . " He refused similar offers : " It 's useless to repeat something you already did . " 
 = = = 1993 : opera internationally = = = 
 Chéreau 's staging of Berg 's Wozzeck was shown from 1993 to 1999 at the Théâtre du Châtelet and the Staatsoper Berlin , conducted by Daniel Barenboim , with Franz <unk> in the title role and <unk> Meier as Marie . It was filmed in 1994 . A review notes the " presentation of even the smallest roles as deeply @-@ considered characters " . His staging of Mozart 's Don Giovanni was shown from 1994 to 1996 at the Salzburg Festival . 
 In 1998 , he directed the film Those Who Love Me Can Take the Train , a " melodramatic , sentimental and emptily wordy ... about the interplay of assorted characters on their way to the funeral of a misanthropic , bisexual minor painter ( Jean @-@ Louis Trintignant ) . " The final scene reflects the cemetery of Limoges to the music of Mahler 's Tenth Symphony . Chéreau 's only English @-@ language film , Intimacy ( 2001 ) , based on short stories by Hanif Kureishi ( who also wrote a novel of the same title in 1998 ) , was played by English actors , including Timothy Spall and Marianne Faithfull , and deals with " the possessiveness of a musician from London who regularly meets a woman for sexual encounters " . It " was a tale of sexual obsession which sparked a debate about unsimulated sex on screen . But , Chéreau said , ' It is not like a porno film , not at all erotic sometimes , but it is beautiful because it is life . ' " In 2003 , he directed His Brother ( Son <unk> ) , centred " on the relationship between two estranged brothers , one gay , the other straight . They come together when the latter suffers from a potentially fatal blood disease . The hospital processes are shot unflinchingly , without sentimentality , which makes this meditation on mortality even more moving . " Koch notes the similarity of a scene when the moribund is shaved for a last futile surgery he lies on a table similar to Mantegna 's Dead Christ . In 2003 Chéreau served at Cannes as president of the jury . 
 His staging of Mozart 's Così fan tutte was shown in 2005 and 2006 in Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , the Opéra National de Paris and the Wiener Festwochen . In 2007 , he staged Wagner 's Tristan und Isolde at La Scala , conducted by Daniel Barenboim . He had stayed away from the opera because he regarded it as " predominantly a musical rather than a theatrical work " , but his " sombre , subtle direction – with <unk> Meier an acutely vulnerable Isolde – was intensely moving " . 
 He directed Leoš Janáček 's From the House of the Dead , again conducted by Boulez , first shown at the Vienna Festival in 2007 , and later at the Holland Festival , the Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence Festival , the Metropolitan Opera ( his debut there in 2009 ) and La Scala . Chéreau 's last film was <unk> ( 2009 ) , " a gloomy , episodic film " about a man who is " haunted by a love @-@ hate relationship with his girlfriend " . His last production was Elektra by Richard Strauss , conducted by Esa @-@ Pekka Salonen , shown at the Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence Festival in July 2013 and scheduled for the MET 's 2015 – 16 season . A review noted : " The clichés of Fascist brutality and expressionist exaggeration are astutely avoided : this is a situation that involves human beings , not caricatures , in a visually neutral environment of bare walls , windows and doors ( designed by Richard Peduzzi ) which is also blackly portentous in atmosphere . " 
 = = Life and death = = 
 Chéreau was in a long @-@ term relationship with his lover and favorite actor Pascal Greggory . He was not interested in gay topics , saying : " I never wanted to specialise in gay stories , and gay newspapers have criticised me for that . Everywhere love stories are exactly the same . The game of desire , and how you live with desire , are the same . " 
 Chéreau died in Paris on 7 October 2013 from lung cancer . He was 68 years old . 
 = = Europe Theatre Prize = = 
 Chéreau was awarded the Europe Theatre Prize in 2008 , in the Edition XII of the prize . The " Reason for award " noted : 
 A natural @-@ born artist with a clear calling , Patrice Chéreau is one of those rare examples of a person who manages to succeed in all the expressive arts . ... Patrice Chéreau is an actor himself with the indispensable support of a team of creative collaborators , including the great set designer Richard Peduzzi , costume designer Jacques Schmidt and lighting designer André Diot . Drawn through his analysis of Brecht towards a correct naturalism , Chéreau has discovered and revived a number of little known texts , not least thanks to the many languages he has mastered . His extraordinary critical interpretation of Marivaux broke through the playwright ’ s sunny surface to reveal him as a forward @-@ looking , harsh social critic . ... Meanwhile , Chéreau shifted from theatre to opera , ... a scandalous reinterpretation of Wagner ’ s Ring at Bayreuth ... He reached the height of his career during his many years at the Théâtre des Amandiers in Nanterre , where he developed a new model of expression , discovered and launched one of the great dramatists of our time , Bernard Marie Koltès , whose major works he directed , including Combat de nègre et de <unk> and Solitude des champs de coton , as well as Shakespeare , Peer Gynt , Heiner Müller , and the historic revival of Les <unk> by Genet . Chéreau eventually turned to cinema , which he found more expressive of the truth of life that he so values . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Director = = = 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 ( for his company " Azor Films " ) 
 = = = Actor = = = 
 = = = Film awards and nominations = = = 
 Main sources : 
 Patrice Chéreau . Awards at the Internet Movie Database . 
 Patrice Chéreau . Awards at Allmovie . 
 = Navajo weaving = 
 Navajo rugs and blankets ( Navajo : <unk> ) are textiles produced by Navajo people of the Four Corners area of the United States . Navajo textiles are highly regarded and have been sought after as trade items for over 150 years . Commercial production of handwoven blankets and rugs has been an important element of the Navajo economy . As one expert expresses it , " Classic Navajo <unk> at their finest equal the delicacy and sophistication of any pre @-@ mechanical loom @-@ woven textile in the world . " 
 Navajo textiles were originally utilitarian blankets for use as cloaks , dresses , saddle blankets , and similar purposes . Toward the end of the 19th century , weavers began to make rugs for tourism and export . Typical Navajo textiles have strong geometric patterns . They are a flat tapestry @-@ woven textile produced in a fashion similar to kilims of Eastern Europe and Western Asia , but with some notable differences . In Navajo weaving , the slit weave technique common in kilims is not used , and the warp is one continuous length of yarn , not extending beyond the weaving as fringe . Traders from the late 19th and early 20th century encouraged adoption of some kilim motifs into Navajo designs . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 The original function of Navajo weaving was to produce clothing : " shoulder robes , rectangular panel or wrap @-@ around @-@ dresses , semi @-@ tailored shirts , <unk> , and a variety of belts , shoulder robes , sashes , hair ties , and garters . " The production of weaving flourished after the mid 1800s for trade with the white settlers . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pueblo influence = = = 
 The Navajo may have learned to weave from their Pueblo Indian neighbors when they moved into the Four Corners region during the year 1000 A.D. Some experts contend that the Navajo were not weavers until after the 17th century . The Navajo obtained cotton through local trade routes before the arrival of the Spanish , after which time they began to use wool . The Pueblo and Navajo were not generally on friendly terms due to frequent Navajo raids on Pueblo settlements , yet many Pueblo sought refuge with their Navajo neighbors in the late 17th century to evade the conquistadors in the aftermath of the Pueblo Revolt . This social interchange is the probable origin of the distinctive Navajo weaving tradition . Spanish records show that Navajo people began to herd sheep and weave wool blankets from that time onward . 
 The extent of Pueblo influence on Navajo weaving is uncertain . As Wolfgang <unk> notes , " Prehistoric Puebloan textiles were much more elaborate than historic ones , as can be seen in the few remnants recovered archaeologically and in costumed figures in pre @-@ contact kiva murals . " <unk> suggests that the absence of surviving colonial @-@ era Pueblo textile examples make it impossible to do more than conjecture about whether the creative origins of Navajo weaving arose from Navajo culture or were borrowed from the neighboring people . 
 = = = Early records = = = 
 Written records establish the Navajo as fine weavers for at least the last 300 years , beginning with Spanish colonial descriptions of the early 18th century . By 1812 , Pedro <unk> called the Navajo the best weavers in the province . Few remnants of 18th @-@ century Navajo weaving survive ; the most important surviving examples of early Navajo weaving come from Massacre Cave at Canyon de Chelly , Arizona . In 1804 , a group of Navajo were shot and killed there , where they were seeking refuge from Spanish soldiers . For a hundred years the cave remained untouched due to Navajo taboos until a local trader named Sam Day entered it and retrieved the textiles . Day separated the collection and sold it to various museums . The majority of Massacre Cave blankets feature plain stripes , yet some exhibit the terraces and diamonds characteristic of later Navajo weaving . 
 = = = Wider commerce = = = 
 Commerce expanded after the Santa Fe Trail opened in 1822 , and greater numbers of examples survive . Until 1880 , all such textiles were blankets as opposed to rugs . In 1850 , these highly prized trade items sold for $ 50 in gold , a huge sum at that time . 
 Railroad service reached Navajo lands in the early 1880s and resulted in considerable expansion of the market for Navajo woven goods . According to Kathy M <unk> of the University of Windsor in Ontario , Canada , " wool production more than doubled between 1890 and 1910 , yet textile production escalated more than 800 % " . Purchases of manufactured yarn compensated for the deficit in wool production . Federal government reports affirmed that this weaving , which was performed almost exclusively by women , was the most profitable Navajo industry during that era . Quality declined in some regards as the weavers attempted to keep up with demand . However , in today society an average price of a rug goes for about $ 800 @.@ 00 . 
 Several European @-@ American merchants influenced Navajo weaving during the next decades . The first to advertise Navajo textiles in a catalog was C. N. Cotton in 1894 . Cotton encouraged professional production and marketing among his peers and the weavers whose work they handled . Another trader named John . B. Moore , who settled in the Chuska Mountains in 1897 attempted to improve the quality of textiles he traded . He attempted to regulate the cleaning and dyeing process of artisans who did business with him , and shipped wool intended for higher grade weaving outside the region for factory cleaning . He limited the range of dyes in textiles he traded and refused to deal fabric that had included certain commercially produced yarns . Moore 's catalogs identified individual textile pieces rather than illustrating representative styles . He appears to have been instrumental in introducing new motifs to Navajo weaving . Carpets from the Caucasus region were popular among Anglo @-@ Americans at that time . Both the Navajo and the Caucasus weavers worked under similar conditions and in similar styles , so it was relatively simple for them to incorporate Caucasus patterns such as an octagonal motif known as a <unk> . 
 Traders encouraged the locals to weave blankets and rugs into distinct styles . They included " Two Gray Hills " ( predominantly black and white , with traditional patterns ) , " Teec Nos Pos " ( colorful , with very extensive patterns ) , " Ganado " ( founded by Don Lorenzo Hubbell ) , red dominated patterns with black and white , " Crystal " ( founded by J. B. Moore ) , Oriental and Persian styles ( almost always with natural dyes ) , " Wide Ruins , " " Chinle , " banded geometric patterns , " <unk> " , diamond type patterns , " Red Mesa " and bold diamond patterns . Many of these patterns exhibit a fourfold symmetry , which is thought by Professor Gary Witherspoon to embody traditional ideas about harmony or <unk> . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 Large numbers of Navajo continue to weave commercially . Contemporary weavers are more likely to learn the craft from a community college course , as opposed to family . A Navajo woman struggles and sacrifices , but for some this is their only source of income . Contemporary Navajo textiles have suffered commercially from two sets of pressures : extensive investment in pre @-@ 1950 examples and price competition from foreign imitations . Modern Navajo rugs are indeed notable for their high prices . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Wool and yarn = = = 
 In the late 17th century , the Navajo acquired the Iberian Churra , a breed of sheep from Spanish explorers . These animals were developed into a unique breed by the Navajo , today called the Navajo @-@ Churro . These sheep were well @-@ suited to the climate in Navajo lands , and that produced a useful long @-@ staple wool . Hand @-@ spun wool from these animals was the main source of yarn for Navajo blankets until the 1860s , when the United States government forced the Navajo people to relocate at Bosque Redondo and seized their livestock . The 1869 peace treaty that allowed the Navajo to return to their traditional lands included a $ 30 @,@ 000 settlement to replace their livestock . The tribe purchased 14 @,@ 000 sheep and 1 @,@ 000 goats . 
 Mid @-@ 19th century Navajo rugs often used a three @-@ ply yarn called Saxony , which refers to high @-@ quality , naturally dyed , silky yarns . Red tones in Navajo rugs of this period come either from Saxony or from a <unk> cloth known in Spanish as <unk> , which was a woolen manufactured in England . With the arrival of the railroad in the early 1880s , another machine @-@ produced yarn came into use in Navajo weaving : four @-@ ply aniline dyed yarn known as Germantown because the yarn was manufactured in Pennsylvania . 
 Among the locally produced yarns for Navajo textile , indiscriminate breeding from 1870 @-@ 1890 caused a steady decline in wool quality . Increasing proportions of brittle <unk> can be found in well @-@ preserved examples from the period . In 1903 , federal agents attempted to address the problem by introducing Rambouillet rams into the breeding population . The Rambouillet is a French breed that produces good meat and heavy , fine @-@ wool fleeces . The Rambouillet stock , were well adapted to the Southwestern climate , but their wool was less suitable to hand spinning . Short @-@ stapled Rambouillet wool has a tight crimp , which makes hand spinning difficult . The higher lanolin content of its wool necessitated significantly more scouring with scarce water before it could be dyed effectively . From 1920 to 1940 , when Rambouillet bloodlines dominated the tribe 's stock , Navajo rugs have a characteristically curly wool and sometimes a knotted or lumpy appearance . 
 In 1935 , the United States Department of the Interior created the Southwestern Range and Sheep Breeding Laboratory to address the problems Rambouillet stock had caused for the Navajo economy . Located at Fort Wingate , New Mexico , the program 's aim was to develop a new sheep bloodline that simulated the wool characteristics of the 19th @-@ century Navajo @-@ Churro stock and would also supply adequate meat . The Fort Wingate researchers collected old Navajo @-@ Churro stock from remote parts of the reservation and hired a weaver to test their experimental wool . Offspring of these experiments were distributed among the Navajo people . World War II interrupted the greater part of this effort when military work resumed at Fort Wingate . 
 = = = Coloration = = = 
 Prior to the mid @-@ 19th century , Navajo weaving coloration was mostly natural brown , white , and indigo . Indigo dye was obtained through trade and purchased in lumps . 
 By the middle of the century , the palette had expanded to include red , black , green , yellow , and gray which signifies different aspects of the earth as defined by different locations of the reservation . Navajo used indigo to obtain shades from pale blue to near black and mixed it with indigenous yellow dyes such as the rabbit brush plant to obtain bright green effects . Red was the most difficult dye to obtain locally . Early Navajo textiles use cochineal , an extract from a Mesoamerican beetle , which often made a circuitous trade route through Spain and England on its way to the Navajo . Reds used in Navajo weaving tended to be <unk> from imported textiles . The Navajo obtained black dye through piñon pitch and ashes . 
 After railroad service began in the early 1880s , aniline dyes became available in bright shades of red , orange , green , purple , and yellow . Gaudy " <unk> " weaves dominated the final years of the 19th century . Navajo weaving aesthetics underwent rapid change as artisans experimented with the new palette and a new clientele entered the region whose tastes differed from earlier purchasers . During the later years of the 19th century , the Navajo continued to produce earlier styles for traditional customers while they adopted new techniques for a second market . 
 = = = Weaving = = = 
 Traditional Navajo weaving used upright looms with no moving parts . Support poles were traditionally constructed of wood ; steel pipe is more common today . The artisan sits on the floor during weaving and wraps the finished portion of fabric underneath the loom as it grows . The average weaver takes anywhere from 2 months to many years to finish a single rug . The size greatly determines the amount of time spent weaving a rug . The ratio of weft to warp threads had a fine count before the Bosque Redondo internment and declined in the following decades , then rose somewhat to a midrange ratio of five to one for the period 1920 @-@ 1940 . 19th @-@ century warps were colored handspun wool or cotton string , then switched to white handspun wool in the early decades of the 20th century . 
 = = Cultural perspectives = = 
 Weaving plays a role in the creation myth of Navajo cosmology , which articulates social relationships and continues to play a role in Navajo culture . According to one aspect of this tradition , a spiritual being called " Spider Woman " instructed the women of the Navajo how to build the first loom from exotic materials including sky , earth , sunrays , rock crystal , and sheet lightning . Then " Spider Woman " taught the Navajo how to weave on it . 
 Use of traditional motifs sometimes leads to the mistaken notion that these textiles serve a purpose in Navajo religion . Actually these items have no use as prayer rugs or any other ceremonial function , and controversy has existed among the Navajo about the appropriateness of including religious symbolism in items designed for commercial sale . The financial success of purported ceremonial rugs led to their continued production . 
 = = = Schools of Thought = = = 
 Ganado Red 
 Two Grey Hills 
 Red Mesa 
 Tec Nos Pos 
 <unk> 
 Chinle 
 Crystal 
 <unk> 
 = = Critical study = = 
 Until recently , anthropologists have dominated the study of Navajo textiles . Most historic examples of these works belong to ethnological collections rather than fine art collections , which mean items have been exhibited and analyzed with an eye toward normative or average works rather than emphasizing technical or artistic excellence . These priorities have artificially inflated the market value for items of inferior craftsmanship . In general , this tendency has affected most non @-@ European art to some degree . 
 Other factors that have hindered art criticism of Navajo textiles include the common distinction between fine art and applied art and the scholarly theory among some archaeologists and art historians that pure artistic expression cannot exist among non @-@ literate peoples . 
 = Vestgrensa ( station ) = 
 Vestgrensa ( originally Ullevål Haveby ) was a light rail station on the Sognsvann Line of the Oslo Metro in Norway . It opened on 10 October 1934 , and was located between Blindern and Ullevål stadion stations . The station was rebuilt when the Sognsvann Line was upgraded from light rail to metro standard in the early 1990s . It was closed on 22 August 1999 , when it was replaced by the new station Forskningsparken . 
 = = History = = 
 Ullevål Haveby station opened on 10 October 1934 , when Akersbanerne had built a light rail line from Majorstuen to Sognsvann . The line was double @-@ tracked from Majorstuen to Korsvoll ( now Østhorn ) , and single @-@ tracked from there to Sognsvann . On 21 February 1939 , the section from Korsvoll to Sognsvann was upgraded to double tracks , and the station Korsvoll had its name changed to Østhorn . Ullevål Haveby station changed also name , to Vestgrensa , to avoid confusion with the northbound Ullevål stadion station . 
 Vestgrensa was part of Holmenkolbanen 's operating network until 1975 , when the municipality of Oslo bought all the company 's stock . In the early 1990s , the stations on the Sognsvann Line were upgraded to metro standard , which involved a heightening and lengthening of the platforms , and installation of a third rail power supply and a new signaling system . The electrified third rail made it impossible for passengers to cross at track level , and under- or overpasses had to be built at all stations . 
 In 1992 , the transport authorities of Oslo decided to close Nordberg and Frøen stations , on the grounds that these stations were too expensive to maintain . The platforms at Vestgrensa were moved a few metres to adjust to the metro trains . Seven years later , on 22 August 1999 , Vestgrensa was closed and replaced with the newly opened Forskningsparken Station . 
 = = Location = = 
 Vestgrensa was located in the Ullevål Hageby neighbourhood in Oslo , between the Oslo Innovation Center ( Norwegian : Forskningsparken ) and the football stadium Ullevaal Stadion . The station was positioned on an elevated embankment , some metres from a bridge over a pedestrian walkway also named Vestgrensa . The station served the residential area in Ullevål Hageby , as well as the University of Oslo at Blindern . A scout hut was in many years located close to the station . 
 = Burger King products = 
 When the predecessor of international fast food restaurant chain Burger King ( BK ) first opened in 1953 , its menu predominantly consisted of hamburgers , French fries , soft drinks , milkshakes , and desserts . After being acquired by its Miami , Florida franchisees and renamed in 1954 , BK began expanding its menu by adding the Whopper sandwich in 1957 , and has since added non @-@ beef items such as chicken , fish , and vegetarian offerings , including salads and meatless sandwiches . Other additions include a breakfast menu and beverages such as <unk> , juices , and bottled waters . As the company expanded both inside and outside the United States , it introduced localized versions of its products that conform to regional tastes and cultural or religious beliefs . To generate additional sales , BK occasionally introduces limited @-@ time offers of special versions of its products , or brings out completely new products intended for either long- or short @-@ term sales . Not all of these products and services have been successful ; in 1992 , Burger King introduced limited table service featuring special dinner platters , but this concept failed to generate interest and was discontinued . 
 The company introduced the first iteration of its breakfast menu , along with the company 's " Specialty Sandwich " product line , in a 1978 menu expansion . The products were some of the first designed by a fast food restaurant chain that were intended to capture the adult market , members of which would be willing to spend more on a higher @-@ quality product . The expanded Burger King menu was part of a plan by then @-@ company president Donald N. Smith to reach the broadest possible demographic market to better compete with McDonald 's , and to fend off then newcomer Wendy 's , who had a growing market share . The plan was successful : the company 's sales increased by 15 percent . Despite another menu expansion in 1985 , the company 's market gains diminished due to neglect of the brand at the hands of then @-@ parent Pillsbury and its successors , Grand Metropolitan and Diageo . When the company was sold to a group led by TPG Capital in 2004 , the trend of targeting an expanded audience was renewed under a plan by its then @-@ CEO Brad Blum . During Blum 's tenure , the company added several products that featured higher @-@ quality ingredients and other menu fare that again attempted to appeal to the adult palate and demographic . As in the past , not all of these products met corporate sales expectations , or in the case of several of its larger offerings , resulted in negative publicity due to nutritional concerns . With the purchase of the company in 2010 by 3G Capital , the company again began another revamp of its product line by phasing out some products , introducing new ones and redesigning others including its flagship Whopper sandwich . 
 Like its menu , the equipment the company cooks its hamburgers with has also evolved as the company grew . The burgers have always been broiled mechanically ; the original unit , called an Insta @-@ Broiler , was one of two pieces of equipment the founders of Insta @-@ Burger King purchased before opening their new restaurant . The Insta @-@ Broiler worked by cooking 12 burger patties in a wire basket , allowing the patties to be cooked from both sides simultaneously . With the acquisition of the chain by its Miami franchisees came an improved unit dubbed a " Flame Broiler " . Designed by the new owners , it featured stationary burners that cooked the meat on a moving chain . The unit broke down less often , while maintaining a similar cooking rate . The cooking format remained for the next 40 years until Burger King developed a new , variable speed broiler that could handle multiple items with different cooking rates and times . These new unit began testing in 1999 and eventually evolved into the two models the company deployed system @-@ wide in 2008 – 2009 . Accompanying these new broilers was new food @-@ holding equipment and a computer @-@ based product monitoring system for its cooked products . The new system allows for more concise tracking of product quality , while giving its users a method to streamline costs by more precisely projecting sales and product usage . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sandwiches and entrées = = = 
 When the predecessor to the modern Burger King , Insta @-@ Burger King , opened in 1953 in Jacksonville , Florida , the company 's menu consisted predominantly of hamburgers , French fries , soft drinks , and desserts . Insta @-@ Burger King was acquired in 1954 by two of its franchisees , James McLamore and David Edgerton , who renamed it Burger King . Under its new ownership , the company continued to develop its core menu , cooking techniques , and equipment . In 1957 McLamore and Edgerton created BK 's signature item , the Whopper , as a way to differentiate BK from other burger outlets at the time . The Whopper is a 4 oz ( 110 g ) hamburger with lettuce , tomato , mayonnaise , pickle , and ketchup , that was priced at 29 ¢ . The sandwich was designed to give the customer a larger product with better value than competitors , who were selling burgers with an average price of 15 ¢ . As Burger King 's flagship product , the Whopper has been expanded beyond the original sandwich into a line of sandwiches all made with the same ingredients . The Whopper sandwich has undergone several modifications in its recipe over the years , with a change from a plain bun to a sesame seed roll in the early 1970s and a change in patty size in the mid @-@ 1980s being two of the most notable . Since its inception , the Whopper has become synonymous with Burger King and become the focus of much of its advertising . The company has even named its kiosk @-@ style restaurants " Whopper Bars " . 
 In 1978 , Donald N. Smith was hired from McDonald 's to help restructure the corporate operations of Burger King to better compete against his former company as well as the then up @-@ and @-@ coming chain , Wendy 's . As part of an operational overhaul he dubbed " Operation Phoenix " , one of his first changes to the company 's menu was to add the Burger King specialty sandwich line in 1979 . This line — with many non @-@ hamburger sandwiches , including chicken and fish — significantly expanded the breadth of the BK menu . It was one of the first attempts by a major fast food chain to target a specific demographic , in this case adults aged between 18 and 34 years , members of which were presumably willing to spend more on a higher quality product . The new products were successful , and the company 's sales increased by 15 percent . While most of the line has since been discontinued , the company 's Original Chicken Sandwich is still offered in all of its global markets , and the ham and cheese sandwich is a regional offering . 
 BK Chicken Tenders made their debut in a menu revision and expansion in 1985 to address the absence of a chicken @-@ based finger product akin to McDonald 's Chicken McNuggets . The product had to be temporarily withdrawn because of limited availability of chicken meat ; it was re @-@ introduced about six months later . Originally made with sliced fillets of chicken , the product was changed to a formed chopped @-@ chicken product several years later . In 1987 , BK rolled out the Burger Bundles , a pack of six mini burger sliders , similar to White Castle was brought back later as the " Burger Buddy " . Fish Tenders were introduced to complement Chicken Tenders during a menu expansion in 1989 . The new fish product , sold in the same style of container as the Chicken Tenders , was an order of fish sticks with Tartar sauce for dipping . Portion sizes were similar to those of the Chicken Tenders . Fish Tenders were discontinued in 1990 . 
 The company introduced its first broiled chicken sandwich , the BK Broiler , in 1990 . The sandwich included a dill @-@ ranch mayonnaise and was served on an oat @-@ bran roll . In 1998 , BK reformulated the BK Broiler into a larger , more male @-@ oriented sandwich : a larger chicken patty with mayonnaise served on a Whopper bun . In 2002 , BK changed the name of the sandwich to Chicken Whopper and added a smaller Chicken Whopper Jr. sandwich . The company replaced the Chicken Whopper line with another broiled sandwich line in 2003 , the BK Baguette line . The chicken sandwich , served on a fresh cooked baguette roll , and came in several varieties , all of which were topped with a series of ingredients that were low in fat . They were sold in the United States at one time , but are now sold only in the European market . The failed Baguette line was replaced in North America with the current grilled chicken iteration , the TenderGrill sandwich . 
 Although Wendy 's was the first to have a value menu in 1989 , Burger King decided to offer its own value menu in 1998 . This menu featured seven products : the Whopper Jr . , a five @-@ piece Chicken Tenders , a bacon cheeseburger , medium @-@ sized French fries , medium soft drink , medium onion rings , and a small milkshake – all priced at 99 ¢ ( USD ) . In 2002 and 2006 , BK revamped its value menu by adding and removing several products such as chili and the Rodeo Cheeseburger . Many of these items , such as Chili , tacos , the Sourdough burger ( a product similar to the Whopper Jr . , but with sourdough bread ) , and Chicken Tender sandwiches have since been discontinued , modified , or relegated to regional menu options . 
 Returning to the practice of targeting the adult demographic as it had in 1978 , BK introduced several new products to its menu in 2003 . The new products included new or revamped chicken sandwiches , a new salad line , and its BK Joe brand of coffee . The first of these items was the TenderCrisp chicken sandwich , an entirely new sandwich which featured a fried 5 @.@ 2 oz ( 150 g ) whole @-@ muscle chicken breast on a corn @-@ dusted roll . The sandwich was part of then @-@ CEO Greg Brenneman 's plans to bolster the company 's revived " Have it your way " advertising program , which was designed to draw younger people to its stores . Some items , including the Enormous Omelet Sandwich line and the BK Stacker line , brought negative attention due the large portion size , amounts of unhealthy fats , and the presence of trans @-@ fats . At the time , many of the products featured higher @-@ quality ingredients like whole chicken breast , Angus beef , Cheddar cheese , and pepper jack cheese . Not all the products new products introduced under Blum 's tenure met corporate sales expectations , the Baguette Chicken sandwiches being an example . Others products , such as Burger King 's line of " indulgent " burgers originally called the Angus Burger , have undergone multiple reformulations . The Angus Steak burger was originally based around a 5 oz ( 140 g ) frozen patty ; despite high expectations from the company , the sandwich fared poorly . After a reformulating program , it was relaunched in 2008 as the 5 oz ( 140 g ) Angus Steakhouse burger . With the introduction of a new multifunction broiler capable of cooking a more diverse set of products , Burger King replaced the Angus Steakhouse burger with the 7 oz ( 200 g ) Steakhouse XT burger in 2009 . In 2011 , the company discontinued selling the product in the North American market , replacing it with the Chef 's Choice Burger . The Chef 's Choice Burger was removed in 2012 . 2014 saw the introduction of the newest attempt at introducing a premium burger to the company 's portfolio with the introduction of the <unk> Ultimate Cheeseburger in North America . 
 The Burger Bundles returned in 2011 with beef and chicken patty options . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 During 1997 , BK revamped its French fries in North America . The improved fries were coated with a layer of potato @-@ based starch , giving the fries a crisp shell that maintained its texture longer . The company introduced them in a series of advertisements that claimed the new fries tasted better than McDonald 's fries in consumer taste comparisons . Other ads featured Mr. Potato Head in a series of demographically @-@ targeted commercials . The fries were in research and development for over two years and already had been available in several markets when the advertising campaign began . In Europe , BK also sells potato wedges , a type of French fry that is thick @-@ cut and wedge @-@ shaped . In 1991 , the company introduced Twister fries , spiral @-@ cut fries with a spicy coating , as part of a promotional push . Part of the product 's appeal was they were served in a paper drink cup as opposed to the normal fry carton . The product was designed as a short @-@ term promotion that would be periodically reintroduced . 
 In 2002 , Burger King offered " Shake ' em up Fries " , which included a bag of fries and a packet of spices . The customer would add the spices to the fries and then shake the bag until the fries were coated . 
 Beyond French fries , the company has introduced several other side products over the course of its existence . Onion rings have been part of the menu for the majority of BK history . Originally made from whole , sliced onions , they were reformulated into a formed product made from onion paste in 2001 as part of a menu revamp . In the same 2001 menu revamp , the company added an onion ring @-@ specific dipping sauce , and emphasized it again during its 99 ¢ BK Value Menu introduction in 2002 . As part of its BK <unk> value menu introduction in 2005 , the company briefly sold jalapeño poppers accompanied by a side of ranch dressing as part of its national menu . The same menu added mozzarella sticks with a side of marinara sauce ; the mozzarella sticks have since been relegated to a regional menu item in the United States , but are sold on the national menu in Canada . 
 = = = Breakfast = = = 
 One of Smith 's significant contributions to the menu was the addition of a breakfast product line as part of the 1978 product line expansion . Up until that point , breakfast was not a market Burger King had served . Other than the addition of the <unk> 'Wich in 1983 , the breakfast menu remained almost identical to the McDonald 's offerings until a menu revamp in 1986 . This expansion introduced BK 's A.M. Express product line , which included French toast sticks and mini @-@ muffins . The new breakfast line was designed to be portable , because studies had shown that an increasing percent of consumers were eating breakfast on the go . Shortly after the introduction of the French toast stick products , BK partnered with Lender 's <unk> to introduce a bagel breakfast sandwich . The new product was designed to drive sales in the morning by piquing customer 's curiosity with a new taste . The product was tested for several months in BK 's original home territory of Miami before a national roll @-@ out . 
 In the late 1990s , BK co @-@ branded several of its breakfast products with former parent Pillsbury ; Pillsbury produced a fresh @-@ baked biscuit product for the chain in 1996 and miniature cinnamon rolls called Cini @-@ Minis in 1998 . As part of the cachet built into the products , Burger King advertises that products are cooked fresh in the restaurant each morning . 
 With the effects of the late @-@ 2000s recession reducing breakfast traffic to the stores , Burger King announced that it was making the first wholesale changes to its breakfast line @-@ up in many years . In early 2010 , Burger King tested a new group of breakfast products under its new BK Brunch product line ; a reintroduced English muffin sandwich , a sandwich featuring <unk> bread , a pair of breakfast bowls , and a non @-@ alcoholic mimosa . In September , a slightly modified variation of the menu was taken national during one of the largest menu expansions in the company 's history . Chief Marketing Officer Mike <unk> said breakfast produced 12 percent of the company 's income , but that was only half of what McDonald 's made . Part of the expansion was a major advertising campaign that encouraged people to change their minds about skipping breakfast at a time of high unemployment . 3G Capital has continued the expansion of the breakfast program with the introduction of Quaker Oats Company oatmeal to its menu in late 2011 . Oatmeal has been shown to be a popular addition to breakfast menus industry @-@ wide due to its low cost , ease in preparation and perception as a healthy , whole @-@ grain option . Analysts from industry analytic firm Technomic stated that it was a good move for Burger King to add a winning product to its menu , but that it should have tried to be more creative by adding other , similar products such as grits . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 As the company expanded both inside and outside the United States , it introduced localized versions of its products that conform to regional tastes and cultural or religious beliefs . In countries with predominantly Islamic populations , such as Saudi Arabia , pork is not served due to Muslim dietary laws . In Muslim countries , meat is slaughtered using the halal method and labeled as such . Similar adaptations also occurred in Israel , where kosher dietary laws forbid the mixture of meat and dairy products . Before the company exited the country in 2010 , many of its locations in Israel were fully kosher . 
 In many international markets , BK offers products or condiments that fit local tastes . For example , in Canada , BK offers <unk> gravy and vinegar for its French fries , and peri @-@ peri sauce is available as a sandwich topping in the United Kingdom . Hungry Jack 's , Burger King 's Australian franchise , offers the " Aussie burger " with fried egg , beetroot , and other Australian flavors . In Asian markets , dark @-@ meat chicken is preferred over white meat , and poultry products sold in these markets often are advertised as such . One of the more regionally differentiated lines of products is the company 's dessert offerings . In the United States , BK offers several desserts , including Otis <unk> chocolate @-@ chip cookies , apple pie slices , Hershey 's Sundae pie slices ( a type of chocolate creme pie ) , and a rotating pie as part of its dessert menu . Internationally the company sells turnovers , <unk> , Cini @-@ Minis , muffins , brownies , and vanilla soft @-@ serve ice cream in cones and sundaes . In most markets where BK sells ice cream , it also sells a mix @-@ in dessert under various names . Some of these international dessert products differ from the domestic products in terms of preparation ; an example is the pies sold in Asian countries that are fried , turnover @-@ style , instead of the deep @-@ dish tart style associated with American sweet @-@ filled pies . 
 = = Preparation methods = = 
 Burger King cooks its foods in one of four ways : broiling , deep frying , baking , or <unk> . As noted in its mottos and advertisements , BK cooks its burgers and grilled chicken on an automated grill , while its other chicken products , fish , sides , and breakfast sausage are deep @-@ fried in vegetable oil . BK prepares its biscuits , cinnamon rolls , and cookies by baking in a convection oven and microwaves its BK Veggie burger patty . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The predecessor to Burger King , Insta @-@ Burger King , began deploying the original broiling device in 1952 when its owners , Matthew Burns and Kieth Kramer , acquired the rights to George Read 's <unk> @-@ Shake and Insta @-@ Broiler machines . The Insta @-@ Broiler cooked the burgers in a wire basket between two broilers , allowing the burgers to be cooked on both sides simultaneously . The machine was capable of cooking over 400 patties per hour , which allowed the company to grow rapidly . When McLamore and Edgarton opened their first Insta @-@ Burger King location in Miami , they revamped the unit into what they called a " flame broiler " – the forerunner of the modern unit used by Burger King today . After the acquisition of Insta @-@ Burger King in 1954 , the pair contracted the construction of the newly designed flame broilers to the <unk> company of Indianapolis , Indiana , for the initial run of broilers . Eventually , the company moved the manufacturing contract for the broiler units to Nieco Automatic Broilers of Windsor , California , who manufactured all subsequent units until the start of the 2000s . 
 When the time came for the company to develop a new broiler , it turned to its equipment manufacturer , Nieco , and St. Louis , Missouri @-@ based Duke Manufacturing . Burger King 's goal was to maintain the company 's trademark flame broiling method while allowing more product options on a flexible cooking platform . The solutions that Nieco and Duke devised met that goal by using control features during cooking . The cooking methods employed by the two manufacturing companies vary in their methods ; Nieco employed two chains , one that maintained a single speed and cooking temperature , and another that had a flexible speed setting and variable temperature control . Duke 's solution utilizes an oven that cooks according to preset parameters for time and temperature , one heterogeneous product batch at a time . The first batch @-@ style broiler was introduced in April 1999 and was tested in @-@ store in central Wisconsin during the summer of 1999 . 
 Beyond the flexibility of the new broilers , the new equipment has several features intended to decrease operational costs . A more efficient design of the burners in the Nieco units produces a 30 percent reduction in energy consumption . The Duke units produce a $ 4 @,@ 000 - $ 5 @,@ 000 annual savings on energy compared to the original units , which ran approximately at full capacity all day . The units are so fuel @-@ efficient that in many US states , the company and its franchises qualify for energy @-@ efficiency rebates . However , and issue arose in September 2011 when the state of Washington department of health warned Burger King of issues with the Duke units . In multiple incidents in seven counties throughout the state , the Duke units were found to have cracked heat spreaders which resulted in under cooked products . Additionally , there was foreign material contamination caused by loose insulation resulting from the cracks as well as other issues . Upon notification , Burger King released a statement that the company has notified franchisees and corporate @-@ owned stores operating the Duke units with orders to repair the problem immediately . Additional training for operators was also ordered . 
 = = = Kitchen equipment = = = 
 Before any products are sold , the company pre @-@ cooks the ingredients and holds them in a heated holding cabinet . To ensure that product consistency is maintained and to reduce the amount of products discarded as waste , Burger King utilizes a computerized monitoring system created by Integrated Control Corp , or ICC . The system , called Kitchen Minder , monitors time and temperature in the cabinets and notifies staff and managers when to prepare more food and discard older products . Initially developed from 1998 to 2000 , the system is designed to work with a holding cabinet system that was developed by Duke . The initial test designs were time @-@ consuming to program because each bay in the holding units had to be programmed manually . This meant several minutes were required for each product , which added up to several hours to program up to six units with eight bays each . When BK finally deployed the system in 2001 , the updated units utilized a Palm Pilot to configure the units using a custom program designed to easily configure the units via Infrared or serial port . A kitchen flow software system that helps centralize information about the system was deployed in 2007 ; combined with the new equipment , it helped further reduce costs for the company and its franchises by calculating projected sales and actual usage . Along with the holding system , Burger King deployed newer high @-@ speed toasters to decrease make times ; the new toasters , while faster , require more maintenance , which increases overall labor costs . 
 = = = Sandwich preparation = = = 
 During periods of high @-@ volume sales , BK will pre @-@ prepare high @-@ demand items such as hamburgers and cheeseburgers ; during slower periods all sandwiches are made to order . The Whopper sandwiches , premium sandwiches and BK Veggies are all made when ordered . 
 = = Demographic targeting = = 
 = = = Value = = = 
 BK targets " value @-@ oriented " customers with its BK Value Menu . In the United States , this menu contains products that are usually priced in the $ 1 @.@ 00 to $ 1 @.@ 49 range . In non @-@ US markets , the BK Value Menu typically takes on a different name , with prices set to reflect the approximate value of one US dollar . Internationally , the company is standardizing its value menu under the King Deals banners that features items for sale at € 1 @.@ 00 in the EU and one dirham in Dubai . In all the markets , the value menu usually includes smaller sandwiches and entrées , small @-@ sized side orders , small @-@ sized drinks , and desserts . In the United States , the value menu has a breakfast offering in the same format as the lunch / dinner value menu . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 As with all major fast food vendors , BK has a menu that specifically targets children . The company introduced its child @-@ oriented product line in North America during the summer of 1990 with an advertising program called the Burger King Kid 's Club . In the United States , the meal is called the Kids Club Meal and it is primarily positioned against the popular Happy Meal from McDonald 's . The meal includes an entrée , a side order , beverage , and a toy . The toy is usually a product tie @-@ in with a movie or popular television show . The entrée and side offerings differ from market to market , as does portion size . 
 In the North American market , BK further divides its children 's menu into three segments : toddler , kids , and " tween " . The only difference between the first two groups is the prize offering ; the toddler will receive an age @-@ appropriate toy . The toys were originally designed by Kentwood , Michigan @-@ based Sassy Inc . , and were introduced in 2000 as a supplement to the company 's existing children 's line . Burger King changed its toddler toy designer to Hudson , Ohio @-@ based Little Tikes in 2003 . 
 The tween offering , introduced in 1999 , is called the Big Kids Meal . The Big Kids Meals consist of a double hamburger , a double cheeseburger , or a six @-@ piece serving of Chicken Tenders plus a small order of fries , and a 16 US fl oz ( 470 ml ) drink , and a toy . Further additions to the line included a six @-@ piece serving of the company 's Chicken Fries product . The introduction of the Big Kids Meal was not without controversy . McDonald 's challenged Burger King 's use of the name in a federal suit that claimed McDonald 's had used the name first . According to the filing , McDonald 's stated the company had used the term in a limited manner in Michigan in 1998 as part of a promotion in Detroit . The suit was judged to be without merit and dismissed in a summary judgment . 
 = = = Adult = = = 
 To appeal to the adult market , BK offers several sandwiches and other products made with higher @-@ quality ingredients such as whole @-@ breast chicken fillets , Angus beef , and other " premium " ingredients . These sandwiches are usually served on a better @-@ quality roll , such as <unk> or corn @-@ dusted potato rolls . Through 2009 and 2010 , the company added other higher @-@ end product such as barbecued ribs , grilled fish , an improved grilled chicken sandwich , kebabs , and an extra @-@ thick burger called the Steakhouse XT . Several industry publications claimed that these new offerings disrupt the differentiation between the fast @-@ food and casual @-@ dining markets with a combination of taste , competitive pricing , speed of service , and convenience . The adult @-@ oriented products of Burger King and it competitors have been criticized by restaurant industry commentators as a temporary blip . The " indulgent " products are seen as blurring the lines between the fast @-@ food and casual @-@ dining market segments and , while they draw in newer customers looking for value , the effect may only be temporary . Once the economic instabilities of the late @-@ 2000s recession fade , customers may return to such casual chains as Chili 's and leave the fast food chains back where they started in terms of customer numbers and profits . 
 BK targets specific sub @-@ groups within the adult market . Products like the BK Stacker and BK XXL are aimed at late teen to young adult males ; health @-@ conscious individuals are offered products such as salads , grilled chicken , and veggie burgers . Products such as the BK Veggie , a meatless burger initially introduced in 2002 , target the female and health @-@ oriented demographic using a co @-@ branded marketing program and a patty produced by the Kellogg Company 's Morningstar Farms division . Another sub @-@ market in this group is on @-@ the @-@ go parents and commuters ; The company 's BK Chicken Fries — French @-@ fry cut pieces of breaded chicken — is specifically targeted to this segment . First introduced in 2005 , the product was successful enough that Burger King expanded the marketing of chicken fries to the children 's demographic with a kid 's meal version of the product in 2007 . The meal was launched with a cross @-@ promotion in conjunction with Nickelodeon 's SpongeBob SquarePants . The series of commercials raised the ire of the American Family Association due to perceived nudity concerns . 
 = = = The " <unk> " = = = 
 One particular market target that was of importance to the company was identified as the " <unk> " . The superfan was a demographic group that included individuals that are 18 to 49 years old , primarily male , who would visit a fast @-@ food restaurant five times a month and eat fast food 16 times a month . Burger King and their competitors hope to attract this group because of the large sums of money that they represent ; an increase in sales to this group could drive an increase in global sales . While <unk> accounted for less than 20 percent of Burger King 's customer base , they accounted for nearly 50 percent of the company 's business . By focusing on this demographic group , the company could increase sales more readily ; it was easier to generate more repeat visits by this demographic than it was to coax new customers to switch from other chains . The company has used advertising featuring its mascot , the Burger King , in tandem with new product rollouts such as its BK Wrapper product to help generate an increased number of visits by this client segment . 
 With the slowing of the global economy due to the financial crisis of 2007 @-@ 2010 , the company experienced a downside of focusing so much on this demographic group . The high unemployment of the recession , coupled with healthier eating habits , drove many customers away from fast food towards the fast @-@ casual segment or forced them to stop eating out . Analysts have stated that by focusing its marketing and advertising programs on men , BK alienated women and children . Morgan Stanley analyst John Glass stated , " Maybe catering to the super fan was the correct strategy to kick @-@ start the business , but maybe they relied on that for too long ... " 
 To help counter the perceived male bias of its superfan target group , the company expanded the definition in early 2010 to cover individuals of both sexes , all ages , and households who frequent fast food within the stated time frame . Throughout 2010 , the company added newer calorie @-@ conscious " Positive Steps " combo meals that were advertised in female @-@ oriented media , as well as a continuing cross @-@ promotional tie @-@ in with the female @-@ oriented Twilight film series . 3G Capital 's new management team eliminated the focus on the superfan after its acquisition the company in 2010 , concentrating on a more broad demographic base that includes women and more health conscious customers . 
 = = Nutrition = = 
 One of the company 's first forays into healthier products was in 1983 with introduction of its salad bar . The salad bar met with light to moderate success , but the company 's franchise holders complained of high operating costs and a poor return on investment . Part of the product , a pita salad , was quickly dropped from the salad bar , as were plans to use the bar unit to boost breakfast sales . In 1987 the company augmented its salad bar with a test line of prepackaged salads , including chef and garden salads . The salad bar was eventually eliminated in favor of packaged salads . In 1990 , BK introduced a new salad line accompanied by a licensing agreement with Paul Newman 's Newman 's Own , Inc . , whose salad dressings accompanied the products . Burger King revamped its salad line again in 2004 , with the introduction of its Fire Grilled Salad products . Burger King sought to differentiate this line of salads by packaging the warm meat toppings — a choice of grilled shrimp or broiled chicken — separately from the cold salad ; this added the appearance of an additional layer of freshness . Currently in the United States , the salads are pre @-@ made off @-@ site . They are sold with two toppings and Ken 's Foods Ken 's Steakhouse brand salad dressing . Internationally , the salads vary in composition and style from market to market . In all markets , salads are one of the items targeted at female and health @-@ conscious consumers . In parts of Europe , salads are sold under the " King Delight " or " LA Range " banner . 
 As a response to recent obesity trends in the United States and other nations , Burger King modified its menu and food preparation practices . In addition to offering lower @-@ fat menu item such as salads , the company has updated its nutrition guides to include dietary guidelines and other nutritional data . One of its reactions to the concerns over trans @-@ fats was to initiate a program in January 2008 to phase out added trans @-@ fat in its products , and to switch to pure vegetable oils that are free of hydrogenated fats . The program ended in early 2009 with a complete changeover to the new oils . Most , but not all , of the products contain no added trans @-@ fats ; some products , such as the beef used in the hamburgers , still contain naturally @-@ occurring trans @-@ fats . 
 To address concerns over the increase in childhood obesity in Western nations and accusations of unhealthy offerings for children by groups such as the Center for Science in the Public Interest , the company created a nutritional program called " BK Positive Steps " that is aimed at children and their families . The program began with the introduction of products such as broiled Chicken Tenders , Kraft Macaroni and Cheese , and apple " fries " , which are French cut apples served in a fry box that are featured in a new low @-@ fat Kid 's Club Meal . According to a statement by Burger King , the new Kid 's Club meals contain no more than 560 calories per meal , less than 30 percent of calories from fat , less than 10 percent of calories from saturated fat , no added trans fats , and no more than 10 percent of calories from added sugars . Additional changes to its menu were announced in May 2009 , including the reduction of sodium levels in its Chicken Tenders product by approximately 33 percent ; a switch to non @-@ fat milk products in the U.S. ; and adding calcium @-@ fortified apple juice to its beverage line @-@ up . The broiled Chicken Tenders product is only sold in the UK / Ireland market . The product line has been expanded to include a boiled mini chicken sandwich for the kid 's meals in this region . 
 The company has adapted its menu to accommodate different dietary lifestyles by adding several vegetarian options , including salads , the BK Veggie sandwich , and its deep @-@ fried spicy bean burger that is sold in Burger King 's international locations . The majority of these products do not qualify as vegan due to the presence of egg or dairy products ; an example is the BK Veggie , which is approved by the British Vegetarian Society . Society guidelines do not require their approved products to be vegan , and allow ovo @-@ lacto @-@ vegetarian ingredients . The Veggie Burger is widely sold in other countries , sometimes under different names ( for example , it is called a " Country Burger " in Germany ) . Burger King added low @-@ carb variants of several of its products in 2004 that are in accordance with low @-@ carb diets such as the Atkins diet and the South Beach Diet . Low @-@ carbohydrate preparation consists of eliminating the bread and serving the product in a bowl with silverware . 
 In January 2010 , BK began to publish a list of which of their products that contain gluten and added menu options designed to help those afflicted with Celiac disease as part of its " Positive Steps " nutrition program . A company representative stated that it understands that its guests have individual dietary needs , and as part of its " Have It Your Way " promise , Burger King offers menu items for individuals with gluten sensitivity . BK food is prepared with several known food allergens , including wheat , milk , soy , and eggs . 
 = = Products = = 
 The range of products sold usually depends on the time of day . Lunch items such as hamburgers and fries are traditionally not served during breakfast time . However , some BK stores do sell food under their " Burgers for Breakfast " program . While for several years the company dictated hours to its franchisees in the United States , that changed with the sale of the company in 2010 . The new owners relaxed the mandated hours for stores to be open from 6 am to midnight Monday through Saturday and 7 am to midnight on Sundays ; franchises were encouraged to stay open later or for 24 hours in markets that could support the business . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 Burger King 's product packaging has undergone many changes over the years . Unlike McDonald 's , the company never used the clamshell style box made of Styrofoam , so when the environmental concerns over Styrofoam came to a head in the late 1980s , the company touted its use of paperboard boxes for its sandwiches . When McDonald 's moved to eliminate its styrofoam packaging , Burger King ran several sarcastically @-@ worded ads in national newspapers stating that it had always wrapped its sandwiches in waxed paper ; they welcomed McDonald 's " to the club " . To cut back on the amount of paper that the company used , the paperboard box was mostly eliminated in 1991 ; it was replaced with waxed paper . <unk> boxes are still used for its " finger food " products like Chicken Tenders and Fries , French toast sticks , and desserts . 
 In 2004 , the company committed itself to a redesign of its entire packaging line that tied the packaging into its irreverent advertising campaign created by Crispin , Porter + Bogusky . Each product 's packaging included a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek commentary about the product itself . Alex Bogusky , partner and executive creative director of CP + B , stated that BK decided " to create a dialogue with the consumer " by utilizing the large areas of white space found on its packaging at the time . All of its sandwich wrappers , cartons , tray liners , bags , breakfast platters , chili cups , condiments , and regional product packaging received what was described as " quirky ad copy " specifically targeting the 18 – 34 @-@ year @-@ old male demographic segment . Besides the humorous commentary , the company also created <unk> @-@ type names for things that would appear in its products , such as a " ringer " – a single onion ring that had been accidentally included in an order of fries . 
 Starting with the introduction of its BK Chicken Fries product in 2005 , BK began adapting some of its product packaging so that it could be placed in an automotive cup holder . The BK Chicken Fry box , while square in shape , will sit comfortably in the cup holder and its top , when opened , forms a small tray that is designed to hold dipping sauce . Burger King credits the design of this box with helping to make its Chicken Fries the most popular adult @-@ oriented chicken product in the United States . It has since added a trademarked and patented round French fry container which it calls the " FryPod " , which is a paper cup made from 50 percent recycled materials that is designed to fit in an automotive cup holder . The package design won an honorable mention at a packaging industry design competition . BK 's large and King sized beverage containers are made from molded HDPE plastic with a funnel @-@ like shaped bottom that allows the oversized cups to fit in cup holders . 
 Union Packaging , a minority @-@ owned , Philadelphia @-@ based paper products company , has supplied much of the packaging for Burger King 's North American operations since winning its first contract in 2000 . The original $ 15 million contract was for paperboard " clamshell " containers and covered 1 @,@ 250 BK locations in the United States . Union was instrumental in the development of the FryPod carton , and its efforts earned the company a supplier of the year award from Burger King in 2007 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Over time , the company reformulates various products in an attempt to boost sales of the product or to improve the taste , appearance , or physical consistency of the product . One such example of this is the BK Big Fish , the company 's fish sandwich offering in North America . Burger King 's original fish sandwich , introduced as early as the late 1960s in some markets , was called the Whaler ; it was a smaller fish sandwich made with tartar sauce and lettuce served on the small sesame seed roll BK used for their hamburgers . When Burger King introduced its broiled chicken sandwich in 1990 , the BK Broiler , it changed the fish sandwich 's breading to a panko style , began serving it on an oatmeal @-@ dusted roll that was used for the broiled chicken sandwich , and renamed the product the Ocean Catch sandwich . When BK reformulated the BK Broiler , the company also reformulated the Ocean Catch as the BK Big Fish in its current configuration . The sandwich was again briefly reformulated after the phase @-@ out of the Baguette sandwiches , and was reintroduced as the Big Fish in 2005 . 
 One of the company 's larger product reformulations came in March 2011 . The company updated the recipe of its 25 + year @-@ old Chicken Tender product line by reformulating the breading and spice mixture while updating the shape . The new formulation was described by the company as being " more broadly appealing " to the palate of its customers according to statement released by the company . Nation 's Restaurant News analyst John Barone stated that the change may also be due to an industry wide move to chicken @-@ based product as a result of raising commodity prices , forcing restaurants to turn towards chicken @-@ based offerings due to the elevated pork and beef prices occurring during the previous year . He added that chicken breast costs have been down or flat during the same period , making it a more appealing choice to companies . The new product push was accompanied with a product tie @-@ in with the movie Hop aimed at the youth market , an adult @-@ oriented advertising campaign pushing convenience and product customization and a nationwide coupon mailing in the United States . Online advertising was emphasized with the release a Facebook gaming application it called the " Tender 8 " . 
 = = = Limited time offers = = = 
 To generate additional sales , BK will occasionally introduce limited time offers ( LTO ) that are versions of its core products or new products intended for either long- or short @-@ term sales . Many of these LTO products focus on core menu products such as the Whopper , which has featured variations such as the Texas Double Whopper with added jalapeños , bacon , and <unk> cheese . Other <unk> include all @-@ new sandwiches like the Chick 'n Crisp sandwich ( now a permanent item in many regions ) and test products such as the company 's Great American Burger , which was an attempt at a premium sandwich in 2003 . It was made with a Whopper patty and several new ingredients , including a bakery @-@ style bun ; peppered bacon ; whole @-@ leaf , as opposed to shredded , lettuce ; seasoned mustard ; and a special sauce . The burger was served with American cheese , mayonnaise , tomato , and onions . A similar burger was tested in Wisconsin in 1999 . That Great American burger featured a single 8 oz ( 230 g ) burger patty and different toppings . It was designed to be cooked on a forerunner of the current batch broiler . 
 Other LTO products sought to expand existing product lines with new base ingredients . The company 's 1992 offering , a Meatloaf Specialty Sandwich , was introduced as part of a push into limited table service . Other LTO variants in its Specialty Sandwich line included an Italian sausage sandwich served in one of three ways : with onions and peppers ; parmigiana @-@ style with mozzarella cheese and marinara sauce ; or with all four ingredients . Steak sandwiches were made from steak fillets or later , restructured beef . Other offerings were a ham and cheese sandwich with mayonnaise , lettuce , and tomato , and a veal parmigiana sandwich . 
 = = = Trends = = = 
 The company is not above following trends within the fast food and fast casual industry ; two of examples of this can be seen in some of its former products . The company 's first wrap product , called a BK Wrapper , was introduced in North America as a breakfast option in April 2008 , with a lunch / dinner version offered in September 2008 . These products were in response to industry trends towards products that are easier to consume on the go , and to trends that began in 2007 regarding smaller foods . Originally a limited time offer , the lunch / dinner version of this product was sold as a regional item through late 2009 , when they were eliminated due to weakening sales . The 2009 introduction of BK Burger Shots , Burger King 's version of sliders , was part of a wider trend in the restaurant industry for this type of sandwich . European locations sell them as the BK Six Pack . The variation sold in the UK and Ireland is called the Angus 6 Pack ; it is six small burgers that are attached together . In the United States they are based on the Burger Bundles / Burger Buddies products of the 1980s , which were originally inspired by the similar products sold at White Castle and Krystal , 
 = = = Licensed products = = = 
 In 2007 , Burger King began licensing its logo and items to outside companies for non @-@ Burger King products . A licensed products company , Broad Street Licensing Group , and its manufacturing partner , the <unk> Group , introduced the first products in the fall of that year : flavored potato crisps in two flavors , flame @-@ broiled burger and French fries with ketchup . <unk> added a third flavor , onion rings , in 2008 . A second licensed product , the company 's child @-@ oriented BK Fresh Apple Fries , was licensed for sale in supermarkets in 2009 to the <unk> Pak company . The company stated that while the products are important in providing brand identity , they will not be concentrating their resources on them , and will be investing the licensing fees into the company 's marketing fund . Industry pundits have criticized the company for this scheme , with Rob Frankel , author of the book The Revenge of Brand X , stating " just because you can do something does not mean you should . " 
 The licensing deals have proven successful . Broad Street has expanded the product line to seventeen countries across the globe while increasing selection to more than a half dozen products designed to mimic the flavors of some of Burger King 's core menu products . The success of the product line and licensing deals garnered the companies an award for " Brand Extension of the Year " from License ! Global magazine , and earned them a nomination for " Best Corporate License of the Year " from the Licensing Industry Merchandisers Association . 
 ConAgra Foods entered into a licensing agreement with Burger King in 2009 for a new line of <unk> French fry products . The new products are King <unk> , which are seasoned crinkle @-@ cut fries ; King <unk> , an extra @-@ large package of fries ; and King <unk> , seasoned potato wedges . The products were slated to be released in September 2009 . The packaging is designed to resemble BK 's FryPod fry container . 
 = = = Failed products = = = 
 Burger King has introduced several new products that performed well in testing , but did not catch on with the public . The failure of the BK Baguette line of sandwiches is an example a product that did not meet corporate expectations ; another earlier failure was the Bull 's @-@ eye Barbecue Burger . The sandwich consisted of two side @-@ by @-@ side hamburger patties , American cheese , and bacon , with Bull 's @-@ eye Barbecue brand barbecue sauce . The sandwich was served on the same 7 in ( 18 cm ) roll as the Specialty Sandwiches . Later it was sold as a traditional @-@ style double cheeseburger . 
 In 1992 , during its time under the ownership of Britain @-@ based Grand Metropolitan , Burger King experimented with table service . After 4 pm , customers would place their order at the counter , and their order would be brought to them at their table . Customers were given complimentary popcorn to eat while waiting for their meal . To coincide with the offering , a series of meals called the Dinner baskets were introduced . The dinner baskets included the Whopper Dinner Basket , Steak Sandwich Dinner Basket , Fried Chicken Dinner Basket , and Shrimp Dinner Basket . In the New England region of the United States , BK sold a Fried clam Basket . The dinner came with two sides , including a choice of a side salad , cole <unk> , French fries , or baked potato . Lasting approximately a year , the sit @-@ down restaurant concept was abandoned in 1994 in favor of the original quick @-@ service formula . 
 Another failed product , this time under Grand Metropolitan 's successor Diageo , was the BK Back Porch <unk> line of burgers that featured a spiced and flavored patty served on a bakery @-@ style roll . There were two varieties : The Regular served with mayonnaise , whole leaf iceberg lettuce , tomato and grilled onions , and the Bacon Cheddar , with bacon and smoked cheddar cheese . There was one LTO variety , the Black Stack <unk> , made with Black Strap Barbecue sauce ( a strong molasses @-@ flavored sauce ) , bacon , lettuce , and tomato , to promote Men in Black II . The <unk> patty was flavored so that it had a taste similar to a hamburger that had been grilled over a charcoal @-@ fired grill . 
 One of its international failures was the BK Crown Jewels line of sandwiches , originally sold in New Zealand . These larger , adult @-@ oriented sandwiches were made with fried and grilled chicken or a Whopper patty and a variety of toppings and served on a Kaiser roll . <unk> included a mango lime sauce , avocado , aioli , a Cajun spiced sauce , and relish . Originally successful , the sandwiches piqued the interest of Burger King 's corporate offices and were being considered for a potential global rollout . However , interest in the product faded and they were discontinued . 
 Introduced as a direct challenge of corporate rival McDonald 's , the Big King was Burger King 's response to the Big Mac and had a similar style and taste . The sandwich was originally introduced in 1993 under the name Double Supreme during its testing stage . The name was switched to Big King when it was introduced nationally in 1997 , and again to the King Supreme when reintroduced in 2002 . The sandwich was discontinued in the North American market in the mid @-@ 2000s . In November 2013 , Burger King brought the Big King back to the North American market as a permanent menu item . The Big King sandwich 's recipe is exactly the same as the original 1990s recipe , including a three @-@ piece roll . The Big King sandwich is also sold in many of the company 's international markets in several forms . 
 = = Suppliers and purchasing = = 
 = = = Purchasing guidelines for meat = = = 
 Like many of its competitors , BK has been targeted by various animal welfare groups , such as PETA , over the treatment of the animals it uses in the manufacture of its ingredients . In a concession to these groups , BK agreed to adopt a series of policies for its suppliers for several of its raw animal products . The company has established a preference for purchasing eggs and pork @-@ based products from those suppliers that use cage @-@ free production methods . 
 = = = = 2001 Guidelines = = = = 
 As part of its 2001 guidelines , Burger King stated that it would begin conducting announced and unannounced inspections of the slaughterhouses for all of its meat suppliers and take action against facilities that fail those inspections . It would establish animal @-@ handling verification guidelines for all the slaughterhouses of its suppliers . The company would require its suppliers to confine no more than five hens in each battery cage , that the birds be able to stand fully upright , and require the presence of two water drinkers per cage . It would stop purchasing from suppliers who engage in the forced molting of hens , develop auditing procedures for the handling of " broiler " chickens , and institute humane handling procedures for chickens at slaughterhouses . It would begin purchasing pork from farms that do not confine sows to stalls . 
 Per the conditions of its agreement with the groups , the company filed a petition in 2002 with the Food and Drug Administration requesting the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) step up enforcement of the Humane Slaughter Act of 1958 . The USDA agreed with the request , stating " it is granting your petition and is developing a proposed rule that addresses the issue of humane handling . " The USDA failed to indicate when it intended to publish the proposal in the Federal Register and solicit public comment , which would be the first step before the agency drafts a final rule . 
 = = = = 2008 Guidelines = = = = 
 The company amended its purchasing guidelines in 2008 . It announced that it would expand its pork purchasing guidelines by requiring 10 % of its pork products be purchased from suppliers who do not use gestation crates , metal enclosures that confine sows and restrict the animal 's movement , and double that amount by the end of the year . It would also immediately begin purchasing 2 % of its eggs from producers whose hens are not confined to small wire battery cages , and double that amount by the end of that year . It agreed with PETA that the company would issue a statement that it would be give purchasing preference to egg suppliers that do not use battery cages and to those poultry suppliers that utilize or upgrade to controlled atmosphere killing , which is considered to be a more humane method of chicken and turkey slaughter . 
 = = = = 2012 Guidelines = = = = 
 A third round of guidelines was issued in April 2012 when the company announced that it would begin phasing in a plan to stop purchasing poultry and pork products from suppliers that caged animals . With this announcement , Burger King became the first American Fast food company to promise to purchase 100 % of its eggs from companies that did not utilize wire battery cages and pork from suppliers that did not use gestational cages for sows . This is an increase of the percentage of cage free products from 9 % of egg purchases and 20 % of pork purchases the company made in 2008 . The plan should be completed by 2017 . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 = = = = Condiments = = = = 
 The H.J. Heinz Company is a significant supplier of condiments to Burger King . The relationship between the two companies dates back into the twentieth century , and they have worked together on several programs such as the 2001 promotional tie @-@ in with the movie Shrek . Heinz provided an LTO <unk> ' Green EZ Squirt colored ketchup and an apple flavored " ooze " dipping sauce for distribution with the Shrek @-@ branded kid 's meals . Heinz has become a primary supplier of ketchup in the United States , Mexico , and Great Britain , while supplying various sauces in several European countries . 
 Kraft foods has supplied many of its products to BK over the years . Several of its condiment lines have found their way into BK menu items . Two Kraft products were involved in direct tie @-@ ins : the Bull 's @-@ Eye BBQ Burger in 2005 and the A @-@ 1 Steakhouse XT sandwich in 2010 . In both cases , Burger King prominently used the names of the Kraft products , A1 Steak Sauce and Bull 's @-@ Eye Barbecue Sauce , in the names of the sandwiches . Kraft has supplied several of Burger King 's children 's products , including a Jell @-@ O brand dessert during BK 's Teletubbies promotion in 1999 , and the Kraft macaroni and cheese used in its lower @-@ fat kid 's meals introduced in 2009 . 
 = = = = Proteins = = = = 
 During the late 1960s , Tyson Foods was devising new methods to broaden their market , including introducing smaller consumer packaging and landing military contracts . The company expanded its commercial division by offering new products to McDonald 's and Burger King . Tyson 's McDonald 's product eventually evolved into Chicken McNuggets while Burger King 's product became the basis of its chicken sandwiches . For their 2010 rib promotion , Tyson was Burger King 's pork supplier . Despite a production @-@ significant lead time , the estimated four @-@ month product supply lasted Burger king less than three months . 
 A 1996 E. Coli outbreak at one of Burger King 's largest beef providers , Hudson Foods , gave Tyson Foods one of its largest business coups . Hudson was one of the largest poultry providers in the United States and one of Tyson 's largest competitors when they moved into beef processing at the behest of Burger King . Once it had secured a contract with Burger King , Hudson opened a beef processing plant in Nebraska . When the plant was identified as the source of an E. Coli breakout in 1996 , Burger King abandoned the company as a supplier . 
 Lopez Foods , Inc. of Oklahoma City is a supplier of beef to the Burger King . While Lopez 's primary customer is McDonald 's , the company supplies BK as well . 
 = = = = Sides and desserts = = = = 
 McCain Foods became a supplier of potato products to the company in 1998 , shortly after an agreement with farmers in Maine to supply potatoes for use in the fast food market . 
 Edwards Baking provides Burger King with prepackaged pies and pie @-@ style desserts while providing oversight and assistance with the chain 's dessert products . BK is one of Edwards ' major national contracts , where the company provides Burger King with assistance in marketing programs , point @-@ of @-@ purchase advertising materials , market research , and other resources . Edwards has a full @-@ time staff assigned to Burger King 's headquarters in Miami . Before Edwards became Burger King 's primary baked goods supplier , the chain had a contract with Awrey Bakeries of Livonia , Michigan , for its line of pre @-@ packaged breakfast products . Burger King sold a line of Awrey products including danish , doughnuts , and birthday cakes . 
 = = = Beverages = = = 
 = = = = Soft drinks = = = = 
 Traditionally Burger King has sold soft drinks from the Coca @-@ Cola Company in its home market . In 1983 , PepsiCo garnered the $ 444 million beverage supplier contract from its rival , and , in the midst of extreme market debate over the future of the contract , had it renewed for a second term in 1987 . The company won the contract by strengthening the marketing and advertising program ties between Burger King and itself . The contract lasted three more years when , partially based upon Pepsi 's growth as a restaurant operator with its Tricon Restaurants division , Burger King moved its beverage contract back to Coca @-@ Cola . 
 Since 1990 , Burger King has continued using Coca @-@ Cola as its beverage supplier , renewing its contract in several times . The Coca @-@ Cola contract is not without its problems ; the 1999 contract called for the Coca @-@ Cola branded Icee products to be made a permanent menu item in all American locations . After the rollout , it was discovered that Coca @-@ Cola employees had faked product test information to bolster prospective sales numbers in an effort to entice franchisees to enroll in a summertime advertising push . Several Coke employees were terminated , and Coca @-@ Cola changed the in @-@ store promotional materials to emphasize the Icee name . The 2003 contract officially extended the relationship between the two companies so that Coca @-@ Cola was the exclusive supplier of soft drinks for the company . Before this , individual international franchises would negotiate their own contracts with their company of choice . The 2003 contract gave Coca @-@ Cola new access to the 3 @,@ 000 operating or planned restaurants on the Asia @-@ Pacific rim , in Europe , and in South and Central America . The purchase of Burger King by 3G Capital lead to a change in the beverage contract for the Caribbean and Latin America markets . 3G , which owns <unk> and is the producer and distributor of PepsiCo products in the region , started cross @-@ licensing between its two companies in April 2011 and switched to Pepsi in these markets . 
 In 1999 , Burger King added a second soft drink supplier contract with the Dr Pepper Snapple Group to include Dr Pepper to its beverage line up in North American restaurants . 
 Burger King 's supply contracts for non @-@ carbonated beverages are separate from the ones for its sodas . When the company first chose to introduce a bottled water product , it chose Nestlé 's Poland Spring brand over Coke 's <unk> . When the contract expired in 2003 , BK moved to Pepsi 's <unk> , the top @-@ selling brand at the time . In 2008 Burger King renewed its relationship with Nestlé by entering into an agreement to sell Pure Life bottled water products . BK moved away from Pepsi 's Tropicana brand juices in 2001 when it went with Coca @-@ Cola 's Minute Maid brands for the North America market . With the introduction of its Positive Steps nutrition program for children , the company turned to the Hershey Company to provide Hershey 's branded low @-@ fat milk in its North American stores . BK is utilizing a popular brand name to promote its products in a move to draw customers ' attention to itself and its meal programs . 
 = = = = Coffee = = = = 
 Produced by Sara Lee 's Douwe <unk> brand , BK Joe was Burger King 's coffee line that was first introduced in 2001 in North America and later in parts of Europe . Advertised as being made from <unk> coffee , the product was made using Douwe 's <unk> system , a platform that eschews coffee brewed from ground beans in favor of a beverage made from a coffee concentrate with hot water added . Sara Lee claims the advantage of the system is that each cup of coffee is made at the time of order with minimal waste and labor . The product was not designed to compete with products from companies such as Starbucks , but was intended to appeal to customers who seek a consistent cup of coffee . 
 Despite the investment in the Douwe Egbert product , Burger King announced it would be phasing out the <unk> system in the United States in the summer of 2010 in favor of Starbucks ' Seattle 's Best brand of coffee . Throughout the summer of 2010 , BK added several new coffee @-@ based products to the new coffee line in an initial effort to bring in more customers during the morning sales period . The new coffee products , including flavored coffees and iced coffee drinks , are available all day to compete with McDonald 's <unk> coffee line . Every Friday during November 2010 , Burger King gave away free 12 US fl oz ( 350 ml ) cups of Seattle 's Best Coffee to encourage people to try its breakfast and coffee lines . The company predicted the number of free cups of coffee would number between two and four million . 
 = = = = Alcoholic drinks = = = = 
 For many years Burger King has sold beer in several of its international locations , such as Germany , but not in its home territory . The company began to sell beer at its BK Whopper Bar limited service concept restaurants in Miami , New York , and Los Angeles in 2010 . The company is selling products from SABMiller and Anheuser @-@ Busch , including Budweiser , Bud Lite , and Miller Lite in aluminum bottles designed to maintain temperature . The move , designed to target the important 30 @-@ and @-@ under demographic , has been called risky by industry analysts because the company is known as a fast food purveyor and not as an alcoholic beverages seller . Other industry consultants have disagreed with the assessment , believing that the move is timely because the company is growing with its aging customer base . 
 = = = Distributors = = = 
 For many years Burger King owned and operated its own distribution system , known originally as Distron . Distron , founded shortly after establishment of Burger King , primarily served the company @-@ owned stores and 50 – 60 percent of franchised stores . Franchise groups were free to purchase supplies from one of seventeen independent distribution systems , often operated by larger franchise groups such as Carrols Restaurant Group . The Distron setup remained relatively stable until BK was purchased from Pillsbury by Grand Metropolitan . Grand Met originally planned to sell it after the purchase , but ended up reorganizing the division into two separate groups for procurement ( Burger King Purchasing [ BKP ] ) and distribution ( Burger King Distribution Services [ BKDS ] ) . The move resulted in the layoff of over a hundred staff members . 
 In 1992 , Burger King and its franchises formed Restaurant Services Inc . ( RSI ) , an independent purchasing cooperative , which covered 100 percent of BK stores in the United States . The creation of RSI was based on a proposal by then @-@ CEO Barry Gibbons create an organization that would be autonomous from BK corporate operations , provide full financial disclosure to participants on pricing issues and revenues , and enjoy the participation of the entire chain to maximize the benefits of volume purchasing . The format of RSI was based on the system employed by KFC for its distribution system and was operated in a similar manner . Two weeks after the formation of the co @-@ operative , Grand Met sold the physical assets of BKDS to Canadian @-@ based buyout firm <unk> Corporation and folded BKP into RSI . 
 Currently the company utilizes independent distributors such as Maines Paper and Food Service and Sysco for supplying North American stores with food and paper products . 
 = 1953 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1953 Atlantic hurricane season was the first time an organized list of female names was used to name Atlantic storms . It officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 , although activity occurred both before and after the season 's limits . The season was active with fourteen total storms , six of which developed into hurricanes ; four of the hurricanes attained major hurricane status , or a Category 3 or greater on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . 
 The strongest hurricane of the season was Carol , although by the time it struck Atlantic Canada it was much weaker . Both hurricanes Barbara and Florence struck the United States ; the former crossed the Outer Banks and impacted much of the east coast , and Florence struck a sparsely populated region of the Florida Panhandle without causing much damage . Bermuda was threatened by three hurricanes within two weeks . In addition to the hurricanes , Tropical Storm Alice developed in late May and left several fatalities in Cuba . The final named storm of the season , Hazel , produced additional rainfall in Florida after previous flooding conditions . There were several unnamed storms , the last of which dissipated on December 9 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Alice = = = 
 A tropical storm developed east of Nicaragua on May 25 , executing a counterclockwise loop over Central America . After weakening over land , Alice re @-@ intensified over the western Caribbean , moving over western Cuba on May 21 with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . On June 1 , it entered the Gulf of Mexico , and later executed another loop off the northwest coast of Cuba . Alice quickly weakened due to a cold front , and advisories were discontinued by June 3 . While near Cuba , Alice produced drought @-@ breaking rainfall that caused flooding and several unofficial drowning deaths . 
 After passing near Cuba , Alice turned to the north and restrengthened to peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ( in fact , it is possible Alice briefly reached hurricane intensity but data was inconclusive ) . It again weakened before making landfall near Panama City Beach on June 6 as a minimal tropical storm , and Alice dissipated shortly thereafter . Alice brought heavy rainfall to Florida , peaking at 13 @.@ 48 inches ( 342 mm ) in Lake Placid . Near where it made landfall , the storm dropped light rainfall , and there were no reports of damage in the state . Alice was the first North Atlantic tropical cyclone to have a female name . It was also one of 22 tropical or subtropical cyclones on record in the month of May . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 = = = Hurricane Barbara = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Storm Barbara over the Bahamas on August 11 . It intensified as it moved north @-@ northwestward , becoming a hurricane by the next day , and reaching peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) just south of Cape Hatteras on August 13 . Barbara moved over the Outer Banks , passing between Morehead City and Ocracoke , and it turned and accelerated to the northeast . Steadily weakening and losing tropical characteristics , the hurricane transitioned into an extratropical cyclone late on August 15 . It turned northward , crossing eastern Nova Scotia and dissipating over Labrador on August 16 . 
 Before Barbara struck the Outer Banks , officials ordered evacuations for a few islands , and several thousand tourists voluntarily left the region . Wind gusts reached 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) at Hatteras and Nags Head . Torrential rainfall fell across the state and extended northward into Virginia , peaking at 11 @.@ 1 in ( 280 mm ) near Onley along the Eastern Shore of Virginia . Across the region , the hurricane left flooding and downed trees , some of which survived the Great Atlantic Hurricane of 1944 . Monetary damage from Barbara was estimated around $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( 1953 USD , $ 11 @.@ 5 million 2016 USD ) , mostly from the crop damage . Newspaper reports indicated there were seven deaths in the country ; two additional deaths occurred offshore Atlantic Canada when a dory sunk . 
 = = = Hurricane Carol = = = 
 On August 28 , a tropical wave developed into a tropical depression near Cape Verde . After moving west @-@ southwestward , it turned to the northwest , intensifying into a tropical storm on August 31 and into a hurricane on September 2 . Passing northeast of the Lesser Antilles , Carol rapidly intensified to Category 5 intensity , reaching peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) on September 3 , making it the strongest hurricane of the season . It gradually weakened , bypassing Bermuda on September 6 and producing high waves . Carol later turned to the north @-@ northeast , brushing Cape Cod and causing boating accidents across New England . Four people were killed in the region . Fishing losses totaled around $ 1 million ( 1953 USD , $ 8 @.@ 84 million 2016 USD ) . 
 After bypassing New England , Carol brushed western Nova Scotia before moving ashore near Saint John , New Brunswick as a minimal hurricane . As it moved ashore , it produced hurricane conditions in eastern Maine , one of only six Atlantic hurricanes to do so . In Nova Scotia , several boats were wrecked or washed ashore , with one drowning death reported . High seas caused coastal flooding , while strong winds downed large areas of trees . Heavy losses to the apple crop occurred in Annapolis Valley , totaling $ 1 million ( 1950 CAD , $ 9 @.@ 15 million 2016 USD ) . Carol later dissipated southwest of Greenland on September 9 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 On August 29 , a tropical storm developed near Isla de la Juventud , south of the western tip of Cuba . It moved erratically , first quickly northwestward through Cuba , followed by a turn to the east across southern Florida . While moving through the state , the storm dropped heavy rainfall , reaching 4 @.@ 67 in ( 119 mm ) at Fort Lauderdale Beach ; similar rainfall was observed in the northern Bahamas . Although one Weather Bureau forecaster described the system as " wide and flat " , the storm gradually organized over the western Atlantic Ocean . On August 31 , after turning to the northwest , the storm reached peak winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , although it weakened to a tropical depression before moving ashore near Savannah , Georgia on September 1 . It turned to the north over land , and dissipated over Kentucky on September 3 . 
 = = = Hurricane Dolly = = = 
 The origins of Dolly were from a tropical wave that moved through the eastern Caribbean Sea , producing 10 in ( 250 mm ) in Saint Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands . The rains closed schools and government buildings around San Juan , Puerto Rico , and flooding was reported in Guayama , Yabucoa , and Patillas . On September 8 , a tropical storm developed north of Puerto Rico , which moved slowly west @-@ southwestward before turning to the north . It quickly intensified , and after Hurricane Hunters reported an eye , Dolly reached hurricane status on September 9 . At that time , hurricane warnings were issued in the Bahamas , although the storm turned away from the archipelago . It intensified to peak winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) on September 10 , as reported by aircraft . 
 Dolly weakened as it accelerated northeastward , although it still threatened to strike Bermuda with strong winds . As a result , the United States Air Force ordered all of the planes on the island to fly to the mainland . After continued weakening , Dolly passed over the island on September 11 , producing only gale @-@ force winds , rains , and little to no damage . It deteriorated into a tropical storm on September 12 and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone later that day . The remnants of Dolly later turned eastward , dissipating just west of Portugal on September 17 . 
 = = = Hurricane Edna = = = 
 Shortly behind Dolly , another tropical wave spawned a tropical depression over the Lesser Antilles on September 15 . As it moved through the region , it produced unsettled conditions across the northeast Caribbean . Dolly quickly intensified as it tracked northwestward , attaining hurricane status on September 15 and peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) the next day . After peaking , the hurricane turned to the northeast and maintained most of its intensity for a few days . It passed just north of Bermuda early on September 18 with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , before beginning a steady weakening trend as it accelerated . By September 19 , Edna completed the transition into an extratropical cyclone , lasting another day before dissipating west of Ireland . 
 Before Edna struck Bermuda , the islanders were well @-@ prepared due to being previously impacted by hurricanes Carol and Dolly , and they boarded up their homes . The hurricane caused " considerable damage " , with wind gusts reaching 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . The winds downed trees , blocking roads , and also caused disruptions to the power and water services . During its passage , Edna produced heavy rainfall and also damaged several roofs . There were three injuries on the island . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the western Gulf of Mexico on September 14 and moved eastward . The storm produced heavy seas across the region , which damaged two small boats . After turning to the northeast , the storm reached peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , followed by executing a clockwise loop from September 16 through September 18 . After maintaining peak winds for about five days , the storm weakened , by which time it curved to the northeast . On September 20 , it moved ashore in Taylor County , Florida and later crossed the state . The storm dissipated on September 21 just off the Georgia coast . 
 = = = Hurricane Florence = = = 
 Florence developed on September 23 near Jamaica from a tropical wave . While passing that island , it produced heavy rainfall that blocked roads . It intensified to hurricane status on September 24 while passing through the Yucatán Channel , and while doing so left heavy damage in western Cuba . After turning north and entering the Gulf of Mexico , Florence quickly intensified to peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . It gradually weakened before making landfall on September 26 as a minimal hurricane in a sparsely populated region of the Florida Panhandle . 
 Before Florence hit the United States Gulf Coast , about 10 @,@ 000 people evacuated Panama City , Florida , and the Weather Bureau issued timely warnings that was credited in preventing any deaths or major injuries . Winds reached 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) at Eglin Air Force Base , and the heaviest rainfall was 14 @.@ 71 in ( 374 mm ) in Lockhart , Alabama . The combination of winds and heavy rainfall left crop damage in the Florida panhandle and southeastern Alabama , although coastal damage was not severe . Overall , 421 houses were damaged and another three were destroyed , with monetary damage estimated around $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1953 USD , $ 1 @.@ 77 million 2016 USD ) . After landfall , Florence quickly transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , and as it continued across the southeastern United States it produced moderately heavy rainfall . It dissipated on September 28 southeast of New England . 
 = = = Hurricane Gail = = = 
 On October 2 , a tropical wave spawned a tropical depression about 815 mi ( 1310 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . The depression quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Gail , and the next day , a ship encountered the storm , reporting a minimum pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 12 inHg ) . As the ship crossed through the center , it reported winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , indicating Gail attained hurricane status . Initially believed to have dissipated and reformed as a new unnamed storm on October 5 , in reality Gail continued northwest and then meandered around the central Atlantic before being absorbed by a front on October 12 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eleven = = = 
 On October 3 , a tropical storm developed near the southern coast of Cuba . It moved northwestward , crossing the island before turning to the northeast . Early on October 5 , the storm brushed southeastern Florida , producing gusty winds and rainfall . The threat of the storm prompted small craft warnings from the Florida Keys through South Carolina . As it accelerated northeastward , the storm strengthened slightly to maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , before becoming extratropical on October 6 . Two days later , the remnants moved over Atlantic Canada with winds of 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) , producing flooding rainfall that washed out several roads . The storm caused two deaths after it wrecked a boat in Broad Cove , Nova Scotia . Later , the cyclone passed south of Greenland before dissipating southwest of Iceland on October 10 . 
 = = = Hurricane Hazel = = = 
 The twelfth tropical storm and the final named storm of the season formed in the Yucatán Channel on October 7 . Given the name Hazel , the storm tracked north @-@ northeastward , then northeastward through the Gulf of Mexico while gradually intensifying . On October 9 , Hazel strengthened into a hurricane made landfall just north of Fort Myers , Florida at its peak intensity of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Peak wind gusts were 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , with a minimum pressure of 987 @.@ 0 mb ( 29 @.@ 15 inHg ) reported in Okeechobee City . The storm crossed the state in about six hours , during which it weakened slightly back to a tropical storm . Over the western Atlantic Ocean , Hazel re @-@ intensified to its peak winds , although by late on October 10 it transitioned into an extratropical storm between North Carolina and Bermuda . The remnants continued northeastward , dissipating southeast of Newfoundland on October 12 . On Sable Island , the storm produced heavy winds and rain . 
 Due to the fairly light winds across Florida , damage from Hazel was minor , estimated around $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1953 USD , $ 2 @.@ 21 million 2016 USD ) . During its passage , the storm spawned a tornado in St. James City that destroyed several homes , and there were indications of another tornado in Okeechobee City . The primary impact from Hazel was from its rainfall , peaking at 10 @.@ 53 inches ( 267 mm ) in Daytona Beach . The rains added to previous flooding conditions across the state , causing a record flood stage along the St. Johns River that flooded 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of highway . Overall flooding damage was estimated up to $ 10 million ( 1953 USD , $ 88 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) , but it was impossible to determine how much was due to Hazel . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Thirteen = = = 
 A tropical storm developed on November 23 about 460 mi ( 740 km ) northeast of Barbuda in the Lesser Antilles . It moved northeastward , strengthening to peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on November 24 . It later turned sharply to the west as it began a weakening trend , followed by a curve to the north . The cyclone dissipated on November 26 about 450 mi ( 725 km ) east @-@ northeast of Bermuda , without ever affecting land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Irene = = = 
 The final tropical cyclone of the season developed on December 7 about 705 mi ( 1735 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Lesser Antilles as a tropical depression . It tracked generally westward , briefly intensifying into a tropical storm on December 8 . The next day it dissipated about 270 mi ( 435 km ) north of the Lesser Antilles . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 These names were used to name storms during the 1953 season . The list was the same for the 1954 season as well . Initially , all female names were used ; it was not until the 1979 season that male and female names were used in alternating order . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . All storm names were named for the first time . No names were retired . 
 = I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) = 
 " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " is a song written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist David Zippel for Walt Disney Pictures ' 35th animated feature film Hercules ( 1997 ) . Included on the film 's soundtrack , the song is performed by American actress and singer Susan Egan in her role as the film 's heroine Meg , while singers Cheryl Freeman , Lillias White , <unk> Y. Thomas , LaChanze and Roz Ryan provide girl group @-@ style backup vocals as the Muses . However , only Egan and Freeman are credited as vocalists on the track . 
 " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " is a mid @-@ tempo R & B and doo @-@ wop ballad reminiscent of the 1950s that incorporates both Motown and teen pop influences . Stylistically similar to the songs of American girl groups The Ronettes and The Supremes , its lyrics are about denying having romantic feelings for someone and parody those of traditional love songs . In the film 's musical sequence , Meg realizes that she has reluctantly begun to fall in love with Hercules but constantly refuses to admit this , while the Muses insist that she stop denying her true feelings for him and embrace them . " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " was written to replace a slower ballad Menken had originally penned for Meg , entitled " I Can 't Believe My Heart " ; the song was abandoned because Meg 's animator Ken Duncan felt that it was not appropriate for her personality . Menken based " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " on songs he had written for his musical Little Shop of Horrors . 
 " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " has been positively received by both film and music critics , who enjoyed its girl group @-@ inspired arrangement , as well as Egan 's sultry delivery and the song 's refreshing difference from traditional Disney ballads ; some critics even dubbed it the film 's best song . While not one of Disney 's most popular songs , " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " has since developed a reputation as one of the studio 's most underrated . American singer Belinda Carlisle recorded a pop rock version of " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " for the film 's soundtrack . American girl group The Cheetah Girls eventually covered the song in 2005 . 
 = = Background and context = = 
 " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " was written by composer Alan Menken and lyricist David Zippel . Menken had originally composed a " soaring " ballad entitled " I Can 't Believe My Heart " for Meg to perform , which would have served as a solo for the heroine intended to depict her falling in love with Hercules . However , Meg 's supervising animator Ken Duncan disagreed with Menken 's song because he believed that the character was simply " too tough " and " hardened by life " to perform such a soft ballad . The writers also agreed that Meg " wasn ’ t a ballad kind of girl . " Therefore , Menken was prompted to write " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " , the style of which he based on girl group songs he had written for his musical Little Shop of Horrors , with which " I Can 't Believe My Heart " was ultimately replaced . Although she had liked the original song , actress and singer Susan Egan , who voices Meg , agreed that the much slower " I Can 't Believe My Heart " was not a suitable number for her character to perform because it was " too straightforward and literal " , whereas " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " expresses a similar meaning , only " the way Meg would — without admitting any of it . " 
 Egan joked that although " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " was " fun " to perform , she felt much more " white " than usual recording alongside the five singers cast as the Muses , who provide the song 's back up vocals . Familiar with singers Cheryl Freeman , Lillias White , <unk> Y. Thomas , LaChanze and Roz Ryan 's Broadway work , Egan felt intimated by their powerful voices and riffing abilities . Egan recalled , " Alan would say , ' Okay Lillias ( White ) , just do a riff over there and LaChanze , you do a little something over here and Susan , just at the end , get from this note to this note and just do a riff . ' I raise my hand and I 'm like , ' Umm , can you plunk it out on the piano ? ' He looks at me like , ' Are you kidding ? ' " While it took Egan half an hour to solidify only one of her riffs , the other singers recorded multiple takes of theirs within that same time ; Egan was greatly humbled by the experience . On the film 's soundtrack , only Egan and Freeman are credited as vocalists on the track . Menken also produced the song . While Danny Troob arranged the song , Michael <unk> conducted the orchestration . 
 Recognized as Meg 's signature song , " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " has been identified as the character 's " big moment of romantic realization " in Hercules . Prior to " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " , the audience has only been exposed to Meg 's cynicism ; the song finally reveals that Meg 's cynicism is actually a reaction to her romantic side . " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " reveals that the character has fallen in love too fast before , and explains that she is afraid of repeating the same mistake once more with Hercules . Despite her best efforts , the character realizes that she has in fact begun to develop feelings for Hercules much to her chagrin , but at first refuses to admit this ; the song allows Meg to " work through her denial " . " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " resembles an " admonishing " exchange between Meg and the Muses . Finally , the character 's resistance eventually proves futile and she ultimately relents . Tracy Dye of Bustle described the scene : " Joined by The Muses , Meg attempts to vehemently deny her amour for Hercules " . Writing for film critic Eric D. Snider 's website , Kimber Kay joked that Meg " tries her best to give a top 40 rendition of her solo song , but it gets stolen by the magnificent Muses . " Additionally , the musical number predicts that one of Hercules ' most difficult challenges will be trying to change Meg 's opinion of him . Writing for The Daily Dot , Aja Romano cited the song as Meg 's " I Want " song . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 At a length of two minutes and twenty seconds , " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " was written in the key of C major at a tempo of 100 beats per minute , and is performed " freely " in the style of a mellow 1950s girl group song . Featuring " sultry " vocals by Egan , the pop song adheres to " the R & B motif " Menken demonstrates throughout the entire film , incorporating doo @-@ wop this time around . Featuring " cooing <unk> @-@ doos and sha @-@ la @-@ las " by the Muses , who perform " gospel @-@ tinged " back up vocals and riffs on the track , Jeffrey Gantz of the Boston Phoenix compared Egan 's " soaring " vocals to those of girl group The Ronettes . Describing " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " as " a traditional Disney [ heroine 's ] lament , " Vulture.com 's Lindsey Weber acknowledged its " unique Motown edge " , comparing the Muses ' vocals to those of girl group The Supremes . Musically , Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic described the teen pop @-@ influenced " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " as " the closest the Herculean villa ever comes to approximating a Broadway show " . Combined , Egan and the Muses ' vocals span two octaves , from the low note of G3 to the high note of C5 . While acknowledging the uniqueness of Egan 's singing voice , one critic also observed that she lacks the vocal range of the actresses who voiced Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) and Belle from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . Meanwhile , Chelsea Fagan of Thought Catalog described Egan 's voice as both " sarcastic " and " smoky " . 
 Lyrically , the love song is about denial , specifically one 's reluctance to fall in love and succumb to romantic clichés ; Meg deciphers how cliché , insufficient and false love can feel . " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " parodies " classic " love songs , and differs in style from love songs usually featured in Disney films by offering " a unique spin " . Rob Burch of The Hollywood News dubbed " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " an " anti @-@ love song " . Described as an " emotional barnstormer " , the song begins with Egan singing the lyrics " If there 's a prize for rotten judgment I guess I 've already won that " , which is followed by " Been there , done that " . Thought Catalog 's Chelsea Fagan believes that this verse " sums up in four lines everything that we ’ ve ever tried to convey while on our third drink out at the bar with the girls " , joking , " I believe this song would come shortly after dancing in a circle with all women , but just before the tearful texting of your ex " , while inspiring listeners to exclaim " You go , girl " . 
 The song expresses " the hesitancy savvy women everywhere feel when trying to stop themselves from falling head over heels " . Gantz described the Muses ' lyrics " Face it like a grown @-@ up / When ya gonna own up / That ya got got got it bad ? " as " admonishing " . Calling the song a " self @-@ aware ballad " , The Oxford Companion to the American Musical : Theatre , Film , and Television author Thomas S. Hischak observed that its lyrics are " filled with sly anachronisms " . Meanwhile , in his book The Disney Song Encyclopedia , Hischak referred to " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " as a " contradictory love song ... in which Meg denies her true feelings yet admits that she is quite taken with the brawny and naive hero Hercules " , additionally observing the Muses ' " oohs " and " ahs . " According to D23 , " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " is a love song " For those who don ’ t want to admit their hearts ’ desires , " as the protagonist refuses to admit her true feelings for her love interest until the very last lyric . Despite being a parody of love songs , " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " is nonetheless considered to be a love song itself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " has garnered positive reviews from both film and music critics , some of whom even identified it as the film 's best song . Aja Romano of The Daily Dot hailed the song as Hercules ' highlight that " satisfies us every time " . Writing for Indiewire , Greg <unk> cited " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " as his favorite , describing the song as one of the film 's " truly great tunes " . Ella Ceron of Thought Catalog called the song " a pop song made on Olympus . " Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic was especially kind towards the song , which he hailed as " the ultimate pantheon of Grecian achievement " . Tan continued , " the five Muses prov [ e ] that their pillow talk skills are right up there with the best of them " , concluding , " The track also works well as an alternative to modern pop 's teenage heartbreak music ... be sure to ditch Hilary Duff and play this instead " . Tracy Dye of Bustle hailed the song as " one of Disney 's most addictive pieces of ear @-@ candy , " appreciating the fact that " it veers from the typical love @-@ laced ballads we 're used to . " Rob Burch of The Hollywood News called " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " a " refreshing change of pace " . 
 <unk> ranked the song fifth on its list of " The Best Ever Disney Songs " , with author Sophie Hall dubbing Meg " The Celine Dion of the cartoon world " . BuzzFeed ranked " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " 14th in its " Definitive Ranking Of The 102 Best Animated Disney Songs " . Meanwhile , BuzzFeed also ranked the song Disney 's ninth greatest love song , while D23 ranked it 10th in a similar article . " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " is also considered to be one of Disney 's most underrated songs , with the New York Post including it on their list . Moviepilot included the song in a similar article , with author Jeremiah Paul describing it as a " hidden gem " which " should have been another classic " , while praising Egan 's performance . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 To promote the film , American singer Belinda Carlisle recorded a pop rock version of " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " in 1997 , which was included on the film 's soundtrack in alongside Egan 's original . Produced by Gary Wallis and Toby Chapman , Carlisle 's rendition was released as a single in both France and Germany . American girl group The Cheetah Girls covered the song in 2005 ; their version was included on the Disney @-@ themed compilation album <unk> 3 . Their cover was released as a single . An abridged version of " I Won 't Say ( I 'm in Love ) " appears on stage in the jukebox musical Disney 's on the Record , performed by Andrew <unk> , with Meredith <unk> , Andy Karl , Tyler Maynard and <unk> <unk> providing backup vocals . 
 = 1933 Texas tropical storm = 
 The 1933 Texas tropical storm produced record rainfall in the south @-@ central United States in July of the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the third storm of the season , developing on July 14 near the Lesser Antilles . While moving westward through the Caribbean Sea , the cyclone passed just south of Jamaica on July 16 . The storm dropped heavy rainfall on the island that caused flooding and road washouts . On July 18 , the storm struck Belize and later moved across the Yucatán Peninsula . Initially it was believed that the storm continued into Mexico and dissipated while another storm formed to its northeast , but it was discovered in 2012 that the storm followed one continuous track . 
 On July 23 , the storm struck southeastern Texas at its peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . It moved inland and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Turning eastward , the storm dropped torrential rainfall in eastern Texas and western Louisiana , peaking at 21 @.@ 3 in ( 540 mm ) in Logansport , Louisiana . Several stations reported record rainfall , including Shreveport , Louisiana where its 24 ‑ hour amount remained the highest daily total as of 2008 . High rains left about $ 1 @.@ 5 million in crop damage between two Texas counties . The rains caused rivers to exceed their banks , forcing evacuations and road closures . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 14 , a tropical depression developed near Saint Kitts . Initially it moved west @-@ northwestward before turning to the west , and on July 15 it passed south of Hispaniola . That day , ships in the region confirmed the presence of a closed circulation . The depression was assessed to have intensified into a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on July 16 , before passing just south of Jamaica later that day . After affecting the island , the storm turned to the west @-@ southwest , reaching peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) early on July 18 . Later that day , a ship reported a pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) , which was adjusted to 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) to compensate a bias in the ship 's barometer . Around 1500 UTC on July 18 , the storm made landfall near Belize City , Belize at its peak intensity . 
 After moving ashore , the storm quickly weakened into a tropical depression while crossing the Yucatán Peninsula . Late on July 19 , it emerged into the Bay of Campeche . It turned to the northwest due to a ridge moving eastward , and the system re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on July 21 . At around 0800 UTC on July 23 , the storm moved ashore on Matagorda Bay in southeastern Texas with winds of about 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The storm again weakened to a tropical depression shortly after landfall , before turning to the north and north @-@ northeast . On July 24 , the cyclone began interacting with a cold front , and became extratropical . It tracked slowly eastward across eastern Texas and northern Louisiana due to a high pressure area to the north . It later moved along the Mississippi River , and early on July 27 , the front absorbed the depression along the border of Arkansas and Mississippi . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While passing south of Jamaica , the storm produced the heavy rainfall in the month of July in at least 40 years , which overflowed rivers . Both Kingston and Saint Andrew Parish reported 9 in ( 230 mm ) , causing flooding and landslides . The storm washed out roads , most of them unpaved , and one bridge was wrecked ; this disrupted the regional transportation . The storm also cut telegraph lines between Kingston and the eastern portion of the island . It later moved across Belize and the Yucatán Peninsula , although no stations reported gale force winds or low pressures . 
 Despite being a weak tropical cyclone , the storm dropped heavy rainfall in eastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana . Some areas received 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) in as little as six hours , and about 50 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 130 @,@ 000 km2 ) reported 10 @.@ 4 in ( 260 mm ) . The highest rainfall total was 21 @.@ 3 in ( 540 mm ) in Logansport , Louisiana . As of 2009 , this was the seventh highest total on record in the state , although three of the amounts were from the same storm . Logansport also reported a 24 ‑ hour total of 18 in ( 460 mm ) , which set the record for the highest daily rainfall total there in July . A secondary rainfall maxima of 19 @.@ 4 in ( 490 mm ) was observed in Shreveport , of which 12 @.@ 4 in ( 310 mm ) of rain fell in 24 hours ; this was the highest daily total on record for the site , and remains the highest as of 2008 . Alexandria also broke its 24 ‑ hour rainfall record in July with a total of 9 @.@ 75 in ( 248 mm ) on July 25 . Heavy rains spread into southern Arkansas and northwestern Mississippi . 
 High rains in eastern Texas , totaling over 10 in ( 250 mm ) , flooded roads in Shelby and Panola counties ; damage in the two counties collectively totaled $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Storm @-@ related flooding washed out a bridge in Henderson and portions of the Santa Fe Railway line between Carthage and Longview . Five people required rescue after being trapped in a fast @-@ moving river . The rains in the region were considered the heaviest in 17 years , and leaving severe damage to corn , cotton , and watermelon crops . Similarly , the floods damaged cotton and other crops in northern Louisiana , totaling several million dollars in losses . The rains caused many streams to exceed their banks , including one creek near Converse that flooded roads and railways . The floods forced families to evacuate in low @-@ lying areas of northern Louisiana . The rainfall in Shreveport caused the worst floods related to a tropical cyclone on record . While the storm was dropping heavy rainfall , it produced thunderstorms and gusty winds along the Texas and Louisiana coastlines . A severe thunderstorm related to the storm damaged roofs and windows in Alexandria , Louisiana . 
 = 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony = 
 The opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympic Games took place on the evening of Friday 27 July in the Olympic Stadium , London . As mandated by the Olympic Charter , the proceedings combined the formal ceremonial opening of this international sporting event ( including welcoming speeches , hoisting of the flags and the parade of athletes ) with an artistic spectacle to showcase the host nation 's culture . The 2012 Games were formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II . The spectacle was entitled Isles of Wonder and directed by Academy Award @-@ winning British film director Danny Boyle . 
 Prior to London 2012 there had been considerable apprehension about Britain 's ability to stage an opening ceremony that could reach the standard set at the Beijing Summer Games of 2008 . The 2008 ceremony had been noted for its scale , extravagance and expense , and hailed as the " greatest ever " . It had cost £ <unk> , whereas London spent an estimated £ 27m ( out of £ 80m budgeted for its four ceremonies ) , which was nevertheless about twice the original budget . However , the ceremony was immediately seen as a tremendous success , widely praised as a " masterpiece " and " a love letter to Britain " . 
 The ceremony began at 21 : 00 BST and lasted almost four hours . It was watched by an estimated worldwide television audience of 900 million , becoming the most @-@ viewed Olympic opening ceremony in both the UK and US . The content had largely been kept secret before the performance , despite involving thousands of volunteers and two public rehearsals . The principal sections of the artistic display represented Britain 's Industrial Revolution , National Health Service , literary heritage , popular music and culture , and were noted for their vibrant storytelling and use of music . Two shorter sections drew particular comment , involving a filmed cameo appearance of the Queen , and a live performance by the London Symphony Orchestra joined by comedian Rowan Atkinson . These were widely ascribed to Britain 's sense of humour . The ceremony featured children and young people in most of its segments , reflecting the ' inspire a generation ' aspiration of London 's original bid for the Games . 
 The BBC released footage of the entire opening ceremony on 29 October 2012 , edited by Danny Boyle and with background extras , along with more than seven hours of sporting highlights and the complete closing ceremony . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games ( LOCOG ) approached Danny Boyle to be the director of the ceremony in June 2010 , and he immediately accepted . Boyle explained that there had been four things that made him take the job : he was a big Olympics fan , he lived a mile from the Stadium and so felt invested in the area , his late father 's birthday was on the ceremony 's date , and he felt his ' Oscar clout ' would enable him to push through what he wanted to do . He said it " felt weirdly more like a ... civic or national responsibility " to take the job . 
 Boyle acknowledged that the extravagance of the 2008 opening ceremony was an impossible act to follow — " you can 't get bigger than Beijing " — and that this realisation had in fact liberated his team creatively . He said " .. obviously I 'm not going to try and build on Beijing , because how could you ? We can 't , and you wouldn 't want to , so we 're going back to the beginning . We 're going to try and give the impression that we 're rethinking and restarting , because they 've ( opening ceremonies ) escalated since Los Angeles in 1984 . They 've tried to top themselves each time and you can 't do that after Beijing . " Beijing 's budget had been £ <unk> , whereas London 's final budget was £ 27m , which was twice the original provision . The London stadium had the same number of seats as Beijing 's , but was half the size ; this intimacy of scale meant that Boyle felt he could achieve something personal and connecting . 
 The different sections of the ceremony were designed to reflect aspects of British history and culture , with the title Isles of Wonder partly inspired by Shakespeare 's play The Tempest ( particularly Caliban 's ' Be not afeard ' speech ) , and partly by the G. K. Chesterton aphorism : " The world shall perish not for lack of wonders , but for lack of wonder . " 
 In July 2010 Boyle started brainstorming ideas with designer Mark Tildesley , writer Frank Cottrell Boyce and costume designer <unk> Anne Larlarb . They considered " what was essentially British " , with the non @-@ British Larlarb able to offer a view of what the world thought Britain meant . Cottrell Boyce had given Boyle a copy of Pandaemonium , ( named after the capital of Hell in Paradise Lost ) by Humphrey Jennings , which collated contemporary reports from the industrial revolution . It had become traditional during the opening ceremony to ' produce ' the Olympic rings in a spectacular manner . Cottrell Boyce commented " Danny had a very clear idea that in the first 15 minutes you had to have a great , startling image that could go around the world ; it had to climax with something that made people go ' Oh my God ! ' " . Boyle decided that " the journey from the pastoral to the industrial , ending with the forging of the Olympic rings " would be that image . 
 The ten distinct chapters on which the team started work were gradually compressed into three principal movements : the violent transition from ' Green and Pleasant Land ' to the ' Pandemonium ' of industrial revolution , a salute to the NHS and children 's literature , and a celebration of pop culture , technology and the digital revolution . 
 When Boyle returned to work on the ceremony in the spring of 2011 he asked Rick Smith of Underworld , with whom he had worked on several film projects as well as his theatrical production of Mary Shelley 's Frankenstein , to be the musical director . At the same time the team moved to the Three Mills studio complex in east London , where a 4x4 metre scale model of the stadium was built . For security reasons , a single CGI @-@ assisted version of the ceremony was kept on editor Sascha Dhillon 's laptop ; anyone needing it had to come to the studio . 
 The cast included professional performers and 7 @,@ 500 volunteers . Boyle considered the volunteers to be " the most valuable commodity of all " . In November 2011 they auditioned at Three Mills , and rehearsals began in earnest in spring 2012 at an open @-@ air site at Dagenham ( the abandoned Ford plant ) , often in foul weather . Although key contributors had to sign non @-@ disclosure agreements and some elements were codenamed , Boyle placed immense trust in the volunteers by asking them simply to " save the surprise " and not leak any information . Further volunteers were recruited to help with security and marshalling , and to support the technical crew . Three weeks before the ceremony , Mark Rylance , who was to have taken a leading part , pulled out after a family bereavement and was replaced by Kenneth Branagh . 
 The Olympic Bell , the largest harmonically tuned bell in the world , weighing 23 tonnes , had been cast in brass under the direction of Mears & Stainbank by Royal <unk> of the Netherlands , and hung in the Stadium . It was inscribed with a line from Caliban 's speech in The Tempest : " Be not afeard , the isle is full of noises " . 
 Boyle gave significant emphasis to the London 2012 theme ' inspire a generation ' and devised a programme relying heavily on children and young people , and built around themes that would relate to the young . 25 schools in the six original East London host boroughs were used to recruit child volunteers for the performance , and 170 sixth formers ( 16 – 18 @-@ year @-@ olds ) , between them speaking more than 50 languages , were recruited from their colleges . 
 On 12 June 2012 at a press conference , Boyle had promised a huge set of rural Britain , which was to include a village cricket team , farm animals , a model of Glastonbury Tor , as well as a maypole and a rain @-@ producing cloud . His intention was to represent the rural and urban landscape of Britain . The design was to include a mosh pit at each end of the set , one with people celebrating a rock festival and the other the Last Night of the Proms . Boyle promised a ceremony with which everyone would feel involved ; he said , " I hope it will reveal how peculiar and contrary we are – and how there 's also , I hope , a warmth about us " . Some of the set was designed with real grass turf and soil . The use of animals ( 40 sheep , 12 horses , 3 cows , 2 goats , 10 chickens , 10 ducks , 9 geese and 3 sheep dogs , looked after by 34 animal handlers ) drew some criticism from People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) . Boyle , who was being advised by the RSPCA , assured PETA that the animals would be well cared for . After the press conference , much commentary in the UK Press was negative and attracted " hundreds of comments online completely supporting ... the view that the opening ceremony would be a disaster . " 
 The overwhelming majority of the music used was British . The team worked next door to the office of the musical director for the closing ceremony , David Arnold , and so hearing each other 's music there was a scramble to claim a particular song first . A.R. Rahman , who worked with Boyle on Slumdog Millionaire and 127 Hours , composed a Punjabi song ' <unk> <unk> ' to showcase Indian influence in the UK , according to Boyle 's wishes . More Indian music was also scheduled for inclusion in the medley . Paul McCartney was to be the ceremony 's closing act . 
 Sebastian Coe was instrumental in asking the Queen to take part in the film sequence . Danny Boyle first pitched the idea to Coe , who loved it . Coe asked Princess Anne , a British member of the IOC and of LOCOG , what she thought , and she told Coe to ask the Queen . So he took it to his friend the Queen 's Deputy Private Secretary . Boyle had two suggestions to play the Queen : either a lookalike , or a world @-@ class actress such as Helen Mirren , filmed in a house that could double as Buckingham Palace . He was therefore surprised to hear that the Queen would be happy to play herself , and wanted a speaking part . Filming took place in late March 2012 , and Happy and Glorious , as well as the opening film sequence Journey along the Thames , was produced by the BBC . 
 Changes were still being made to the programme in the final days before the ceremony : a BMX bike section was dropped due to time constraints , and the ' Pandemonium ' and ' Thanks .. Tim ' sections were edited down . In 2016 Boyle recounted how he had come under pressure from junior minister Jeremy Hunt to cut back the NHS section , which he had saved only by threatening to resign and take the volunteers with him . 
 Two full dress and technical rehearsals took place in the Olympic stadium , on 23 and 25 July , in front of an audience of 60 @,@ 000 comprising volunteers , cast members ' families , competition winners , and others connected to the Games . Boyle asked them not to ' spoil the surprise ' ( # <unk> ) for the billions who would watch on the Friday night . 
 = = Officials and guests = = 
 Seated in the Royal Box were the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh , the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall and other members of the British Royal Family . They were accompanied by Rowan Williams , Archbishop of Canterbury ; David Cameron , the Prime Minister , with his wife Samantha ; former Prime Ministers John Major , Tony Blair , and Gordon Brown ; and London Mayor Boris Johnson . Officials of the Olympic movement included Jacques Rogge , President of the IOC , and Sebastian Coe , Chairman of LOCOG . 
 International guests included Queen Margrethe II of Denmark , Queen Sofia of Spain , Princess Sirindhorn of Thailand , First Lady of the United States Michelle Obama , Prime Minister of Russia Dmitry Medvedev , President of Brazil Dilma Rousseff , Prince Willem @-@ Alexander and Princess <unk> of the Netherlands , Prime Minister of Jamaica Portia Simpson @-@ Miller , Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard , President of Singapore Tony Tan , Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Erdogan , Prime Minister of Bangladesh Sheikh Hasina , the President of the Federal Republic of Germany Joachim Gauck , the President of Italy Giorgio Napolitano , and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . 
 = = Proceedings = = 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 At exactly 20 : 12 ( 8 : 12 pm ) the Red Arrows performed a flypast over the Olympic Stadium and then over the concert in Hyde Park . This concert featured artists selected to represent the four nations of the United Kingdom : Duran Duran , Stereophonics , Snow Patrol and Paolo Nutini . 
 The prologue celebrated Britain 's maritime heritage , and was accompanied by extracts from the BBC Radio Shipping Forecast and maritime images on the big screens . The audience held up blue sheeting to simulate the sight and sound of the ocean . Frank Turner performed three songs ( " Sailor 's Boots " , " Wessex Boy " and " I Still Believe " ) on the model of Glastonbury Tor , joined by Emily Barker , Ben Marwood and Jim Lockey , as well as his regular backing band the Sleeping Souls . LSO On Track ( an orchestra of 80 young musicians from ten East London boroughs together with 20 LSO members ) then performed Edward Elgar 's " Nimrod " from the Enigma Variations . 
 = = = Countdown ( 21 : 00 – 21 : 04 BST ) = = = 
 The ceremony began at 9pm after a one @-@ minute ' 60 to 1 ' countdown film made up of shots of numbers , such as those on house doors , street nameplates , London buses and market labels . 
 A two @-@ minute film Journey along the Thames , directed by Boyle and produced by the BBC , opened the ceremony . To the sound of " Surf Solar " by Fuck Buttons , it followed the River Thames from its source to the heart of London , juxtaposing images of contemporary British life with pastoral shots and flashes of scenes from the stadium . The characters <unk> , Mole and Toad from The Wind in the Willows were briefly seen , as was a ' Monty Python hand ' pointing towards London on umbrellas , and an InterCity 125 train passing the Olympic rings as crop circles in a field . At Battersea Power Station a Pink Floyd pig was flying between the towers ; the clock sound from another Pink Floyd song " Time " was heard passing Big Ben . The soundtrack included clips from the theme tune of The South Bank Show , " London Calling " by The Clash , and the Sex Pistols ' " God Save the Queen " as the film followed the route of the band 's infamous cruise down the River Thames during the Silver Jubilee . After lifting to an aerial view of East London mirroring the title sequence of the BBC soap opera EastEnders , to the sound of the drum beats from the closing theme , the film flashed down through the Thames Barrier , into Bow Creek , and then below surface through a London Underground train and station , historic footage of Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's Thames Tunnel , and through the Rotherhithe Tunnel . It then switched to a sequence filmed outside the stadium shortly before the ceremony , superimposed with posters from all the previous Summer Olympics except 1900 Paris , 1936 Berlin , 1984 Los Angeles , and 1996 Atlanta , to a recording of " Map Of The Problematique " by Muse . This ended with a live shot of three cast members holding posters for the 2012 competition . 
 There was then a 10 @-@ second countdown in the stadium , with children holding clusters of balloons that burst simultaneously with the audience shouting out the numbers . 
 Bradley Wiggins , who had won the Tour de France five days earlier , opened the ceremony by ringing the Olympic Bell that hung at one end of the stadium . Four upper @-@ atmosphere balloons were released , each expected to carry a set of Olympic rings and a camera up to the mid @-@ stratosphere . 
 = = = Green and Pleasant Land ( 21 : 04 – 21 : 09 ) = = = 
